eT di ATT IS 9417 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


Wate hhe Frater Ñ used 
sea Wied SATA $ ufui ent 
afesn — frry 


( ZAT UTS) 


Welding of High Strength Steel 
Bars for Reinforced Concrete 
Construction — 
Recommendations 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 25.160:77.140.15 


© BIS 2018 


mA ATA SRT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
e HAF VAT, 9 Fees BHC FMI, w$ fercit-110002 
Ni io ss i MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2018 Price Group 7 


Concrete Reinforcement Sectional Committee, CED 54 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted bv the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Concrete Reinforcement Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1977 and was revised in 1989. In the first revision, resistance butt-welding of 
cold worked bars was deleted and reference to gas pressure welding of cold worked bars was made. 


In this revision, major changes covered are considering the welding of online quenched steel bars for reinforced 
concrete construction which also includes high corrosion resistance (HCR) varietv. These changes have been 
incorporated in light of the findings of a studv conducted bv Welding Research Institute, Tiruchirappalli on the 
weldabilitv of copper-chromium and copper thermo-mechanicallv treated (TMT) bars/online quenched steel bars 
for reinforced concrete construction. Lap welding of high strength deformed steel bars using gas metal arc welding 
(GMAW) using CO,, has also been added. 


Provisions for welding of mild steel bars for reinforced concrete construction have been covered in IS 2751 : 1979 
‘Code of practice for welding of mild steel plain and deformed bars for reinforced construction (first revision)’. 


For welding micro-alloyed steel bars, a reference may be made to IS 9595 : 1980 ‘Metal arc welding of carbon 
and carbon manganese steels — Recommendation’ in regard to the provisions relating to carbon equivalent 
establishing welding procedures and other relevant details. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 9417 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


WELDING OF HIGH STRENGTH STEEL BARS FOR 
REINFORCED CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION — 
RECOMMENDATIONS 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down recommendations for welding 
high strength steel bars conforming to grades Fe 415, 
Fe 415D, Fe 500 and Fe 500D of IS 1786 by flash butt 
welding, shielded metal arc welding, gas pressure 
welding and gas metal arc welding (GMAW) using CO, 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards listed in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, definitions given in 
IS 812 shall apply. 


4 PLANS AND DRAWING 


Plans and drawing for welding reinforced steel bars 
shall be prepared in accordance with SP 46. 


5 SYMBOLS 


Symbols for welding used in plans and shop drawings 
shall conform to IS 813. 


6 WELDING EQUIPMENT AND ACCESSORIES 


Welding equipment and accessories used in welding 
of steel bars for concrete reinforcement shall conform 
to the requirements of the appropriate Indian Standards, 
where available. Where an Indian Standard is not 
available, equipment and accessories shall be of the 
best available quality. Their capacity shall be adequate 
for the welding procedure. A general guidance for 
selection of equipment and accessories is included in 
Annex B. 


7 PARENT METAL 


The parent metal shall be of guaranteed weldable 
quality of steel conforming to IS 1786. 


8 SAFETY AND HEALTH REQUIREMENTS 


Safety and health requirements as prescribed in IS 818 
shall be applicable. Fire precautions shall be as given 
in IS 3016. 


9 ELECTRODES 


Electrodes used shall conform to IS 814. 
10 WELDING PROCESSES AND PROCEDURES 


10.1 General 


10.1.1 High strength deformed steel bars shall be either 
butt welded or lap welded. Butt welding may be carried 
out either by flash butt, gas pressure or by shielded 
metal arc welding process. Lap welding may be carried 
out either by shielded metal arc welding process or by 
gas metal arc welding (GMAW) using CO.. 


10.1.2 Bars of unequal diameter may be welded. 
However, in case of butt welding, the difference in 
diameter of bars shall not exceed 5 mm. Where unequal 
diameter bars are welded, the dimension ‘d’ mentioned 
in this standard refers to diameter of the smaller bar. 


10.1.3 The surface of the ends of the bars to be welded 
shall be clean and free from rust, paint, grease and/or 
other contaminants which are likely to affect the quality 
of weld. 


10.2 Flash Butt Welding of High Strength Deformed 
Steel Bars 


10.2.1 Flash butt welding may be adopted if a large 
number of welding has to be done at the same place 
and when the electric supply is available of the required 
capacity in respect of the cross-sectional area of the 
maximum size of the bar to be welded. 


10.2.2 Procedure 


10.2.2.1 The ends of the bars to be welded should be 
placed in proper alignment in clamps so that bent or 
eccentric joints do not result. The clamps should be 
cleaned before each welding operation to avoid current 
loss and to eliminate harmful notches or grooves due 
to burning in of spots of arcing. 


10.2.2.2 The bar ends shall be uniformly pushed against 


IS 9417 : 2018 


each other from the moment of contact to the up-setting. 
The transformer regulator should be so set that the 
current at the contact area is between 85 and 90 A/mm2. 


10.2.2.3 If the capacity of butt welding machine or the 
available power is not sufficient to take the load for 
welding from cold, welding may be done after 
preheating. By making and breaking of the contact arc 
repeatedly, heat can be made to spread over the entire 
cross-section of the bar. The number of short-circuits 
(contacts and reversing) should be kept to the minimum 
possible so that the welding time and spread of heat in 
the longitudinal direction in the bar is minimum. 
Satisfactory joints with only slight reduction in original 
strength ofthe bar can be achieved with current density 
up to 25 A/mm’. 


10.2.2.4 In automatic machines, the flash rate should 
be so set that a continuous flash without interruption 
can be achieved. If the rate is set, too high additional 
short-circuits are required leading to heat spread. If the 
rate is too low, the flash will be interrupted and 
consequently air penetrating into the joints will form 
oxides. If the machine 1s hand-operated, the flash should 
be maintained to avoid interruption. 


10.2.2.5 For bars with sheared ends, a burn-off (flash- 
off) length of about 5 to 7 mm is required (this length 
Is practically independent of the bar diameter). Very 
short burn-off lengths lead to defective welding because 
all the impurities may not have been removed from the 
place of welding. Increase in the burn-off length will 
spread heat along the length of the bar thus reducing 
the strength of the bar. 


10.2.2.6 The up-setting should result from the burning 
off, that is, without interruption in the rain of sparks. 
The electric supply should be switched off about 1/3 


to 1 s after the start of the up-setting or in the case of 
automatic machine after 1 to 3 mm of up-set travel. 


The voltage and frequency of the current should be 
checked before commencing the welding operation. 
Deviations from the nominal value or large fluctuations 
during the operation may lead to gross defects in 
welding. Wherever possible, welding should be done 
during day time when the total load on the network is 
fairly balanced. 


10.3 Butt-Welding by Shielded Metal Arc Welding 
Process 


10.3.1 General 


Butt-welds by metal arc welding process are normally 
adopted to join bars of thickness more than 20 mm. 


10.3.2 Preparation for Welding 


10.3.2.1 The preparation of the edges of the rods shall 
be as shown in Fig. 1. The edges shall be prepared by 
shearing, machining, or oxy-acetylene flame cutting. 
Beveling may be made by machining, grinding oxy- 
acetylene cutting. The fusion faces and the surrounding 
material shall be free from scale, dirt, greases, paint, 
rust and contaminants. 


10.3.2.2 When it is not possible to rotate the bars for 
carrying out all welding in flat position, the edge 
preparation shall be such that welding is done on both 
sides in the vertical position. 


10.3.2.3 All the bars to be butt welded should be aligned 
and set up in position with their axis in one straight 
line. This may be done in a jig or by means of a clamp 
or by using guides. Rotation of the bars should be 
avoided until they are adequately welded so that no 
disturbance to the alignment is caused and no twist is 


Fic. 1 EDGE PREPARATION 


2 


introduced in the bars during the process of welding. 
The joints mav not be out of alignment bv more than 
25 percent of the thickness of the thinner material for 
material up to and including 12 mm thick, or bv more 
than 3 mm for thicker material. 


10.3.3 Electrode 


10.3.3.1 Welding electrodes with flux covering of rutile 
(R) or basic (B) type as per IS 814 are recommended 
for better results depending on the size of the bar to be 
welded. Storage of the latter type and their drying 
immediately prior to use must be strictly in accordance 
with the recommendation of the electrode manufacturer. 


10.3.3.2 The size of electrodes depends upon the 
position of the bead and thickness of the bar to be 
welded. The root runs should be made with electrodes 
of size not exceeding 2.5 mm. For successive beads, 
the size of the electrodes should be progressively 
increased so that in the top bead, the electrode size 
does not generally exceed 3.15 mm for 20 mm bars 
and 5 mm for 40 mm bars. 


10.3.3.3 Concentration of heat shall be avoided by 
proper welding sequence and manipulation of 
electrodes. 


10.3.4 Procedure 


10.3.4.1 The sequence of welding beads is shown in 
Fig. 2. The runs | to 4 are made in the position of 
welding best suited for the quality of the weld. Besides 
the interruption in welding required for cleaning of each 
bead, a pause shall be made after every second bead 
and the bar is allowed to cool. The temperature of the 
bars at a distance of about one bar diameter from the 


IS 9417 : 2018 


joints shall not exceed 300 °C immediately after the 
bead is made. Before commencing the next bead, the 
temperature shall not exceed 250 °C. The temperature 
may be checked approximately by using temperature 
indicating crayons. However, in the absence of 
temperature indicating devices, the bar may be allowed 
to cool down to hand hot temperature before the next 
bead is deposited. 


After completing bead 4, the bars are turned through 
180° and the beads 5 to 7 are made in the same manner 
as described above. The top bead 8 is deposited as the 
joint is continuously rotated and the size of the 
reinforcement should be approximately as indicated in 
Fig. 2. 


10.3.4.2 In the case of non-rotatable bars, the beads 
1 to 4 should be made as explained in 10.3.4.1 The 
welder then moves to the other side and beads 5 to 7 
are similarly made. It is difficult to deposit a uniform 
top bead for non-rotatable bars and it may be necessary 
to make two or more separate annular runs so that the 
joint is approximately axisymmetric and has sufficient 
reinforcement as shown in Fig. 2. 


10.4 Butt Welding by Gas Pressure Welding Process 


Gas pressure welding is basically a hot forging process 
of joining the two bars end-end. The bar ends are heated 
by a multi-nozzle burner using oxy-acetylene flame and 
fused by forcing the two bar ends against each other 
under pressure to effect a solid phase welded joint. 
Annex C gives more information on recommendations 
in regards to the preparation for welding procedure and 
equipment. 


2A DOUBLE V-BUTT JOINT 


2B K-JOINT 


Fic. 2 SEQUENCE OF WELDING 


IS 9417 : 2018 


10.5 Lap Welding of High Strength Deformed Steel 
Bars 


10.5.1 General 


Lap joints mav be made in high strength deformed steel 
bars of all sizes. Thev are preferred when access for 
welding is from one side onlv, and while connecting 
prefabricated units. Use of electrodes with flux covering 
of Tvpe 3 or Tvpe 6 of IS 814 are recommended for 
better results depending on the size of bar being welded. 
Storage of the latter tvpe and their drving immediatelv 
prior to use must be strictly in accordance with the 
recommendations of the electrode manufacturer. 


10.5.2 Preparation for Welding 


Edge preparation is not necessarv for lap welds. The 
joint faces and the surrounding material shall be free 
from scale, dirt, grease, paint, rust and contaminants. 


10.5.3 Electrodes 


The size of electrodes according to the diameter of the 
bar to be welded shall be as follows: 


Normal Diameter Size of 
of Bar, d Electrode, Max 
mm mm 
Up to and including 10 2:5 
Over 10 up to and including 18 3.15 
Over 18 up to and including 28 4.0 
Over 28 5.0 


10.5.4 Procedure 


The arc should be struck as shown in Fig. 3. Somewhere 
in the middle of the joint and not at its beginning. 


The movement of the electrode for welding lap joints 
in the horizontal and vertical position is indicated in 
Fig. 3. 


The various lap joints used to connect high strength 
deformed steel bars are shown in Fig. 4 to Fig. 7. 


In Fig. 4 to Fig. 6, the dimensions indicated as '5d' for 
single side welding should be halved to '2.5d', if the 
welds are deposited from the opposite side also. The 
single-strap arrangement shown in Fig. 7 is not 
recommended where access is from one side only. In 
the case of joints illustrated in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7, the 
strap material shall also conform to 7 and the strap 
cross-sectional area should, at least, equal that of the 
bar to be joined. 


10.6 Gas Metal Arc Welding (GMAW) Using CO, 


10.6.1 GMAW uses a continuous and consumable wire 
electrode and CO, as the shielding gas. This welding 
procedure should be carried out indoors. GMAW is 


not recommended for butt joints. 


10.6.2 Annex D gives more information about GMAW. 


11 VISUAL INSPECTION 


Each welded joint shall be visually inspected for the 
following: 


a) Shape of profile — The profile of the welds 
shall be uniform, slightly convex and free from 
overlap at the toes of the welds. 

b) Uniformity of surface — The weld surface 
shall be uniform in appearance throughout its 
length and shall show no pronounced hump 
or crater. 

c) Degree of undercut — The welded joint shall 
be free from undercut but slight intermittent 
occurrences may be disregarded. 

d) Freedom from surface defects — The surface 
ofthe weld shall be free from cracks, cavities, 
solid inclusions and other visible defects. 

e) Misalignment — The misalignment ofthe bars 
welded shall not exceed one-fourth of bar 
diameter or 5 mm, whichever is less. 

NOTE — Misalignment shall be evaluated on the basis 


of smaller diameter in case of bars of unequal diameters 
are used. 


12 INITIAL TESTS 


Prior to production welding, test welds shall be carried 
out under the local production conditions to establish 
that the proposed joints can be made satisfactorily. For 
the purpose, the tests shall be the same as in 13 but 
only 3 test pieces will be required for tensile test and 3 
for bend test. Such initial tests shall be repeated, if there 
is any change in, 

a) the welding process; 

b) the grade of high strength deformed steel bars; 

c) the type or size of electrode; 

d) the welder; and 


e) the position of welding, unless the new 
position is an easier one. 


13 QUALITY CONTROL TESTS 


13.1 Butt Welds 


Test pieces containing butt welds at the centre in the 
as-welded condition shall be selected at the rate of one 
for tensile test and one for bend test for every 100 joints 
or as decided by the Engineer-in-Charge. 


13.1.1 Tensile Test 


Unmachined specimens with a free length between grips 
about 20d should be used. The selected pieces when 
subjected to a tensile test shall have tensile strength of 


IS 9417 : 2018 


VERTICAL 
WELDING 


WITHDRAWAL 


HORIZONTAL 
WELDING 


STRIKING OF ARC WITHDRAWAL 


3A WELDING IN THE HORIZONTAL POSITION 3B WELDING IN THE VERTICAL POSITION 
Fic. 3 WELDING oF Lap JOINTS 


SECTION ATA-B 


1 STRIKE THE ELECTRODE HERE: THE ARC STRIKING POINT MUST LIE IN THE 
GROOVE WHICH WILL BE SUBSEQUENTLY WELDED-OVER 

2 WELDING DIRECTIONS FOR HORIZONTAL OR NEAR-HORIZONTAL 
LAP JOINTS: IN THE CASE OF VERTICAL LAP JOINTS, THE WELDING 
SHALL BE PERFORMED FROM BOTTOM TO TOP (RISING) 

3 LIFT-OFF ELECTRODE 


Fic. 4 Lap JOINT 


IS 9417 : 2018 


A—- 
NECNON SES SSS 
AN TESS Sy — 
EN ^ à s TANA S WEIN UN qa, s 
A—- SLOPE 1:20 =0.2d 


25d 


210d 25d 


SECTION VIEW A-A 


d 
=0.2d 


SECTION VIEW A-A 


Fic. 5 Lap JOINT (VARIANT) 


ee eee ae ee 
ee eee 3 


SS AG ie Sa 


NA m ~= 
—m ee ee eee 


1 STRIKE THE ELECTRODE HERE: THE ARC STRIKING POINT MUST LIE IN THE 
GROOVE WHICH WILL BE SUBSEQUENTLY WELDED-OVER 

2 WELDING DIRECTIONS FOR HORIZONTAL OR NEAR-HORIZONTAL STRAPPED 
JOINTS; IN CASE OF VERTICAL STRAPPED JOINT, THE WELDING SHALL BE 
PERFORMED FROM BOTTOM TO TOP (RISING) 

3 LIFT-OFF ELECTRODE 

4  BUTTED BAR 


Fic. 6 STRAPPED JOINT (d = NOMINAL DIAMETER OF BUTTED BAR) 


-—- 38——-— =s 
TU SSO an an ume a 
TELST 
— 1 Ne 


SECTION VIEW A-A 


Fic. 7 STRAPPED JOINT (VARIANT) 


not less than 90 percent or the actual tensile strength of angle of 60° around a mandrel of diameter specified 


the bar but in no case shall be less than 485 MPa for below, before any crack appears: 
Grade Fe 415 and 545 MPa for Grade Fe 500 of IS 1786. 


The fracture shall not take place in the weld joint. Nominal Diameter of Diameter of Mandrel 
13.1.2 Bend Test Bar, d 
mm mm 


The welding flash or reinforcement shall be removed 
at the point where contact is made with the mandrel. 
The welded joint shall be capable of being bent to an 


Up to 10 5d 
Over 10 Td 


13.2 Lap Joints 


Test pieces containing lap joints at their centre in the 
as-welded condition shall be selected at the rate of one 
sample for tensile test for everv 100 joints or as decided 
bv the Engineer-in-Charge. 


13.2.1 Tensile Test 


The free specimen length between grips shall be 
between 25 d and 30 d, where d is the nominal diameter 
of the bar. The breaking load shall not be less than the 
guaranteed load in accordance with IS 1786 required 
to fracture the bar. 


IS 9417 : 2018 


14 RETESTS 


If a sample selected for testing fails to meet the 
requirements given under 13.1 and 13.2, the purchaser 
or his representative shall take two further samples from 
the same lot. If on testing, either of the samples fails to 
meet the specified requirements, the whole lot shall be 
rejected. 


IS 9417 : 2018 


ANNEXA 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
IS No. Title IS No. Title 
812: 1957 Glossary of terms relating to welding 1786 : 2008 High strength deformed steel bars and 


and cutting of metals 


wires for concrete reinforcement — 


813 : 1986 Scheme of symbols for welding (first Specification (fourth revision) 
revision) 1851 : 1997 Single operator type arc welding 

814 : 2004 Covered electrodes for manual metal transformers — Specification (third 
arc welding of carbon and carbon revision ) 
manganese steel — Specification 2635: 1997 DC electric welding generators — 
(sixth revision) Specifications (third revision ) 

818 : 1968 Code of practice for safety and health 2641 : 1989 Electric welding accessories — 
requirements in electric and gas Specifications (first revision) 
welding and cutting operations (first 3016: 1982 Code of practice for fire precautions 
revision ) in welding and cutting operations 

1179 : 1967 Specification for equipment for eye 9857 : 1990 Welding cables — Specifications 
and face protection during welding (first revision) 

(first revision) SP 46 : 2003 Engineering drawing practice for 
schools and colleges 
ANNEX B 
(Clause 6) 


SELECTION OF EQUIPMENT AND ACCESSORIES FOR WELDING HIGH STRENGTH 
DEFORMED BARS USED FOR REINFORCED CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION USING FLASH 
BUTT WELDING AND SHIELDED METAL ARCH WELDING WITH COVERED ELECTRODES 


B-1 GENERAL 
The methods of welding covered in this annex are: 


a) Flash butt welding; and 


b) Shielded metal arc welding with covered 
electrodes. 


B-2 FLASH BUTT WELDING EQUIPMENT 


B-2.1 The efficiency of the flash butt welding 
equipment, manifested by its conjunctive efficiency for 
high strength deformed steels should be about 8 kVA/ 
cm2 of the cross-sectional area of the bar in order that 
sufficient cold weld may be accomplished. 


B-2.2 The jaws for clamping the bars should preferably 
be long and pin shaped in order to assume a rectilinear 
central feeding of the bar ends. The joint should 
preferably be of copper to assume a smooth and uniform 
flow of current from the jaws into the bar. 


B-3 SHIELDED METAL ARC WELDING 
EQUIPMENT 


B-3.1 In its simplest form, the equipment required for 
shielded metal arc welding of high strength deformed 
steel bars for concrete reinforcing consists of following: 


a) Welding power source; 

b) Accessories, such as, electrode holders, earth 
clamp, welding cable, connectors, chipping 
hammer and wire brush; 

c) Protective equipment for the operator, such 
as, hand screen or helmet, gloves, apron, etc; 
and 

d) Suitable electrode storage and drying 
equipment, where necessary. 


B-3.1.1 Welding Power Source 


The current for welding may be alternating or direct. 
There 1s little to choose between them for work 


involving mild steel welding. Electricitv from the 
mains is usuallv at too high a voltage for arc welding. 
Various tvpes of equipment are used for reducing this 
voltage and delivering a welding current of right 
characteristics. 


B-3.1.1.1 Alternating current transformer of oil-cooled 
or air-cooled type has the advantage of being low in 
initial cost and requiring verv little maintenance. 
Various types of controls for varying the current to suit 
conditions are in common use. Some of these are: (a) a 
static choke with tappings, (b) a choke the value of 
which may be varied by means of the movement of the 
core, (c) achoke with a saturable core, and (d) a variable 
flux linkage transformer. Being essentially a single- 
phase load, welding transformers when connected to 
3-phase supply mains may cause slightly unbalanced 
load conditions. Condensers of adequate rating may 
also be connected across the input lines for improving 
the power factor. 


B-3.1.1.2 Rotary machines, such as, motor generators 
suitable for use on alternating current mains give a 
direct current output of the required characteristics. 
They have the advantage that they impose a balanced 
load on 3-phase supply mains. They are, however, 
initially more expensive and require more maintenance 
than transformers. 


B-3.1.2 Where the mains supply is direct current, a 
motor generator designed for direct current mains use 
has to be selected. 


B-3.1.3 Rectifier welding sets which are relatively high 
in initial cost, require very little maintenance because 
of elimination of most moving parts. They also impose 
a balanced load on 3-phase supply mains. 


B-3.1.4 For work at sites where mains power supply is 
not available, a petrol or diesel engine driven welding 
generator may be selected. Such machines are often 
mounted on trailers for easy portability. 


B-3.1.5 Other points to be considered when selecting 
the equipment are, 


a) that the machine is designed to work 
satisfactorily in the climatic conditions that 
will be met with during service; 

b) that it is well made and conforms to relevant 
Indian Standards, wherever these exist; and 

c) that the current capacity is adequate for 
welding with the sizes of electrodes expected 
to be used. 


IS 9417 : 2018 


B-3.1.5.1 IS 1851 covers transformer welding 
equipment and IS 2635 covers motor generator 
equipment for manual metal arc welding. 


B-3.1.5.2 Electrode holders shall conform to the 
requirements laid down in IS 2641 and shall be of 
suitable rating for welding with electrodes in sizes 
expected to be used. 


B-3.1.5.3 Welding cables shall conform to the 
requirements laid down in IS 9857, if cables with 
copper conductors are used. Cables with aluminium 
conductors shall be of a quality proved for performance. 
Two lengths of cables are required, one from the 
welding set to the electrode holder and the other from 
the work piece to the welding set. 


B-3.1.5.4 All cable terminal connections, such as, 
sockets-earth clamp, shall also conform to the 
requirements specified in IS 2641. 


B-3.1.5.5 A well-made chipping hammer with a 
hardened and tough cutting edge and a narrow type 
wire brush which may reach the root of the weld would 
also be required for deslagging and cleaning the weld. 


B-3.1.6 Protective Equipment 


A non-conducting hand screen or helmet fitted with 
protective filter lens will be required to protect the face 
and eyes of the operator from the ultra-violet and infra- 
red rays emitted by the arc. The filter lens has the double 
function of securing good vision of the arc and giving 
effective protection by cutting off the harmful rays. The 
eye and face protection equipment should conform to 
the appropriate stipulations laid down in IS 1179. 


B-3.1.6.1 Aprons and leather gloves should be of a 
standard that has been proved adequate for welder’s 
use. Shoulder guards, leggings and other such protective 
garments may be necessary when the operator has to 
do positional welding in conditions where freedom of 
movement is restricted. 


B-3.1.7 Storage 


The conditions of the electrodes used have an important 
bearing on the ultimate quality of the weld produced. 
Particularly, when moist ambient conditions are 
envisaged, for instance, at site work, the storage of 
electrodes has to be given much attention. Heated 
storage cabinets or drying ovens are must when low 
hydrogen type electrodes are being used for site work. 
Other types of electrodes also are preferably stored 
before use in such cabinets when ambient conditions 
are unfavourable. 


IS 9417 : 2018 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 10.4) 
GAS PRESSURE WELDING 


C-1 GAS PRESSURE WELDING PROCESS 


The gas pressure welding process mav be used for butt 
welding of reinforcing bars. 


C-1.1 Preparation for Welding 


C-1.1.1 The ends of bars and the extreme ends of new 
bars shall be cut by shearing or machining to make the 
face approximately normal to the axis of the bar. Care 
shall be taken to ensure that the bar ends do not twist 
while shearing. 


C-1.1.2 Rust, oil, paint, cement paste and any other 
coating over the bar-ends shall be removed and the 
surfaces to be welded shall be finished as flat as 
possible. 


C-1.2 Procedure 


C-1.2.1 Bars are clamped securely in the clamping unit 
with no misalignment keeping the gap between the bar 
ends less than 3 mm. 


C-1.2.2 To begin with, the bar ends are heated by a 
reducing flame to avoid any oxide formation. The flame 
shall be directed at the joint and the burner shall be 
rotated to ensure uniform heating of the bar ends. On 
sufficient heating, the gap between the bars ends shall 
be closed by the application of axial pressure 
(preliminary or first stage pressurization). 


C-1.2.3 After preliminary pressurization and complete 
closing of the gap, the bar ends shall be heated by a 
neutral flame. The heating shall be done for an 
appropriate period ensuring that the bar ends do not 
melt. 


C-1.2.4 On sufficient heating of the bar ends, 
appropriate axial pressure (final or second stage 


10 


pressurization) is applied so that the bulge at the weld 
interface is about 1.4 times the bar diameter. Heating 
shall be stopped at this stage. However, pressure 
application shall be maintained for some time even after 
the flame is put off. 


C-1.2.5 The bars shall be unclamped after the glow of 
the heated area vanishes. 


C-1.2.6 In case the flame dies out during heating, the 
affected area shall be cut off and the welding procedure 
begun afresh. 


C-2 GAS PRESSURE WELDING EQUIPMENT 


C-2.1 The equipment for gas pressure welding 
comprises of, 


a) oxygen and acetylene gas cylinders with 
regulating values, etc; 

b) 
c) 
d) 


multi-nozzle burner; 
clamping unit; and 
pressurizer. 


C-2.1.1 The burner consists of a blow pipe with four 
or more nozzles. The nozzles shall be so arranged to 
ensure uniform heating of the bar surface. The burner 
shall provide stable flame during heating and the heating 
capacity shall be appropriate to the size of the bar. 


C-2.1.2 The clamping unit shall grip the bars well, be 
easy to handle, capable of being used in horizontal or 
vertical position of welding, and have such mechanism 
that no misalignment develops at the welded portion. 


C-2.1.3 Pressurizer shall be either hydraulic or 
mechanical and may be either manually operated or 
electrically driven. The pressurizer shall be capable of 
maintaining uniform axial pressure 


IS 9417 : 2018 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 10.6.2) 
GAS METAL ARC WELDING USING CO, 


D-1 GAS METAL ARC WELDING PROCESS 


The gas metal arc welding (GMAW) process using CO, 
may be used for lap welding of high strength deformed 
steel bars. However, in view of the constraint of space 
for the torch, butt welding through this process is not 
recommended. 


D-2 GAS METAL ARC WELDING EQUIPMENT 


D-2.1 The equipment for gas metal arc welding consists 
of following: 


a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 


Welding gun and wire feed unit; 

Welding power supplv; 

An electrode; 

Shielding gas (CO,) supplv; and 

A source of cooling water mav be required 
for water cooled welding gun. 


D-2.1.1 The most common welding gun is a hand held 
air-cooled gun and it is used for general welding. The 
second most common tvpe of welding torch is water- 
cooled gun. It uses higher current levels for heavier 
sections and larger wire diameters. The third tvpical 
holder tvpe is an automatic gun that is water cooled; 
this gun is used tvpicallv with automated equipment. 


D-2.1.2 Most applications of gas metal arc welding use 
a constant voltage power supply. As a result, any change 
inarc length (which is directly related to voltage) results 
in a large change in heat input and current. A shorter 
arc length will cause a much greater heat input, which 
will make the wire electrode melt more quickly and 
thereby restore the original arc length. This helps 
operators keep the arc length consistent even when 
manually welding with hand-held welding guns. To 
achieve a similar effect, sometimes a constant current 
power source is used in combination with an arc 
voltage-controlled wire feed unit. In this case, a change 
in arc length makes the wire feed rate adjust in order to 
maintain a relatively constant arc length. In rare 
circumstances, a constant current power source and a 
constant wire feed rate unit might be coupled, especially 
for the welding of metals with high thermal 
conductivities, such as aluminum. This grants the 
operator additional control over the heat input into the 
weld, but requires significant skill to perform 
successfully. 


Alternating current is rarely used with GMAW; instead, 
direct current is employed and the electrode is generally 


positively charged. Since the anode tends to have a 
greater heat concentration, this results in faster melting 
of the feed wire, which increases weld penetration and 
welding speed. The polarity can be reversed only when 
special emissive-coated electrode wires are used, but 
since these are not popular, a negatively charged 
electrode is rarely employed. 


D-2.1.3 Electrode selection is based primarily on the 
composition of the metal being welded, the process 
variation being used, joint design and the material 
surface conditions. Electrode selection greatly 
influences the mechanical properties of the weld and 
Is a key factor of weld quality. In general, the finished 
weld metal should have mechanical properties similar 
to those of the base material with no defects such as 
discontinuities, entrained contaminants or porosity 
within the weld. To achieve these goals, a wide variety 
of electrodes exists. All commercially available 
electrodes contain deoxidizing metals such as silicon, 
manganese, titanium and aluminum in small 
percentages to help prevent oxygen porosity. Some 
contain denitriding metals such as titanium and 
zlrconium to avoid nitrogen porosity. Depending on 
the process variation and base material being welded, 
the diameters of the electrodes used in GMAW typically 
range from 0.7 to 2.4 mm (0.028-0.095 inch) but can 
be as large as 4 mm (0.16 inch). The smallest 
electrodes, generally up to 1.14 mm (0.045 inch), are 
associated with the short-circuiting metal transfer 
process, while the most common spray-transfer process 
mode electrodes are usually at least 0.9 mm 
(0.035 inch). 


D-2.1.4 Shielding gases are necessary for gas metal 
arc welding to protect the welding area from 
atmospheric gases such as nitrogen and oxygen, which 
can cause fusion defects, porosity, and weld metal 
embrittlement if they come in contact with the electrode, 
the arc, or the welding metal. This problem is common 
to all arc welding processes; for example, in the 
shielded-metal arc welding process (SMAW), the 
electrode is coated with a solid flux which evolves a 
protective cloud of carbon dioxide when melted by the 
arc. In GMAW, however, the electrode wire does not 
have a flux coating, and a separate shielding gas is 
employed to protect the weld. This eliminates slag, the 
hard residue from the flux that builds up after welding 
and shall be chipped off to reveal the completed weld. 
Typical gas-flow amounts are approximately 
20-25 l/min (40-50 ft°/h). 


IS 9417 : 2018 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Concrete Reinforcement Sectional Committee, CED 54 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (17, Nalanda Apartment, D-Block, 


Vikaspuri, New Delhi 110018) 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute (CSIR), Karaikudi 


CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Tourism & Transportation Development Corporation 


Limited, New Delhi 


Dextra India Private Limited, Mumbai 


Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch (MES), New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Construction Company, Mumbai 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Stainless Steel Development Association, New Delhi 


Institute of Steel Development and Growth, Kolkata 


Jindal Steel & Power Limited, Gurugram 


JSW Steel Limited, Raigad 


Larsen and Toubro Limited (ECC Construction Division), 


Chennai 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 


Ministry of Steel, Government of India, New Delhi 


12 


Representative(s) 


Suri G. SHARAN (Chairman) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
SHRI RAJESH KHARE (Alternate) 


SHRI S. R. KARADE 
SHRI D. M. Mecon (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SARAVANAN 


DIRECTOR 
SHRI S. S. GAHARWAR (Alternate) 


Suri T. S. KRISHNAMOORTHV 
Dr B. H. BHARATHKUMAR (Alternate) 


Director (HCD-NW&S) 
Director (HCD-N&W) (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL MAHAJAN 
Suri O. P. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI G. R. SHIROMANI 
SHRI LACHHMAN SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SHISHIR BANSAL 


SHRI SUNIL DESAI 
SHRI JITENDRA H PATHAK (Alternate) 


BRIG GIRISH JOSHI 
LT CoL GAURAV KAUSHIK (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI DEEPAK AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI VENKATARAMANA. N. HEGGADE 
SHRI SUDEESH RAJENDRAN (Alternate) 


Suri SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
Dr CHETAN HAZAREE (Alternate) 


SHRI Hart OM Gupta 
Suri MANOJ K MITTAL (Alternate) 


ProF A. K. NAGPAL 
Pror B. BHATTACHARJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI ROHIT KUMAR 
SHRI JOUSLINE GEORGE (Alternate) 


DR JAVANTA K. SAHA 
Suri ARIJIT GUHA (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHWANI KUMAR 
SHRI LAKSHMINARASIMHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI PRATAP K PATRA 


SHRI S. KANAPPAN 
SHRI STHALADIPTI SAHA (A/ternate) 


SHRI U. CHAKRABORTV 
SHRI J. K. JHA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. VERMA 
DR SANJAV WAKCHAURE (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. BHATNAGER 
SHRI ANIL KUMAR MISHRA (Alternate) 


Organization 


National Highwavs Authoritv of India, New Delhi 


Mandi Govindgarh 
National Metallurgical Laboratorv, Jamshedpur 
NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Nuclear Power Corporation India Limited, Mumbai 

Outokumpu India Private Limited, New Delhi 

P.S.L. Limited, Mumbai 

Rashtriva Ispat Nigam Limited, Visakhapatnam 

Research Design and Standards Organization, Ministrv of 
Railwavs, Lucknow 

Steel Authoritv of India Limited, Bhilai Steel Plant, Bhilai 

Steel Authoritv of India Limited, Durgapur Steel Plant, 


Durgapur 
Steel Authority of India Limited, R&D Centre for Iron & 


Steel, Ranchi 
Steel Re-Rolling Mills Association of India, Kolkata 
STUP Consultants Private Limited, Mumbai 
Sunflag Iron & Steel Co Limited, New Delhi 


Tata Steel Limited, Jamshedpur 


Tata Steel Limited (Wire Division), Mumbai 


In personal capacitv (BC 96, Salt Lake Citv, Kolkata 700064) 


In personal capacitv (House No. 2310, Sector 7D, 
Faridabad 121006) 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretarv 
SHRI S. D. RANE 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Institute of Secondarv Steel Technologv Association, 


IS 9417: 2018 


Representative(s) 


SHRI V. V. ARORA 
SHRI AMIT TRIVEDI (Alternate) 


SHRI M. P. SHARMA 
SHRI K. VENKATARAMANA (Alternate) 


SHRI RoBIN KUMAR BAGCHI 
SHRI VISHVA BANDHU GUPTA (Alternate) 


Dr D. D. N. SiNGH 
SHRI A. K. BANSAL 


SHRI Y. T. PRAVEENCHANDRA 
SHRI R. N. SARANGI (Alternate) 


SHRI YATINDER PAL SINGH SURI 
SHRI PURUSHOTHAMA REDDV (Alternate) 


SHRI R. RADHAKRISHNAN 
Suri KUNAL PATEL (Alternate) 


Suri C. H. SRINIVASA Rao 
Suri G. Rasa LINGAM (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL KUMAR 
Suri A. K. PANDEV (Alternate) 


SHRI U. K. BHALLA 
SHRI SANJAV KAMRA (Alternate) 


SHRI A. N. BANARJEE 
SHRI ABHIJIT DATTA (Alternate) 


Dr Vinop KUMAR 
Suri D. KARMAKAR (Alternate) 


Suri B. M. BERIWALA 
SHRI SWAPAN KUMAR CHAKRAVORTV (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIT KUMAR CHAKRABORTV 
SHRI ANIRBAN SENGUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI R. K. MALHOTRA 
SHRI JAGANNATHAN SOMU (Alternate) 


SHRI BISWAJIT GHOSH 
SHRI TANMAY BHATTACHARVV (Alternate) 


SHRI SHISHIR V. DESAI 
SHRI SURESH MAHAJAN (Alternate) 


Dr Ant K. Kar 


SHRI HARISH KUMAR JULKA 


SHRI SANJAV PANT, Scientist F & Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Scientist E (Civil Engg), BIS 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutorv institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and qualitv certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the countrv. 

Copvright 

BIS has the copvright of all its publications. No part of these publications mav be reproduced in anv form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copvright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodicallv; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 54 (10574). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central |: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.IT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


