TRAT HA IS 16471 : 2017 
Indian Standard 


watt A Are at acetal ar aA 
a ut & faeg man — faster 


Protection of Below Ground 
Structures Against Water from the 
Ground — Guidelines 


ICS 91.120.30 


© BIS 2017 


ada Ah SR 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
® aM Fa, 9 age wat AM, ae feecit-110002 
wus MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2017 Price Group 9 


Waterproofing and Damp-Proofing Sectional Committee, CED 41 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Waterproofing and Damp-Proofing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


Different types of waterproofing materials are used in the building industry. In order to obtain satisfactory 
performance, it is essential that prior to the application of these materials for the damp-proofing and 
waterproofing treatment, special care has to be taken to design the details and carefully prepare the building 
surface for receiving the treatment as recommended. This standard provides guidance for the waterproofing 
treatment of structures below ground. It is essential to ensure the water tightness/protection from water of 
the structures so that the flow of water from inside the structure to outside (in case of swimming pools), and 
the infiltration of water from the surrounding soil into the structure are effectively prevented. This standard 
is intended to provide guidance to the designers, engineers, contractors and others engaged in building 
activity to ensure protection of below ground structures against water. 


A number of recent developments are addressed, which are important when specifying, designing and 
constructing below ground structures, including, 


a) more deep construction in congested urban areas; 
b) an increase in the provision of basements; 
c) development and use of new materials for waterproofing; and 


d) amore detailed assessment is provided of the risks inherent in below ground construction and how 
these might best be addressed. 


It is to be noted that the figures used in this standard are only representative of different installation methods, 
and should not be translated directly into practice without first checking all the parameters specific to the 
installation. 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international coordination among the 
standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field 
in this country. This has been met by deriving assistance from BS 8102 : 2009 ‘Code of practice for protection 
of below ground structures against water from the ground’, published by the British Standards Institution. 
This standard has been formulated to suit Indian context and is largely based on the technical provisions 
given therein. 


This standard has been formulated to serve as a useful guidance and suggest recommendations for planning 
and carrying out waterproofing activity. It should not be quoted as if it were a specification and particular 
care should be taken to ensure that claims of compliance are not misleading. It has been assumed in the 
formulation of this standard that the execution of its provisions is entrusted to suitably qualified and experienced 
people, for whose guidance it has been formulated. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16471 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


PROTECTION OF BELOW GROUND STRUCTURES 
AGAINST WATER FROM THE GROUND — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down recommendations and 
provides guidance on methods of dealing with and 
preventing the entry of water from surrounding 
ground into a structure below ground level. It covers 
the use of, 


a) waterproofing barrier materials applied to 
the structure, 


b) structurally integral watertight construction, 
and 


c) drained cavity construction. 


It also covers the evaluation of groundwater 
conditions, risk assessment and options for drainage 
outside the structure. It applies to structures which 
extend below ground level and those on sloping sites. 


This standard does not give recommendations 
concerning the use of embedded heating in 
structures, floors and walls or for the special 
requirements in connection with the design and 
construction of cold stores. 


NOTE — Structures are generally characterized as deep, 
if they have more than one storey below ground level, 
or shallow, if they have only a single storey below 
ground. This standard is applicable to both. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreement based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 4911, IS 6461 (Part 7) and the following 
shall apply. 


3.1 Cavity Drain Membrane — A dimpled, flexible, 
high-density polymer sheet, which can be placed 
against the internal face of a structure after 
construction and is designed to intercept water 
penetrating the structure and direct it to a drainage 
system. 


3.2 Cut-off Wall — An embedded retaining wall 
(see 3.4) designed to surround and seal-off an area, 
to inhibit water inflow from the surrounding area. 


3.3 Damp Area — An area which, when touched, 
might leave a light film of moisture on the hand but 
no droplets of water (that is beading). 


3.4 Embedded Retaining Wall — A wall used to 
support the sides of an excavation, installed in 
advance and penetrating below the lowest level of 
the below ground construction. 


NOTE — Within this standard the principal forms 
considered constitute the primary permanent wall for 
the below ground construction, and are taken as 
diaphragm walls, contiguous or secant piles (which may 
be installed in different configurations) or steel sheet 
piles. 


3.5 Ground Barrier — An impermeable barrier 
between the structure and the ground intended to 
prevent or impede the ingress of water, dampness, 
radon, methane and other ground gases and 
contaminants. 


3.6 Loading Coat — Layer of material designed to 
hold a Type A waterproofing material in place when 
resisting water pressure. 


3.7 Perched Water Table — Reservoir of water in 
the ground maintained permanently or temporarily 
above the standing water level in the ground below 
it, and is caused by the presence of an impervious 
soil or a stratum of low permeability. 


3.8 Seepage — The slow transmission of water 
through discrete pathways of a structure. 


3.9 Tanking — An application of an appropriate 
waterproofing barrier to the walls, the base slab and, 
where relevant, the roof of a below ground structure, 
such that the entire envelope of the structure below 
ground is protected against water ingress. 


NOTE — A cavity drain membrane is not considered to 
constitute tanking. 


3.10 Type A (Barrier) Protection — Protection against 
water ingress which is dependent on a separate 
barrier system applied to the structure. 


3.11 Type B (Structurally Integral) Protection — 
Protection against water ingress which is provided 
by the structure. 


IS 16471 : 2017 


3.12 Type C (Drained) Protection — Protection against 
water ingress into usable spaces which is provided by 
the incorporation of an appropriate internal water 
management system. 


3.13 Vapour Check — Membrane or other element that 
restricts the transmission of water vapour. 


3.14 Waterproof — Impervious to water. 
NOTE — This can also be known as watertight. 


3.15 Waterproofing — Application of waterproof/ water- 
resisting materials. 


3.16 Waterproofing Barrier — Material that does not 
permit the transmission of free water, but might allow 
some water vapour permeability. 


3.17 Waterproofing System — Materials and methods 
used to protect a structure from water ingress and might 
also provide resistance to the diffusion of water vapour. 


3.18 Water Resistance — Ability of a material to resist 
water penetration. 


3.19 Waterstop — Material designed to inhibit the 
transmission of water through joints in the structure. 


3.20 Water Vapour — Water in its gaseous state. 


3.21 Water Vapour Resistance — Ability of a material 
to resist water vapour penetration. 


4 DESIGN PHILOSOPHIES 
4.1 General 


It is essential for the success of any project involving 
below ground structures that strategies for dealing with 
groundwater, soil gases and contaminants are considered 
from the very earliest stages of the planning and design 
processes. For guidance on construction project 
management, a reference may be made to IS 15883 (Part 1). 
For new structures, it is recommended that the structural 
design, overall weatherproofing design, waterproofing 
design and construction processes are considered 
together, as they generally interact. In addition, it is 
recommended that, during the design process and at all 
stages of the construction process, the designers, 
specialists, manufacturers/suppliers and installing 
contractors establish and maintain effective channels of 
communication. Regular and clear communication 
coupled with good site supervision allows variations and 
amendments to the design to be planned and executed 
without compromising the performance of the 
waterproofed structure (see also 4.2). 


4.2 Design Team 


The advice of a geotechnical specialist should be sought 
on the geology and hydrogeology, the external drainage 
options and groundwater conditions (see 5). A 


waterproofing specialist should be included as 
part of the design team so that an integrated 
waterproofing solution is created. The 
waterproofing specialist should, 


a) be suitably experienced; 


b) be capable of devising solutions that 
accommodate the various project 
constraints and needs; and 


c) provide the design team with 
information and guidance that assists 
with and influences the design, 
installation and future maintenance of 
the waterproofed structure. 


All design decisions made by others that might 
have an impact on the waterproofing design 
should be brought to the attention of the 
waterproofing specialist/designer and installing 
contractors. Final decisions and any 
recommendations should be approved by the 
designer/engineer-in-charge. 


NOTE — The waterproofing specialist could be 
the manufacturer or material supplier, provided 
that the manufacturer/supplier has the relevant 
expertise. 


4.3 Principal Considerations of Design 
4.3.1 General 


In order to develop a robust design for protecting 
a structure against groundwater, the following 
factors should be assessed: 


a) Likely highest level of the water table, 
the drainage characteristics of the soil 
and other site specific properties (see 5); 


b) Appropriate waterproofing measures 
(see 6), that is Types A, B or C protection 
and, where necessary, external drainage 
based on, 


1) the results of the site evaluation, 
including the classification of the 
water table; and 


2) the intended use of structure, with 
consideration given to any 
requirement for future flexibility. 
This should be undertaken in 
consultation with the client; 

c) Appropriate type of primary 

waterproofing system (see 8, 9 and 10). 


A three-dimensional review of structure and 
waterproofing should be undertaken so as to 
identify any complex geometries, which are not 
readily identified from normal two-dimensional 
details. Service entries are particularly vulnerable 


to water penetration; where they cannot be avoided, 
they should be carefully detailed, incorporating 
sealing, to minimize the risk of water ingress (see 
8.1.3). 


NOTES 


1 The general principle is to assess the risk of water 
reaching the structure and then to select a waterproofing 
system capable of achieving the required internal 
environment. 


2 Mechanical heating and ventilation often play an 
important role in creating the internal environment, 
particularly where higher grades are required. The design 
of such systems is a specialist activity, outside the scope 
of this standard. Condensation may also be controlled 
by the provision of adequate ventilation (assisted by 
heating), coupled with the suitable treatment of floor 
and wall surfaces. 


3 The three-dimensional review needs to include detailed 
information on the proposed waterproofing system (for 
example, the effect that this has on wall base details, 
laps in membranes and waterstops). Examples of 
complex geometries are corner details and where the 
wall adjoins: the base slab/foundation; the superstructure; 


differing floor levels; and windows below ground. 
4.3.2 Defects and Remedial Measures 


An ideal waterproofing solution would be defect- 
free. However, it should be noted that two types of 
defects might occur in any waterproofing, where a 
structure is subjected to water pressure, and this 
could mean that the required internal environment is 
not achieved. These defects are as follows: 


a) Defects owing to poor workmanship or the 
inappropriate use of materials; 


b) Defects owing to the specific properties of 
the materials being used. 


It is essential that the construction methods and 
materials used to realize the design are such that the 
defects in (a) are avoided. The defects in (b), which 
are generally minor, should be recognized and catered 
for in the design. Contingency planning for dealing 
with any localized defects or system failure that arise 
should be included as part of the overall water- 
resisting design for the structure (see also 11). 


In either case, the issue of repairability should be 
taken into account and the feasibility of remedial 
measures assessed. 


Figure 1 outlines the principal factors and stages 
that need to be addressed in order to produce a robust 
waterproofing solution for a below ground structure. 
It demonstrates that some matters are interrelated 
and that a degree of iteration might result from a 
need to address buildability and repairability. The 
principal issues (boxes) do not necessarily need to 
be addressed in the order shown but all need to be 
understood and evaluated. 


IS 16471 : 2017 


NOTE — Reference to defects does not apply to normal 
designed flexural cracks or surface crazing in concrete 
elements but only to through cracking, which might 
need to be locally sealed. 


5 SITE EVALUATIONS 


NOTE — Attention is drawn to the fact that many of 
the issues addressed in this clause are also relevant to 
the design of the structure itself. 


5.1 General 
5.1.1 Desk Study 
A desk study should be carried out, 


a) to assess the geology and hydrogeology, 
including soil permeabilities, flood risk, 
radon, methane and other ground gases and 
contaminants (for example, chlorides and 
acids); 

b) to assess the topography of the 
surrounding ground in relation to the below 
ground structure; 


c) to establish the likely highest level of the 
water table and the potential for the 
occurrence of a perched water table; and 


d) to identify any missing ground and 
groundwater information, which should then 
be obtained by undertaking a site 
investigation. 


5.1.2 Risk Assessment (see Note 1) 


A risk assessment should be carried out which 
considers the long-term water pressures, the effects 
of surface water infiltration and the use of external 
drainage and cut-off walls. 


Risk assessment should also consider, 


a) the effects of climate change, burst water 
mains and sewers, adjacent trees, sulphates, 
radon, methane and other ground gases and 
contaminants; and 

b) where external drainage is proposed, the 
effects of drawdown on adjacent structures, 
the potential silting of drainage and 
befouling issues. 


Even when the site investigation indicates dry 
conditions, the risk of some water logging (see 
Note 2) in the future should be assumed. 


The following consequences of failure should be 
analyzed when doing desk study: 

1) Dispute costs, legal fees; 

2) Private or public property damage liability; 


3) Endangerment of building operative or 
public from damage to electrical equipment; 


IS 16471 : 2017 


Initial Information 
Design Philosophy 
* Design Team 
Site Evaluation 
* Desk Study 


* Risk Assessment 
* Water table Classification 
Review of Structure 
* Type (e.g. New or Existing?) 


«Intended use 
* Foundation form and design 


* Construction Methodology 


Structural Design Considerations 


Selection of type A, Bor C 
waterproofing protection 


Is combined protection necessary? 


Has buildability been considered? 
Has repairability been addressed? 


Fic. 1 DESIGN FLOWCHART 


4) Damage to archives, stored goods or plant; 5.1.3 Water Table Classification 

5) Loss of rent; Where assessment of the water table is undertaken, 

6) Reduction in value of property; this should be classed into the following three 

7) Damage to reputation of landlord/ categories, which can then be used to determine the 
developer; suitability of different types of waterproofing 

8) Facility, business disruption; protection (see 6.2): 

9) Lack of access/utility of basement areas; and a) High — Where the water table or perched 

10) Costs of remedial work and operational water table is assessed to be permanently 
delays. above the underside of the base slab. 

HORES b) Low — Where the water table or perched 

water table is assessed to be permanentl 

1 The principal risks with respect to water ingress into bel th derside ofthe b P lab fd 

structures are the external environmental conditions. C OW G UNGErSIQE O . Ne BSE 5140. Is 

2 Even in permeable subsoil, groundwater requires time only applies to free-draining strata. 

to drain away and this can result in limited pressure c) Variable — Where the water table 


periodically coming to bear against the structure. 


fluctuates. 


NOTE — In certain ground conditions, external drainage 
systems can be used to convert the high 
and variable water tables to the low condition (see also 


6.3). 
5.2 Inspection and Survey for Existing Structures 
5.2.1 General 


Following an assessment of the external risk 
(see 5.1.2), a comprehensive survey should be 
undertaken of any existing waterproofing 
arrangements. The structure should also be examined 
in order to determine any potential movement that 
might occur between the walls and floor. 


As the space available in below ground structures 
may be converted into habitable rooms during 
refurbishments, the survey should also consider the 
previous use, for example this might have been such 
that dampness was of less concern than for the 
proposed use. 


NOTES 


1 The base slab of many older structures is likely to 
abut the external walls. This can give rise to movement 
between wall and floor. Special flexible joint details 
might be required so that strains in the waterproofing 
materials are controlled within acceptable limits where 
bonded or surface-applied barrier materials are used in 
such situations. Similar details might also be required at 
other locations where structural movement can occur. 


2 Less movement would be expected in cases where the 
floor is set into the wall although horizontal movement 
can occur unless the floor is reinforced such as to 
achieve the necessary fixity. 


3 Existing waterproofing might have to be removed 
completely and replaced with an entirely new system, 
although in some instances it might be possible to apply 
a Type A barrier or a Type C drained cavity system 
directly. These systems can be considered where there 
is no existing waterproofing but the suitability of Type 
A barrier materials depends on the characteristics of 
the surface of the wall or floor. 


5.2.2 External Walls 


An old external cavity form of waterproofing 
protection might be encountered that is not 
immediately obvious. Where an external cavity is 
found, it should be inspected to confirm that, 


a) the cavity is not bridged by debris; 


b) any drainage is still functioning and has not 
been silted up; and 


c) air bricks are not obstructed by soil or 
vegetation. 


It should be established whether walls are earth 
retaining or free standing as there might be instances 
where the waterproofing measures have not been 
continued along internal walls abutting the external 
retaining wall. 


IS 16471 : 2017 


The survey should include any construction which 
abuts the main structure, such as garden walls and 
arches under steps, as these are a potential source 
of moisture transfer. 


NOTES 


1 An example of an external cavity is where an inner 
wall, load bearing or otherwise, has been built with a 
cavity between it and an earlier retaining wall. This 
cavity might be closed/capped with a plinth, and would 
typically be drained at the base and ventilated by air 
bricks. 


2 Where the external wall is of solid construction, there 
might be no waterproofing or there might have been 
previous attempts to mask dampness. Many such 
applications can be incomplete or ineffective. It is 
possible that the attempted waterproofing was 
inappropriate for the prevailing external conditions or 


the wall surface to which it had been applied. 
5.2.3 Floor at Base Slab Level 


Where drainage tiles have been used to cover the 
floor, they should be assessed to confirm that they 
have sufficient strength to withstand loadings from 
walls, plant, equipment, vehicles, etc, appropriate to 
the intended use. Where no-fines concrete has been 
used as a drainage layer, this should be similarly 
assessed to confirm that it has sufficient strength to 
withstand loadings and is still draining effectively. 


Consideration should also be given to, 


a) the ability of any surface to accept the 
proposed waterproofing; and 


b) the effect that any proposed waterproofing 
system is likely to have on stresses imposed 
on the existing structure by groundwater 
once the waterproofing system has been 
installed. 


NOTES 


1 Drainage tiles are typically made from clay or 
concrete. Both tiles and no-fines concrete have widely 
been replaced by cavity drain membranes. The floor 
should be thoroughly surveyed for signs of moisture 
penetration. 


2 Moisture from the ground can move across abutting 
constructions at any level and in some conditions 
running water might be encountered. 


6 WATER-RESISTING DESIGNS 
6.1 Groundwater 


6.1.1 Waterproofing measures should be designed 
on the basis of water to the full height of the retained 
ground at some time during the structure’s life where, 


a) no detailed geological or hydrogeological 
assessment has been undertaken; 


b) the results of the soil investigations are 
inconclusive with respect to groundwater; 


IS 16471 : 2017 


c) the ground drainage characteristics are 
unreliable; and 


d) the drainage measures (either internal or 
external) are unreliable or un-maintainable 
and infiltration cannot be controlled. 


Protection against water ingress from the following 
three sources should be considered: 


1) Inflow of surface water, ranging from 
percolation of rain to inundation of water 
from burst water mains (see 6.3); 


2) Water pressures acting on the external 
retaining wall system; and 


3) Water pressures below the base slab. 
The water-resisting design should enable the system 
to withstand a pre-determined head of water or 
control the water before it reaches the structure. One 
or both of the following methods may be used, 
in conjunction with the waterproofing protection 
(see 6.2), to reduce water penetration, depending on 
the conditions of the site and the required internal 
environment: 

i) Exclusion of surface water (see 6.3); and 

ii) Sub-surface drainage (see 6.4). 


6.2 Waterproofing Protection 
6.2.1 General 


One, or a combination, of the following types of 
waterproofing protection should be selected: 
a) Type A (barrier) protection; 
b) Type B (structurally integral) protection; and 
c) Type C (drained) protection. 


Key 
1 External waterproofing 


NOTE — Examples of the three types of waterproofing 
protection are given in Fig. 2. 


When making this selection, consideration should 
be given to, 


1) the need for 
(see 6.2.2); 


2) the water table classification and required 
performance level (see 6.2.3); and 


combined protection 


3) the need for continuity in the protection 
(see 6.2.4). 


There is a range of waterproofing systems that can 
be incorporated in each type of waterproofing 
protection and these should be assessed in 
accordance with 8, 9 and 10, as appropriate, and 
relevant manufacturers’ data sheets to confirm that 
the system selected is suitable for the structure to 
which it is to be applied. It is noted that the 
manufacturer’s recommendations for installation, 
including provision of protection, should always be 
followed. 


Similarly, recommendations for fixings where 
proprietary products are used should be followed. 


In cases where the below ground structure is fully 
buried or the sub-structure extends beyond the 
superstructure, protection should be provided 
against water ingress through the roof slab, for 
example by, 


i) encouraging water to drain away from the 
structure; 
il) providing drainage above the roof slab; 


ili) using an external barrier. 


For existing structures, the following types of 


2 Masonry or concrete wall, as appropriate (see Table 1) 


3 Concrete floor slab 

4 Sandwiched waterproofing 
5 Loading coat 

6 Internal waterproofing 


2A TYPE A (BARRIER) PROTECTION 


IS 16471 : 2017 


Key 

1 Water resistant reinforced concrete wall and slab 

2 External or internal (within wall) waterstop, as required 

3 Waterstop required at junction between wall and slab and at all construction joints 
4 Concrete/steel piled wall 

5 Water-resistant reinforced concrete floor slab or slab with added barrier 

6 Waterstop at junction to follow profile of wall 

7 Piled wall might need to be faced to achieve desired water resistance (see Table 1) 


2B Type B (STRUCTURALLY INTEGRAL) PROTECTION 


Key 

1 Cavity drain membrane 

2 Inner skin (render, drylining or walling, depending on system) 

3 Maintainable drainage channel with pipe connection to suitable discharge point 
4 Sump formed in-situ or preformed 

5 Pump 

6 Wall cavity 

7 Reinforced concrete/steel pile or diaphragm wall 

8 Drainage channel 

9 Waterstop at junction to follow wall profile 

10 Internal block wall 

11 Access point(s) to drainage 

12 Floor slab with integral protection and/or added membrane (internal or external) 


2C Type C (DRAINED) PROTECTION 


Fic. 2 TYPES OF PROTECTION 


IS 16471 : 2017 


waterproofing systems should be considered, 
subject to their suitability for application and their 
ability to be repaired: 


a) Aninternal Type A waterproofing barrier on 
a structure of suitable strength and 
stiffness, built of concrete or masonry 
(subject to the condition of the surface) (see 
Fig. 2A); 

b) A drained cavity to the walls and floor, 
using a Type C cavity drain system (see 
Fig. 2C). 


In situations where the use of a waterproofing system 
covered by this standard is either not achievable or 
not cost effective, other methods may be used, if 
they can be shown to lead to similar results. However, 
the risks and implications of such methods should 
be investigated and recorded. 


6.2.2 Combined Protection 


Consideration should be given to the use of 
combined protection (that is, Type A and Type B, 
Type A and Type C or Type B and Type C) where in a 
single system, 


a) the assessed risks are deemed to be high 
(see 5); 

b) the consequences of failure to achieve the 
required internal environment are too high; or 


c) additional vapour checks are necessary for 
a system where unacceptable water vapour 
transmission can occur. 


Although structures with Type B protection are 
designed to be water resistant, additional 
waterproofing systems may be applied internally or 
externally to control water vapour movement, where 
appropriate. An in-situ ‘liner’ wall designed to 
provide Type B protection can be cast inside an 
embedded retaining wall to provide combined 
protection. In some cases, a fully bonded barrier 
might also be provided between the two elements. 


Although structures with Type C protection are 
designed to control and manage seepage into a 
structure, where this is unacceptably high the water 
resistance of the structure should be improved prior 
to the installation of the Type C protection, by the 
application of either Type A or Type B protection. 


When combining types of protection, the 
compatibility of the different protection types should 
be assessed in order to minimize the risks and negate 
the need for remedial measures. 


6.2.3 Water Table Classification and Grades of 
Waterproofing Protection 


When selecting a type of waterproofing protection, 
Table 1 and Table 2 should be taken into account, in 
conjunction with the following: 


a) During the life of the structure, some degree 
of groundwater pressure is likely to build 
up against the chosen waterproofing 
system. 


b) Cracking or defective construction joints 
can provide a potential path for water 
ingress. 

c) Water ingress can occur where there is 
groundwater pressure. If this is not 
consistent with the required performance 
level (see Table 2), 


1) consideration should be given to the form 
and feasibility of remedial work; and 


2) if remedial work is not possible, the 
design should be altered. 


d) There are a number of risks associated with 
not carrying out planned maintenance for 
structures with Type C protection, for 
example, pump failure (see 10.3). 


The designer should discuss these points with the 
client prior to deciding on which type(s) of 
waterproofing protection to use. The following 
should also be taken into account: 


1) Initial capital costs compared with costs for 
future maintenance and any necessary 


upgrades; 

2) Scope for testing during installation; 

3) Risks associated with aggressive 
groundwater and other ground 


contaminants, which might require the use 
of a specific protection barrier; 


4) Need or ability to provide heating and/or 
ventilation and the consequences arising in 
terms of water vapour. 


NOTE — This might call for the adoption of an 
improved grade of waterproofing protection (see 
Table 1 and 6.2.2) or active environmental control in 
order to manage water vapour (see Table 2). 


6.2.4 Continuity of Waterproofing Protection 


The need for continuity in the waterproofing 
protection should also be considered when selecting 
a type of protection. In most circumstances, the 
protection should be continuous. In certain 
situations, for example, where a drained cavity is 
combined with an underslab membrane, 
discontinuity with respect to waterproofing can be 
acceptable subject to careful detailing and an 
appropriate assessment of risk (see 5.1.2 and Note 2). 
Any build up of water should be permanently 
controlled by a water management system. 


The proposed type of foundation and its suitability 
for providing continuity of waterproofing (where so 
required) should be assessed. 


IS 16471 : 2017 


be acceptable, if there is a need to manage radon, 
methane and other ground gases and contaminants 
(see 6.5). 


In existing structures, assessment of any direct or 
potential discontinuity should be undertaken in order 
to determine the need for special waterproofing 
details, for example to overcome the effects of future 
movement. 


6.3 Exclusion of Surface Water 


Where practicable, provision should be made to 
prevent or reduce percolation of rainwater into the 
ground. 


NOTES 


1 Continuity can be provided in situations where the 
surface or structure of the wall and foundation provides 
uninterrupted positioning of the waterproofing 
measures. 


NOTE — Burst water mains and leaky sewers can provide 
additional sources of surface water. These can affect 


2 Discontinuity of waterprooting protection might nòt perched water tables. The drainage behind the wall needs 


Table 1 Use of Different Protection Types Based on Water Table Classification 


(Clause 6.2.3) 
Risk Associated Water Table Waterproofing Protection 
. ifi i _ sn 
with Water Classification Le a 
Table (see Note) Type A Type B Type C 
we 
Piled Wall Reinforced» 
Concrete Wall 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
Low Low Acceptable Acceptable Acceptable Acceptable 
Variable Acceptable, if the Acceptable where: Acceptable Acceptable 
variable a) The piled wall is directly 


classification is 
due to surface 
water. 
Manufacturer’s 


accessible for repair and 
maintenance from inside the 
structure; or 

b) The piled wall is combined 


advice should be 
sought 


with a fully bonded 
waterproofing barrier; or 

c) The piled wall is faced 
internally with a concrete wall. 


High Acceptable where, 
a) an appropriate 
cementitious multi- 
coat render or 
cementitious 
coatings are used; 

b) the wall is of 


concrete 


Acceptable Acceptable 


High 


Measure to a) 
reduce risk b) 


Use combined protection 

Incorporate appropriately designed sub-surface drainage and ensure that this is maintained 
c) Use a fully bonded waterproofing barrier 

d) Lower the permeability of the main structure wall 

e) Use concrete with a waterproofing admixture 


f) Ensure that discharge systems, for example, pumps are maintaned so that the system remains effective 


NOTE — The water table classifications are defined as follows (see also 5.1.3): 
a) Low — where the water table or perched water table is assessed to be permanently below the underside of the base slab. 
This only applies to free drainage strata. 
b)  Varibale — where water table fluctuates. 
c) High — where the water table or perched water table is assessed to be permanently above the underside of the base slab. 
d) Ground permeability might affect risk under a low or varibale water table (see 5.1). 


Table 2 Grades of Waterproofing Protection 


(Clause 6.2.3) 

SI No Grade Example of Use of Structure Performance Level 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) 1 Car parking, plant rooms (excluding electrical Some seepage and damp areas tolerable, 
equipment) depending on the intended use” 

ii) 2 Car parking, plant rooms (utilities) and No water penetration acceptable. Damp areas 
workshops requiring a drier environment tolerable, ventilation might be required 
(than Grade 1), storage areas 

ili) 3 Ventilated residential and commercial areas, No water penetration acceptable. 


including offices, restaurants, retails shops, 
leisure centres, car parking, etc 


Ventilation, dehumidification or air conditioning 
necessary, appropriate to the intended use 


D Seepage and damp areas for some forms of construction can be quantified by reference to available industry standards. 


9 


IS 16471 : 2017 


to be able to cope with the highest inflow rates, for 
example, the burst water main, which might not be 
practicable in coarse grained soils. 


6.4 Sub-surface Drainage 


Where sub-surface drainage is deemed necessary to 
lower the potential for hydrostatic pressure on the 
waterproofing system and lessen the risk of water 
ingress through defects, it should be provided by 
one of the following methods: 


a) Permeable granular fill; 

b) No-fines or hollow block work; 

c) Geosynthetic drainage composite; and 
d) Underslab drainage. 


Such provisions should be made maintainable where 
they are used to control the level of water in a 
structure that does not in itself provide adequate 
water resistance. 


Where practicable, water should be kept from 
prolonged contact with perimeter structure walls or 
base slabs by porous or open jointed land drains, 
combined with a geosynthetic drainage composite 
installed to the full height of the earth-retaining wall 
and laid to proper slope around the perimeter of the 
structure, adjacent to the wall footing and, where 
appropriate, beneath the slab itself. 


The sub-surface system should be graded to an open 
outlet below the level of the lowest slab, such as to 
a stormwater drain protected by a pumped surcharge 
device or to a pumped sump, and can also provide a 
suitable outfall for any sub-floor drainage. 


Perimeter drainage at base slab level is likely to lower 
the groundwater table to a degree that varies with 
the permeability of the subsoil and the possible 
consequences of this (such as permanent lowering 
of the water table in the surrounding area) should be 
taken into account. Any existing system of land 
drains should be tested, checked and only retained 
if both appropriate and maintainable. Any local 
diversions necessary should retain the existing 
geometry so far as practicable with new and easily 
maintainable pipework. 


Care should be taken so that no damage is caused in 
nearby structures. 


Where deep structures are contemplated in built up 
areas, groundwater lowering should not be 
undertaken without careful investigation in 
conjunction with a groundwater specialist (see 4.2). 
Perimeter walls providing a cut off into an impervious 
layer or stabilization of granular subsoils by grout 
injection or similar alternative treatments may be 
considered instead. 


10 


Cut-off walls are formed from diaphragm walls, secant 
piles or steel piles. Over the excavated wall depth 
remedial works can be carried out on leaky walls. 
This is not feasible for the length of wall below 
formation. Therefore, specified tolerances should be 
such that there is adequate intersection between piles 
or provision of continuous water bars at diaphragm 
wall panel joints and particular attention should be 
given to workmanship. In interbedded soils, relief 
wells may be used below formation level. The cut- 
off wall may also be used to reduce the flow rate and 
control the drawdown outside the site. 


NOTES 
1 Figure 3 gives examples of the positioning of land 
drains, drainage channels and sub-surface drainage. 


2 For structures in coarse-grained soil, with variable 
and high water tables (see 5.1.3), the flow rates are 
likely to make it impracticable to pump for the design 
life of the structure. In these cases, a hydraulic cut off 
wall into fine-grained soils is required to isolate the 
ground below the base slab. This enables an underslab 
drainage system to relieve the water pressure below the 
base slab. 


3 For structures in fine-grained soil, with variable and 
high water tables (see 5.1.3), the flow rates are more 
likely to make it practical to pump for the design life 
of the structure. A drainage system may be provided 
outside the retaining wall to control the water pressures. 
An underslab drainage system may also be provided 
below the base slab to control the water pressures 


6.5 Ground Gases 


The insertion of a ground barrier for the prevention 
of radon, methane and other ground gases and 
contaminants from entering a structure should be 
considered in the design, choice of the materials and 
installation of any waterproofing system. 


7 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION ISSUES 
7.1 Site De-watering 


Where appropriate, the site should be de-watered at 
least until such time as the below ground structure 
and waterproofing is completed (see 6.4 regarding 
the effects of dewatering on nearby structures). On 
open sites, where any adjacent structures are 
sufficiently remote to be unaffected by groundwater 
lowering, de-watering or pumping from carefully 
arranged sumps with appropriate drainage channels 
should be continuous while the laying of any 
waterproofing barrier materials is in progress and until 
all loading coats have hardened and the structure 
has developed sufficient strength to resist the full 
water pressure. 


7.2 Structural Elements 


Forms of construction to receive below ground 
waterproofing protection may include the following: 


IS 16471 : 2017 


3A CONSTRUCTION WITHOUT A TOE 


1 


3B CONSTRUCTION WITH A TOE 


Key 


1 Maintainable land drain (see 6.4) not to be positioned closer than a line of 45° from the underside of the 
slab/blinding or with an invert above the upper surface of the floor slab 
2 Measures to control water vapour might be necessary where the invert of the land drain is above the 


underside of the floor slab 


3 Incorrect position of land drain, which can cause hydrostatic pressure on barrier leading to water ingress, 


if defects are present 


4 Subsoil drainage layer, where appropriate (see 6.4) 


5 Structural wall slab and foundation slab 


Fic. 3 SuB-SURFACE DRAINAGE POSITIONING 


a) Walls-constructed from, 


1) masonry (plain or reinforced brick or 
block); 


2) precast concrete; 


3) in-situ concrete, either cast in form 
(plain, reinforced or prestressed) or 
embedded walls; or 

4) _ steel or concrete piles in embedded walls. 


b) Base-slab constructed from concrete cast 
in-situ, plain or reinforced, raft or other form. 


11 


c) Roof, where applicable-constructed from 
reinforced in-situ concrete, precast concrete 
with an in-situ topping, or a steel composite 
slab, as appropriate. 


NOTES 


1 For structures cast entirely below ground, or where 
the substructure extends beyond the superstructure, the 
roof slab requires protection against water ingress (see 
6.2.1). 


2 Further guidance on construction methods for each 
type of waterproofing protection is given in 8, 9 
and 10. 


IS 16471 : 2017 


8 TYPEA (BARRIER) PROTECTION 
8.1 Structural Aspects 


Structures using Type A protection are normally 
constructed of concrete or masonry. Deeper 
structures are of concrete construction. Steel can 
also form part of the construction as temporary sheet 
piling. Consideration might be given to employing 
the sheet pile wall as an element of the waterproofing 
system (see 9). Schematic illustrations of Type A 
protection are given in Fig. 2A. 


8.1.1 General 


Barrier protection design should be based on an 
evaluation of, 


a) the nature of the substrate(s); 


b) the likely overall and local movements that 
might cause distress in the waterproofing 
barrier; 


c) the ability of the barrier system to 
accommodate these movements; 


d) the essential characteristics of the 
waterproofing system, for example, bonded/ 
unbonded, pre-applied/post-applied, liquid- 
applied or pre-formed; 


e) the need for external or internal application; 
and 


f) the effects of environmental contaminants. 
8.1.2 Differential Movement and Cracking 


Barrier-specific properties should also be evaluated, 
allowing for any predicted cracking from the 
structure. The waterproofing barrier should be 


4A REINFORCED (in-situ CONCRETE/ 
Masonry WALL) 


Key 
1 Stress and crack width reduced by reinforcement 


capable of providing the appropriate protection 
against water and water vapour without disruption 
or decay. 


Although some barrier materials accept local strains 
and can accommodate a crack opening in the 
supporting structure, it should be noted that others 
might be damaged by differential movement or 
cracking (see Fig. 4). 


Care should be taken so that a load-bearing substrate 
is capable of supporting the barrier material, even 
under sustained water pressure, particularly around 
openings or service penetrations. A levelling or 
smoothing layer should be applied to masonry 
structures, as required. 


Remedial measures to fill significant voids or 
openings should be undertaken as the effect of 
sustained water pressure forcing the barrier material 
into them might create a risk of failure. 


NOTE — There are two issues in regard to the possible 
influence of cracks on barrier performance. One relates 
to cracks pre-existing at the time of application and 
the ability of the selected system to initially bridge the 
crack. Decisions based on the specific properties of 
the barrier material would be needed before deciding 
whether any such cracks require pre-treatment. The 
second issue is the ability of the selected system to 
accommodate cracks that might form after application. 


8.1.3 Continuity of Waterproofing Barrier 


The waterproofing barrier should, in most instances, 
be continuous around the structure (see 6.2.4). In 
order to maintain the continuity of the barrier, 
penetrations through walls or floors that are to be 
protected (for example openings for services, pipes, 
cables) should be avoided, wherever possible. Where 


4B UNREINFORCED OR NOMINALLY REINFORCED 


(in-situ CONCRETE/MASonrY WALL) 


2 Likely to be compatible with most waterproofing barriers 
3 Stress and crack width increased by lack of reinforcement 


4 Might exceed strain capacity of some water proofing barriers, if wall cracks 


Fic. 4 EFFECT OF STRUCTURE ON APPLIED WATERPROOFING BARRIER 


it is essential to provide such openings, special 
treatment around the penetration should be provided 
and reference should be made to the manufacturer’s 
instructions and specialist advice. Similarly, where 
fixings through the barrier are necessary, the 
manufacturer’s instructions should be followed. 
Movement joints below ground should not be used 
unless unavoidable; in such cases these should be 
waterproofed based on structural design 
requirements and in consultation with the 
manufacturer’s instructions. 


Where a waterproofing barrier is required for a 
structure supported on piled foundations, special 
consideration should be given to the detailing so 
that structural continuity is not compromised (see 
Fig. 5) and reference should be made to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. 


8.2 Waterproofing Barrier Materials 
8.2.1 General 


The waterproofing barrier used to provide Type A 
protection should be installed in one of the following 
locations, depending on the material(s) from which 
it is formed: 


a) On the exterior face of walls or slabs 
(external waterproofing); 

b) On some external source of support (reverse 
waterproofing); 

c) Within the structure (sandwiched 
waterproofing); and 

d) On the interior face of perimeter walls 


(internal waterproofing). 


Table 3 should be considered when selecting the 
appropriate waterproofing barrier for use. All barriers 


IS 16471 : 2017 


should be installed strictly in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions, including any 
recommendations regarding, 


1) protection from damage, following application 
and curing, where the barrier is applied 
externally; 

2) penetrations through the barrier; 

3) fixings, where these are necessary; and 

4) application over joints in the substrate. 


8.2.2 Bonded Sheet Membranes 


Bonded sheet membranes may be pre- or post-applied 
to the structure. Pre-applied membranes are initially 
attached to enabling works in a reverse 
waterproofing application; they subsequently 
become bonded to poured concrete walls and slabs 
using synthetic adhesive layers. 


8.2.2.1 General 


A bonded sheet membrane should be firmly 
supported by a load bearing structure so that external 
ground and water pressures are adequately resisted. 


It is important that the sub-structure provides a 
satisfactory base on which to apply the membrane, 
and therefore concrete should be free from ridges 
and indentions and finished to a true and even 
surface, preferably with a wood float finish. Brickwork 
and block work should have flush joints. In all cases 
the manufacturer’s instructions shall be closely 
followed regarding, substrate preparation, detailing 
and lap sealing. 


For hot applied materials, care needs to be taken to 
ensure the adhesive is melted for the whole area to 
avoid only partial bonding of the membrane and 


Key 

1 Floor slab 

2 Pile cap, as appropriate 
3 Pile 

4 Pile reinforcement 


5 Slab/pile/pile cap to have integral protection and/or added internal or external membrane 


(catering for reinforcement, see 8.1.3) 


Fic. 5 PILE TO FLOOR SLAB JUNCTION 


13 


IS 16471 : 2017 


(Clause 8.2.1) 


Table 3 Categories of Barrier Materials 


SI No. Type of Barrier Description Application” 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Bonded sheet membranes a) Pre-applied composite sheet Applied before concreting of structural 
(see 8.2.2) membranes comprising thermoplastic slabs and confined walls. Can be applied 
polyolefin (HDPE and LDPE based externally or sandwiched 
carrier film), synthetic adhesives and 
protective layer that bond to concrete 
poured against them 
b) Synthetic or bitumen based sheet Can be applied externally or sandwiched. 
membrane can be either, Does not provide bonded membrane 
1)flexible, cold applied (self Protection below slabs 
adhesive); or 
2)hot applied (torch-on or bonded 
using a hot melt bitumen adhesive 
or cold bitumen adhesive) generally 
applied in multiple layers 
ii) Unbonded sheet membranes Flexible, synthetic sheet co-extruded Can be applied externally or sandwiched. 


iii) 


iv) 


v) 


vi) 


(see 8.2.3) 


Liquid applied membranes 
(see 8.2.4) 


Geosynthetic liners 


(see 8.2.5) 


clay 


Cementitious crystallization 


slurries and powders 
(see 8.2.6) 
Cementitious multi coat 


renders, topping and coatings 
(see 8.2.7) 


D see Figs. 2 and 6. 


associated risks of water tracking (see Fig. 6). Cold 


membranes generally made of plasticized 
PVC with a signal layer in case of damage 


There are many types of liquid applied 
membranes, which included one or two 
part systems 


These comprise bentonite with a single 
or dual carrier material, typically of 
Geotextile or HDPE 

There are two principal forms: dry 
bentonite and pre-hydrated bentonite 


These are applied as coating to surface 
of concrete walls and slabs or a solution 
or powder added to concrete 


These are generally applied in multicoats 
or slurries and are resistant to liquid water 
but allow some water vapour penetration 


applied materials are increasingly preferred due to 


ease of installation and to avoid the high risk of fire 


and injury. 


6A REINFORCED (in-situ CONCRETE/ 
Masonry) WALL 


Key 


Requires separation layers and protection 
screed below slab 


Can be applied externally or sandwiched 


Can be applied externally or 
sandwiched. Vulnerable to wet/dry cycling 
and must remain confined to be 
watertight 


Can be applied internally or externally 


Can be applied internally or externally 


8.2.2.2 Horizontal applications 


Membrane applications below foundations slabs are 


all effectively reverse waterproofing applications and 
should therefore use only a pre-applied bonded 


6B UNREINFORCED OR NOMINALLY REINFORCED 


(in-situ CONCRETE/MASONRY) WALL 


1 Bonded barrier preventing water from tracking from a defect in the membrane to a 
crack/joint in the supporting concrete wall 
2 Partially bonded or unbonded barrier allowing water to track from a defect 


3 Defect in barrier 


NOTE — If the defect is coincident with a crack, the crack can be repaired with crack injection. 


Fic. 6 EFFECT OF BONDED AND UNBONDED BARRIERS 


14 


membrane slab (see Fig. 6B). Protective screeds, 
fabrics or boards should be avoided as they act as a 
de-bonding layer between the membrane and 
structural concrete and provide a path for water 
migration. 


8.2.2.3 Vertical applications (pre-applied) 


For protection of walls on confined sites against 
temporary works or piled walls, a pre-applied 
membrane that subsequently becomes bonded to the 
poured concrete should be mechanically fixed to the 
vertical substrate to provide a fully bonded 
application. 


8.2.2.4 Vertical applications (post-applied) 


For walls with external working space that allows the 
waterproofing to be applied after the concrete wall is 
poured, post-applied self adhesive membranes shall 
be used. Walls shall be prepared in accordance with 
membrane manufacturer’s instructions. Careful 
attention needs to be paid to the compatibility and 
sealing of the junction between the exposed external 
face of the pre-applied slab membrane and the 
post-applied membrane. 


8.2.3 Unbonded Sheet Membranes 
8.2.3.1 General 


As the membrane is unbonded utmost care should 
be taken to avoid any damage. All substrates should 
be as smooth as possible, free from debris, and other 
irregularities that may puncture the waterproofing 
layers. 


8.2.3.2 Horizontal applications 


The membrane is loosely laid sandwiched between 
layers of geotextile; the first layer is an adjustment 
layer to compensate for surface irregularities, the 
second is a separation layer from subsequent 
minimum 50 mm screed protection. The engineer 
should note that on piled foundations, the unbonded 
membrane is separated from the structure and will 
fall away in case of ground settlement leaving the 
membrane unsupported against water pressure. 


8.2.3.3 Vertical applications 


For walls the same sandwich layers are required. The 
membrane must be attached to the walls using 
mechanical fixings recommended by the manufacturer 
to which the membrane can be spot welded. Protection 
to be provided by boards or masonry walls. 


8.2.3.4 Lap seam welding 


For all applications, watertightness of unbonded 
membranes relies totally on lap seam welding. 
Adjacent membranes are joined together using 


15 


IS 16471 : 2017 


specialist equipment to provide a double seam weld 
that allows pressure testing of joints. The pressure 
testing is to check the integrity of the welds for 
watertightness and strength and must be completed 
before subsequent layers are applied. 


8.2.3.5 Compartmenting 


To prevent water tracking as described in Fig. 6, 
unbonded membranes require a compartmenting 
system to enable the membrane to be divided into 
sectors and limit the free movement of water ingress 
around the structure. This is achieved using 
waterstops profiles of the same material double 
welded to the waterproof layer. These welds should 
also be pressure tested for integrity. Future repair 
operations can be carried out by injection of water 
reactive resins. For these repairs to be effective and 
the source of leaks readily identified, compartment 
sizes should be limited to no more than 150 m’. 


8.2.4 Liquid Applied Membranes 
8.2.4.1 General 


Details on the preparation of the substrate, 
application rate, method and curing requirements 
should be sought from the manufacturer. Liquid 
membrane (see IS 12027) performance is dependent 
on the applied thickness and correct mixing of 
components. Particular attention should therefore be 
paid to site quality control of mixing and application, 
both wet and dry film thicknesses to avoid thin 
patches and unmixed material. 


8.2.4.2 Sandwich applications 


When applied to the internal face of the structure, 
the membrane might need to be restrained against 
the effects of water pressure; in such cases, the 
restraining element should be firm against the applied 
liquid membrane. Suitable protection to the 
membrane should be provided. Specialist literature 
may be referred for detailed information. 


8.2.5 Geosynthetic Clay Liners 


Bentonite is a natural clay mineral, which has the 
capacity to expand when in contact with water 
forming a barrier to the transmission of water and 
other liquids. Bentonite is held between two 
geosynthetic layers. The bentonite forms an 
impervious seal providing it remains hydrated and 
fully confined. The geosynthetic layers attach to the 
poured concrete. 


Geosynthetic clay liners are available in two forms. 
Dry bentonite liners rely on activation taking place 
on site from the absorption of the groundwater once 
installed. Pre-hydrated bentonite liners are 
manufactured by vacuum extrusion and do not need 
to be hydrated on site. 


IS 16471 : 2017 


8.2.5.1 General 


Bentonite-based waterproofing should only be used 
where the liner remains confined between two 
surfaces. For this reason, bentonite membranes are 
generally not suitable for use below slabs where 
ground settlement is likely, for example on piled 
foundations. 


NOTE — The materials are suitable for new-build and 
refurbishment applications. 


8.2.5.2 Horizontal applications 


Geosynthetic clay liners can be laid onto compacted 
sub-base or blinding concrete. The surface can be 
damp, but the liner should not be laid into standing 
water and should be protected from wet weather to 
avoid premature hydration. Prematurely hydrated 
material should be replaced prior to concreting. The 
manufacturer’s advice should be sought on surface 
preparation requirements. 


The manufacturer should also be consulted regarding 
the continuity of the horizontal liner with the vertical 
liner as different options exist depending on the type 
of vertical application, that is pre-applied (see 8.2.5.3) 
or post-applied (see 8.2.5.4). 


8.2.5.3 Vertical applications (pre-applied) 


When pre-applied, the liner should be fixed to 
formwork or to secant, contiguous or steel piles or 
diaphragm walls and the concrete should be poured 
directly, confining the liner. 


8.2.5.4 Vertical applications (post-applied) 


When post-applied, the liner should be nailed to the 
reinforced concrete structure. Minimal substrate 
preparation is required. As the waterproofing 
performance relies on full confinement for the life of 
the structure, as soon as possible after the vertical 
bentonite sheeting has been applied to the walls, 
backfilling should take place in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions and to avoid the risk of 
premature hydration. 


8.2.6 Cementitious Crystallization Slurries and 
Powders 


Cementitious crystallization barriers are blends of 
Portland cement, treated quartz sands and active 
chemicals. They are supplied in powder form and are 
mixed with water to form slurry, which is then applied 
directly to the prepared concrete surface. The active 
chemicals combine with free lime and moisture 
present in the capillary tracts to form insoluble 
crystalline complexes which prevent water ingress. 


8.2.6.1 General 


Cementitious crystallization barriers should be 
applied to either internal or external surfaces of the 


16 


concrete structure by brush or spray. They are 
suitable for use on both new and existing structures, 
and do not require a loading coat. 


Surfaces should be prepared (in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions) so as to have a capillary 
open structure prior to the application of the barrier. 


NOTE — A capillary open structure refers to the 
intrinsic fine capillary tracts (pore structures) of a 
concrete matrix. 


8.2.6.2 Horizontal applications 


Cementitious crystallization barriers can be applied 
as single coat slurry to hardened concrete or dry 
sprinkle and trowel-applied to fresh concrete. They 
can also be applied to concrete blinding immediately 
prior to the placing of overlaying concrete. 


8.2.6.3 Vertical applications 


The barrier should be applied in a two-coat 
application to all vertical surfaces. Vertical surfaces 
should be prepared in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions. 


NOTE — The rate and final depth of the crystals 
growing into the capillary channels depend on the 
concentration of active elements in the product, the 
concrete quality, the presence of free lime, temperature 
and humidity. All these are variable factors and change 
over the life of the concrete particularly as free lime is 
no longer available. 


8.2.7 Cementitious Multi-coat Renders Mortars 
and Coatings 


The installation of cementitious multi-coat renders 
mortars and coatings should, unless otherwise 
advised by the manufacturer, be left until as much as 
practicable of the structure’s dead load has been 
applied. The substrate should be prepared in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions prior 
to the application of the system. 


Details on the application method and rate, mixing, 
number of layers/coats and curing requirements 
should be sought from the manufacturer. 


Existing substrates and structural elements should 
be assessed for suitability to withstand any increase 
in applied loads from water pressure. Specialist 
literature may be referred for detailed information. 


9 TYPE B (STRUCTURALLY INTEGRAL) 
PROTECTIONS 


9.1 General 


Concrete structures containing a waterproof 
admixture should be considered as having a lower 
degree of water/vapour transmission when the design 
of the concrete mix and casting of the structure is 
adequately supervised and the admixture is assessed 
and certified (see 9.2.1.3). Service entries are 


particularly vulnerable to water penetration; where 
they cannot be avoided, they should be carefully 
detailed, incorporating sealing, to minimize the risk 
of water ingress. 


NOTE — For water and water vapour resistance, 
Type B protection relies upon the design and the 
materials incorporated into the external shell of the 
structure itself. Schematic illustrations of Type B 
protection are given in Fig. 2B. 


9.2 Materials for Structurally Integral Protection 
9.2.1 Concrete 
9.2.1.1 General 


The following factors are considered as being of 
particular importance in achieving a water-resistant 
concrete structure and thus should be taken into 
account, 


a) the design of the structure (general and 
detailed), and the specification of materials; 

b) the quality of workmanship in preparing and 
placing concrete; 

c) curing; 

d) site organization; 

e) the condition of the formation, that is the 
formation should be clean with no running 
water; 

f) material storage; and 

g) the close-fitting of formwork, the fixing of 


reinforcement(s) and the preparation of joints. 


Crack widths in concrete should be controlled by 
using the appropriate design, mix specification, 
detailing, construction supervision and curing 
(especially in relation to temperature). 


The effects of residual moisture ingress (water or 
water vapour) may be minimized by the provision of 
appropriate internal environmental design and 
control mechanisms. 


When selecting applied internal finishes, advice 
should be sought from the manufacturer. Moisture 
content and relative humidity should also be 
considered. 


NOTE — Reinforced concrete structures may be designed 
and detailed specifically to minimize water ingress with 
no additional protective measures. Concretes meeting 
minimum design requirements for structural use and 
durability in the ground, and properly placed and 
compacted, are likely to have good resistance to the 
transmission of water in liquid form. A degree of 
resistance to water vapour transmission is also achieved 
dependent on section thickness. The pattern of any 
seepage encountered is often associated with poor joints, 
cracks or other discontinuities such as service 
penetrations. 


17 


IS 16471 : 2017 


9.2.1.2 Reinforced and prestressed concrete (in- 
situ or precast) 


Structures in reinforced or prestressed concrete 
should be designed and constructed in accordance 
with IS 456 and IS 1343. 


9.2.1.3 Concrete containing waterproofing 
admixtures 


Manufacturers should be consulted as to the 
performance of a specific waterproofing admixture 
in reducing the risk of water penetration through a 
crack, possibly under considerable hydrostatic 
pressure. Potential seepage locations, such as 
penetrations and joints, would typically be addressed 
by design (for example waterstops; see 9.2.1.4). 


Waterproofing admixtures should be used in 
conjunction with other waterproofing components 
supplied by the same manufacturer, for example, 
waterstops, sealants. 


NOTE -— There is a range of products, generally 
categorized as waterproofing admixtures, which seek 
different ways to increase the inherent resistance of 
concrete to water and water vapour. As the mechanisms 
used by each product to achieve these aims are quite 
diverse, it is not possible in this standard to give specific 
guidance on their use. 


9.2.1.4 Waterstops 


The principal types of waterstops can be classified 
as following: 


a) Passive sections: 


1) Rubber or flexible polyvinyl chloride (PVC) 
extruded profiles cast into the concrete on 
both sides of the joint, either at the concrete 
surface or mid-depth of the concrete section, 
to form a physical obstruction to water 
transmission; and 


2) Steel strips placed mid-depth of the concrete 
section to form a physical obstruction to water 
transmission. 


b) Active or hydrophilic strips: 


1) Preformed profiles of materials or sealant 
composition applied to the concrete joint at 
depth in the section. The materials swell or 
give rise to crystal growth on contact with 
water providing an enhanced obstruction. 
They can be used as a sole material or in a 
composite product with passive waterstop 
sections; and 


2) Post-injected systems. 


Permeable hose or other sections that are fixed 
to the construction joint surface before casting 


IS 16471 : 2017 


the second pour, to facilitate the injection of a 
specialised sealing resin into the joint, when 
required. 


Waterstops should be used to provide enhanced 
resistance to water transmission at joints in the 
concrete structure, for example, at construction or 
day-work joints, services or other penetrations (see 
Fig. 2). The positioning of the waterstop(s) (external 
and/or internal) should be appropriate for the method 
of construction and the level of risk. Particular 
attention should be given to the use of waterstops 
at movement joints (see 8.1.3). 


The specifier should be satisfied that waterstops 
have been tested and certified for the application, 
service conditions and groundwater chemistry 
proposed. 


Where centre-bulb waterstops are used, robust 
methods of fixing should be used to keep the 
components in place during concreting operations. 
Correct orientation should be provided to facilitate 
adequate compaction of the concrete around any 
internal components and to avoid creating paths for 
subsequent water ingress. 


9.2.2 Steel 


Steel piles in either sheet (see IS 2314) or tubular 
form may be used as the permanent structural wall in 
cases where the pile clutch interlock system between 
individual sections can be adequately sealed. Soldier 
piles formed from H or I sections may also be used 
with suitable lagging. Steel structures should be 
designed and constructed in accordance with IS 800. 


9.3 Embedded Retaining Walls 
9.3.1 General 


Construction for deep structures may be either top 
down or bottom up, or a combination thereof. The 
construction method should, as dictated by the 
ground conditions and site constraints (including 
the proximity of buildings on adjacent sites), 
determine the use and type of embedded piled walls, 
which may be of concrete or steel pile, or diaphragm 
walls. 


For all types of embedded retaining wall, the 
requirements for water resistance should be clearly 
specified. In particular, the acceptability of running 
or dripping water (seepage) and the extent to which 
any damp areas are tolerable should be considered 
and specified, as appropriate for the required grade 
of waterproofing protection (see 6.2.3). 


For all embedded retaining walls, whether concrete 
or steel, the joint between the base slab and the wall 
should be precisely detailed to achieve structural 
continuity consistent with the design. This junction 


18 


should be viewed as a _ three-dimensional 
arrangement (see also 4.3.1), such that all potential 
water paths can be identified and detailed. The joint 
should be carefully detailed and waterstops should 
be attached to, and follow, the profile of the wall in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 


NOTES 


1 Embedded retaining walls provide a degree of integral 
protection, although the number of joints and difficulties 
controlling their construction can lead to a risk of a 
greater quantity of water penetration, compared with a 
cast in form wall, and this needs to be allowed for in the 
overall design strategy. 


2 Grouting tubes may also be installed within a clean 
flush joint so that remedial grouting can be undertaken, 
if necessary. Attempts to install grout tubes that 
maintain intimate contact with convoluted joints might 
be unsuccessful; in this situation, a hydrophilic strip 
bonded to the joint with adhesive might be more suitable 
(see also 11). 


9.3.2 Concrete Retaining Walls 


Piled and diaphragm retaining walls should conform 
to the general requirements. 


Where secant pile retaining walls are used, specialist 
advice should be obtained as to the appropriate 
system and construction method for the project. 


NOTES 


1 The water penetration through well-formed walls 
using these techniques is normally limited to, and 
controlled by, the vertical joints rather than the flow 
through the concrete elements and there is thus little 
benefit in designing concrete piled and diaphragm walls 
in accordance with the higher tightness classes specified. 


2 The joints between diaphragm wall panels can be 
enhanced by the incorporation of water bars, where the 
performance requirements justify it. Such water bars 
can be effective at restricting water ingress via 
transverse flow through the wall section but further 
attention might be necessary to deal with water flowing 
up the wall joints inboard of the water bar location. 


9.3.3 Steel Retaining Walls 


The performance level of water tightness should be 
specified. This may be achieved by the application 
of an appropriate sealing system(s) to the clutch 
interlocks, using one of the following systems: 


a) Active (hydrophilic) systems, pre-applied 
or, if essential, applied under shelter and 
tightly controlled conditions on site; or 

b) Passive (hot-installed bituminous product) 


systems; or 


c) Welded clutches. 


The system selected should be able to provide the 
specified performance and be consistent with the 
method of installing the piles. The manufacturer’s 
instructions should be followed to achieve the 
necessary resistance to seepage. 


For integral protection, sheet pile interlocks should 
be welded or sealed with a hydrophilic material. 


Sealing welds along the interlock should be capable 
of accommodating any movement that might take 
place. The welding process should be selected to 
suit the environment to which the welds are exposed 
and the site conditions in which welding occurs. 


The connection to the base slab should cater for 
any uplift forces in addition to providing a robust 
barrier to water ingress. Horizontal sealants should 
be provided at the junction between the base slab 
and the perimeter wall using active or passive 
methods. 


Where possible, sheet piles should be shop-welded 
and subsequently driven in sets of two or three, thus 
reducing the extent of site welding required. If 
welding is undertaken on site, only the exposed length 
of the sheet piles is treated. Appropriate working 
conditions need to be provided and the piles should 
be driven within acceptable deviations to form the 
joint. 
NOTES 


1 In some instances, welded clutches might be used in 
addition to the systems specified in 9.3.3 (a) and (b). 


2 Steel sheet pile interlocks can be seal-welded after 
installation to provide watertight structural walls. 


3 Failure to prepare the surfaces appropriately increases 
the risk of porosity in the welds, with reduction in the 
degree of water resistance over time. 


10 TYPE C (DRAINED) PROTECTION 


Type C waterproofing protection manages water that 
penetrates the external shell of a structure, by 
collecting it in a cavity formed between the external 
wall and an internal lining/wall. There is permanent 
reliance on this cavity to collect groundwater 
seepage and direct it to a suitable discharge point, 
for example, drains or a sump for removal by gravity 
drainage or mechanical pumping. 


New construction generally incorporates a cavity 
drain membrane. However, the use of other products 
and techniques, such as drained voids constructed 
in masonry, can also be considered. Traditionally, 
the cavity in floor construction has been formed by 
the use of either no-fines concrete or ceramic tile 
systems. These are rarely used in new construction, 
but might be encountered when refurbishing existing 
structures (see 5.2.3). Schematic illustrations of 
Type C protection are given in Fig. 2C. 


10.1 Structural Aspects 


The outer leaf of the exterior wall should be capable 
of controlling the quantity of water that can pass 
through it, in order not to exceed the drainage 


19 


IS 16471 : 2017 


capacity of the system. Water entering a drained 
cavity system is regulated by the structure, so 
defects that might result in unacceptable leaks should 
be remedied before the system is installed. 


10.2 Cavity Drain Systems 


NOTE — Cavity drain systems do not change the 
loadings due to water on an existing structure, other 
than where remedial measures are taken to control water 
ingress. 


10.2.1 Cavity Drain Systems with Membranes 
10.2.1.1 Cavity drain membranes 


Cavity drain membranes should be used in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. In 
particular, the stud height or profile of the membrane 
should be selected in conjunction with the 
manufacturer’s data and after considering the 
external hydrostatic pressure, the porosity of the 
structure and the predicted rates of water ingress 
though the structure’s external fabric. Cavity drain 
membranes can be used on surfaces that have been 
contaminated with impurities. However, in these 
situations, consultation should be undertaken with 
the local environmental agency regarding discharge 
from the system. 


Before a cavity drain membrane is laid or fitted on 
walls and floors constructed of new concrete, the 
concrete surface should be treated to reduce the risk 
of leaching of free lime or mineral salts and to avoid 
the obstruction of the drainage system. 


NOTE — Where cavity drain membranes are used, the 
membrane forms a permanent cavity between the 
external elements of the structure and the internal wall/ 
floor finishes. Such cavities vary in width, depending 
on the stud height or profile of the membrane, but are 
usually up to 20 mm. 


10.2.1.2 Floor cavities 


Where the floor cavity incorporates perimeter 
channels that discharge into a sump(s), both the 
channels and the sump(s) should be cleaned before, 
during and after installation of the membrane to allow 
uninterrupted drainage (see also 10.3). Before the 
cavity drain membrane is laid, 


a) the floor should be flood tested to confirm 
that all water runs freely to the points of 
collection; and 

b) the base slab should be cleaned to remove 


all debris that might cause blockages. 


Sections of the membrane(s) laid across the floor 
should be jointed and sealed. Once laid, the 
membrane should be protected against damage 
caused by following trades. The membrane should 
be inspected for damage and any defects should be 
remedied before floor finishes are applied. 


IS 16471 : 2017 


NOTE — The cavity drain membrane may be covered 
with a variety of floor finishes depending on the design 
requirements of the structure. 


10.2.1.3 Wall cavities 


The wall cavity should be constructed so that it 
remains free draining at all times. 


Where the wall cavity incorporates perimeter 
channels that work in conjunction with a drained floor 
cavity, the drainage, which is common to walls and 
floors, should conform to 10.2.1.2. 


Before the cavity drain membrane is fitted, in 
situations where the cavity is to be constructed or 
installed over existing walls, all wall coverings that 
might decay, or become loose or friable, should be 
removed. 


NOTES 


1 If they are not removed, such wall coverings can 
cause the blockage of the cavity or drainage channels 
and impede free drainage. Sections of the membrane(s) 
fitted to the walls should be jointed and sealed ensuring 
adequate laps. 


2 The cavity drain membrane may be covered with a 
variety of wall finishes dependent on the design 
requirements of the structure. 


10.2.2 Cavity Drain Systems Without Membranes 


Where a drained cavity is formed by a masonry cavity 
wall, the inner leaf should be either built off a 
concrete upstand, constructed integrally with the 
slab, or built of engineering bricks to a minimum of 
150 mm above channel level. Materials should be 
selected which are appropriate to the environment 
on both faces. Where the cavity is constructed 
against an embedded retaining wall, allowance 
should be made for the permitted construction 
tolerances, in order to maintain the necessary 
channel width. Care should be taken during 
construction to keep the cavity clear of debris and 
mortar droppings. 


In order to allow free drainage from the channel and 
access for maintenance, it is recommended that this 
channel is laid nominally level but with adequate 
access points for maintenance through the inner leaf 
of the cavity wall. Where possible, the drainage 
channel should be formed within the depth of the 
slab. Where this cannot be achieved, the detailing 
should be such that water cannot migrate from the 
cavity across the slab. 


A drained cavity to the roof should be considered 
either as part of the base construction or, where 
necessary, as part of the remedial measures. 


10.2.3 Cavity Ventilation 


It is not usually advisable to ventilate the cavity; 
however, it might be necessary in certain 


circumstances, such as where there is a potential for 
radon, methane or other ground gases and contaminants 
to be present. In these circumstances, specialist advice 
should be sought during the design phase. 


10.3 Maintenance and Commissioning 
10.3.1 Design 


In order to maximize the long-term integrity and 
effectiveness of a waterproofing system 
incorporating Type C protection, the waterproofing 
system should be designed to be maintainable. 
Access points that allow routine maintenance of 
channels and outlets should be incorporated into 
the design of the waterproofing system. 


10.3.2 Installation and Inspection 


Immediately after the installation of a cavity drain 
system, drainage channels and sumps should be 
cleared out and tested. Pumping devices should be 
checked, tested and fully commissioned in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 


The servicing requirements for the waterproofing 
system should be clearly set out in the 
documentation supplied by the designer to the client, 
including the need for regular planned maintenance 
of the drainage and/or pumping systems not less 
than once a year. The client should be informed that 
any failure to adhere to the maintenance schedule 
could result in a failure of the waterproofing system. 


NOTE — In circumstances where pumps are running 
for long periods of time, or where the system is subject 
to silting or the deposition of free lime, more frequent 
servicing might be necessary. 


11 REMEDIAL MEASURES 
11.1 General 


Before any remedial action is taken, defects should 
be diagnosed to determine the cause and extent of 
failure. The correct diagnosis of the fault is of vital 
importance, to establish whether faults exist with the 
system as a whole, or whether faults are localized 
(see also 5.2). Where remedial work is required, the 
following measures should be considered: 


a) Installation ofa tanking system or a drained 
cavity; 
b) Installation of external drainage; or 


c) localized works to the fabric of the structure, 
such as, 


1) pressure or vacuum grouting (see 11.2); 


2) crack sealing with resin or cementitious 
mortar (see 11.3); 


3) crack filling by pressure or vacuum 
injection (see 11.4); and 


4) replacement of locally defective material 
(see 11.5). 


These should be considered irrespective of whether 
planned remedial treatment has been included as a 
contingency measure in new construction or for 
maintaining or improving the internal environment 
of an existing structure. 


If the location of a defect in an existing external 
membrane can be established, it is possible in some 
instances, where access is not a problem, to expose 
the membrane and carry out repairs by excavating 
locally, adjacent to the walls of the structure. 


Where the internal membrane is fully bonded to the 
substrate, the defect is generally located at the 
position where dampness or seepage occurs. Once 
the internal finish has been removed to reveal the 
defect, the membrane can be locally repaired using 
compatible materials. 


Where the internal membrane is only partially bonded 
to the substrate, the defect might be more difficult to 
locate. Even if the defect can be found, further 
migration to other defects can follow. In such cases, 
consideration needs to be given to removing and 
replacing the entire membrane with a new bonded 
system. 


Locating defects in a sandwich system can be 
particularly problematic and localized repair is seldom 
viable. Where access is not feasible, grouting in 
accordance with 11.2 and 11.4 ought to be 
considered. 


NOTE — There are many causes of seepage in new and 
existing structures, principally poor design and/or 
specification, defective materials, defective 
workmanship, deterioration of the structure, or a 
change in the external environment (for example, rising 
groundwater or locally leaking sewers or water mains). 
Adjacent construction works can also affect the pattern 
of groundwater flow and surface water run-off. A number 
of these factors can also combine to cause problems. 


11.2 Pressure or Vacuum Grouting 


Grouting to cut off seepage might repair isolated defects. 
However, it should be noted that, where a large number 
of defects occur, it is more effective to prevent water 
ingress by other methods. There are a number of grouting 
materials available for use based on, 


a) cement; 

b) bentonite; 

c) chemical (example, acrylic); 

d) resin (example, epoxide, polyester and non- 
expansive polyurethane); 

e) expansive polyurethane; and 

f) modified rubber latex. 


IS 16471 : 2017 


Holes should be drilled through the walls and floor 
of the structure adjacent to the defect (sometimes 
inclined to intersect seepage paths) and the pressure 
or vacuum grout should be driven into the material 
behind to gel and seal the leak. As grout selection 
and application are specialized techniques, advice 
should be sought from manufacturers and 
experienced applicators prior to use. 


Care should be taken when grouting larger areas to 
avoid blocking any external drainage systems. 


NOTE — Often more than one phase of grouting is 
needed as the seepage might be moved to defects 
elsewhere in the structure or higher up in the walls. 


11.3 Crack Sealing with Resin or Cementitious 
Mortar 


Where structural continuity is not required and there 
is no hydrostatic pressure against the adhesion of 
the repair, cement grout, neat cement grout or low 
viscosity latex emulsion should be brushed into 
cracks and porous areas to seal them against water 
ingress. Suitable materials include, 


a) cementitious slurry; 

b) cement/silica-fume slurry; 

c) polymer-modified cementitious slurry; 

d) polymer resin; 

e) cementitious crystallization systems; and 
f) epoxide putty. 


11.4 Crack Filling by Pressure or Vacuum Injection 


Pressure or vacuum injection can be used to fill and 
seal cracks and joints, particularly at kickers where a 
waterstop has become displaced and cutting out and 
replacement is not practical. 


The selection of grout systems should take into 
account, 


a) the likelihood of structural movement; 
b) the nature and size of the defect; 

c) the moisture content of the substrate; 
d) the temperature of the structure; and 
e) the injection method to be used. 


Where the wall or floor is expected to remain damp, a 
water-tolerant grout should be used. Suitable 
materials include, 


1) epoxy resin; 

2) polyurethane resin; 
3) acrylic resin; 

4) polyester resin; 


5) styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR) and acrylic 
emulsions; and 


6) polymer-modified cementitious grouts. 


IS 16471 : 2017 


NOTES 


1 Porous areas of concrete can sometimes be injected 
successfully, but severe honeycombing might require 
the defect to be cut out and replaced. 


2 Injection techniques have been used to seal very fine 
cracks. 


11.5 Replacement of Locally Defective Material 


The properties of the repair material should be 
selected to match the substrate as closely as 
possible, particularly the shrinkage and thermal 
behaviour. Specialist advice should be obtained to 
select the most suitable concrete repair system and 
to specify the required performance of the material 
to suit the size, depth and location of the area to be 
repaired. 


Where proprietary mortars or concretes are used, 
they should be applied in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions, and any repair should 
be undertaken by experienced contractors. 


NOTES 


1 Where a relatively small number of well-separated 
defects in the walls or floors result in seepage (for 
example, poorly compacted concrete), adequate repairs 
can be achieved by cutting out and replacing the 
defective area. Achieving a water-resistant joint 
between the substrate concrete and the repair material 
is the most critical feature of this method. The 
installation of temporary drainage points, in the area 
to be repaired, might be necessary in some situations to 
control the seepage. However, some repair materials 
are formulated for application where running water is 
present. 


2 Surface preparation and the compatibility of the 
physical and chemical properties of the repair material 
are important. Many types of repair materials are 
available, including, 


a) concrete compatible with that used in the 
original construction; 


b) polymer-modified cementitious mortars and 
concrete; 


c) polymer-based mortars; and 


d) sprayed concrete. 


ANNEXA 


(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. 
456 : 2000 
800 : 2007 
1343 : 2012 
2314: 1986 
4911: 1986 
(first revision) 
6461 (Part 7) : 1973 


Title 
Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete (fourth revision) 
Code of practice for general construction in steel (third revision) 
Code of practice for prestressed concrete (second revision) 
Specification for steel sheet piling sections (first revision) 
Glossary of terms relating to bituminous waterproofing and damp-proofing of buildings 


Glossary of terms relating to cement concrete: Part 7 Mixing, laying, compaction, 


curing and other construction aspects 


12027 : 1987 


Specification for silicone-based water repellents 


15883 (Part 1):2009 Guidelines for construction project management: Part 1 General 


IS 16471 : 2017 


ANNEX B 


(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Water Proofing and Damp-Proofing Sectional Committee, CED 41 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (48-B, Pocket B, Gangotri Enclave, 
Alaknanda, New Delhi 110 019) 


BASF Construction Chemicals (I) Private Limited, Mumbai 

Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, 
New Delhi 

CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Construction Chemicals Manufacturers’ Association, Mumbai 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Forsoc Chemicals (India) Private Limited, Bangalore 
HIRCO Developers Private Limited, Mumbai 
Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited (Research and Development 
Centre), Faridabad 
IWL India Limited, Mumbai 


Kasturi Projects Private Limited, Thane 
Lloyd Insulation (India) Limited, New Delhi 


MC Bauchemie (India) Pvt Limited, New Mumbai 

MES Builders Association of India, New Delhi 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in- Chief’s Branch, 
Army HQ, New Delhi 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 
Public Works Department, Govt of NCT of Delhi, New Delhi 


Public Works Department, Govt of Tamil Nadu, Chennai 


Research Design & Standards Organization, Lucknow 


Sika India Private Limited, Kolkata 


STP Limited, New Delhi 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 
GCP Applied Technologies India Pvt Ltd, Guragon 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Suri S. P. BANWAIT 


SHRI UPEN PATEL 
Suri PRAMOoD Parıl (Alternate) 


SHRI J. K. PRASAD 
Suri A. K. Tiwarı (Alternate) 


Suri S. P. AGARWAL 
Dr SukubeEo R. Karane (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. SHARMA 
Suri S. P. CHoupuary (Alternate) 


Suri M. A. WAHEED 
SHRI GANGADHARAN MANARI (Alternate) 


SHRI J. K. BHAGCHANDANI 
Ms JYOTSNA SHRIDHAR (Alternate) 
Suri U. B. RAVINDRA BABU 
SHRI SANTOSH DEODHAR 
SHRI Vivek NAIK 


Dr K. P. NAITHANI 
Dr M. C. Jain (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK BANSAL 
Suri M. L. Muruian (Alternate) 


Suri K. R. Pat 


SHRI Monit KHANNA 
Suri K. K. Mitra (Alternate) 


Suri SAMIR SURLAKER 
SHRI SUNNY SURLAKER (Alternate) 


SHRI JASPAL SINGH MAGO 
SHRI PRAVEEN KAKKAR (Alternate) 


BRIG MANOJ KUMAR 
CoL M. K. Prasan (Alternate) 


SHRI R. BHASKAR 


Suri R. P. MATHUR 
Suri D. C. Gort (Alternate) 


Joint CHIEF ENGINEER (BUILDINGS) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (PLANNING & DeEsIGN) (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (WoRKS) 
SHRI ASHUTOSH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJOY DASGUPTA 
SHRI PRASHANT JHA (Alternate) 


Suri K. P. SRIVASTAV 
Suri ROHIT VARSHNEY (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. DHAWAN 
SHRI VIKAS RASTOGI 


Suri SANJAY Pant, Scientist ‘E’ and Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri S. ARUN KUMAR 
Scientist D (Civil Engg), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, 
of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be 
addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 41 (7903). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amendment No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg ce 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14, C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 23379120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 a 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 22542315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) i 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


