NAT HA IS 16345 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


THAT — PEA Ara A AAS 
Sama Ñ gemer RES cht CATA 
% fora fam 


( Teel TREAT ) 


Geosynthetics — Guidelines for 
Installation of Geotextile used 
in Subgrade Separation in 
Pavement Structures 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2020 


anda HM eat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2020 Price Group 3 


IS 16345 : 2020 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Geosynthetics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


This standard was first published in the year 2015 and has now been revised to incorporate the modified requirement 
of overlap. 


A large variety of detrimental factors, such as environmental conditions, subgrade conditions, traffic loading, 
utility cuts, road widening, ageing, etc, contribute to distress in pavements which need to be addressed in the 
maintenance or rehabilitation of the pavements. Pavement maintenance treatments are often ineffective and short 
lived due to their inability to both, treat the cause of the problem and renew the existing pavement condition. 
The main cause of distress in pavements is the inability of pavement materials to drain out precipitated surface 
water infiltrating through the pavement, leading to softening and weakening of pavement subgrade and base thus 
accelerating pavement degradation. Further, existing pavement distress such as surface cracks, rocking joints and 
subgrade failures cause the rapid reflection of cracking up through the maintenance treatment. 


The preferred strategy for long-term road and pavement performance should, therefore, be to build in safeguards 
during initial construction. These performance safeguards include stabilizing the subgrade against moisture 
intrusion and associated weakening, strengthening road based aggregate with efficient drainage of infiltrated water, 
and as a last resort, enhancing the stress absorption and moisture proofing capabilities of selected maintenance 
treatments. 


The geogrids and the geotextiles are the most cost effective tools for safeguarding roads and pavements. 
Geosynthetics extend the service life of roads, increase their load-carrying capacity, and reduce rutting. The most 
common method for quantifying the geosynthetic benefits is the determination of Traffic Benefit Ratio (TBR) 
which is defined as the ratio of reinforced load cycles to failure (excessive rutting) to the number of cycles that 
cause failure of an unreinforced road section. In general, geosynthetics have been found to provide a TBR in 
the range of 1.5 to 70, depending on the type of geosynthetic, its location in the road, and the testing scenario. 
The researchers have found that for weak subgrades (CBR = 2 percent) the geotextile extends the service life of 
a flexible pavement section by a factor of 2.5 to 3.0 compared to a non-stabilized section. Further, a geotextile 
effectively increased the pavement section’s total AASHTO structural number by approximately 19 percent. 
Similarly, for pavement sections with moderate strengths (CBR = 4.2 to 4.5 percent), the geotextile increased 
the service life of the pavement section by a factor of 2.0 to 3.3 and the AASHTO structural number increased 
by 13 to 22 percent. Also, the benefit of inclusion of geosynthetic material is briefed with design methodologies 
in IRC SP 59 : 2019 “Guidelines for use of geosynthetics in road pavements and associated works (first revision Y. 
Both geotextiles and geogrids thus can play an important role in extending the life of a roadway system. 


The four main applications of geosynthetics in roads are subgrade separation, subgrade stabilization, base/ 
subbase reinforcement and overlay stress absorption and sub-surface drainage. Subgrade stabilization and base 
reinforcement involve improving the road structure as it is constructed by inserting an appropriate geosynthetic 
layer. Base reinforcement is the use of geosynthetics to improve the structure of a paved road. 


Subgrade separation and stabilization applies geosynthetics to both unpaved and paved roads. When serving as a 
separator, the geotextile prevents fines from migrating into the base course and/or prevents base course aggregate 
from penetrating into the subgrade. The soil retaining properties of the geotextile are basically the same as those 
required for drainage and filtration. Therefore, the retention and permeability criteria required for drainage should 
be met. In addition, the geotextile should withstand the stresses resulting from the load applied to the pavement. 
The nature of these stresses depend on the condition of the subgrade, type of construction equipment and the 
cover over the subgrade. Since the geotextile serves to prevent aggregate from penetrating the subgrade, it shall 
meet puncture, burst, grab and tear strengths required. At small rut depth, the strain in the geosynthetic is also 
small. In this case, the geosynthetic acts primarily as a separator between the soft subgrade and the aggregate. 
Any geosynthetic that survives construction will work as a separator. This application is limited to soils which 
either in initially or seasonably have a CBR > 3 but < 8. In this application the geotextile is a substitute for the 
choked subbase stone commonly used over plastic subgrades. It is important to understand that this function may 
be required when geogrids are used to provide base reinforcement or confinement. 


IS 16345 : 2020 


For larger rut depths, more strain is induced in the geosynthetic where the stiffness properties of geosynthetic 
are essential. A considerable reduction in aggregate thickness is possible by the use of geosynthetic having a 
high modulus in the direction perpendicular to the road centerline; however, the benefits of the geosynthetics are 
dependent on the membrane action achieved with a stiff geosynthetic as well as the lateral movement. For very 
weak subgrades, it is often beneficial to combine the benefits of both separation and stabilization. The following 
general conclusion can be drawn relating to a typical road base: 


a) A geosynthetic element that functions primarily as a separator (typically when the subgrade CBR > 3) 
will prevent the mixing of poor soils with granular materials of pavement (separation geotextiles). This 
will enhance the long term performance of pavement. 


b 


wm 


A geosynthetic element that functions primarily to provide confinement of the aggregate and lateral 
restraint to the subgrade (typically when the subgrade CBR < 3) will both increase the allowable bearing 
capacity of the subgrade and provide an improved load distribution ratio in the aggregate. The combined 
benefits can enhance load carrying capacity of the road by well over 50 percent (stabilization geogrids, 
geocells and geotextiles). 


The general rules for use of geogrids and geotextiles in roadway system are as follows: 


a) Temporary Roads — Used for hauling and access roads that are subject to low volume of traffic including 
working platform for permanent road construction: 


1) Clayey or silty subgrade with California Bearing Ratio (CBR) < 4 — If a clean base aggregate is 
used, then a non-woven separator geotextile shall be used. If a “choked aggregate” like general 
crusher run is used, then use either a geotextile or a biaxial geogrid that has good aperture stability 
and appropriate size. For a design equivalent single axle loading (ESAL) less than 1 000, a woven 
geotextile designed for both separation and membrane roles may be used, that is, consider the 
geotextile’s modulus. For larger ESAL, use a woven or non-woven geotextile designed simply for 
separation. The reinforcement role of the geogrid seems safe for approximately 10 000 ESAL. 


2 


— 


Sandy subgrade with CBR < 3 — Select a biaxial geogrid with good aperture stability and appropriate 
size or, a woven geotextile that has a reasonable interface friction with the sand and the aggregate. If 
a woven geotextile is considered, care should be taken to ensure that it does not actually create a slick 
slip-plane beneath the aggregate, that is, look at the interface friction by using geotextiles with high 
surface roughness which leads to enhanced interface friction. 

b) Permanent Roads (ESAL > 200 000): 

1) Clayey or silty subgrade with CBR < 3 — Consider building a working platform using the temporary 
road methods upon which conventional road can be constructed. 

2) Clayey or silty subgrade with 3 < CBR < 8 — If there is any potential for degradation due to water 
intrusion, frost heave, etc. then include a separator geotextile to protect the base aggregate during 
these periods. 

3) Sandy subgrades with CBR < 3 — Use a biaxial geogrid that has good aperture stability and 
appropriate size to reinforce the base aggregate. This is particularly helpful when poor quality stone 
and small aggregate thickness is used, less than 25 cm. 

Geosynthetics can also be used as inter layers by placing them below or within the overlay (asphalt concrete) and 
are thus helpful in rehabilitating distressed road surfaces. These may also provide a moisture barrier. 


Survivability is very important from the viewpoint of its long-term durability and is defined as resistance to 
mechanical damage during road construction and initial operation. The ability of a geosynthetic to survive 
installation and reasonable service loads shall be assured if it is to perform as designed. Installation damage to a 
geotextile is a function of the following: 


a) Geotextile thickness, 

b) Compactive effort and lift thickness, 

c) Type and weight of construction equipment used for fill spreading, 
d) Grain size distribution of backfill, 

e) Angularity of backfill, 

f) Polymer used in the manufacture of geotextile, and 

g) Geotextile manufacturing process. 


IS 16345 : 2020 


Geotexiles are mainly made from polyester (PET) or polypropylene (PP). PP is lighter than water, strong and 
very durable. PET is heavier than water, has excellent strength and creep properties, and is compatible with most 
common soil environments. Geotextiles are mainly of two types, namely, woven and non-woven geotextiles. 
Knitted and stitch bonded geotextiles are occasionally used in the manufacture of specialty products. Non-woven 
geotextiles are highly desirable for subsurface in planer drainage, and erosion control applications as well as, 
for road stabilization over wet moisture sensitive soils. Out of woven geotextiles, slit film fabrics geotextiles are 
commonly used for sediment control, that is silt fence and road stabilization applications but are poor choices for 
subsurface drainage and erosion control applications. Monofilament woven geotextiles have better permeability 
making them suitable for certain drainage and erosion control applications. High strength multifilament woven 
geotextiles are primarily used in reinforcement applications. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed 
or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off 
numerical values ( revised )’. 


111 


IS 16345 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — GUIDELINES FOR 
INSTALLATION OF GEOTEXTILE USED 
IN SUBGRADE SEPARATION IN 
PAVEMENT STRUCTURES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes guidelines for installation of 
geotextile used in subgrade separation in pavement 
structures. 


2 SURFACE PREPARATION 


The graded surface shall be smooth and free of 
obstructions, depressions and debris. Clear and grade 
the installation area. Remove all sharp objects and large 
stones. Cut trees and shrubs flush with the subgrade. 
Removal of topsoil and vegetation mat is not necessary, 
but is recommended where practical. Excessive soft 
spots or voids may be unsuitable for geosynthetic 
installation. 


3 DEPLOYMENT OF THE GEOSYNTHETIC 


3.1 Unroll the geosynthetic in the direction of 
construction traffic. Hold the geosynthetic in place 
with pins, staples, fill materials or rocks. Do not drag 
the geotextile on the ground or mishandle in any 
way. Loosely place the geotextile without wrinkles or 
folds, and with no void spaces between the geotextile 
and the ground surface so that the placement of the 
overlying material not tear the geotextile. Lap or sew 
the geotextile at the ends and sides of adjoining sheets 
as specified by the construction drawings or by the 
Engineer. Successive sheets of geotextiles shall be 
overlapped a minimum of 300 mm, with the upstream 
sheet overlapping the downstream sheet. 


3.2 In case of slopes, place the geotextile with the 
machine direction oriented up-down. Lap the upper 
sheets over the lower sheets. When the geotextile 
is placed on a slope steeper than 6V:1H, securely 
anchor the laps to the ground surface with pins or 
stakes as necessary to prevent the slippage and tearing 
of the geotextile. Start placement of fill material on 
the geotextile at the toe of the slope and proceed 
upwards. 


3.3 On curves, the geosynthetic may be folded or cut to 
conform to the curves. The fold or overlap shall be in 
the direction of construction and held in place by pins, 
staples, or piles of fill or rock. 


3.4 If geotextiles are placed under water or in areas 
where water will flow, the geotextile may be placed 
with the machine direction parallel to the direction 
of water flow. Overlap sheets such that upstream 
sheet is placed over the top of the downstream sheet. 
Adequately secure the geotextile to prevent slippage. 
As the geotextile is placed under water, place the 
backfill material on it to the required thickness. Do not 
place geotextile more than 15 m ahead of the specified 
cover material. 


3.5 The geosynthetic shall be laid smooth without 
wrinkles or folds on the prepared subgrade in the 
direction of construction traffic. Adjacent geosynthetic 
rolls shall be overlapped in the direction of construction. 
Depending on the strength of the subgrade, the overlaps 
may have to be sewn or joined as required in the plans 
Overlap shall be in the direction as shown on the plans 
or as given below: 

Existing Subgrade Soil Minimum Overlap 
Strength (CBR) 


Greater than 3 300 — 450 mm 
1-3 0.6-1m 
0.5-1 1 m or sewn 
Less than 0.5 Sewn 

All roll ends 1 m or sewn 


3.6 The base reinforcement geosynthetic shall be laid 
as per the design requirements. 


3.7 When field sewn seams are required, sew field seams 
with polymeric thread consisting of polypropylene 
or polyester and as resistant to deterioration as the 
geotextile being sewn. Use a colour of thread that 
contrasts with the geotextile being sewn so that the 
stitches are exposed for inspection when the geotextile 
is placed. Seams shall meet the testing requirements 
given below: 


a) Use two rows of lock type stitching, to make the 
seams. The two rows of stitching shall be 12 mm 
apart with a tolerance of + 6 mm and not cross 
except for restitching. 


IS 16345 : 2020 


b) The minimum seam allowance (the minimum 
distance from the edge of geotextile to the nearest 
stitching shall be: 


Flat or prayer seam, Type SSa-1 40 mm 
“J” Seam, Type SSn-1 25 mm 
Butterfly-folded seam, Type SSd-1 25mm 


c) Obtain the geotextile manufacturer’s 
recommendation for the type of seam and stitch 
to be used. If the contractor does not obtain and 
provide this information, use a “J” seam with at 
least three stitches per 25 mm. The flat or prayer 
seam may be used for repair or damaged in-place 
geotextile. 


3.8 Priorto covering, the geosynthetic shall be inspected 
by a certified inspector of the engineer to ensure that the 
geosynthetic has not been damaged during installation. 
Damaged geosynthetic shall be repaired or replaced 
immediately. In case the geotextile is damaged during 
installation, or aggregate placement, a geotextile patch 
shall be placed over the damaged area extending 
beyond the damaged area a distance of 300 mm, or the 
specified seam overlap, whichever is greater. 


3.9 The geotextile shall be laid at the proper elevation 
and alignment as shown on the construction drawings. 
The geotextile may be temporarily secured in place 
with ties, staples, pins, sand bags or backfill as required 
by fill properties, fill placement procedures or weather 
conditions. 


3.10 Placement of drainage aggregate shall proceed 
immediately following placement of the geotextile. The 
geotextile shall be covered with a minimum of 150 mm 
of loosely placed aggregate prior to compaction. The 
aggregate shall be compacted with vibratory equipment 
unless the trench is required for structural support. The 
subbase or base shall be placed by end dumping onto 
the geosynthetic from the edge of the geosynthetic, or 
over previously placed subbase or base aggregate. On 
soils with CBR > 3, most rubber-tired vehicles can be 
driven at slow speeds, less than 16 km/h and in straight 
paths over the exposed geosynthetic without causing 
damage to the geosynthetic. Sudden braking and 
sharp turning should be avoided. Tracked construction 
equipment should not be operated directly upon the 
geosynthetic. A minimum fill soil thickness of 15 cm 
is required prior to operation of tracked vehicles over 
the geosynthetic. Turning of tracked vehicles should be 
kept to a minimum to prevent tracks from displacing 
the fill and damaging the geosynthetic. Do not use 
rubber-tired equipment directly on the geotextile when 
woven, multilayer, or welded strip geotextile are used. 


3.11 For soils with CBR < 1, construction vehicles 
shall not be allowed directly on the geosynthetic. The 
sub-base or base shall be placed such that at least the 
minimum specified lift thickness shall be between the 


geosynthetic and equipment tires or tracks at all times. 
Turning of vehicles shall not be permitted on the first 
lift above the geosynthetic. 


3.12 On subgrades having a CBR value of less than 1, 
the sub-base or base aggregate should be spread in 
its full thickness as soon as possible after dumping to 
minimize the potential of localized subgrade failure 
due to overloading of the subgrade. 


3.13 Any ruts occurring during construction shall be 
filled with additional subbase or base material, and 
compacted to the specified density. 


3.14 If placement of the backfill material causes 
damage to the geosynthetic, the damaged area shall be 
repaired as previously described above. The placement 
procedure shall then be modified to eliminate further 
damage from taking place. 


3.15 The geotextile shall be laid at the proper elevation 
and alignment as shown on the construction drawings. 
The geotextile shall be installed in accordance with the 
installation guidelines provided by the manufacturer 
or as directed by the Engineer. The geotextile may be 
temporarily secured in place with ties, staples, pins, 
sand bags or backfill as required by fill properties, 
fill placement procedures or weather conditions or as 
directed by the Engineer. 


3.16 Place, spread, and compact granular fill material 
in such a manner that minimizes the development of 
wrinkles in or movement of the geotextile. 


4 PROTECTION OF GEOTEXTILE 


4.1 Protect the geotextile at all times from ultraviolet 
(UV) rays, contamination by surface runoff and 
construction activities. Traffic or construction 
equipment shall not be permitted directly on the 
geotextile except as directed. 


4.2 During installation, cover the geotextile with 
specified cover material as soon as possible. Do not leave 
in uncovered condition for more than five days, except 
when used with temporary, wrap faced, mechanically 
stabilized earth walls and asphalt overlays. 


4.3 Place the cover material on the geotextile in such 
a manner that the geotextile is not torn, punctured or 
shifted. Use a minimum 150 mm thick cover layer 
or twice the maximum aggregate size, whichever is 
thicker. Do not end-dump cover material directly on 
geotextiles other than riprap geotextile. 


4.4 Limit the construction vehicles in size and mass so 
that the rutting in the initial layer above the geotextile 
is not more than 75 mm deep or half the layer thickness, 
whichever is lesser. Do not turn vehicles on the first 
layer. 


5 INSPECTION 


5.1 The owner or owner’s representative may randomly 
inspect geotextile before, during and after (using test 
pits) installation. 


5.2 Any damaged or defective geotextile (that is frayed 
coating, separated junctions, separated layers, tears, 
etc.) be repaired/replaced in accordance with 6. 


6 DAMAGE REPAIR 


6.1 Repair orreplace alltorn, punctured or contaminated 
geotextiles during construction. Repair by placing a 
patch of the specified geotextile over the affected area. 
Overlap the existing geotextile with the patch. 


6.2 Where geotextile seams are required to be sewn, 
repair any damaged sheet by sewing unless otherwise 
indicated on the plans or special provisions, as directed 
below: 


a) Embankment Geotextile — Construct embankment 
stabilization according to details shown on the 
plans. Place the geotextile layers so that the 
geotextile machine direction is transverse to the 
embankment centerline. Spread the geotextile 
so that all slack and wrinkles are eliminated. 
Construct embankment in uniform layers. 


b) Riprap Geotextile — Place geotextile behind 
and beneath riprap, buttresses, inlays, shear keys 


IS 16345 : 2020 


and erosion control applications according to the 
details shown. Demonstrate to the satisfaction of 
the engineer that the combination of the rock-fill 
drop height and the thickness of any aggregate 
cushion, when specified or required, is adequate 
to prevent puncturing or damaging the geotextile 
when placing the riprap or stone embankment 
material, the following limits apply: 


Maximum Drop Height, m 


Size of Rock Onto Geotextile Onto an Aggregate 


Material Cushion Blanket 
(1) (2) (3) 
Greater than 0 1 
90 kg 
90 kg or less 1 1 


After placing the riprap, backfill all voids in the 
riprap face so that the geotextile is completely 
covered and not visible 


Cc 


wa 


Subgrade Geotextile — For roadbed subgrade 
separation, prepare the subgrade. Correct 
geotextile failures, as evidenced by soil pumping 
or roadbed distortion, by removing any covering 
material in the affected area and placing a 
geotextile patch on the exposed geotextile. Cover 
the patch with the specified cover material and 
compact before proceeding. 


IS 16345 : 2020 


ANNEX A 


( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


Organization 


The South India Textile Research Association Council, 
Coimbatore 


Ahmedabad Textile Industry’s Research Association, 
Ahmedabad 


Best Geotechnique Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

Central Coir Research Institute, Alappuzha 

Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Charankattu Coir Mfg Co (P) Ltd, Kerala 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkata 


DKTE Centre of Excellence in Nonwovens, Ichalkaranji 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Geosynthetics Testing Services Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 


ICAR- National Institute of Natural Fibre Engineering & 
Technology, Kolkata 


Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar 

Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi 

Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 
Indian Jute Mills Association, Kolkatta 


Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 


International Geosynthetics Society, India Chapter, 
New Delhi 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. N. Desai (Chairman) 


SHRIMATI DEEPALI PLAWAT 
Suri JIGAR Dave (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH NAIK 
Dr D. ANITA RAVINDRANATH 
SHRIMATI SUMY SEBASTIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


Dr R. CHITRA 
Suri MANIsH Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri C. R. DEVRAJ 

Suri C. D. ATHUL Ras (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
Dr SWAPAN GHOSH 

Pror (DR) A. K. SAMANTHA (Alternate) 
SHRI ANIKET S. BHUTE 
SHRI A. K. SINHA 

SHRI Manos Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
SHRI RAJENDRA GHADGE (Alternate) 
Dr DEEPAK MANJUNATH 


SHRI MANIK BHOWMICK 
Dr SanJoY DEBNATH (Alternate) 


PROF AMIT PRASHANT 
Pror A. K. GHOSH 


Dr MAHUYA GHOSH 
Suri Kousuik Das (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. CHANDRA 
Suri J. K. BEHERA (Alternate) 


Dr Anup RAKSHIT 
SHRIMATI Rucuita Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri Y. K. KUSUMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


Organization 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, 
Navi Mumbai 


Megaplast India Pvt Ltd, Daman 


Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 


Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, Thane 


National Highways Authority of India, Ghaziabad 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Office of the Jute Commissioner, Kolkatta 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


Texel Industries Limited, Gandhinagar 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, 
Mumbai 


In personal capacity [Bhakta Nivas, 12-1-170/46 P, 
Hanuman Nagar, Jaipuri Colony, Nagole, 
Hyderabad 500 068] 


In personal capacity [104, Kanchanban, A. W. Vartak 
Marg, Vile Parle (East), Mumbai 400 057] 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16345 : 2020 


Representative(s) 
Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
Suri C. V. RAJESH 
SHRI HEMENDRA BEHERA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIV KUMAR 


Dr VISHAL RAMESH THOMBARE 
SHRI MANDAR BHALCHANDRA PINGLE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH PRAKASH SINGH 
Suri Mupit GARG (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri M. Dutta (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. Roy 
SHRI SOUMYADIPTA Datta (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
SHRI SANJAY CHARAK (Alternate) 


SHRI AMITAABH GOENKA 
SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH SHARMA 
Suri V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH BAGLI (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANOI 
SHRI SAURABH Vyas (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILESH R. MEHTA 
SHRI NARESH R MEHTA (ALTERNATIVE) 


SHRI V. K. PATIL 
DRANJAN K. MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


Dr MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 


Dr G. V. Rao 


SHRI V. N. Gore 


Suri A. K. Bera, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 
Suri J. K. Gupta 
Scientist ‘D’ (TXD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (14520). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


