IS 14704:1999
(Reaffirmed 2004)

Indian Standard

BULKHANDLINGEQUIPMENTBAGSTACKER-CUM-LOADERkJNLOADERPORTABLE-DESIGNANDCONSTRUCTION -GENERALREQUIREMENTS

ICS

53.080

0 BIS 1999

BUREAU
MANAK

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 Price Group 2

June

IF99

Bulk Handling

Systems and Equipment

Sectional Committee,

HMD 07

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Bulk Handling Systems and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. This standard covers the general requirements of mechanical type portable bag stacker-cum-loader/unloader (PBSCLU). The requirements laid down in the Indian Standard are not withstanding the requirements of any other Statutes. Regulations, Acts and Rules of any Central or State Government Orders issued from time to time which are otherwise to be met. The PBSCLU are used without much difficulty for stacking in empty godowns and de-stacking fully loaded godowns starting~from one end. PBSCLU are also easily used where large aisle ways are provided for straight line loading and unloading. PBSCLU will be transported by trucks for installation in the aisle ways for loading/unloading wagon/trucks. The PBSCLU can also load and unload the wagon by keeping them in between two tracks. The PBSCLU can load and unload indivisual wagons, trucks and stacks in the godowns. The PBSCLU will be kept in between the road-fed godowns where there is enough space available for easy manoeuverability. In addition, it can also be operated by a standby diesel power in case of electric power-cut so that wharfage and demurrages on account of idle labour is eliminated. The equipment in various configuration is generally used for handling bags during:

i) truck loading/unloading, ii) iii) wagon loading/unloading stackingldestacking (both open and close), and

in godowns. of equipments are:

The various configurations _a) Portable

flat belt conveyor

with provision of luffing and self propelled travel. of luffing, slewing and self propelled along

b) Combination with/without

of flat belt conveyors with provision telescopic mechanism for conveyor(s).

For the purpose of deciding whether a particularrequirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 14704 : 1999

Indian Standard

BULKHANDLINGEQUIPMENTBAGSTACKER-CUM-LOADEIWJNLOADERPORTABLE -DESIGNANDCONSTRUCTION -GENERALREQUIREMENTS
1 SCOPE This standard covers general requirements for design, manufacture and testing of portable ~bag stacker-cum-loader/unloader (PBSCLU) suitable for stacking/destacking bags of nominal mass of 100 kg and below with provision of luffing and propelling 2 REFERENCE The Indian Standard IS 8597 : 1978 `Flat belt conveyors' contains provision which through reference in this text, constitutes provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard. 3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 4.3 Equipment shall be mounted on caster wheels or pneumatic or tubeless type or rail mounted with cable reeling device to allow easy movement of equipment to desired location in the operating area/aisle-ways, The front wheel shall be bigger in diameter that the rear one's to have better manoeuverability. The rear wheel shall be of swiveling type. Suitable locking arrangement for holding the equipment in position during operation shall be provided. 4.4 Arrangement shall also be provided to turn the bags to a desired angle by means of guide plate/ transfer drum to be located at delivery point in case of multiple conveyor discharge. This shall be an optional feature. 4.5 Equipment for conveying bags up to 50 kg shall have minimum 650 mm belt width and above 50 kg bags the minimum belt width will be 800 mm. 4.6 The drive unit shall comprise of reduction gear unit with TEFC squirrel cage induction motor of suitable power rating to match the rated capacity of the equipment. Reversible starter switch with control panel to facilitate forward and reverse operation shall be provided. 4.7 The constructional features shall confirm to IS 8597. 5 MAIN FEATURES 5.1 Equipment shall be single or double boom (retractable) type to meet the purchasers requirement. 5.2 The requirement shall reversible for de-stacking with provision of sack pads to provide extra clearance of 300 mm (Max) while destacking. 5.3 Equipment shall be able to adjust delivery height manually or by power driven system. This shall be self sustaining. For manual operation it shall not require a force of more than 150 N to operate. 5.4 Propelling of equipment power driven system. shall be manual or by flat belt conveyor

3.1 Design, manufacture and supply of PBSCLU shall meet the performance requirement as specified by the purchaser. 3.2 The equipment shall be suitable for the duty conditions as specified by the purchaser. 3.3 Purchaser shall provide the information as specified in Annex A to the manufacturer for proper design/selection of equipment. 4 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION

4.1 Equipment shall be designed to meet the specified requirements in respect of: a) b) c) d) e) stacking height of bags; stacking material; type, size and weight of bags to be handled; loading/unloading rate of bags; and manoeuverability of equipment to suit the layout and other requirements of the purchaser.

4.2 The design of the equipment shall be such as to allow the height of bag stacker to be adjusted manually or by power driven system as specified by the purchaser to keep the delivery height at a desired level. The maximum allowable slope of the stacker shall be designed such that no sliding back of bags takes place. 1

5.5 In case of double boom, retracting of the boom shall be either manual or power driven as specified.

IS 14704:1999

5.6 Bag counter attachment (optional) provided if so specified by the purchaser.
6 DIMENSION Equipment Table 1. shall conform to dimensions

shall

be

marking to match them with assemblies or the components.

the related

subplate

10.5The equipment showing:
given in a) b) c) d) e)

shall have identification

7 OPERATION Equipment shall be designed to be operated from push button mounted at the tail end. 8 OPTIONAL ITEM shall be provided if

Manufacturer's name; Serial number and date of manufacture; Capacity; Purchaser's equipment number, purchase order number; and Any other relevant data. MEASURES

11 SAFETY

Automatic display totalizer required by the purchaser. 9 TESTING

11.1 Proper arrangements shall be made to avoid slipping/failing down of the bags from the equipment. 11.2 The electric motor, starter, limit switches cable, etc, shall conform to relevant standards. and

9.1 The schedule of inspection and testing shall be as agreed between the purchaser and the supplier. 9.2 The equipment shall operate satisfactorily without undue noise, vibrations or display of any unfavourable characteristics. 9.3 The load testing shall be with reference to current load as well as rated capacity.

11.3 The lubricating points~and bearing shall.be dust` proof for longer life. 11.4 The whole structure shall be made with light weight material for easy manoeuverability. 11.5 Chain guard or belt guard.shall be provided wherever necessary to prevent accidents. Zero speed switch shall be provided to function in case of bag getting struck. 12 OPERATIONAL MANUAL

10 PROTECTION

AND PAINTING

10.1 The equipment and its sub-assemblies shall be suitably painted. The machine parts shall be protected against rust with a rust-preventive coating. 10.2 The equipment and its sub-assemblies shall be given two~coats of anti corrosive primer and two coats of anti corrosive finish paint as specified by purchaser. Each coat shall have 30 micron dry film thickness. 10.3 The equipment shall be properly packed so as to avoid any damage during transportation. 10.4 In case, the sub-assemblies or the components have to be packed separately, they shall have suitable

12.1 Equipment shall be supplied with a set of drawings, operational and maintenance manual, catalogue and preventive maintenance chart as specified by the purchaser. 12.2 Manufacturer shall indicate the minimum tools to be kept for maintenance. One set of such tools shall be supplied with each machine by the manufacturer/ supplier. 12.3 Lubrication schedule indicating frequency of lubrication and recommended oil/grease etc, shall be furnished by the manufacturers for preventive maintenance.

ANNEX

A

(Clause 3.3)
INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE SUPPLIED BY PURCHASER

4 Stacking material to be handled; b) Type, size and weight of bags tobe handled; c) Mode of transport/truck/wagon; 4 Type of truck/wagon open/closed; e) Stacking height of bags; f-l Layout plan warehouse/stockyard/odown; rate of bags; 2%)Loading/unloading Type of equipment Single/double; h) Length of the conveying system - m; 3
2

k) Arrangement m) n)
P) q) r)

for shifting equipment Pneumatic tyre/tubeless tyre; Drive arrangement - manual/power driven; Arrangement of boom retraction manual/power; Bag counter arrangement - Yes/No; Provision of turning of bags to be provided Yes/No; and Any other requirement.

Table 1 Dimension of Bag Stacker-cum-Loader/Unloader - Portable Design (Clause 6)
All dimensions in millimetres.

