Waa Arch IS 16361 : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2020) 


eWiwemufeen urea stata enu 
(Œa) sidera (33 ) utes 
— fahre 


Thermoplastic Polymer based 
Coatings: (a) Undercoating (b) 
Finishing — Specification 


ICS 25.220.01; 83.080.20 


O BIS 2015 


ada AM em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WS, 9 gae WHC BÉ we feeei-110002 
mw MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in | www.standardsbis.in 


October 2015 Price Group 8 


Paints, Varnishes and Related Products Sectional Committee, CHD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Paints, 
Varnishes and Related Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Indian Standard is available for all known generic paints. The thermoplastic polymer based coating has got a 
unique place in the protective and semi-decorative application. The thermoplastic polymer based coating has got 
certain uniqueness in comparison to the conventional protective coatings. The most important criteria of this 
coating is that it is based on bio-degradable, non-plastic, non-toxic polymer based coating and gives better 
protective coating in comparison to the conventional paints. 


Some of the salient features of the thermoplastic polymer based coating are: 


a) The coating is not thermosetting in nature and, therefore, it can be reactivated at a later date during 
repainting and old paint layer form a monolithic layer with the fresh coating. 


b) Self priming, single pack system, no limitation of pot life. 


c) After application and drying forms elastic skin having high tensile strength and elongation at break, 
which takes care of expansion and contraction of substrate. 


d) Coated film skin is fire retardant in addition to other properties and impermeable to air and moisture. 


e) Skin is not brittle, so no cracking even after prolonged exposure to open atmosphere or sultry soil as 
Observed from resistance to salt spray test. 


f) Coating is thermoplastic and no layer to layer separation even in multiple layer application. 


g) Coated film is antibacterial, antifungal and non-toxic. Non-toxic property of the coating is very important 
when the coating is applied inside the drinking water tank for anticorrosion and waterproofing purpose. 
Similarly coating applied to inside the tank of water treatment plant should also be non-toxic in nature. 
This test shall be got tested from a reputed Government Institute (for example, IITR, Lucknow), initially 
at the time of approval and subsequently when change in composition declared subsequently by the 
manufacturer of the paint. 


h) When TMT/ribbed bar are coated with this coating, the pull out strength increases contrary to the 
conventional fact that the strength decreases when coated with epoxy coating. This phenomena would 
support rationalization of structural steel during design of structure. 

j) Easy to carry out patch repair at site at any time and can be used in a wide range working temperature of 
-15?C to + 150°C. 

This standard covers the material which was being manufactured for almost 15 years and used by different 
Government, Semi-Government, Corporate and other Organizations and would be required by chemical, petro- 
chemical, fertilizer, nuclear power, thermal power, ports, docks, rail ways, oil rigs, steel, automobile, water and 
waste water treatment plants etc. 


For satisfactory results, it is desirable that inner coat, top coat and thinner are obtained from the same manufacturer. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16361 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


THERMOPLASTIC POLYMER BASED COATINGS: (A) 
UNDERCOATING (B) FINISHING — SPECIFICATION 


1SCOPE 


This standard prescribes requirements, method of 
sampling and tests for the material commercially 
known as thermoplastic polymer based coatings 
intended to be used as an anticorrosive coating for the 
protection from corrosion in steel structures, pipe lines, 
steel towers (transmission/telecom), bridges, flyovers, 
vehicle chassis, vehicle underbody, reinforcement bars 
(better substitute of fusion epoxy), concrete tanks and 
pipeline inside coating, building exterior and terrace, 
etc. This material is also having waterproofing 
properties specially when applied in civil constructions 
and wood products. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 1303 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Thermoplastic — Here thermoplastic means the 
polymer coating can be reactivated with the help of 
suitable thinner for the polymer. After reactivating the 
polymer, fresh coat of the same polymer coating can 
be applied and the old reactivated layer will form a 
monolithic layer with the fresh layer. This is an 
important property of this coating and could be 
advantageous as maintenance paint. All conventional 
anticorrosive paints are thermosetting in nature and 
cannot be reactivated at a latter date. 


3.2 Tensile Strength of the Skin — It is applicable 
to all material which are solid and has got some 
elongation property. Tensile strength means the 
amount of force required per unit area at the breaking 
point of the material under pull stress. Since the 
conventional paint skin is not having any elastic 
property and the skin can not be placed for such 
testing, itis not mentioned under paint and varnishes. 
But the polymer coating has got very good tensile 


strength and the coating skin can be placed for such 
testing, this is incorporated as one of the physical 
property of the coating skin. 


3.3 Elasticity of the Skin — It is related to those 
materials which has got some measurable tensile 
strength. When the material is under stress for tensile 
strength measurement, the material get elongated 
before breaking. Elongation measured at the time of 
breaking of sample is expressed as percentage of the 
original length of the test sample. This particular 
polymer coating skin has got elongation property and 
the elasticity of the polymer skin may vary from 250 
to 450 percent of the original length of the test sample. 
Conventional paint skin is not having such elasticity 
and because of that this terminology and definition is 
not used in paint and varnishes. 


3.4 Permeability — Specific permeability of a film is 
the milligrams of water that permeate through 1 cm? 
area of 1 mm thick film in 24 h after a constant rate 
has been attained under conditions of 27?C and a 
difference in relative humidity across the film of 
approximately 100 percent. 


4 CLASSIFICATION 


Based on applications the material has been classified 
in to three different classes as given below: 


a) Class I— [For Industrial and automobile anti- 
corrosive applications (excluding civil 
application)] — The products under this class 
are mainly used for the protection from 
corrosion on the steel structures, pipe lines, 
tanks, steel towers (transmission/telecom), 
bridges, flyovers, vehicle chassis, vehicle 
underbody, rail ways, defence etc. 


b) Class II — (For anti-corrosive reinforcement 
bar coating) — The products under this class 
are mainly used for the protection from 
corrosion of steel reinforcement bars as a 
better substitute of fusion epoxy coating. 


c) Class III — [For anti-corrosive cum 
waterproofing for civil (Infrastructure like 
water treatment plant, sewerage treatment 
plant, effluent treatment plant etc.)] — House 
hold building exterior and terrace, drinking 
water tank, etc. The products under this class 


IS 16361 : 2015 


are mainly used for the protection from 
corrosion and water leakage and also for 
decorative application (all in one) in the 
buildings from terrace, building exterior, 
Industrial floor coating, cement pipe line 
inside coating, water and sewerage treatment 
plant's tank inside coating, effluent treatment 
tank's inside coating change, etc. This 
material would be supplied in two categories: 


1) Asinner coat, and 

2) Astop coat. 
In the case of inner coat this is classified as Class I, 
Class II and Class III depending on their application. 
Wherein top coat shall be classified as Class I and Class 
III and would be applied on inner coat. The methods 
of applications class wise is given in Annex W. 


5 MANUFACTURE 


The manufacturing process of these products are quite 
different in comparison to the conventional paint 
manufacturing process. Here the key is the 
manufacturing of the polymer which is responsible for 
all the special properties of the finished products. Part 
of the polymer is dissolved with different ingredients 
in a specific blend of organic solvents and other part is 
used to make colour master batch. Both parts blended 
together to make an almost homogenous mixture 
having some ingredients in the emulsified state. With 
little stirring of the material it will again become 
homogenous and suitable for direct application as a 
single pack ready mix coating. 


6 REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Composition 


The composition shall be such that it satisfies the 
requirements specified in this standard. Depending on 
the end use of the coatings, there may be some variation 
in formulation but the requirement in Table 1 to be 
met in all cases. 


6.2 'The material shall conform to the requirements 
given in Table 1. 


7 TESTS 


7.1 Unless specified otherwise, tests shall be conducted 
as prescribed in different parts of IS 101. Reference to 
the relevant sections are given in col 4 of Table 1. 


7.2 Preparation of Test Panels 
7.2.1 Type of Panels 
7.2.1.1 Steel Panels 


Unless otherwise specified panel of 150 x 100 x 1.25 
mm of mild steel plate be prepared as per the method 


described in 2 of IS 101 (Part 1/Sec 3). 

7.2.1.2 Wood Panels 

Panel as described in 6 of IS 101 (Part 1/Sec 3). 
7.2.1.3 Cement/Asbestos Panels 

Panel as described in 7 of IS 101 (Part 1/Sec 3). 


7.2.2 The paint shall be mixed properly and thinned 
with the thinner, supplied along with the paints, if 
required and applied on metal/wood/cement panel with 
the help of dip system. The panels shall be coated with 
3 or 4 coats of the product and shall be air dried for 2 
to 3 h at 27°C after each successive coatings. The final 
coated test panels shall be air dried for 24 h in a 
horizontal position at 27°C. Unless otherwise specified 
in the respective test method, an even and uniform coat 
having a dry film thickness of 65 to 80 micron shall be 
obtained. The film thickness shall be determined by 
the method prescribed in 6 of IS 101 (Part 3/Sec 2). 
Unless otherwise specified, the air dried coated panels 
shall be then subjected to conditioning at a temperature 
of 27 x 2°C and 65 + 5 percent relative humidity for 
minimum 48 h. The tests shall then be carried out as 
soon as possible. 


7.3 The pull out test and toxicity test on the applicable 
variety of the paint are to be considered as type tests 
and shall be carried out initially on a composite sample 
of the product taken from a batch/lot for approval. 
However if there is a change in the composition of the 
material, these two tests shall be repeated on the 
product with changed formulation. The other tests are 
considered as routine tests. 


7.4 Quality of Reagents 


Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and reagent 
grade water (see IS 1070) shall be employed. 


NOTE — ‘Pure chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities which affect the results of analysis. 


8. PACKING AND MARKING 


8.1 Packing 


Unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser and 
the supplier, the paint shall be packed in metal 
containers conforming to 1S 1407 or IS 2552. 


8.1.1 The material when intended for defence purposes, 
shall be marked in accordance with IS 5661. 


8.2 Marking 
Each container shall be legibly marked as under: 


a) Nomenclature of the material; 


b) Nature of coat and class (for example inner 
coat, class I); 


SI No. 


1) 


a) 
i) 


ii) 


iii) 


iv) 
v) 
vi) 
vii) 
viii) 
ix) 
x) 
xi) 
xii) 
xiii) 
xiv) 
xv) 
xvi) 
xvii) 
xviii) 
xix) 


xX) 


xxi) 


xxii) 


xxiii) 
xxiv) 
XXV) 


xxvi) 


Table 1 Requirements for Thermoplastic Polymer Based Coating 


Characteristic 


Q) 


Colour 


Consistency 


Viscosity 
(Brook field) 


Drying Time, 
Hard Dry, Max 
Dry film thickness 


Finish 
Mass per 10 litre 


Volume 
Solid (Min), (non volatile vehicle) 


Flash point 

Resistance to heat 

Resistance to humidity 
Resistance to neutral salt spray 
Resistance to water 

Resistance to acid 

Resistance to alkali 

Resistance to low temperature 
Moisture vapour permeability test 


Flexibility and adhesion test — 

Bend test 

Flexibility and adhesion test — Scratch 
hardness [Top coat (finishing)] 
Hardness test 

[Top coat (finishing)] 

Fire retardant test 


a) Tensile test: 
Tensile strength, Min 


b) Elongation at Break, Min 
Impact resistance 
for Class II only 


Pull out test for Class II material only 


Durability test (QUV) 

[Top coat (finishing)] 

Toxicity test from Institute of Toxicology 
on 5 male rats and 5 female rats for Class 
III material only limited to where use is for 
application of paint for coating in drinking 
water tank 


other than IS 101. 


(Clauses 6.1 and 6.2) 


Requirement 


(3) 


Standard colour as per IS 5 or as agreed 
to between the purchaser and the 
supplier 


Smooth, uniform and suitable for spray/ 
dip / brush application 


Air spray — 300 cps, Airless spray — 500 
- 600 cps, Dip — 500 - 700 cps, Brush — 
400 - 600 cps. 


4 h at room temperature 
20 to 25 micron per coat 


Smooth and matt / gloss 
8.5 to 10 kg 
25 (w/w) 


Above 28°C 
To pass the test 
To pass the test 
To pass the test 
To pass the test 
To pass the test 
To pass the test 
To pass the test 
Nil 

To pass the test 


To pass the test 
To pass the test 


Char height, mm, Min 30 

Flame spread Length, mm, Max 150 
Time after glow, (s), 3 

Time after flaming, (s), 12 


a) 18 to 21 kg/cm? 
b) 250 to 450 percent 


No disbonding of the coating from 
substrate around impact area. 


Increase in bond strength in comparison 
to uncoated Ribbed-bar 


To pass the test 


No mortality 


IS 16361 : 2015 


Method of Tests, Ref to 
IS 101 Annex 
(4) (5) 
(Part 4/ Sec 2) — 
— B 
— C 


(Part 3/Sec 1) 


Clause 6 of 
(Part 3/Sec 2) 


(Part 3/Sec 4) 
(Part 1/sec 7) 
(Part 8/Sec 6) 


(Part 1/ Sec 6) 


IS 2770 (Part 1)” 


Eocmn-mommu 


Z 


"d 


U 


Itis to be got done from a reputed 
Government Institute (for example, 


IITR, Lucknow) 


NOTE — All the above tests shall be done on inner coat except the tests at SI No. xix), xx) and xxv), where the tests shall be performed 
along with top coat (finishing). 


IS 16361 : 2015 


c) Manufacturer’s name, address and his 
recognized trade-mark, if any; 


d) Batch number or lot number in code or 
otherwise; 


e) Month and year of manufacture; 
f) Net volume of material; and 
g) Advisory note: 
1) Do not expose to naked flame. 
2) Stir well before use. 
3) Apply on dry and clean surface only. 


8.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The container may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


8.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which the licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


9. SAMPLING 


The representative sample shall be drawn as prescribed 
in IS 101(Part-1/Sec1). Sample taken from each batch 
of product from any container after thorough mixing 
may be treated as one sample. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
IS No. Title IS No. Title 
5 : 2007 Colours for ready mixed paints and (Part 8/ Tests for pigments and other solids, 
enamels (sixth revision) Sec 6): 1993 Volume solids 
101 Methods of sampling and test for 265 : 1993 Hydrochloric acid (fourth revision) 
paints, varnishes and related products 266 : 1993 Sulphuric acid (third revision) 
(Part 1)/ Test on liquid paints (general and 296 : 1986 Sodium carbonate, anhydrous (third 
physical), revision) 
Sec 1: 1986 Sampling (third revision) 376 : 1986 Sodium hydroxide, analytical 
Sec 3: 1986 Preparation of panels (third revision) reagent (third r evision). [ln 
Sec 6 : 1987 Flash point (third revision) 1070 : 1992 Reagent grade water (third revision) 
Sec 7 : 1987 Mass per 10 litres (third revision) 1303 : 1983 Glossary of terms relating to paints 
(Part 3)/ Tests on paint film formation, (second LEVIS ion). 
Sec 1 : 1986 Drying time (third revision) 1314 : 1984 Calcium chloride (second revision) 
Sec 2 : 1989 Film thickness (third revision) 1407 : 1980 Round paint tins (second revision) 
Sec 4:1987 Finish (third revision) 2096 : 1992 Asbestos cement flat sheets (first 
Sec 5 : 1987 Fineness of grind (third revision) revision ) l 
(Part 4/ Optical tests 2552 : 1989 Steel drums (galvanized and 
. 2 P lvanized ) (third revision) 
Sec 2) : 1989 Colour ( third revision ) unga i Ne a 
(Part 5)/ Mechanical test on paint films 2770 (Part 1): Methods of testing bond in rein- 
: IU 1967 forced concrete: Part 1 Pull-out test 
Sec 1: 1988 Hardness tests (third revision) : 
Scc2.: 1988: Flexibility and adhesion (third 3400 (Part 1): Methods of test for vulcanized 
: revision) y = 2012 rubber: Part | Tensile stress-strain 
E OS properties (third revision) 
asd Durability, tests onp amit films, 4985 : 2000 Unplasticized PVC Pipes for potable 
Sec 1 : 1988 Resistance to humidity under water supplies (third revision) 
conditions of condensation (third 5661 : 1970 Code of practice for packing and 
revision) . - marking of packages of paints, 
Sec 2 : 1989 Keeping properties (third revision) enamels, varnishes and allied 
Sec 3 : 1990 Moisture vapour permeability (third products 
revision) 8662 : 2004 Enamel, synthetic, exterior: (a) 
(Part 7/ Environmental test on paint films, undercoating (b) finishing for 
Sec 1):1989 Resistance to water (third revision) railway Coaches (second revision) 


IS 16361 : 2015 


ANNEX B 
[Table 1, SI No. (1)] 
CONSISTENCY 


B-1 APPARATUS 


B-1.1 Palette Knife or Metal Rod 


B-1.2 Steel Panels — Steel panels shall be prepared 
as given in 7.2. 


B-2 PROCEDURE 


Insert a clean metal rod or palette knife into the original 
container and examine the nature of settling. The 
material shall not cake hard inside the container and 
shall be in such a condition that stirring easily produces 
a smooth uniform material suitable for dipping on steel 
panels. 


ANNEX C 
[Table 1, SI No. (ii1)] 
VISCOSITY 


C-0 GENERAL 


C-0.1 Determination of the apparent viscosity of the 
material/coating with the help of rotational type 
viscometer (Brookfield viscometer). 


C-0.2 Outline of the Method 


This method consists of determining the apparent 
viscosity of coating by measuring the torque on a 
spindle rotating at constant speed in the material. 


C-1 APPARATUS 


C-1.1 Rotational Type Brookfield Viscometer with 
Variable Speed 


C-1.2 Thermometer, 0 — 100°C, least count — 1°C. 
C-1.3 Glass beaker, 500 ml. 


C-2 PROCEDURE 


C-2.1 Ensure that all the viscosity readings are noted 
at 25?C. Place the instrument on flat and vibration free 
surface. Level the instrument with attached spirit level. 
Select the spindle and attach it to the instrument. Lower 
the viscometer until the groove (immersion mark) on 
the spindle just touches the material. Move the 
container slowly in horizontal plane, until the spindle 
is located in approximately the center of the container 
so that the test will be run in an undisturbed region. 


C-2.2 Turn on the viscometer. Adjust the viscometer 
RPM for the material under test. Allow the viscometer 
to run till constant reading is achieved. Once constant 
reading is achieved note the reading and switch off 
the instrument. 


C-3 CALCULATIONS 


Calculate the apparent viscosity as follows: 


V=fxs 
where 
V = viscosity on sample in centipoises, 
F = scale factor (furnished with instrument), and 
s = scale reading of viscometer. 


In case of digital viscometers, viscosity reading is 
directly displayed on the viewing screen /window. 


NOTE — Precautions: 
a) Do not keep viscometer unguarded when not in use. 


b) Do not keep any spindle loose. After use clean the spindle 
properly and keep in the spindle stand provided with instrument. 


c) Do not keep instrument upside down with a fluid coated with 
spindle still attached. It will spoil the pivot bearing of the 
instrument (pivot bearing is where spindle is attached). 


d) Keep conversion table provided to calculate the viscosity in 
safe place preferable with instrument in case itself. 


e) While checking viscosity maximum care should be taken to 
avoid air bubbles. 


IS 16361 : 2015 


ANNEX D 
[Table 1, SI No. (x)] 
DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO HEAT 


D-0 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


It prescribes the test method for the evaluation of the 
heat resistant properties of coatings designed to protect 
any surfaces exposed to elevated temperatures. Air- 
dried panel is heated to a specified temperature under 
stipulated conditions. After this, it is cooled and dipped 
in water. The extent of deterioration of the film is 
compared with that of an unheated coated panel tested 
at the same time. 


D-1 APPARATUS 


D-1.1 Oven with Air Circulation Arrangement 


The oven shall be capable of being maintained at 125 
+ 2°C. 


D-2 TEST PANELS 
D-2.1 Steel Panels 
Panel shall be prepared as prescribed in 7.2. 


D-3 PROCEDURE 


D-3.1 Place the panels in the oven at 125°C and shall 
be spaced by minimum 100 mm from the sides of the 


oven and at least 20 mm apart from each other and 
subjected to heating at the maintained temperature for 
the specified time. The preferred method of ensuring 
even heating of the coated panels is to suspend them 
by means of fine wires. Alternatively, the panels may 
be supported in a rack made from suitable heat 
insulating material or placed them by keeping the 
painted side upward, on the piece of asbestos board/ 
sheet resting on supports. 


D-3.2 At the end of Ih heating remove the panels 
immediately from the oven and cool to room 
temperature, which is then immersed in water at room 
temperature for 24 h. Take out the panels from water 
and examine it after air drying for 1 h. 


D-4 OBSERVATIONS 


Examine the panels for change of colour or signs of 
other deterioration of the coating, by comparing with 
identically prepared but unheated panels. The material 
shall be deemed to have passed the test, if the paint 
film remain firmly adhere with substrate and shall not 
shows any sign of cracking, blistering, flaking or any 
other signs of deterioration. 


ANNEX E 
[Table 1, SI No. (xi)] 
DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO HUMIDITY 


E-0 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


This test is carried by suspending the dried painted 
panels in a corrosion cabinet maintained with 100 
percent relative humidity and a temperature cycle of 
42°C to 48°C for 500 h and examining it for any signs 
of deterioration and corrosion of metal surface. 


E-1 APPARATUS 


E-1.1 Corrosion Cabinet — As prescribed in 2.1.2 
of IS 101 (Part 6/Sec 1). 


E-2 TEST PANELS 


E-2.1 Steel Panels 
Panel shall be prepared as prescribed in 7.2. 


E-3 PROCEDURE 


E-3.1 Keep the painted panel in a vertical position at a 
temperature of 60°C to 65°C for 1 h. Cool the panel to 
room temperature and protect the edges to a depth of 5 
mm with a suitable protective composite material 
which shall have melting point above 50?C [Preferably 
consisting of 3 parts by weight of paraffin wax (melting 
point 60°C) and 1 part by weight of carnauba wax 
(melting point 182?C)]. Then suspend it vertically in 
the corrosion cabinet. 


E-3.2 After exposure for 500 h in the set environmental 
conditions of corrosion cabinet, remove the panel and 
examine it for signs of deterioration of paint film. 
Remove 25 mm strip of the film from the centre of the 
panel carefully with help of non-corrosive paint 


remover and examine the exposed metal for signs of 
corrosion after neglecting 25 mm portion of the 
exposed surface from each end. 


E-4 OBSERVATIONS 


The metal surface shall not show any sign of corrosion; 


IS 16361 : 2015 


changes in appearance and condition of the paint film 
shall not be taken into consideration in deciding about 
acceptability. 

NOTE — Immediate after assessment of the panel, the exposed 


area shall be protected with a suitable non-corrosive transparent 
lacquer for reference purposes. 


ANNEX F 
[Table 1, SI No. (xii)] 
DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO NEUTRAL SALT SPRAY TEST 


F-0 GENERAL 


This standard prescribes a method for determining the 
resistance of coatings to the neutral salt spray test 
performed for 2 000 h. 


F-1 APPARATUS 


F-1.1 Spray cabinet — As prescribed in 3.2 of IS 101 
(Part 6/Sec 1). 


F-1.2 Test Solution — As prescribed in 3.3 of IS 101 
(Part 6/Sec 1). 


F-2 TEST PANELS 


F-2.1 Steel Panels 
Panel shall be prepared as prescribed in 7.2. 


F-3 PROCEDURE 
F-3.1 Preparation of Scratch 


Make a scratch or scribed mark through the coating to 
the panel. Use the single cutting tool and locate the 
scratch at least 20 mm away from edges of the test 
panel. 


F-3.2 Follow the procedure as prescribed in 3.5 of 
IS 101 (Part 6/Sec 1). 


F-3.3 Examination of Test Panels 


Periodic visual examination of the panels should be 
made with precaution to avoid any damage to the 
surface of the test panel. Each periodic examination 
shall not exceed 60 min in any 24 h period and 
whenever possible, should be repeated at the same 
period of next successive days. The panels shall not 
be allowed to become dry during examination. 


NOTE — By agreement between the interested parties, it is 
sometimes necessary that painted components of different 
shapes are subjected to the test. When such tests are conducted, 
it is of particular importance to expose the shaped components 
in their regular form of use. Within this restriction, the 
component should be placed so as to minimize the disruption 
of flow. However, test panels and components should not be 
tested simultaneously, if the shape of the painted component 
interferes with the general direction of flow. 


F-3.3.1 Atthe end of the 2000 h, remove the test panels 
(or painted components, as the case may be) from the 
apparatus and rinse with clean water to remove residues 
of salt solution from the surface. Immediately examine 
the test surfaces for signs of deterioration, for example, 
blistering, staining, loss of adhesion, and creep of 
corrosion from scratch. Keep the panels in the standard 
atmosphere for 1 h and examine the test surfaces for 
deterioration. Then carefully remove 150 mm x 50 mm 
strip from the test surface using of a non-corrosive paint 
remover and examine the exposed surface for signs of 
corrosion. 


IS 16361 : 2015 


ANNEX G 
[Table 1, SI No. (xiii)] 
DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO WATER 


G-0 GENERAL 


This prescribed method demonstrate the probable 
effect on painted surface which are exposed under 
conditions where prolonged condensation of water may 
takes place but not have an extremely corrosive 
atmosphere. 


G-1 APPARATUS 
As prescribed in 3 of IS 101 (Part 7/sec 1). 


G-2 PREPARATION OF TEST PANELS 


G-2.1 Steel Panels 
Panel shall be prepared as prescribed in 7.2. 


G-2.2 Wood Panels 
Panel shall be prepared as prescribed in 7.2. 


G-2.3 Cement/Asbestos Panels 


Panel shall be prepared as prescribed in 7.2. The edges 
of the test panel, after coating with the product under 
test, shall be sealed by suitable means. 


G-3 PROCEDURE 


G-3.1 As prescribed in 5.2 and 5.2.1 of IS 101 (Part 7/ 
sec 1). All the three type of panels can be 


simultaneously put under test provided space permits. 


G-3.2 At the end of 500 h, remove the panels from the 
tank, blot them with absorbent paper and immediately 
examine the whole test surface of each panel for 
blistering or other signs of deterioration. Allow the 
panels to stand at room temperature for 24 h. 


NOTE — For periodical examination, panels shall be taken 
out from the tank and blotted with absorbent paper, examined 
for blistering or other signs of deterioration and then 
immediately returned to the tank. 


G-4 OBSERVATIONS 


Examine the test surface again for loss of adhesion, 
rust staining, change of colour, embrittlement or signs 
of any other deterioration. The material shall be 
deemed to have passed the test if the paint film remains 
firmly adhere with substrate and shall not shows any 
sign of cracking, rust staining, embrittlement or any 
other signs of deterioration. 


NOTES 


1 The exposed panels at the end of the testing can also be 
compared against the approved sample. 

2 If the exposed surface area of the panels kept for reference 
purposes, then after completion of examination, carefully 
remove 150 mm x 50 mm strip from the test surface using of a 
non-corrosive paint remover and examine the exposed surface 
of panel for signs of corrosion. This exposed area shall be then 
protected by a suitable transparent lacquer. 


ANNEX H 
[Table 1, SI No. (xiv)] 
DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO ACID 


H-0 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


An air-dried panel of the material is immersed in 
different acids for 7 days. Any deterioration of the film 
is then examined. 


H-1 REAGENT 
H-1.1 Sulphuric Acid — 1 : 20 (v/v) ( see IS 266 ). 
H-1.2 Hydrochloric Acid — 1 : 10 (v/v) ( see IS 265). 


H-2 PREPARATION OF TEST PANELS 
H-2.1 Steel Panels 


Panel shall be prepared as prescribed in 7.2. The edges 
of the test panel, after coating with the product under 
test, shall be sealed by suitable means. 


H-3 PROCEDURE 


H-3.1 The test shall be carried out at a temperature of 
27 527€. 


H-3.2 It is preferable to immerse the test pieces 
individually in the acid but for convenience, several 
test pieces can also be immersed in a single tank. In 
such cases, the nature of the test pieces shall be identical 
and every precaution shall be taken to ensure that the 
test liquids are unaffected by the test pieces. 


H-3.3 The test pieces shall be spaced at least 30 mm 
from the sides of the tank and shall be at least 30 mm 
apart from each other. The test pieces shall be 
electrically insulated from their supports. 


H-3.4 Place sufficient amount of acid solutions in the 
vessels of suitable sizes to facilitate partial immersion 
of the test panels in solution. Immerse the test piece in 
an approximately vertical position using suitable 
supports, if necessary. Cover the container for the entire 
duration of the test to minimize the loss of acid 
solutions by evaporation or splashing. During the entire 
period of testing, aerate the acid solutions by means of 
a slow stream of air (free from oil and grease). 


IS 16361 : 2015 


Compensate any loss of acid solution by addition of 
fresh acid solutions or distilled water at suitable 
intervals in order to maintain the original volume/ 
concentration. 


H-3.5 At the end of the 7 days immersion period, test 
pieces shall be removed and washed thoroughly in 
running water. Any residual liquid on the surface of 
test pieces shall be removed by dabbing with suitable 
absorbent paper or cloth. 


H-4 OBSERVATIONS 


The test piece after a recovery period of 1 h shall be 
compared with an identically prepared but un- 
immersed test panel under good illuminating condition, 
to examine for any sign of deterioration of coating. 
The material shall be deemed to have passed the test, 
if the paint film on the panel does not shows any 
appreciable changes in characteristic of softening, 
blistering, cracking and colour. 


ANNEX J 
[Table 1, SI No. (xv)] 
DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO ALKALI 


J-0 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


An air-dried film of the material is immersed in a 
solution of different alkalis and examined for any 
deterioration. 


J-1 REAGENTS 


J-1.1 Sodium Carbonate Solution — 5 percent 
anhydrous sodium carbonate in water (w/w) (see 
IS 296). 


J-1.2 Sodium Hydroxide Solution — 5 percent 
sodium hydroxide in water (w/w) (see IS 376). 


J-1.3 3M aqueous solution of CaCL. (see IS 1314). 


J-2 PREPARATION OF TEST PANELS 
J-2.1 Steel Panels 


Panel shall be prepared as prescribed in 7.2. The edges 
of the test panel, after coating with the product under 
test, shall be sealed by suitable means. 


J-3 PROCEDURE 


J-3.1 The test shall be carried out at a temperature of 
27 x 2?C. 


J-3.2 It is preferable to immerse the test pieces 
individually in the test liquids but for convenience, 
several test pieces can also be immersed in a single 
tank. In such cases, the nature of the test pieces shall 
be identical and every precaution shall be taken to 
ensure that the test liquids are unaffected by the test 
pieces. 


J-3.3 The test pieces shall be spaced at least 30 mm 
from the sides of the tank and shall be at least 30 mm 
apart from each other. The test pieces shall be 
electrically insulated from their supports. 


J-3.4 Place sufficient amount of alkali solutions in the 
vessels of suitable sizes to facilitate partial immersion 
of the test panels in solution. Immerse the test piece in 
an approximately vertical position using suitable 
supports, if necessary. Cover the container for the entire 
duration of the test to minimize the loss of alkali 
solution by evaporation or splashing. During the entire 
period of testing, aerate the alkali solution by means 
of a slow stream of air(free from oil and grease). 
Compensate any loss of alkali solution by addition of 
fresh alkali solution or distilled water at suitable 
intervals in order to maintain the original volume/ 
concentration. 


IS 16361 : 2015 


J-3.4.1 At the end of the 1 000 h immersion period, 
test pieces shall be removed and washed thoroughly 
in running water. Any residual liquid on the surface of 
test pieces shall be removed by dabbing with suitable 
absorbent paper or cloth. 


J-4 OBSERVATIONS 


The test piece after a recovery period of 1 h shall be 


compared with an identically prepared but un- 
immersed test panel under good illuminating condition, 
to examine for any sign of deterioration of coating. 
The material shall be deemed to have passed the test, 
if the paint film on the panel does not shows any 
appreciable changes in characteristic of softening, 
blistering, cracking and colour. 


ANNEX K 
[Table 1, SI No. (xvi)] 
DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO LOW TEMPERATURE 


K-0 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


The prescribed test method is for determining the 
resistance of a paint to low temperature. An air-dried 
film of the material is kept in cooling medium 
at -20?C for 30 min and examined for any 
deterioration. 


K-1 APPARATUS 


An arrangement to hold cooling media in closed 
vessel(can be sealed /air tight) and to measure and 
maintain the test temperature within + 2°C through out 
the test period. 


K-2 TEST PANELS 
Steel panels shall be prepared as prescribed in 7.2. 


K-3 PROCEDURE 


The prepare and conditioned test panel shall be 


10 


submerged in the cooling medium (for example dry 
ice, liquid nitrogen, etc). The test panel shall be kept 
initially for sufficient time to ensure that the required 
temperature of —20?C is reached throughout the test 
panel. After attaining the temperature of —20?C, test 
shall be continued for 30 min. At the end of testing 
period, test panels shall be removed and bring to room 
temperature. After conditioning to room temperature 
for sufficient time, the test panel shall be examined 
under good illuminating condition. 


K-4 EXAMINATION OF THE TEST PANEL 


The test piece shall be examined for any sign of 
deterioration of coating and if required, shall be 
compared with an identically prepared but untested test 
panel. The material shall be deemed to have passed 
the test, if the paint film on the panel does not shows 
any appreciable changes in characteristic of blistering, 
cracking and colour. 


IS 16361 : 2015 


ANNEX L 
[Table 1, SI No. (xvii)] 
DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE VAPOUR PERMEABILITY 


L-0 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


This method determines the rate at which moisture 
passes through films of paint coating. 


L-1 APPARATUS 


L-1.1 Permeability Cup — As prescribed in 3.1 of 
IS 101 (Part 6/Sec 3). The cup having capacity of 12 
ml and which permits exposure of 10 cm? of paint film 
may also be used. 


L-1.2 Low Humidity Chamber — As prescribed in 
3.2 of IS 101 (Part 6/Sec 3). 


L-1.3 Balance — Analytical balance, range — 200 mg, 
least count -1 mg. 


L-1.4 Temperature Control — As prescribed in 3.4 
of IS 101 (Part 6/Sec 3). 


L-1.5 Desiccant — As prescribed in 3.6 of IS 101 
(Part 6/Sec 3). 


L-2 TEST SPECIMENS 


L-2.1 The test specimen shall be smooth, through 
continuous film of uniform thickness throughout the 
test area and entirely free from dust or other foreign 
matter. The thickness of the coating applied shall be 
between 900 and 1 000 micron DFT and shall not 
vary by more than 5 percent of the total thickness in 
any test series. 


L-2.2 PREPARATION OF FREE FILMS 


Take clean, smooth and levelled surfaced M.S. plate 
of size 12cm x 10cm x 0.2cm(thickness) for testing. 
Cover the plate from both side with release paper 
having the releasing side on outer face. Apply the 
coating on the plate by dipping in the material and dry 
in the air for 3 h at room temperature. A coating of 
900 to 1 000 micron DFT shall be developed by multi 
dip coating method and repeated drying. Finally allow 
the coated plate to air dry for 72 h. After air drying, 
place the panel bearing the film in a mercury bath for 
amalgamation. Remove carefully the detached film 
from the bath. Since the film is air dried and to be 
tested as free film, the unexposed surface of detached 
film shall be allowed to get exposed to air for at least 7 
days prior to test. 

NOTE — A device equipped with a perforated metal plate for 

holding the substrate under vaccum, and a mechanical drive 


for drawing down the coating with an applicator, serves the 
purpose better than other modes of application. 


L-2.3 Cut a circular disc from the film by the method 
as prescribed in 4.4 of IS 101 (Part 6/Sec 3). 


L-3 PROCEDURE 


Follow the steps as prescribed in 4.5 and 5.1 of IS 101 
(Part 6/Sec 3). 


L-4 CALCULATION 
As prescribed in 6 of IS 101 (Part 6/Sec 3). 


ANNEX M 
[Table 1, SI No. (xviii)] 
BEND TEST 


M-0 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


This is an empirical test for assessing the resistance of 
a coating of paint, varnish, etc, to cracking and/or 
detachment from a metal substrate when subjected to 
bending around a cylindrical mandrel. 


M-1 APPARATUS 
M-1.1 Mandrel — A rigid mandrel, made up of 


11 


corrosion resistant suitable material, such as stainless 
steel, having diameter of 13 mm shall be used. 


M-1.2 Type 2 Apparatus — A suitable apparatus as 
shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 of IS 101(Part 5/sec 2). 


M-1.3 Test Panels — Steel panel of size 100 mm x 50 
mm x 1.0 mm. Panel shall be prepared as prescribed in 
7.2. Panels shall be flat and free from distortion and the 
surface shall be free from any visible ridges or cracks. 


IS 16361 : 2015 


M-2 PROCEDURE 


M-2.1 Ambient Conditions 


The test shall be carried out at 27 + 2°C and 65 + 5 
percent relative humidity. Warming the test panel by 
undue handling shall be avoided. 


M-2.2 Testing shall be done as prescribed in 2.4.6 of 
IS 101 (Part 5/sec 2). 


M-2.3 Examination of the Test Panel 


Examine the coating of test panel immediate after 


bending. Use normal corrected vision or, by agreement, 
a lens of 10X magnification, and examine the coating 
for cracking and/or detachment from the substrate, 
ignoring the surface of the coating less than 10 mm 
from the edge of the panel. The material shall be 
deemed to have passed the test if the coated film on 
the panel shall not show any visible crack and/or 
detachment from the steel plate. 

NOTE — If a lens is used, it is essential to mention this fact in 


the test report to avoid misleading comparisons with results 
obtained using normal vision only. 


ANNEX N 
[Table 1, SI No. (xix)] 
SCRATCH HARDNESS TEST 


N-0 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


This is a test method for determining the resistance of 
a paint film to penetration by scratching with a needle. 
This test may be used for qualitative evaluation test, 
expressed as 'pass/fail', when tested by applying a 
single specified load to the needle. 


N-1 APPARATUS 


N-1.1 A suitable apparatus as prescribed in 3.2 of 
IS 101 (Part 5/Sec 2). 


N-1.2 Preparation of Test Panels 


The paint shall be mixed properly and thinned with 
the thinner, supplied along with the paints, if required 
and applied on the steel panel as prepared in 7.2.1.1 
with the help of dip system. The panel shall be first 
coated with the inner coat for 2 or 3 coats and shall be 
air dried for 2-3 h at 27°C after each successive 
coatings. The final coat shall be with the top coat 
(finishing coating) only to obtain an even and uniform 
total coat having a dry film thickness of 65 to 80 
micron. The finally coated test pieces shall be air dried 
for 24 h in a horizontal position at 27?C. The film 
thickness shall be determined by the method prescribed 


12 


in 6 of IS 101 (Part 3/Sec. 2). Unless otherwise 
specified, the dried coated panels shall be conditioned 
at a temperature of 27 + 2°C and 65 + 5 percent relative 
humidity for a minimum of 48 h. The tests shall then 
be carried out as soon as possible. Ensure that the panels 
shall be flat and free from distortion and surface shall 
be free from any visible ridges or cracks. 


N-2 PROCEDURE 


N-2.1 Ambient Conditions 


The test shall be carried out at 27 + 2°C and 65 € 5 
percent relative humidity. Warming the test panel by 
undue handling shall be avoided. 


N-2.2 Testing shall be done as prescribed in 3.4.2 of 
IS 101(Part 5/sec 2). The specific load applied to the 
needle is 1 000 g. 


N-2.3 Examination of the Test Panel 


Remove the panel and examine the scratch to see if 
the coating has been penetrated to the substrate. Use 
normal corrected vision or by agreement, a suitable 
magnification may be used, in which case the degree 
of magnification shall be mentioned in the test report. 


IS 16361 : 2015 


ANNEX P 
[Table 1, SI No. (xx)] 
HARDNESS TESTS 


P-0 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


The method of test prescribed here is for determination 
of hardness of formed film of the product by Pendulum 
test method. The resistance of a single coat film or 
multicoat system of products is determined to a single 
blow impact by a pendulum. 


P-1 APPARATUS 


P-1.1 A suitable apparatus as prescribed in 2.2.1 of 
IS 101 (Part 5/sec 1). 


P-2 PREPARATION AND COATING OF TEST 
PIECES 


P-2.1 Test Pieces 


It shall be burnished steel tube (as drawn and tempered 
or in normalized condition) with dimensions as 28 mm 
internal diameter, 38.0 + 0.5 mm external diameter 
and 125 mm length. 


P-2.2 Preparation 


The test pieces shall be prepared as described in 2 of 
IS : 101 (Part-1/Sec 3). 


P-2.3 Coating of Test Pieces 


The coating shall be properly mixed and thinned with 


the thinner, supplied along with the paints, if required 
and applied on the tube with the help of dip system. 
The tube shall be initially coated with the inner coat 
for 2 or 3 coats and shall be air dried for 2-3 h at 27°C 
after each coating. The final coat shall be with the top 
coat (finishing coating) only to obtain an even and 
uniform total coat having a dry film thickness of 65 to 
80 micron. The final coated test pieces shall be air dried 
for 24 h in a horizontal position at 27?C. The film 
thickness shall be determined by the method prescribed 
in 6 of IS 101 (Part 3/Sec. 2). Unless otherwise 
specified, the coated test panels shall be conditioned 
at a temperature of 27 + 2°C and 65 + 5 percent relative 
humidity for a minimum of 48 h. The tests shall then 
be carried out as soon as possible. 


P-3 PROCEDURE 


P-3.1 Attach the test pieces to the arms of the apparatus 
and fix the arms at the specified inclination from the 
vertical. Release the arms for impact by pendulum. 
Remove the test pieces. 


P-3.2 Examination of the Test Piece 


Examine the test piece coating immediately after the 
test. Examine the point of impact for the loss of 
adhesion or removal of the coating. 


ANNEX R 
[Table 1, SI No. (xx1)] 
FIRE RETARDANT TEST 


R-1 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


The apparatus consisting of a two foot tunnel inclined 
at 38? to the horizontal axis to which coated test panel 
placed facing downwards to form the roof of the tunnel 
as shown in Fig. 2. Paint under test should be applied 
at the recommended dry film thickness of 65 to 80 
micron. 


R-2 EVALUATION OF THE COMPOSITIONS 
FOR FIRE TEST 


R-2.12 Foot-Tunnel Test 
R-2.1.1 Apparatus — The frame of the tunnel is 


13 


fabricated using 75 x 75 x 3 mm angle iron mounted 
on a 650 x 125 mm base plate. The sample holding 
rack utilises a 750 x 100 mm specimen size. An 
asbestos backing plate of 750 x 100 mm is used to 
prevent the test specimen from warping during the fire 
test. A small opening at the lower end of the tunnel is 
provided with a mirror to observe the propagation of 
the flame. Temperature at the back of the panel is 
measured by inserting thermocouple through a small 
hole at the top cover which is located right above the 
burner. A Bunsen burner is used at the lower end of 
the inclined tunnel and the distance between the burner 
top and test specimen is about 40 mm. 


IS 16361 : 2015 


R-3 PROCEDURE a) Char height — Maximum height of char in 


‘Ths patat teapplied on the wooden panels Olimalayan millimetre at a point directly above the burner. 


fir) of size 750 x 100 x 10 mm. The test panel shall be b) Flame spread length — Only flame extending 
prepared as prescribed in 7.2. The panel is positioned along the surface of the test panel should be 
in the inclined top and the asbestos plate which is of recorded as flame spread length. 


the size of the test specimen is placed above the painted c) After glow — The time in seconds for which 
panel. Mark the coated panel in such a way that ‘0’ panel emits light after removal of the source 
mark is positioned exactly above the tip of the burner of fire. 

and further marking are made in 1" succession till end d) After flaming — The time in seconds for 
of the panel as shown in Fig. 1. Panel is exposed to which flame continues after removal of the 
flame for 5 min with pressure 2.0 Ibs /square inch and source of fire. 

observations with respect to the following shall be 

noted. 


FiG. 1 TEST PANEL FOR FIRE TEST 


22%) 


“TAT RROR 


Fic. 2 FIRE TEST APPARATUS (2 FOOT TUNNEL) 


14 


IS 16361 : 2015 


ANNEX S 
[Table 1, SI No. (xxii)] 
TENSILE STRESS — STRAIN PROPERTIES 


S-0 PRINCIPLE OF THE METHOD 


In this test, test pieces in dumb-bell shape are stretched 
in a tensile testing machine at a constant rate. Reading 
of load and elongation are taken as required during 
the uninterrupted stretching of the test piece and when 
it breaks. 


S-1 APPARATUS 


S-1.1 Marker and Tensile Test Machine — The 
marker and tensile test machine shall be as prescribed 
in 7 and 11 of IS 3400 (Part 1). 


S-2 TEST PIECE 


S-2.1 Preparation of Free Films 


The paint film shall be prepared as prescribed in L- 
2.1and L-2.2. 


S-2.2 Preparation of Test Piece 


The test piece shall be in the shape of a dumb-bell, 
Type 1 as described in 6.2 of IS 3400 (Part-1) and of 
sizes as given in Table 1 and Table 2 of IS 3400 (Part 1). 


S-3 PROCEDURE 


Testing shall be carried out at 27 + 2°C, unless 
otherwise specified. Follow the procedure as described 
in 9, 9.1, 10, 10.3, 10.4, 12, 12.1, 13 and 13.1 of IS 
3400 (Part 1). 


NOTE — For dumb-bell thickness, minimum three 
measurements to be done and minimum value shall be regarded 
in calculation of tensile strength or breaking strength. If the 
variation between the values are more than 0.08 mm, such 
sample should be discarded for test. 


S-4 CALCULATIONS 


S-4.1 Tensile strength and elongation at break shall be 
calculated as prescribed in 15 and 15.1 of IS 3400 
(Part 1). 


S-4.1.1 For tensile strength, elongation at break, the 
result reported shall be the middle value, if an odd 
number of test pieces are used, or the average of the 
middle two values if an even number of test pieces are 
used, the various results being arranged in order of 
increasing value. The report shall include the observed 
values, number of test pieces used and direction of 
grain (if any). 


ANNEX T 
[Table 1, SI No. (xxiii)] 
DETERMINATION OF IMPACT RESISTANCE 


T-0 GENERAL 


Test pieces are subjected to blows from a falling striker 
of specified mass and shape which is dropped from a 
known height on the test piece. The severity of this 
test method can be adjusted by changing the mass of 
the striker and/or by changing the drop height. The 
impact resistance of the Class II material meant for 
coating on reinforcing bar by mechanical damage shall 
be determined by this method. 


T-1 APPARATUS 


T-1.1 Falling Weight Testing Machine 


T-1.1.1 Main Frame — With guide rails or tube, which 
can be fixed in the true vertical position, to 
accommodate the striker (see Fig. 7 of IS 4985) and 


15 


release mechanism to release the striker to fall 
vertically and freely. 


T-1.1.2 Striker — It is a heavy metallic cylindrical 
body with hemispherical end comprising nose having 
diameter of 15.875 mm. The nose may be comprising 
all or part of the hemisphere, combined with a stem at 
least 10 mm long (see Fig. 8 of IS 4985 for guidance). 
The mass of the striker, including any associated 
weights, shall be 1 800 g. Below the stem, the nose 
shall be of solid steel, polished and free from flats, 
indentations or other imperfections which may 
influence the result. 


T-1.1.2 Release Mechanism — It is a drop tube 
approximately 1.50 m long used to contain the striker 
and guide the striker during free fall from a variable 
height which can be adjusted to any height up to at 


IS 16361 : 2015 


least 2 m measured from the top surface of the test 
piece, with an accuracy of +10 mm. A scale shall be 
attached for measuring the height of the drop to the 
nearest 2.0 mm. 


T-1.1.3 Specimen Holder — The base plate of the 
apparatus shall include a device for positioning and 
holding the test specimen on line with the axis of the 
vertical drop line. 


T-2 TEST PANELS 


Steel panels shall be prepared as prescribed in 7.2. 


T-3 PROCEDURE 


The test shall be performed at room temperature. With 
an impact of 9 Nm, no shuttering, cracking or bond 
loss of the coating shall occur except at the impact 
area, that is, area permanently deformed by the striker. 


ANNEX U 
[Table 1, SI No. (xxv)] 
DETERMINATION OF DURABILITY 


U-0 GENERAL 


U-0.1 Outline of the Method 


The prescribed test method is for determination of 
durability of the product by ascertaining its actual 
behavior when suitably prepared test panel of the 
product is subjected to accelerated weathering test. 
Under accelerated weathering test, the test panel 
prepared by using paint/coating is exposed to heat, light 
and water in artificial weathering apparatus in a 
controlled manner. 


U-1 APPARATUS 


U-1.1 Accelerated Weathering Apparatus — An 
artificial weathering apparatus of UV condensation 
type with following test condition parameters: 


a) Lamptype: Ultra violet fluorescent light UV— 


B 313 


b) Test cycle: 1) UV —4 h. at 60 + 
1°C 
2) Condensation —4 h. at 50 + 
1°C 
c) Irradiance : 0.67 


16 


U-2 TEST PANELS 


U-2.1 Asbestos Cement Panels — It is of sizes 150 
mm x 75 mm (see IS 2096). Panel shall be prepared as 
prescribed in 7.2 except that initial 2 to 3 coats shall 
be with inner coat and the final coating shall be with 
top coat (finishing) so that the total dry thickness of 
coating shall be between 65 to 80 p. 


U-3 PROCEDURE 


The test panel shall be exposed for a period of 500 hr 
in the apparatus under the conditions stipulated in 
U-1.1. Expose the panels alternately in UV and 
condensation at the condition prescribed in U-1.1. 


U-4 Evaluation of Exposed Films 


U-4.1 Before evaluation, the test panel should be 
thoroughly cleaned with running water followed by 
wiping the surface with wet soft cloth or chamois 
leather with light pressure (to avoid burnishing) till 
the surface is visibly cleaned of debris. 


U-4.2 The requirements of this test shall be considered 
to be satisfactory, if the performance in respect of the 
characteristics as prescribed under C-3.2 of IS 8662 
are within the limits as specified in C-4.3 of IS 8662. 


IS 16361 : 2015 


ANNEX W 
(Clause 4) 
METHODS OF APPLICATIONS 


W-0 GENERAL 


The manufacturer's guide line (if any) and also the 
following is to be followed for particular method of 
application. 


W-1 CLASS I 


The surface shall be either shot blasted to minimum 
Sa 2.5 to Swedish Specification SIS 055900: 1967 or 
cleaned using wire brush/Sand paper to remove the 
loose rust, dust, etc, and finally cleaned with thinner 
soaked cloth to remove the last traces of dust, oil and 
grease. Depending upon the level of corrosion, the DFT 
of the inner coats are to be decided before going for 
the top coat with say 20 to 25 micron DFT. This class 
of coating can be applied by brush, spray or dip process. 
The dilution level depends upon the process of 
application. The manufacturer of the paint is to be 
consulted with the data of chemical composition of 
the corrosive fumes to find out the required DFT of 
inner coats. 


W-2 CLASS II 


The surface shall be shot blasted to minimum Sa 2.5 
to Swedish Specification SIS 055900: 1967 to remove 
the loose scale and finally cleaning with thinner soaked 
cloth to remove the last traces of dust, oil and grease. 
Normally two coats are to be applied — one inner coat 
and the other top coat by dip coating method. For the 
first coat, the bars are to be dipped in to the coating for 
30 to 40 s. Remove the bars, shake it to remove the 
droplets from the bottom of the bars and allow to dry. 


17 


Normally it will be dried at room temperature by air 
circulation. One can accelerate the drying process by 
blowing hot air or passing the bars through hot air 
chamber at a temperature of 110 to 125° C for 10 
to 12 s. 


Once the bars cooled to room temperature, it can be 
dipped in the top coat for 30 to 40 s and dried in the 
same way as above. Though this class is primarily 
suitable for application by dip method, it may however 
be applied by spraying and touchup by brush. After 
the final coat bars can be used after 72 h. It can be cut 
to size or bend to size with out any de-lamination or 
cracking. Once it is used for concretizing, one can find 
enhancement of bond strength by 8 to 12 percent in 
comparison to the necked bar to concrete bond strength. 


W-3 CLASS III 


The concrete surface (most of the cases) should be dry 
and clean before application of this product. Initially 
the surface can be cleaned with the help of wire brush 
to remove the loose cement aggregates. Finally remove 
the dust with the help of cloth and brush. The building 
exterior can be coated by two inner coats and one top 
coat for UV resistance. For terrace waterproofing, 
coating inside the tanks in effluent treatment plant, 
water treatment plant, sewerage treatment plant, inside 
coating in cement pipe line, etc, the total thickness 
depends upon the life expectancy of the coating. The 
manufacturer's guideline (if any) can be consulted for 
the total DFT of the coating based on the life 
expectancy and the combination of products. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 20 (1939). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


AMENDMENT NO. 1 JULY 2021 
TO 


IS 16361 : 2015 THERMOPLASTIC POLYMER 
BASED COATING (A) UNDERCOATING (B) 
FINISHING — SPECIFICATION 


(Page 3, Table 1, SI No. vii), col 1) — Substitute ‘Volume Solid (Min), 
(nonvolatile vehicle)’ for ‘Solid content percent by weight (Min) . 


(Page 3, Table 1, SI No. vii), col 2) — Substitute ‘25(w/w)’ for ‘25’. 


(Page 2, clause 6) — Insert new clause in requirement clause as: 


*6.3 The material shall be tested for restriction from lead in accordance with 
IS 101 (Part 8/Sec 5). When tested the material shall not contain lead or 


compounds of lead or mixtures of both, calculated as Metallic lead exceeding 
90 ppm.’ 


(CHD 20) 


Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


