YNAT 977% IS 17951 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


чач afa Hera cht а 4 Waa % «тей 
ade A чап а чаа HaHa st 
ata chi fafa 


Method for Determination of 
Performance Relating to Safety of 
External Building Envelope 
Impacted by Wind Borne Debris 


ICS 91.120.99 


© BIS 2023 


UR 979% SRI 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM Aaa, 9 TSR ME WH AMT, AE feet - 110002 


Мыла oY МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2023 Price Group 7 


Cyclone Resistant Structures Sectional Committee, CED 57 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Cyclone 
Resistant Structures Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Windows, doors, curtain walls, roof and wall cladding systems are building envelope components often 
subjected to damage in cyclone or high speed wind. The adequacy of the structural design is substantiated by 
accounting for the design load as given in IS 875 ‘Code of practice for design loads (other than earthquake) for 
buildings and structures’ in different parts, which discuss proof loads as added factors of safety. However, these 
do not account for other factors such as the impact of wind borne debris caused due to cyclone or high speed 
wind. Wind borne debris present in cyclone or high speed wind has been causing a significant amount of 
damage to building envelopes. The actual in-service performance of fenestration assemblies and impact 
protective systems in areas prone to severe high speed wind depends on many factors. The main factors that 
affect the actual loading on building surfaces during a severe windstorm include varying wind direction, duration 
of the wind event, height above ground, building shape, terrain and surrounding structures. The resistance of 
fenestration or protective systems assemblies to wind loading after impact depends upon the product 
design, installation, load magnitude, duration and repetition. 


The damage caused by wind borne debris during cyclone or high speed wind goes beyond the failure of 
building envelope components, such as windows, doors, and curtain walls. Breaching of the envelope exposes a 
building’s contents to the damaging effects of continued wind and rain. A potentially more serious result 
is internal pressurization. When the windward wall of a building is breached, the internal pressure in the 
building increases, resulting in increased outward acting pressure on the other walls and the roof. 


This standard covers types of generally occurring impact loads, and provides necessary testing methods and 
acceptance criteria against these type of impact loads which are generated on external building envelope by wind 
borne debris. 


The impact bodies may be loose objects which are kept near buildings premises, wooden logs, may be small or 
big, and any hard particles/pebbles, etc. Their mass may range from small pebbles of 5 g to 1 kg to big objects 
like 4 kg to 50 kg. 


Exterior windows, glazed curtain walls, doors, skylights, louvers, vents and cladding elements being facade 
entities for any buildings are necessary to be tested and verified for these wind borne debris impact loads. 


This standard applies to the design of entire fenestration or impact protection systems assemblies and their 
installation. The performance determined by this standard relates to the ability of elements of the building 
envelope to remain unbreached during a windstorm. 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the 
standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this 
country. This has been met by deriving assistance from the following publications: 


ASTM E1886-05 ‘Standard Test Method for Performance of Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls, Doors, 
and Impact Protective Systems Impacted by Missile(s) and Exposed to Cyclic Pressure Differentials’ 


ASTM E1996-09 ‘Standard Specification for Performance of Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls, Doors, 
and Impact Protective Systems Impacted by Windborne Debris in Hurricanes’ 


Report No. 15775; ‘Simulated Wind Driven Debris Impact Testing of External Personal Access 
Doors’ 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 17951 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF PERFORMANCE 
RELATING TO SAFETY OF EXTERNAL BUILDING ENVELOPE 
IMPACTED BY WIND BORNE DEBRIS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard provides the method for determination 
of performance relating to safety of external 
building envelope like glazed curtain walls, exterior 
doors, exterior windows, impact protective systems 
(shutters, screens), skylight, wall cladding system, 
etc, impacted by wind borne debris, for buildings 
and other structures located in geographic regions 
that are prone to cyclone or extreme wind events. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent edition of the 
standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 190 : Coniferous sawn timber (baulks and 
1991 scantlings) — Specification (fourth 
revision) 


IS 280 : Mild steel wire for general engineering 


2006 purposes (fourth revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standarads, the following 
terms and their definitions shall apply: 


3.1 Fenestration Assembly (External) 


The construction intended to be installed to fill an 


intended opening in exterior envelope. 
3.2 Impact Protective System 


The construction applied, attached, or locked over 
an exterior glazed opening system to protect that 
system from wind borne debris during high wind 
events. Impact protective system includes types that 
are fixed, operable, or removable. 


3.3 Lumber 


A dressed piece of surface dry softwood lumber. 


3.4 Missile 


The object which is propelled toward a test 
specimen. 


3.5 Test Specimen 
The entire assembled unit submitted for testing. 
3.6 Windborne Debris 


The objects carried by the wind in cyclone or high 
speed wind. 


4 TEST CRITERIA 
4.1 Test Impact Loads 


The test impact load as given in Table 1, shall 
be applied for height up to 10 m by means of 
missile on the external envelope of the building, 
which depends upon the level of protection and 
the distance from the coastline. 


Test beyond the height of 10 m may be performed as 
per the agreement between the interested parties in 
view of the vicinity of the structure and other factors. 


IS 17951 : 2023 


Table 1 Detail of Missiles and Their Impact Speed 
[Clauses 4.1, 6.4 (a) and 6.4 (b)] 


SI No. Type of missile Level Missile Impact Speed 
m/s 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Small missile A No. of balls = 10 40 
(Steel ball) Shape = Spherical 
Mass = (2 + 0.1) g 
Diameter = 8 mm 
Ss Mass = (2 050 + 100) g 
ii) B Cross section = (100 x 50) mm? 12 
Length = 1.2 m+ 100 mm 
©. г Mass = (4 100 + 100) g 
iii) Large missile C Cross section = 100 x 50 mm? 15 
(Wooden Length = 2.4 m + 100 mm 
lumber) 
Mass = (4 100 + 100) g 
iv) D Cross section = 100 x 50 mm? 24 


Length = 2.4 т + 100 mm 


NOTE — Tolerance of + 1 percent shall be taken, in case tolerance is not mentioned. 


4.2 Test Sequence required in an emergency; and buildings and 
other structures having critical national defence 


The test specimen shall be subjected to test by functions. 


applying the large missiles first and subsequently 
by the small missile. b) Basic Protection 


4.3 Level of Protection All buildings and structures except those listed 
in 4.3.1 (a). 


4.3.1 For this test, buildings are classified in three 


categories as given below: 
a) Enhanced Protection (Essential Facilities) 


Buildings and other structures designated as 
essential facilities, including, but not limited 
to, hospitals; other health care facilities 
having emergency treatment facilities; 
jails апа detention centres; fire, rescue 
and police stations, and emergency 
vehicle garages; designated emergency 
shelters; Communication centres and other 
facilities required for emergency 
response; power generating stations; other 
public utility facilities 


c) Unprotected 


Buildings and other structures that represent a 
low hazard to human life in a windstorm 
including, but not limited to agricultural 
facilities, production greenhouses, certain 
temporary facilities, and storage facilities. 


4.3.2 Based on the level of protection and the 
distance of building from the coastline, the 
test impact load shall be applied as given in 
Table 2. However as рег the agreement 
between the interested parties, stringent level of 
test impact load may be performed. 


IS 17951 : 2023 


Table 2 Test Impact Load to be Applied 


(Clause 4.3.2) 
SI No. Distance from Coastline Test Impact Load 
Enhanced Protection Basic 
: Unprotected 

(Essential Facilities) Protection 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) Greater than 60 km and up to 100 km С+А В+А М№опе 
il) Less than equal to 60 km D+A C+A None 


NOTES 
1 A, B, C and D are as given in Table 1. 


2 Test beyond 100 km from the coastline, may be performed, considering the vulnerability of structures in view of vicinity of 


the structure and other factors. 


5 TEST SPECIMEN AND LOCATION OF 
IMPACT 


5.1 Test Specimen 


The test specimen shall be of full size, as utilized in 
actual use. The installation methodology shall also 
be as per the actual use. Number of test 
specimen shall be decided such that one specimen 
shall not be impacted by more than two large 
missile test and one small missile test. 


5.2 Location of Impact 


For the large missile tests, the locations given in 
5.2.1 to 5.2.6 should be taken into consideration. If 
specimen passes the large missile test, it will be 
tested for small missile test with ten spherical steel 
balls at random locations. Location other than given 
in 5.2.1 to 5.2.6 may also be tested as per the 
agreement between the interested parties in view of 
the operational and functional requirements of the 
specimen. 


Large missile shall be impacted within radius of 
65 mm from the centre of impact location. In case 
of interface corner, the location of impact shall be 
150 mm away from the corner. 


5.2.1 Windows 


Full size windows shall be tested as an assembly 
consisting of the glazing and its typical frame 
including any seals. The assembly shall be subjected 
to the test at the following location: 


a) Geometric centre, and 
b) Interface corner. 


Where interior mullions are present, additional 
impacts are to be performed at the following 
locations: 


a) Centre of mullion, and 
b) Base/end of mullion. 


5.2.2 Doors 


Full size door shall be tested as an assembly 
consisting of the door and its typical frame. For 
single leaf door, the assembly shall be subjected 
to the test at following locations: 


a) Geometric centre, and 
b) Interface corner. 


In the case of double leaf door assembly, an 
additional impact shall be performed at the 
following location: centre meeting point or mullion. 


5.2.3 Impact Protection Systems 


5.2.3.1 Full size impact protection systems such as 
shutters or screens shall be tested as a system 
consisting of the shutter or screen and its typical 
frame, including any accessories, if applicable. The 
impact protection system shall be subjected to the 
test at the following locations: 


a) Geometric centre, and 


IS 17951 : 2023 


b) Interface corner. 


Where interior studs or supports are present, 
additional impacts shall be performed at these 
locations: 


a) Centre of interior stud/support, and 
b) Base/end of interior stud/support. 


5.2.4 Roof, Skylight and Wall Cladding Systems 


Roof, skylight and wall cladding shall be tested as a 
system. A test cladding system consists of two 
sheets assembled together as it will be in practice. 
The assembled system shall be subjected to the test 
at the following locations: 


a) Geometric centre of one sheet, 

b) Interface corner of one sheet, 

c) Adjacent to lap on underlapped sheet at 
midspan, and 

d) Adjacent to lap on underlapped sheet 
adjacent to end support. 


5.2.5 Wall Panel Systems 


Wall panels shall be tested as a system. A test wall 
panel system consists of two panels, their usual 
supports and fasteners assembled together as it will 
be in practice. The assembled system shall be 
subjected to the test at the following locations: 


a) Geometric centre of one panel, 

b) Interface corner of one panel, 

c) Directly on panel to panel interface joint, 
and 

d) Directly on panel sheet at midspan adjacent 
to the other panel. 


The above impact locations are for flat surface wall 
panels. In the case of profiled wall panels, 
additional tests may be required. 


5.2.6 Other Wall and Roof Assembly 


Wall and roof assembly other than 5.2.1 to 5.2.5 
such as continuous masonry/concrete/metal units 
shall be tested in full size as utilized in actual use, 
but not greater than 3 m x 3 m. The sample should 
be supported as it will be in practice. The 
assembled system shall be subjected to the test at 
the following locations: 


a) Geometric centre, and 
b) Interface corner. 


6 TEST APPARATUS 


The test apparatus shall have major components as 
given in 6.1 to 6.4. 


6.1 Mounting Frame 


The mounting frame shall be a fixture which 
supports the test specimen in a vertical position 
during testing. The maximum deflection of the 
longest member of the mounting frame during 
impact shall not exceed L/360, where L denotes the 
longest unsupported length of a member of the 
mounting frame. Deflection measurements shall be 
made normal to the plane of the specimen at the 
point of maximum deflection. The mounting frame 
shall be either integral with the test chamber or 
capable of being installed into the test chamber prior 
to or following missile impact(s). The mounting 
frame shall be anchored such that it does not move 
when the specimen is impacted. 


6.2 Missile Propulsion Device(s) 


It shall be any device capable of propelling the 
missile at a specified speed, orientation, and impact 
location. The missile shall be such that it does not 
accelerate upon impact due to the force of gravity 
along a line normal to the specimen. The details of 
typical missile propulsion device are given in 
Annex A for reference. 


6.3 Speed Measuring Systems 


6.3.1 These shall be speed measuring devices, such 
as photoelectric sensors, high speed video camera 
and standard video camera. 


6.4 Missiles 
The missiles shall be as given below: 


a) Small Missile 


It shall be solid spherical steel balls as per 
Table 1 made of steel conforming to IS 280, 
having a mass of (2 + 0.1) g. 


b) Large Missile 


It shall be made of softwood as per IS 190 or 
any equivalent timber. The missile shall have 
no defects, including knots, splits, checks, 
shakes or wane within 300 mm of the impact 
end. The cross-section, mass and length of 
the different large missile shall be given in 
Table 1. 


7 TEST PROCEDURE 
7.1 Preparation 


7.1.1 Remove from the test specimen any sealing or 
construction material that is not intended to be used 
when the unit is installed in or on a building. 
Support and secure the test specimen into the 


mounting frame in a vertical position. The test 
specimen shall not be removed from the mounting 
frame at any time during the test sequence. 


7.1.2 Unless specified otherwise, for more stringent 
conditioning, condition the specimens for 4 h 
within a temperature range of 15 °C to 40 °C. 


7.1.3 Secure the specimen and mounting frame 
such that the missile will impact the exterior side 
of the specimen as installed. 


7.1.4 Locate the end of the propulsion device from 
which the missile will exit at a distance from the 
specimen equal to 1.5 times the length of the 
missile, but shall be not less than 1.80 m. The 
distance for small missile test is same as distance 
taken for large missile test on the same specimen. 


7.1.5 Weigh each missile within 15 min prior to 
impact and load the missile into propulsion device. 
Align the missile propulsion device such that the 
specified missile will impact the test specimen at 
the specified location. 


7.1.6 Reset the speed measuring system. The 
measured missile speed will be within the following 
respective tolerances at any point after the missile 
acceleration caused by the propulsion device equals 
zero: 


+ 2 percent specified speed; when speed is 
< 23 m/s 
+ 1 percent specified speed; when speed is 
> 23 m/s 


7.2 Propulsion of Missile 


7.2.1 Propel the missile at the specified impact speed 
and location. 


7.2.2 For missiles having a longitudinal axis, on 
impact the longitudinal axis of the missile shall be 
within 65° + 5° of a line normal to the specimen at 
the specified impact point. 


From a horizontal datum, measure the vertical height 
to the centre of the exit end of the propulsion device 
(if it is horizontal), Н, and the vertical height to the 
centre of the missile impact point on the specimen, 
h. To ensure the missile rotates less than 5° prior to 
impact: 


5°< апт | н 1 


where d denotes horizontal distance from the exit end 
of the propulsion device to the specimen. 


7.2.3 Repeat these steps for all impact locations as 
specified for the specimen. 


IS 17951 : 2023 


8 ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA 


8.1 The acceptance criteria for the large missile 
test are as follows: 


a) If large missile did not penetrate and no 
obvious tear formation is present on the 
inner side : Pass 


b) If test specimen stops the missile but is left 
with a tear formation smaller than 130 mm 
long or 1 mm wide : Pass 


с) If test specimen stops the missile but is left 
with a tear formation greater than 130 mm 
long or 1 mm wide : Fail 


d) If test specimen stops the missile but the 
missile is visible from the inside (that is, 
protruding through test specimen) : Fail 


8.2 If test specimen passes the large missile test at 
all critical locations, impact the same specimen with 
small missile test at random location. The 
acceptance criteria after the small missile test are 
as follows: 


a) If none of the spherical steel balls penetrates 


through the test specimen : Pass 


b) If any of the spherical steel balls penetrates 
through the test specimen : Fail 


9 INFORMATION SUBMITTED BEFORE 
TESTING 


The following information should be provided with 
test request of specimen. 


a) Level of protection as per 4.3, 

b) Test impact load if other than Table 2, 

c) Description of the test specimen such as 
dimensions, mass, material and framing 
system (if applicable), 

d) Detail of installation method with all 
supporting devices/materials, and 


e) Location of impact if other than 5. 


10 TEST REPORT 


The following information should be 
mentioned in the test report. 


a) Name of the test; 

b) Client details; 

c) Referred Indian standard; 

d) Information submitted with test request of 
specimen; 

e) Date of test; 

f) Test report number; 

g) Identification number of the test specimen; 


IS 17951 : 2023 


h) 


Ш 


k) 


Description of the test specimen, such as 
dimensions, mass, material and framing 
system (if applicable); 

Description of mounting frame used for 
testing and the details of installation of 
specimen on mounting frame; 

Details of conditioning of specimen; 


m) Description of missile; 


n) 


р) 


q) 


Location of impact for large missile test on 
test specimen; 

A statement of whether, upon completion 
of testing, the test specimen pass or fail in 
accordance with referred Indian standard or 
any specified criteria as per the agreement 
between interested parties; and 

Any other information as found necessary. 


IS 17951 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 6.2) 


MISSILE PROPULSION DEVICE 


A-1 The main components, test apparatus, assembly, 
and operation of missile propulsion devices shall be 
as given in A-1.1 to A-1.6. 


A-1.1 Large Missile Air Cannon 


A-1.1.1 The large missile air cannon shall use 
compressed air to propel the large missile. The 
cannon shall be capable of producing missile impact 
at the defined locations and speed. It shall consist of 
four major components : a compressed air supply, a 
pressure release valve, a barrel and support frame, 
and a speed measuring system for determining the 
missile speed. 


A-1.1.2 The barrel of the large missile cannon shall 
consist of a 100 mm nominal inside diameter pipe 
and shall have a length at least as long as the missile. 
The total length of the barrel shall be the distance 
from the pressure valve to the vent holes in advance 
of the timing system or to the mouth of the barrel. 
The barrel of the large missile cannon shall be 
mounted on a support frame in a manner to facilitate 
aiming the missile so that it impacts the specimen at 
the desired location. 


A-1.1.3 The end of the missile that impacts the target 
is denoted as the missile’s impactend. The end of 
the missile opposite to the impact end is denoted as 
the missile’s trailing edge. A sabot shall be used 
at the trailing edge of the missile to 
facilitate launching. 


A-1.1.4 The speed of the missile shall be measured 
on the trailing edge of the missile after it exits the 
barrel. The photoelectric sensors can be mounted on 
an extension of the barrel or supported 
independently of the cannon. In either case, the 
missile shall not be accelerated as its trailing 
edge passes between the photoelectric sensors. 


A-1.2 Bungee Test Apparatus 


The following are the suggested components of 
bungee test apparatus: 


a) Arigid PVC (or other suitable) pipe having 
a 100 mm nominal inside diameter and a 
minimum length of 2.75 m. 


b) Three to five 7.62 m long having 10 mm 
outside diameter and 5 mm inside diameter 
latex rubber surgical tubings banded 
together. 


c) One 50 mm x 100 mm x 150 mm wooden 
block with threaded eye hook mounted to 


and projecting from either face of 100 mm 
x 150 mm size. 


d) Two through-beam photoelectric sensors of 
the same make and model with minimum 
tolerances of + 2 percent (see A-1.6) 


e) Mounting frame of general construction 
capable of supporting pipe and timing 
system without movement during test. 


f) One 3 m steel cable with a quick release 
snap hook attached to one end. 


g) Hand operated cable winch with ratchet 
lock. 


A-1.3 Assembly 


The assembly shall be done as given below, the 
typical detail of missile propulsion devices being as 
given in Fig. 1: 


a) Drill two holes through each side of the 
PVC pipe one at 610 mm and another at 
1 520 mm from one end of the pipe, 
respectively. Holes should be of sufficient 
size to allow the light beams from the 
photoelectric sensors to pass through the 
holes unobstructed across the diameter of 
the pipe. 


b) Mount the photoelectric sensors on the pipe 
such that the light beams pass through the 
respective holes from one side of the pipe 
to the other across the pipe’s diameter. 


c) Drill one hole through each side of the PVC 
pipe approximately 150 mm from the end 
of the pipe upon which the sensors are 
mounted. These holes should be located 
90° around the pipe circumference from the 
holes described in A-1.3 (a). 


d) Thread each end of the surgical tubing 
bundle through one of the respective holes 
and fix the ends such that they cannot pull 
out. Pull the centre of the bundle through 
the pipe such that it exits the pipe at the 
opposite end. 


e) Attach the wooden block to the surgical 
tubing bundle such that the centre of the 
block is aligned with the centre of the 
bundle. The 100 mm x 150 mm face of the 
block with the eye hook protruding from it 
should face away from the end of the tube 
from which the tubing bundle exits. 


IS 17951 : 2023 


f) Mount the tube/surgical tubing assembly to 
the frame as illustrated in Fig. 1. 


g) Mount the hand winch to the frame in the 
illustrated location. Fix the end of the steel 
cable that does not have the quick release 
snap hook to the winch and rap the cable 
around the drum of the winch. The end of 
the cable with the snap hook should hang 
free. 


h) Connect the quick release snap hook to the 
eye hook of the wood block and draw 
enough cable on the winch drum to place a 
slight tension in the surgical tubing bundle. 


A-1.4 Operation 
The device shall be propelled as follows: 


a) Place the large missile in the pipe such that 
the trailing end of the missile rests on the 
wood block of the surgical tubing bundle. 


b) Crank the hand winch to draw wooden 
block back to cause tension in the surgical 
tubing bundle. The amount of tension 
caused in the bundle is based on the number 
of tubes in the bundle and the required 
missile propulsion speed. 


c) Reposition the missile such that the end is 
centered on the wooden block. 


d) Set up zero timing system for speed 
measurement. 


e) Align pipe such that the projected missile 


PHOTOELECTRIC 
SENSORS 


SURGICAL TUBING 
BUNDLE 


will impact the test specimen at the specified 
location. 


f) Release retaining pin of the quick release snap 
hook to release wooden block and propel missile. 


A-1.5 Small Missile Cannon 


A compressed air cannon shall be used that is 
capable of propelling missiles of the specified 
speed. The cannon assembly shall comprise a 
compressed air supply, a remote firing device 
and valves, abarrel, and a timing system. The 
small missile cannon shall be mounted on a 
frame designed to permit movement of the cannon 
so that it can propel missiles to impact the test 
specimen at specified locations. The 
photoelectric sensors shall Бе positioned to 
measure missile speed within 1.50 m of the impact 
point on the test specimen. 


A-1.6 Photoelectric Sensors 


Two photoelectric sensors shall be used. Both 
photoelectric sensors shall be the same model. An 
electronic timing device shall be activated when the 
reference point of the missile passes the first sensor. 
The electronic timing device shall be stopped when 
the reference point of the missile passes the second 
sensor. The electronic timing device shall have an 
operating frequency of not less than 10 kHz with a 
response time not to exceed 0.15 ms. The speed of 
the missile shall be determined by dividing the 
distance between the їмо through-beam 
photoelectric sensors by the time interval counted by 
the electronic timing device. 


ELECTRONIC CLOCK 


MISSILE 


WOOD BLOCK WITH 
THREADED EYE 


UL 


VL 


WL 


ГА РІРЕ 
= 

7 

22777 


150 
т 610тт 
1520 тт 


„== 
H 


oe RELEASE 


MOUNTING FRAME SNAP HOOK, 


FIG. 1 TYPICAL DETAILS OF MISSILE PROPULSION DEVICE 


IS 17951 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Cyclone Resistant Structures Sectional Committee, CED 57 


Organization 
In Personal Capacity (B-03-3, Raheja Atlantis, 
National Highway 08, Sector 3l- 32А, 


Gurugram) 


Adlakha Associates Private Limited, 
New Delhi 


BES Consultants Private Limited, 
Mumbai 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
CSIR-Structural Engineering Research 
Centre, Chennai 
CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, 
New Delhi 
Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 
Housing & Urban Development Corporation Ltd, 
New Delhi 
India Meteorological Department, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras 
Hindu University), Varanasi 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
Kanpur 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
Chennai 


Indian Society for Wind Engineering, 
Roorkee 


Jaypee University of Engineering and 
Technology, Guna 


Representative(s) 


DR PREM KRISHNA (Chairperson) 


SHRI PRAMOD ADLAKHA 
SHRI ABHAYA ADLAKHA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAN GOVIND 
SHRI VENUGOPAL S. B. (Alternate) 


DR ACHAL MITTAL 
SHRI SIDDHARTH BEHERA (Alternate) 


DR P. HARIKRISHAN 
DR G. RAMESH BABU (Alternate) 


DR R. K. GARG 
DR S.S GAHARWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI D. K. GARG 
SHRI SAUROBH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR G. G. S. ACHARY 
SHRI BHASKAR PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK BANSAL 
SHRIMATI SUNITHA DEVI. S 
SHRIMATI MONICA SHARMA (Alternate) 


DR S. MANDAL 
DR A. SARKAR (Alternate) 


PROF A. K. JAIN 
DR DIPTI RANJAN SAHOO (Alternate) 


DR RAJEEV GUPTA 
PROF K. MURALI 
PROF S. A. SANNASIRAJ (Alternate) 


PROF MAHESH TANDON 
PROF AJAY GAIROLA (Alternate) 


DR S. ARUNACHALAM 


IS 17951 : 2023 


Organization 


Kuraray India Private Limited, Delhi 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Mumbai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer in 

Chief's Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD 

(Army), New Delhi 
National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi 
National Institute of Ocean Technology, 


Chennai 


Nuclear Power Corporation India Ltd, 
Mumbai 


RWDI Consulting Engineers (India) Pvt Ltd, 
Trivandrum 


Sardar Vallabhbhai National Institute of 
Technology, Surat 


STUP Consultants Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Skeleton Consultants Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Visvesvaraya National Institute of 
Technology, Nagpur 


In Personal Capacity (4, Jorawar Bhavan, 93, 
Maharishi Carve Road, Marine Lines, Mumbai) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI MALVINDER SINGH ROOPRAI 
SHRI SUMIT BANERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI BALA SARASWATHI ILANGO 
SHRI К. JOHN SANDEEP (Alternate) 


SHRIP. K. JAIN 
COL N. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


MS RANU CHAUHAN 
SHRIJAVED IQBAL (Alternate) 


SHRI A. SATAYA KIRAN RAJU 
SHRI К. MULLAIVENDHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
SHRI AMIT VIYAJWARGIYA (Alternate) 


DR K. SURESH KUMAR 
SHRI RAHUL P. S (Alternate) 


DR ATUL K. DESAI 

PROF ASHOK J. SHAH (Alternate) 
SHRID. С. ATHAVALE 

SHRI A. D. RALKAR (Alternate) 


PROF ABHAY GUPTA 


DR О. К. JAISWAL 
DR L. M. GUPTA (Alternate) 


MS ALPA SHETH 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 


GENERAL 


(Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
DR MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


10 


(Continued from second cover) 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 Rules for rounding of numerical values (second revision). The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 57 (17840). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern :C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot Мо. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


