IS 15741:2007

Indian Stanch-d TEXTILES -- RESISTANCE TO IGNITION OF CURTAINS AND DRAPES -- SPECIFICATION

ICS 13.220.@, 59.080.30

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG Price Group 3

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

h?<

2007

Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TX 05

FOREWORD
This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. by the Chemical

There have been many fire incidents in recent years in public buildings/places, the origin of which could be many such as electric short circuiting, ignition, etc. The origin of fire may not be that much dangerous and hazardous ,as the ease of ignition and spreading of fire due to combustible materials such as curtains and drapes and othe~ textilt%, plastics, upholstered furniture, etc. Depending upon the type of materials encountered in burning, its ease of ignition and its fire spread properties, the extent of damage to the life and property could be enormous. In order to prevent or minimize the dalmage to life and property due to such fire risks, formulation of standard for resistance to ignition of curtains and drapes in public placew'buildings needs no emphasis. It needs to be borne in mind that measures to reduce the ignitability ofa textile or textile assembly may adversely affect other firo properties such as smokeand toxic gas evolutionand this aspect mayrequireconsiderationwhen materials

andconstructiontechniquesare beingevaluated.Therefore,it is desirablethat the finishingmaterialsusedforvarious surfaces and decorations including textiles should be such that it does not generate toxic smokeand/or fhrnes,
Specification for resistance to ignition of textile materials and assemblies for use in the public buildings/places exist in vario~s developed countries as a fall out of various legislation, rules or acts, etc, or directions of local bodies. The trend is increasing in other countries also and India should be no exception to this. This standard lays emphasis on matching the magnitude of threat posed in various places/buiIdings with commensurate performance levels of fire resistant textile materials for curtains and drapes so as to ensure safety of the life and property. The list of buildings/places under different fire hazards categories has been included as per SP 7:2005 `National Building Code of India 2005'. The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C.

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 1S 2: 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 15741:2007

Indian Standard TEXTILES -- RESISTANCE TO IGNITION OF CURTAINS AND DRAPES -- SPECIFICATION
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies requirements for the resistance to ignition of curtains and drapes used for public places/buildings.
NOTE -- The levels of ignition resistance have been set afler careful consideration of the fire risk of the partictdar end-use environment involved. These levels do not necessarily reflect the behaviour of curtains and drapes in a fully developed fire. NOTE -- The ignitability performance specified for curtains and drapes for different end-uses varies according to the level of risk associated with a particular environment as shown in Table 1.

4.2 Durability

of Treatment

1.2 Curtains and drapes for domestic use and transport
are not covered

in this standard.

Carry out the water soakhg treatment by subjecting the curtains and drapes to the water soaking procedure described in IS 12467 (Part 1) or IS 12467 (Part 2) except that the test specimen shall be dried by any method suitable for the fabric type before it is conditioned prior to testing in accordance withIS6359. 5 SAMPLING 5.1 Lot

NOTE -- Guidante (m the applicability of hazard categories to
particular premises is given in the notes in Table 1,

2 REFERENCES
The standards given in AnnexA contain provisions which,

through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the edition; indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards. 3 TERMINOLOGY For the purposes of this standard the definitions given in SP 45 and the following shall apply. 3.1 Fire Hazard -- Potential for loss of life (or injury) and.lor damage to property, by tire. 3.2 Fire Risk -- Probability of fire causing loss of life (or injury) and/or darnage to property. 3.3 Ignition Risk -- The probability that ignition will result if a source of heat is allowed into close proximity or contact with a combustible material. 4 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS RESISTANCE TO IGNITION 4.1 Ignitability The curtains or drapes shall meet the levels of ignition resistance given in Table 1 when tested in accordance with the test methods specified in Table 1 for the various categories of hazardous places/buildings as specified in Annex B.
1

The quantity of identical type of curtains and drapes manufactured under similar conditions and supplied to a buyer against one dispatch note shall constitute a lot.
NOTE -- `Identical type' means that there has been no major basic alteration to the material specification, that is, the fibre content, weave and mass per unit area of fabric. Changes in the colour of a product or minor changes in the pattern or weave, for example, of the order of 2 picks/cm may be disregarded,

5.2 Random sample from the lot shall be drawn as per relevant Indian Standard or as agreed to between the buyer and the seller. 5.3 The sampling of the material shall be done as specified in the relevant material specification or as agreed to between the buyer and the seller. In the absence of relevant standard on material specification or agreement between the buyer and the seller, the curtains and drapes shall be tested atler every 2500 units produced or once per month, whichever is the more practicable, in accordance with IS 15612 (Parts 2 to 4). Re-testing shall be carried out where there is any major basic alteration to a material specification (for example of fibre content, weave or mass per unit area of fabric). Changes in the colour of a product or minor changes in the pattern or weave, for example of the order of 2 picksl cm, shall not be deemed sufficient reasons to necessitate re-testing. 6 MARKING 6.1 Each piece of curtain and drapery material shall carry a permanently stitched and clearly readable label with the following information:

FOR

1--123

Bls/ND/07

lS 15741 :2007 Table 1 Performance Requirements
(Clauses

on Application of Hazard Categories
1.2 and 4.1)
Moderate Hazard Occupancies (4) Class I ignitability as per IS 15612 (Part 1) As per Annex B High Hazard Occupancies (5) Class 1 ignitability IIS per IS 15612 (Part 1) As per Annex B

SI
N(). (1) i)

Hazard Category (2) Requirements"

Low Hazard Occupancies (3) Class 2 ignitability as per 1S 15612 (Part 1) As per Annex B

ii)

Typical examples of places/buildings NOTES

I It is important to realize that the listing of types of premises under different hazard categories in Table 1 is given for guidance only and that the classification of a particular premises into one of the hazard categories is a decision for staff responsible for fire safety.

2

The examples cited in Table 1 for each hazard category cannot be exhaustive and do not cover all types of possible premises in a hazard category. It will be noted that some of the examples appear in more than one hazard category. This reflects the range of hazards possible under different circumstances for particular types of premises. Other examples, whether or not listed in Table 1, could also fal I into more than one hazard category. Howevec when all the relevant factots have been considered, a particular premises can then be assigned to one hazard category. 3 The classification of a particular premises into one of the hazard categories in Table 1 is a decision for staff responsible for fire safety, for example, bui Iding control, fire brigade, licensing authorities, or environmental health authorities. Their classifications may be ditTerent from the examples given in Table 1. Attention is drawn to the following when classifying a hazard area: a) Statutory b) Building requirements regulations and other recommendations; and local authority bye-laws;

c) Regulations; d) Consumer protection acts and safety; places of work that require clearance residential care premises; and like premises; by tire authorities;

e) Fire precautions f) Fire precautions g) Fue precautions h) Fire precautions j)

in existing in existing in existing in premises

places of entertainment

used as hotels and boarding houses which require a fire certificate; houses;

Fire safety management

in hotels and boarding

k) Whether

or not people sleep at premises;

m) Level of occupancy; n) Whether, in the case of fire, occupants could be expected on their own or whether they would need assistance, babies, children, old and infirm, the invalid, the sick, and those retained by locked doors; P ) Presence or absence of an automatic tire detection and alarm system, or an automatic fire extinguishing system; for example,

q) Any special hazards, such as cooking, heating, live flame effects, smoke effects, low lighting levels, strobe lighting, loud music, drinking, use after dark; r) Whether or not the premises and s) I.ocation are, during times of use, under the control of staff trained in appropriate evacuation procedures;

of the hazard area, namely, of floors, whether or not high rise and/or below ground sod/or windowless.

4 Flame retardant treatments are sometimes applied to curtains and drapes to improve resistance to ignition. Those responsible for controlling these textile materials need to be satisfied that such treatment will continue to be effecfive and will not deteriorate in use. The tests described in 4.2 are designed to show whether such an added flame retardant is likely to be affected by contact with water and/ or by any dry cleaning process, and can be taken as a general guide to the overall permanence of a flame rttardant treatment. " If a particular premises in a low hazard area is also used for sleeping purposes then that premises shall assigned a higher hazarti category.

a)

Nature and composition of the curtain and drape material, for example, Polyester/cotton blended (50 :50 percent) curtains for information of the users;

d) Name and address of the manufacturer or his trademark(s); e) The words `FIRE RESISTANT'; and 9 Any other information force. as required by the law in

b) Length and width, in mm and mass, in g/m2 for information of the users; c) Class of ignitability; 2

6.2 The minimum size of the graphic part of the label shall be 50 mm x 50 mm. The colour of the label shall be white

ls 15741 :2007 with a green border and the words `FIRE RESISTANT' shall be white and of minimum height 5 mm. The class of ignitability shall be black, 6.3 The following wording shall also appear on the label: a) Complies with this standard; direct test/predictive test for low hazard (not recommended for use in higher hazard areas); or b) Complies with this standard for medium hazard (not recommended for use in higher hazard areas); or c) Complies with tliis standard for high hazard (not recommended for use in higher hazard areas). 6.3.1 The letters of the wording shall be easily legible and of minimum height 2 mm. 7 PACKING The curtains or drapes shall be packed as per the relevant Indian Standard or as agreed to between the buyer and the seller.

ANNEXA (Clause 2.1)
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS IS No. (Part 2): 2005 Title Measurement of flame spread of vertically oriented specimens with large ignition source Method for determining the ignitability of vertically oriented specimens (small flame) Method of determining the flame spread of vertically oriented specimens National Building Code of India 2005 Handbook on glossary of textile terms

IS No.

Title Method for conditioning of textiles Textiles -- Assessmentof of upholstered furniture: Ignition source: Shouldering (first revision)

6359 ; 1971 12467 (Part 1): 2005 (Part2) :2005 15612

ignitability
(Part 3): 2005 cigarette (Part 4): 2005

Ignition source: Match-flame equivalent Textiles -- Burning curtains and drapes: Classification scheme behaviour of

SP 7:2005 SP45 :1988

(Part 1): 2005

ANNEX B

(Clause 4.1 and Table 1)
BROAD CLASSIFICATION OF INDUSTRIAL AND NON-INDUSTRIAL OCCUPANCIES INTO DIFFERENT DEGREE OF HAZARD

B-1 LOW HAZARD

OCCUPANCIES

Assembly buildings (D-1, D-2 and D-3) Casinos Computer installations Hospitals including `X' ray and other diagnostic clinics (Institutional buildings)

Analytical and/or Q.C. Laboratories Assembly buildings small (D-4 and D-5) Clubs Day centres Dwellings, lodges, dormitories, Educational and research CM13ce premises Places of worship Residential buildings (A-1 to A-4) (except hotels A-5) B-2 MODERATE HAZARD OCCUPANCIES terminal buildings 3 etc institutions

Hostels Mercantile occupancies complex, etc) Place of public pandals, etc) Public buildings Public halls (departmental stores, shopping

Museums, archives, record rooms entertainment (Exhibitions, marriage

Airport and other transportation

lS 15741 :2007
Public

houses and bars

Offshore installations Prison cells Sleeping accommodation certain hostels Underground in certain hospital wards and in (F-3)

Residential apartments, hotels, cafes, restaurants, services' messes B-3 HIGH HAZARD OCCUPANCIES Hazardous occupancy buildings (J)

shopping complexes

ANNEX C

(Foreword)
COMMITI'EE COMPOSITION Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TX 05

Organization Textiles Committee,
Mumbai

Reprwermfive(s)
DR G. S. NADICiAR (Chafrmart) (Alternate) SHRJE. VISWAMBHAaAM

Ahmedabad

Textile Industry's of Engineering

Research

Association,

Ahmedabad

DIRECTOR DR H. L. VLJAYKUMAR DR K. MUROGESH BA6U (Alternate) DJL(Ms) C. R. RAJE (Alternate) DR R. H. BALASUBRAMAWA DR M. Q. ANSAKI (Alternate) SHRIAJAYAGGARWAL DR V. G. NAYAK

Bapuji Institute

& Technology,

Davangere

Central

Institute

For Research

on Cotton

Technology,

Mumbai

Central

Pollution

Control

Board,

Delhi

Clariant

India Ltd, Mumbai (Production & Supplies). New Delhi

Ehrectorate of Standardization

LT-COL(DR) R. SRJVASTAVA LT-CDR B. MANJUNATH (Alternate) PROF (DR) K. K. GOSWAMI (Ahcrrrute) SHIUMATI BEmv DAS GUPTA SHRIA. K. BANERJEE SHRIABHEY NAIR (Aliernate) SHRI PAWAN SHARMA

Indian hstitute

of Carpet

Technology,

Bhadohi

Indian Jute Industries' .laya Shree Textiles,

Research Rishra

Association,

Kolkata

L. N Chemical Manddal Man-Made

Industries,

Mumbai Bhilwara Surat

SHRIKETAN L. GANDHI DR N. K. MATHUR DR SANDEEP R. NAIK SHIU M. G. PATEL(Alternate) LT-COL P. P. NAIDU SHFURAMAYAD~v (Alternate) Ms ARCHANA VYAS Ms PRIYANKA KATNAR(Alfernate) Mumbai SHRI R. A. LAL SHRIRAYMONJS RAtJRMKAR SI+RID. 1. DESAI (,41/ernafe)

Verma Textile Institute, Textile Research

Association,

Ministrv

of Deferwe (DGQA),

Kanpur

Mimstry

of Defence

(tl&D),

Kanpur

Office of' The Textile Commissioner, Premier Colorscan Instruments

Pvt Ltd, Thane

1S 15741:2007
Organisation
Rajasthmr Spinning and Weaving Mills Ltd, Noida

Representafme(s)
SHRJK. D. JOSHI
SHRI VIJAY YADAV

(Alternate)

Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi

SHRIP. K. BADAMI SHRI SANJEEVISRANI (Alternafe)

SNDT Women'sUniversity, Mumbai Suditi hrdustriesLtd, Mumbai

DR(MS)BHARATIA. SHRI R. CHINKAJ

PATWARDHAN

SHRI RAJENDRA GAIKW;.D (Alternate)

Sunil Industries Ltd, Mumbai

SHRI VFNODG, LATH SHRI RAMESH KHANNA (A&-nafe)

Texan Lab, Ivlumbai

SHRIULLHASNIMKAR SHRI RAHULBHAJEKAR (A/ferVate)

Textiles & Engineering

Institute,

icbalkaranji

PUOF S. K. LAGA PROFS. S. CHINCHWADE(Ahernafe)

The Bombay Millowner's

Association,

Mumbai

SHRJ MAHESHSHARMA SHIUB. S. ACHARyA SHRI P. R. MISTRY

The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai

(Al~errrote)

The South India Textile Research The Synthetics&Art

Associatiorr,

Coimbatore Murnbai

SHRID. BALASUBRAMANIAN SHRI K. S. T.ARAPOREWALA SHRI D. L. SHAH (Alternafe) PROF M. D. TELI PROFS. R. SHUKLA (A(fernate)

Silk Mills' Research Association,

University

Department

of Chemical

Technology,

Mumbai

Veermata Jeejabai Wool Research

Technological

Institute,

Mumbai

PROFK. D. GAWAND SHRIMATIG. P. RANE SHRIV. C. pANSE(/fb7USte)

Association,

Thane

In personal

capacity (2 Siddhi Vinayak Cooperative Groop Housing Society, Swatantrya Veer Savarkar Marg, Prabhadevi, Dadar. Mumbai) General

SHRIM. D. DIXIT

BIS Directorate

Director and Head (TXD) [Representing Director General

(Ex-oflicio)]

Member Secretaty
SHRIM. S. VERNiA

Director

and Head (TXD), BIS

5

2--123

BIS/ND/07

GMGIPN--123

BIS/ND/07--300

Bureau of Indian Standards
Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau ojlndian development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright
No part of the these publications may be reproduced in any form BIS has the copyright of all its publications. without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the i're~ use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.

Review of Indian Standards
Amendments are" issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards am also reviewed periodically; a standard alongwith amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'.

This Indian Standard

has been developed

from Doc : No. TX 05 (828). Issued Since Publication
Date

Amendments
Amend No.

of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, ? Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Website: www.bis.org. in Telephones :23230131, 23233375, 23239402 Regional Offices : Central :
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg {

Telephones
23237617

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

23233841

23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Northern

:

Southern

:

C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

z

& 5

Western

:

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

@ m m N T

Branches

:

AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. .IAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.

PRINTED

BY THE GENERAL

MAN,+G~u

GOVERNMENT

oF

INDIA

PRESS,

NASHIK

