INATA Ah IS 1448 (Part 86) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


UAT sit Sach Sears — TATT 
wag frat 
ATT 86 NINAR wetter ues 
agaaa FAA ANT chet A ASAT chr TOT 
(TECH FRÍO) 


Petroleum and Its Products — 
Methods of Test 


Part 86 Determination of Total Base 
Number by the Potentiometrical 
Perchloric Acid Titration Method 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 75.080 


© BIS 2023 


anda AS at 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR YAA, 9 TE Me TH AMT, AE fare - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


Qe: PEC Y 


August 2023 Price Group 6 


Methods for Sampling and Test for Petroleum and Related Products of Natural or Synthetic Origin (excluding 
bitumen) Sectional Committee, PCD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 86) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Methods for Sampling and Test for Petroleum and Related Products of Natural or Synthetic Origin 
(excluding bitumen) Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products 
Division Council. 


This standard was originally published in 1977 based on joint publication of ASTM D2896-73 and IP276/75. The 
first revision has been brought out to keep pace with the latest technological developments and international 
practices. In this revision references have been updated. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 
In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 


calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (second revision)’. 


IS 1448 (Part 86) : 2023 


Indian Standard 
PETROLEUM AND ITS PRODUCTS — METHODS OF TEST 


PART 86 DETERMINATION OF TOTAL BASE NUMBER BY THE 
POTENTIOMETRICAL PERCHLORIC ACID TITRATION METHOD 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 86) prescribes the method of 
test for the determination of basic constituents in 
petroleum products by potentiometric titration with 
perchloric acid in glacial acetic acid. 


1.2 For many materials the results obtained by this 
method will be similar to those obtained by 
IS 1448 (Part 1/Sec 2). With certain compounds 
such as strongly overbased oil additives and 
nitrogenous polymeric compounds, higher results 
may be obtained. 


1.3 The constituents that may be considered to have 
basic characteristics include organic and inorganic 
bases; amino compounds; salts of weak acids, for 
example, soaps; basic salts of polyacidic bases; and 
salts of heavy metals. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this standard, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the edition indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreement based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of these standards. 


IS No. Title 


IS 1070 : 2023 Reagent grade water — 
Specification (fourth revision) 


IS 1448 (Part 1/ Methods of test for petroleum 
Sec 2) : 2002 and its products: (Part 1/Sec 2) 
Determination of base number 
of petroleum products by 
potentiometric titration (second 

revision) 


3 SUMMARY OF METHOD 


3.1 The sample is dissolved in an essentially 
anhydrous mixture of chlorobenzene and glacial 
acetic acid and titrated with a solution of perchloric 
acid in glacial acetic acid with a potentiometric 
titrimeter. A glass indicating electrode and a calomel 
reference electrode are used, the latter being 


connected with the sample solution by means of a 
salt bridge. The metre meter readings are plotted 
against the respective volumes of titrating solution, 
and the end point is taken at the inflection in the 
resulting curve. 


3.2 Occasionally, certain used oils give no 
inflection in the standard titration, in which case 
aback titration modification with sodium acetate 
titrant is employed. 


4 DEFINITION 
4.1 Total Base Number 


The quantity of perchloric acid expressed in terms of 
the equivalent number of milligrams of potassium 
hydroxide that is required to neutralize all basic 
constituents present in 1 g of sample. 


5 APPARATUS 


5.1 Potentiometric Titrimeter — either suitable for 
automatic recording or manual 


5.2 Glass Electrode — suitable for pH 0 to 11, 
general purpose type 


5.3 Reference Electrode — sleeve-type saturated 
calomel electrode with non-aqueous salt bridge as 
described in 8 (see Note). 


NOTE — Some reference electrodes with fritted or fibre 
diaphragms and some combined glass plus reference 
electrode systems are commercially available, such as the 
single-rod glass plus silver/silver chloride electrode 
assembly. During the development of this method, the use 
of electrodes of these types gave problems in some 
laboratories, but not in others. Accordingly, these electrodes 
are permitted in this method provided that the sodium 
perchlorate bridge is used; however, if stability or other 
problems arise with their use, the sleeve-type electrode 
should be used. 


5.4 Stirrer — Either mechanical or electrical, with 
variable speeds and with propeller or paddle of 
chemically inert material. If an electrical stirrer is 
used, it shall be grounded so that disconnecting or 
connecting the power to the motor will not produce 
a permanent change in metre reading during the 
course of titration. A magnetic stirrer with stirring 
bar may be used provided it meets the above 
conditions. 


IS 1448 (Part 86) : 2023 


5.5 Burette — 10 ml or 20 ml capacity, graduated 
in 0.05 ml divisions and calibrated with an accuracy 
of + 0.02 ml, or an automatic burette of similar 
accuracy. 


5.6 Titration Beaker — having 250 ml or 300 ml 
capacity, made of borosilicate glass. The tall form of 
beaker is particularly suitable. 


5.7 Titration Stand — a suitable stand to support 
the beaker, electrodes, stirrer, and burette. An 
arrangement that allows for the removal of the 
beaker without disturbing the electrodes, burette and 
stirrer is desirable (see Note). 


NOTE — Some apparatus may be sensitive to interference 
by static electricity, shown by erratic movementsof recorder 
pen or metre indicator, when the titration assembly (beaker 
and electrodes) is approached by the operator. In this case 
surround the beaker closely with a cylinder of copper gauze 
which is electrically grounded (earthed). 


6 REAGENTS 


6.1 Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and 
reagent grade water (see IS 1070) shall be used in 
tests. 


NOTE — ‘Pure chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities which affect the results of analysis. 


6.2 Acetic Acid — glacial (see Note) 


NOTE — Acetic acid, acetic anhydride, and chlorobenzene 
are toxic and irritant. Carry out all operations involving the 
use of these materials in a well-ventilated area, preferably 
under a hood. 


6.3 Acetic Anhydride — see Note under 6.2 
6.4 Chlorobenzene — see Note under 6.2 


6.5 Perchloric Acid — standard acetous solution 
(0.1 N) 


Mix 8.5 ml of 70 percent to 72 percent perchloric 
acid (or 10.2 ml of 60 percent to 62 percent 
perchloric acid) with 500 ml of glacial acetic acid 
and 30 ml (or 38 ml if the 60 percent to 62 percent 
perchloric acid is used) of acetic anhydride. Dilute 
to 1 litre with glacial acetic acid. Allow the solution 
to stand for 24 h before standardization. 


NOTES 


1 Excess acetic anhydride shall be avoided to prevent 
acetylation of any primary or secondary amines which may 
be present. 


2 This perchloric acid solution is not hazardous under the 
conditions of this test. However, concentrated perchloric 
acid is a powerful oxidizing agent when heated and forms 
explosive mixtures when heated with organic matter. Care 
should be taken to avoid contact with organic matter under 
conditions that may result in subsequent drying or heating 
and spills should be washed immediately and thoroughly 
with water. 


6.5.1 Standardization of Perchloric Acid 


Heat a quantity of potasstum hydrogen phthalate in 
an oven at 120 °C for 2 h and allow it to cool. Take 
0.1 g to 0.2 g of the potassium hydrogen phthalate 
weighed to the nearest 0.1 mg and dissolve it in 40 
ml of warm glacial acetic acid. Add 80 ml of 
chlorobenzene, cool, and titrate with perchloric acid 
(see 6.5), using the electrode system and procedures 
given in 8.1 to 8.4 and 9.4 to 9.7. Detect the end 
point by the same procedure as will be used for base 
number determination (see 10.2). Carry out a blank 
titration on 40 ml of glacial acetic acid plus 80 ml of 
chlorobenzene (see 9.8). Calculate the normality (N) 
of the perchloric acid as follows; 


1000 x M 


N= — 
204.23 (V, — Vo) 
where 


M = mass, in g, of potassium hydrogen 
phthalate; 


Vı = volume, in ml, of perchloric acid 
used; and 


P = volume, in ml, of perchloric acid 
corresponding to V, for the blank 
titration. 


NOTE — Because of the relatively large coefficient of 
cubic expansion of organic liquids, the acetous perchloric 
acid solution should be used within + 5 °C of the 
temperature at which it was standardized. If used at a 
temperature more than 5° higher, multiply the volume used 
by the factor (1 - 0.001 t). Ifused at a temperature more than 
5° lower, multiply by the factor (1 + 0.001 t) (where t is the 
difference in °C between temperatures of standardization 
and use, and is always positive). 


6.6 Potassium Hydrogen Phthalate 
6.7 Sodium Perchlorate Electrolyte 


Prepare a saturated solution of sodium perchlorate 
(see Note) in glacial acetic acid. An excess of 
undissolved sodium perchlorate should always be 
present at the bottom of the solution. 
NOTE — Sodium perchlorate is toxic and irritant. It is also 
a powerful oxidizing agent when heated. Care should be 
taken to avoid contact with organic matter under conditions 


that may result in subsequent drying or heating, and spills 
should be washed immediately and thoroughly with water. 


6.8 Titration Solvent 


Add 1 volume of glacial acetic acid to 2 volumes of 
chlorobenzene (see Note under 6.2). 


6.9 Anhydrous Sodium Carbonate 


6.10 Sodium Acetate Solution — 0.1 N acetous 


Dissolve 5.3 g of anhydrous sodium carbonate in 
300 ml of acetic acid. Dilute to 1 litre with acetic 
acid after solution is complete. 


6.10.1 Standardization of Sodium Acetate Solution 


Use the required volumes of titration solvent and 
8.00 ml of 0.1 N acetous perchloric acid. Titrate 
with sodium acetate (see 6.10), using the electrode 
system and procedure given in 8.1 to 8.4 and 9.4 to 
9.7. Detect the end point by the same procedure as 
will be used for base number determination 
(see 10.2). Calculate the normality (N,) of the 


sodium acetate solution by the following formula: 
8.00 — Vo) xX N 
et 0) 
v2 
where 


V, and N are as defined in 6.5.1; and 
V, = Volume in ml of standard acetous sodium 
acetate used in the standardization. 


7 PREPARATION OF SAMPLE 


It is essential to ensure that the sample is 
representative since any sediment may be acidic or 
basic or have adsorbed acidic or basic material from 
the liquid phase. If necessary, samples may be 
warmed to aid mixing. Used oils should be 
vigorously shaken to ensure homogeneity before 
preparing the test sample. 


8 PREPARATION OF ELECTRODE SYSTEM 
8.1 Preparation of Electrodes 


If the calomel electrode is to be changed from 
aqueous bridge to non-aqueous, drain out the 
aqueous solution, wash out all crystals of potassium 
chloride with water, then rinse the outer jacket (salt 
bridge) several times with sodium perchlorate 
electrolyte. Finally fill the outer jacket with sodium 
perchlorate electrolyte up to the filling hole. When 
using the sleeve-type electrode, carefully remove the 
ground glass sleeve and thoroughly wipe both 
ground surfaces. Replace the sleeve loosely and 
allow a few drops of electrolyte to drain through, to 
flush the ground glass joint and to wet the ground 
surfaces thoroughly with electrolyte. Set the sleeve 
firmly in place, refill the outer jacket with the 
sodium perchlorate electrolyte, and rinse the 
electrode with chlorobenzene. When in use, the 
electrolyte level in the calomel electrode should be 
kept above that of the liquid in the titration beaker 
to prevent entry of contaminants into the salt 
bridge.When not in use, fill the calomel electrode 
with sodium perchlorate electrolyte solution, leave 
the bung in the filling orifice, and immerse both 
electrodes in distilled water, keeping the level of the 
electrolyte above that of the distilled water. 


IS 1448 (Part 86) : 2023 


8.2 Testing of Electrodes 


Test the titrimeter-electrode combination when first 
put into use or when new electrodes are installed and 
retest at intervals thereafter as follows: 


Dip the electrodes into a well-stirred mixture of 
100 ml of glacial acetic acid plus 0.2 g of potassium 
hydrogen phthalate and record the titrimeter 
reading. Rinse the electrode with chlorobenzene and 
immerse in 100 ml of glacial acetic acid plus 1.5 ml 
of 0.1 N perchloric acid. The difference between 
readings should be at least 0.3 V. 


8.3 Cleaning of Electrodes 


Following a titration, first wash the electrodes with 
chlorobenzene acetic acid solvent to remove any 
adhering oily material from the previous titration, 
then with water, to dissolve any sodium perchlorate 
that may have formed around the sleeve of the 
calomel electrode and to restore the aqueous gel 
layer of the glass electrode. Rinse again with 
titration solvent. Before starting a series of sample 
titrations, follow this rinsing procedure, then run one 
or two blank titrations on the solvent to condition the 
electrodes. Repeat the blank titrations, if necessary. 


8.4 Maintenance of Electrodes 


If there is reason to believe that the glass electrode 
has become contaminated, it may be cleaned by 
immersing in cold chromic acid cleaning solution 
for five minutes, followed by thorough water 
washing. After this cleaning treatment, test the 
electrode as described in 8.2. The calomel electrode 
can be cleaned by draining and refilling with fresh 
sodium perchlorate solution. Maintain the 
electrolyte level in the calomel electrode above that 
of the liquid in the titration beaker at all times. Do 
not allow the electrodes to remain immersed in 
titration solvent for any appreciable period of time 
between titrations. While the electrodes are not 
extremely fragile, handle them carefully at all times 
and particularly avoid scratching the glass electrode. 


9 PROCEDURES 


9.1 Calculate the quantity of sample required from 
its expected total base number (TBN) from the 
following formula: 

Approximate mass of sample, in g = 


28/expected TBN 
NOTE — For a possible exception, see Note under 12.2. 
Weigh the sample into the titration beaker, applying 


the limits shown as follows. A maximum of 20 g 
should be taken for analysis. 


IS 1448 (Part 86) : 2023 


SI No. Mass of Sample Precision of Weighing 
(in g) (in g) 
0) (2) (3) 

i) 10 to 20 0.05 

ii) 5 to 10 0.02 

iii) 1 to 5 0.005 

iv) 0.25 to 1 0.001 

v) 0.1 to 0.25 0.000 5 


9.2 Add 120 ml of titration solvent (see 6.8). 


9.3 Place the beaker on the titration stand and stir the 
solution until the sample has dissolved (see Note). 


NOTE — If solution of the sample proves difficult, 
dissolve in 80 ml of chlorobenzene in the titration beaker, 
then add 40 ml of glacial acetic acid. Many used oils contain 
some solid material which will not dissolve. The presence 
of this undissolved material will not affect the test result. 


9.4 Prepare the electrodes as described in 8.1 to 8.3. 
Position the electrodes in the solution so that they 
are immersed as far as possible. Continue the stirring 
throughout the determination at a rate sufficient to 
produce vigorous agitation without spattering and 
without stirring air into the solution. Adjust the 
titrimeter so that it reads in the upper part of the 
millivolt scale; for example, 700 mV. For simple 
titrimeters without this adjustment, it may be 
necessary to incorporate a source of potential in 
series with the electrode. A 1.5 V dry cell and 
potential divider is suitable. 


9.5 Fill the burette with 0.1 N perchloric acid 
solution and place the burette in position in the 
titration assembly, taking care that the tip is 
immersed below the level of the surface of the liquid 
in the beaker. Record the initial burette and 
titrimeter (cell potential) readings. 


9.6 Titrations 
9.6.1 Manual Titration 


Add suitable small portions of titrant and after 
waiting until a constant potential has been 
established (see Note), record the burette and 
titrimeter readings. At the start of the titration and 
in any subsequent regions (inflections where 0.1 ml 
of titrant consistently produces a total change of 
more than 0.03 V (corresponding to 0.5 pH scale 
unit) in the cell potential, add 0.05 ml portions. In 
the intermediate regions (plateaux) where 0.1 ml 
increments change the potential by less than 0.03 V, 


Add large portions sufficient to produce a total 
potential change approximately equal to, but 
notgreater than 0.03 V. Titrate in this manner until 
the potential changes less than 0.005 V 
(corresponding to 0.1 pH scale unit) per 0.1 ml. 


NOTE — Consider the cell potential constant when it 
changes less than 0.005 V/min. 


9.6.2 Automatic Recording Titration 


Adjust the instrument in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions and set the titration 
speed at 1.0 ml/min, maximum. 


9.7 On completion of the titration, remove the 
beaker and rinse the electrodes and burette tip with 
chlorobenzene acetic acid titration solvent, then with 
water, then again with solvent (see 8.3). Store in 
water when not in use (see 8.1). 


9.8 For each set ofsamples make a blank titration on 
120 ml of titration solvent. For a manual titration, 
add 0.1 N perchloric acid in 0.05 ml increments, 
waiting between each addition until a constant cell 
potential is established. Record titrimeter and 
burette readings after each increment. Follow the 
procedure in 9.6.2 for an automatic titration. 


10 CALCULATION 


10.1 For a manual titration, plot the volumes of the 
acid added against the corresponding titrimeter 
readings. Interpret the end point from the graph 
obtained from the manual or automatic titration. The 
end point is the midpoint of the inflection, that point 
at which the curve changes from concave to convex. 
The end point may be preceded and followed by a 
deflection of at least 50 mV/ml of titrant. 


10.2 When there is no inflection point or only a very 
poor one, proceed to ‘back titration’ method 
prescribed in 12. The inflection obtained during 
back titration preferably should meet the criteria 
described in 10.2. 


10.3 Calculate the total base number (TBN) as 
follows: 


Total base number (TBN), mg KOH/g = 


(Va, — V3) X N x 56.1 


M 
where 

V, = volume, in ml, of perchloric acid 
used to titrate the sample to the 
inflection point on the titration curve; 

V, = volume, in ml, of perchloric acid 
used corresponding to V, for blank 
titration at same potential as sample; 

N = normality of perchloric acid solution, 
and; 

M = mass, in g, of the sample. 


Report the result as the total base number (TBN) by 
potentiometric perchloric acid titration. 


11 BACK TITRATION 


11.1 Some used oils give no inflection point or only 
a very poor one with the method as describedabove. 
When this situation is encountered, the following 
modified method may be used. In this modified 
method, excess standard perchloric acid solution is 
added to the sample, then the excess perchloric acid 
is back titrated with standard sodium acetate 
solution. 


11.2 Weigh accurately the amount of sample 
specified in 9.1 (see Note) into the titration beaker. 


NOTE — The sample size for the back titration 
modification should not exceed 5 g. If, with a 5 g sample, 
no inflection point is found, reduce the sample size to 3 g 
and repeat the analysis. Reducing the sample size generally 
improves the clarity of the inflection point. However, it 
shall be noted that the cooperative work which led to the 
precision statement (see 13.1.1 and 13.1.2) employed a 
sample size of 5 g maximum. 


11.3 Dissolve the sample in 80 ml of chlorobenzene 
(see Note under 9.3) and add 40 ml of acetic acid. 


11.4 Use a volumetric burette or pipette to add 
accurately 8.00 ml of standard 0.1 N acetous 
perchloric acid solutions to the beaker. The standard 
perchloric acid solution shall be in excess. If 
necessary, add more than 8.00 ml and correct 
accordingly (see 12.7). 


11.5 Stir the contents of the beaker for 2 min. 


11.6 Titrate the un-neutralized perchloric acid with 
standard 0.1 N acetous sodium acetate solution. 
Carry out the titration in the same manner as 
described in 9. For the back titration, the starting 
point will be in the range of 0 mV to 100 mV. 


IS 1448 (Part 86) : 2023 


11.7 Instead of weighing out a separate sample and 
proceeding through 12.6, the back titration 
procedure can be used on a sample being titrated as 
in 9.1 to 9.6.2, provided that the sample size did not 
exceed 0.5 g (see Note under 12.2). When it is 
apparent from the forward titration that a 
satisfactory inflection is not present, note the 
volume of standard perchloric acid used, then 
proceed with 12.6. The standardization (see 6.10.1) 
should be modified to coincide with the volume of 
standard perchloric acid used. 


11.8 Calculate the total base number (TBN) from 


the following formula: 


11.9 Total base number (TBN), mg KOH/g = 


(V, — V5) x N, x 56.1 
M 


where 


V, and N, are as defined in 6.10.1; 

V; = volume, in ml, of standard acetous sodium 
acetatSe used in the sample titration; and 

M = mass, in g, of the sample. 


11.10Report the results as total base number (TBN) 
by back titration modification of potentiometric 
perchloric acid titration. 


12 PRECISION 


12.1 The following criteria should be used for 
judging the acceptability of results (95 percent 
confidence). 


13.1.1 Repeatability 


Duplicate results by the same operator should be 
considered suspect if they differ by more than the 
following percentage of mean total base number; 


SI No. Fresh oils and Percent 
additive concentrates 
0) (2) (3) 
i) Total base number 5 
to 59.9 
ii) Total base number 3 


greater than 59.9 


iii) Used oils on which are 5 
employed the forward 


titration 


iv) Used oils which require 24 
the back titration 


IS 1448 (Part 86) : 2023 


13.1.2 Reproducibility considered suspect if they differ by more than the 


Results submitted by two laboratories should be Toll winte pet Centaces Of medi ioral Dase ul 


SI No. Fresh oils and additive Percent 
concentrates 
(1) (2) (3) 

i) Total base number to 59.9 6 

11) Total base number greater than 59.9 4 

111) Used oils on which are employed 15 
the forward titration 

1v) Used oils which require the back 32 
titration 


NOTE — The ranges of total base number values for which the above precision values were established are given in Annex A. 


IS 1448 (Part 86) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 13.1.2) 
TEST COVERAGE 


A-1 During the development of this method, co- 
operative testing was done on samples covering a 
wide range of types of oils, of additive concentrates 
which are used to prepare these oils, and of services 
for the oils. Even so however, it was not possible to 
cover the complete range of total base numbers. It is 
believed that reasonable interpolation and 
extrapolation from the ranges used will not 
introduce serious errors in the precision. The ranges 
used were: 


Fresh oils — Total base number of 5.5 to 13.5 


additive concentrates — Total base number of 
60 to 99. 


Used oils on which forward titration was employed 
— Total base numbers of 3.8 to 11.0. 


Used oils which required the back titration — Total 
base number of 2.9 to 4.4. 


IS 1448 (Part 86) : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Methods for Sampling and Test for Petroleum and Related Products of Natural or Synthetic Origin (excluding 


bitumen) Sectional Committee, PCD 01 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 

Air Headquarters, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 

All India Instrument Manufacturers and Dealers 
Association, Mumbai 


Bharat Oman Refineries Limited, Bina 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Castrol India Limited, Mumbai 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology, 
Bhubaneshwar 


Central Revenue Control Laboratory, New Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai 


CSIR - Central Institute for Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 


Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality Assurance, 


New Delhi 

Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of 
Defence, Kanpur 

Elico Limited, Hyderabad 


GAIL (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Gulf Oil Lubricants India Limited, Mumbai 


HPCL Mittal Energy Limited, Noida 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited — Refineries and 
Pipelines Division, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


DR ANJAN RAY (Chairperson) 


SHRI S. A. TAWAB 
SHRI D. ANANDRAJ Roy (Alternate) 


PROF G. M. RAO 


SHRIMATI ASAWARI KELKAR 
SHRI B. SRIDHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI R. SUBRAMANIAN 
SHRI C. SHANMUGANATHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMAN RAI 


DR SMITA MOHANTY 


SHRI V. SURESH 


SHRI H. RAMAKRISHNAN 
DR V. SELVAVATHI (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. SINGH 
SHRI S. R. K. RAO (Alternate I) 
SHRI S. DUTTA (Alternate II) 


SHRI SANTOSH NAMDEO 


DR S. K. PANDEY 
SHRI SACHIN VINAYAK ZOPE (Alternate) 


SHRI T. V. SHIVA K. RAO 
SHRI N. RAJU (Alternate) 


DR NITYANANDA PANDA 
DR S. MAHANTY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI MAYURESH GODBOLE (Alternate I) 
SHRI S. GANESH (Alternate II) 


SHRI SATYABRATA BANDYOPADHYAY 


SHRI NARENDRA KUMAR GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ELECHERAN KUMAR 


SHRI SANTOSH DHAKU BHOGALE (Alternate I) 


SHRI MAHESH TOTLA (Alternate II) 


DR SHASHI PAL SINGH 
DR ASHUTOSH MISHRA (Alternate) 


Organization 


Indian Oil Corporation (MKTG), Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation (R&D Centre), Faridabad 
Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 


Lubrizol India Limited, Mumbai 


Mangalore Refinery and Petrochemical Limited, 
Mangaluru 


Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Nayara Energy Limited, Mumbai 


Numaligarh Refinery Limited, Golaghat 


Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Oil India Limited, Duliajan 


Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board, New Delhi 


Petroleum Conservation Research Association, 


New Delhi 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 1448 (Part 86) : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI A. S. KRISHNAMOORTHY 
DR SREEKUMARN. VEEDU (Alternate) 


DR S. K. MAJUMDAR 


SHRIP. K. PANDEY 
SHRI RAHUL NIGAM (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL MANE 
SHRIMATI REENA KURIL (Alternate) 


SHRI YOGEESHA 
SHRI ANITHA SHETTY (Alternate I) 
SHRIR. M. PRAKSAH (Alternate I) 


SHRI RAJESH SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI SONAM GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI K. C. NASKAR 
SHRI P. K. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


SHRI MRIGANKA TARAFDAR 
DHIRAJ GONDALIA (Alternate) 


SHRI SOBHAN KONWAR 
SHRI ANJAN KALITA (Alternate) 


SHRI GOUR MOHAN DASS 
SHRIMATI LEENA JOHN (Alternate I) 
SHRI DINESH S. R. REDDY KAKUTURI (Alternate II) 


SHRI B. C. DATTA 


SHRI ANIL MEGHANI 
SHRI NOOR KHAN (Alternate) 


SURENDRA PRATAP 
SHRI M. P. BANGWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAMOD MALL 


DR RAJESH KUMAR 
DR MUKESH GARG (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI MEENAL PASSI, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (PETROLEUM, COAL AND RELATED 
PRODUCTS) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR (GENERAL 


(Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI HARI MOHAN MEENA 
SCIENTIST ‘C’/DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
(PETROLEUM, COAL AND RELATED PRODUCTS), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 01 (20192). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


