NAT AWA IS 17648 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Prea suara A ast À faror 
Weert wore 8a feerrast 


Guideline for Distribution 
Management System in the 
Context of Electrical Utilities 


ICS 27.100 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2021 Price Group 7 


Power System Control and Associated Communications Sectional Committee, LITD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Power 
System Control and Associated Communications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and 
Information Technology Division Council. 


Indian grids have seen tremendous growth in electricity consumption in last few decades, which resulted into 
requirement of increase in efficiency in operation in all the sectors of power systems. This standard is focused 
on the distribution system. This standard provides a set of requirements to guide the Indian utilities who want to 
implement such a solution. The requirements mentioned in the standard are minimum and utilities may incorporate 
additional requirements to develop the reference project on case to case basis. These requirements are developed 
in accordance with present operational practices of Indian power distribution system operate. The requirements 
in this standard are listed and explained to make the utilities aware of their features and must not be construed as 
mandatory but rather be used as a guide to the Utilities to understand these tools so as to help them decide along 
with the solution provider what is the best course for their implementation within the utility’s network. 


Application To Application (A2A) 
and Business To Business (B2B) 
Communication 


Equipment And 
System Interfaces 


Specific Object 
Mappings 


Field Object Models 


External Systems 


(Symmetric Client / 
Server protocols) 


Fic. 1 OPERATION TECHNOLOGY OVERVIEW 


IS 17648 : 2021 


CONTENTS 
Page No. 
1 SCOPE ues 1 
2 REFERENCES a 1 
3 DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM OPERATION MODEL (DSOM) 1 
4 DISTRIBUTION MANAGEMENT APPLICATION 2 
4.1 Network Connectivity Analysis (NCA) 2 
4.2 Distribution Load/Power Flow (DLF/DPF) 3 
4.3 Characteristics of LF Application 3 
4.4 Real Time Load Flow Execution 3 
4.5 Input/Output 4 
4.6 Alarms 4 
4.7 Display and Reports 4 
5  VOLT-VAR CONTROL 4 
5.1 Voltage Control 4 
5.2 VAR Control 5 
5.3. Modes of Operation 5 
5.4 Reports 5 
5.5 Displays 5 
6 DISTRIBUTION LOAD FORECASTING 5 
6.1 Short-Term Load Forecasting (STLF) 6 
6.2 Long Term Forecasting 6 
7 FAULT IDENTIFICATION & SERVICE RESTORATION 6 
7.1 The FISR function shall have the General Characteristics 7 
7.2 Detection of Fault 7 
7.3 System Isolation and Restoration 8 
7.4 Reports 9 
7.5 Graphical User Interface 9 
8 LOAD SHEDDING APPLICATION (LS) 9 
8.1 Basic Rules for Load Shedding and Restoration 9 
8.2 Modes of Operation 9 
8.3 Manual Load Shed 9 
8.4 Manual Load Restoration N 9 
8.5 Auto Load Shed E 10 
8.6 Auto Load Restoration ss 10 
8.7 Alarms/Events a 10 
8.8 Summary Report ss 10 


9 OPERATIONS MONITORING we 11 


iii 


IS 17648 : 2021 


Page No. 

10 DISTRIBUTION OPERATIONAL MODIFICATION (JUMPER, GROUND & CUT) ve 11 
10.1 Jumper ss 11 

10.2 Ground i 11 

10.3 Cuts ss 11 

10.4 Reports and Displays si 12 

11 OUTAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM m 12 
11.1 Objective of the OMS is Intended to Provide Following Functions a 12 

11.2 OMS Integration other System ay 12 

12 OPTIMAL FEEDER RECONFIGURATION be 13 
12.1 Objective Functions m 13 

12.2 Output ii 14 

12.3 Modes of Operation a 14 

12.4 Reports m 14 

12.5 Displays us 14 

13 DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM STATE ESTIMATOR (DSSE) m 14 
13.1 Determination of Load Base Values sei 14 

13.2 Trust Factor a 14 

13.3 Load Adaptation a 14 

14 SHORT CIRCUIT CALCULATION (SCC) = 14 
14.1 SCC Calculation ae 15 

14.2 Modes of Operation = 15 

15 QUALITY OF SERVICE INDICES ee 15 
ANNEX A LIST OF REFFERED INDIAN/INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS es 16 
ANNEX B ABBREVIATION Pe 16 

LIST OF FIGURES 

Fig. 1 Operation Technology Overview ay il 
Fig.2 Sample Utility Implementation (see IS/IEC 61968) we 2 


Fig.3 Sample Concept of Outage Management System s 13 


IS 17648 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


GUIDELINE FOR DISTRIBUTION 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM IN THE 
CONTEXT OF ELECTRICAL UTILITIES 


1 SCOPE 


The scope of this standard is limited to the requirement 
of the processes and technological enablement 
for distribution operation. This includes outage, 
interruption handling to enhance reliability and safety 
with optimized resources. The scope covers integration 
scenarios at the interfaces with other applications in 
line with common information model [Ref IS 16336 
(Part 1) with ISAEC 61968]. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A and abbreviations in 
Annex B contains provisions which, through reference 
in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At 
the time of publication, the editions indicated were 
valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties 
to agreement based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards. 


3 DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM OPERATION 
MODEL (DSOM) 


The solution shall include a Distribution System 
Operations Model (DSOM). The DSOM shall serve 
as a central interface and information resource. 
DSOM shall represent the operating state of Utility’s 
distribution network as well as the operating state of the 
solution, other systems with which it communicates, 
field devices, and communication systems. 


The DSOM shall provide as a minimum complete 
network model including data of the electrical asset 
for example, line (that is, length, type of conductor, 
technical particular of conductor, transformer etc), 
and land-based data. GIS interface adaptor to enable 
the connectivity with GIS application and its data 
format/model shall be provided. The Graphic data 
import from GIS systems shall support native formats 
of GIS systems and be usable for data import. Data 
transfer/input shall be supported both globally and 
incrementally on manual request and automatically 


at regular intervals. Data import from GIS shall be 
compatible to import related reference layers such 
as streets, buildings, poles etc. and other background 
information. 


All Technological addresses (TAs) shall be 
automatically assigned within the system to the 
tags linking the graphic data to the attribute data in 
the GIS, the attribute data shall be loaded into the 
SCADA/DMS data base and the data/text shall be 
displayed on SCADA/DMS diagrams if viewed in 
GIS mode. The display shall be in GIS background 
with zoom, pan, scaling and UI navigation techniques 
in synch with SCADA/DMS system displays. This 
model repository will be the single model authority 
for the entire utility network to be used by utility. This 
integrated repository is to be maintained at the GIS 
System. In absence of GIS system at the utility, this shall 
be developed in SCADA/DMS system dedicatedly. 


The GIS shall use CIM/XML adapters, if available 
with other applications. In case GIS does not support 
CIM/XML then pgdb and DxF export should be 
provided. SCADA model adapters need to be 
GIS aware; SCADA shall be able to update its models 
from GIS. The system shall utilize an IS/IEC 61970 
(Part 1) and ISEC 61968 compliant interfaces. 
The system shall enable export of all data as per 
IEC 61970-552 : 2016 (CIM-XML). Where GIS data 
is not available DSOM Data shall be created manually. 


Data exchange shall be over model neutral messaging 
services and CIM/XML data exchange for real-time 
RDBMS will be used. 


The DSOM shall adequately represent power system 
elements generators, substation buses, on-load tap 
changing transformers, reactors, breakers, recloser, 
overhead lines, underground cables, voltage regulators, 
load break switches, fuses, switched capacitor banks, 
distribution transformers, loads (with parameterized 
voltage dependencies), automatic transfer switches, 
and temporary connections and disconnections applied 
in the field using jumpers, grounds, and cuts. 


IS 17648 : 2021 


IEC 61968 compliant interface 


— 


a 


DAC 


Planning 
systems 


Information 
exchange 
model 


Customer 
info. system 


Fic. 2 SAMPLE UTILITY IMPLEMENTATION (see IS/IEC 61968) 


4 DISTRIBUTION MANAGEMENT 
APPLICATION 
The distribution management applications shall 


consists of a set of tools to help the operator monitor, 
control and aid in the observation and restoration of 
the distribution system. Following applications to be 
included: 


a) Network 
analyzer); 


connectivity analyzer (topology 


b) Distribution load/power flow; 

c) Volt/var control; 

d) Load forecasting; 

e) Fault isolation and system restoration; 
f) Rotational load shed; 

g) Operations monitoring; 


h) Distribution network (modification (jumper, 
ground and cut)/temporary network changes; 


j) Outage management system; 

k) Optimal feeder reconfiguration; 
m) Distribution system state estimator (DSSE); 
n) Short circuit calculation (SCC). 


4.1 Network Connectivity Analysis (NCA) 


4.1.1 Definition and Purpose 


An accurate insight into the present topology of the 
distribution network (normal or disturbed) is required 
for management of distribution networks. Network 
connectivity analysis (NCA) analytical function is 
a general tool for various topology analysis of the 
distribution network represented in form of graphs. 
On the basis of network connectivity and switchgear 
statuses, this function provides the network topology 
that is used in other functions. 


4.1.2 Functionality 
Main analyses to be provided by the NCA are: 


a) Locating an element of the network (transformer, 
section, etc) by name or ID. 


b) Locating and marking supply paths of network 
elements. 


c) Determining and marking of statuses of network 
elements (making distinction among energized 
and de-energized network elements, switchgear 
statuses, etc.). 


d) Locating and marking of networks loops. 


e) Locating and marking of all network elements 
downstream a selected element. 


f) Locating and marking of all elements supplied in 
a radial way by a selected root. 


g) Locating and marking of all sources and flow 
directions that supply a point. 


h) Colouring the network element by voltage level. 
j) Colouring of grounded parts of network. 

k) Colouring by on/off status of elements. 

m) Colouring by active phases. 


4.1.3 Methodology 


Graph topological searching procedures are basis for 
this function establishment. Different types of coloring 
are mainly applied for presentation of results of the 
function running. The function can be used in both the 
on-line and simulation mode. 


4.1.4 Input/Output 


Main input of the function is the considered network 
graph (network connectivity) provided by the network 
model function running. 


4.2 Distribution Load/Power Flow (DLF/DPF) 


4.2.1 Distribution load/power flow is a numerical 
analysis of the flow of electric power that is, an 
application that uses network topology information 
provided by the connectivity analyses application, as 
well as the current estimated load demands, measured 
input to determine present state of network. The 
network’s state shall consist of; 

a) Complex voltage, 

b) Current, flow of active and reactive power, 

c) Voltage drop, and 


d) Losses. 


4.2.2 Generally, load (power) flow model of power 
systems (distribution networks included) represents 
a mathematical description of the active and reactive 
power balance in the system (the power supply equals 
to the load and losses), for selected voltage conditions. 
The load flow application shall provide estimated 
values for those electrical quantities at network 
locations where telemetered measurements are not 
available/not provided by user. Load flow shall be the 
base for establishment of all other DMS functions. 


The LF shall take following into consideration: 
a) Telemetered data from SCADA; 
b) Manual entry data; 
c) Estimated data from last state estimator/LF raw; 


d) Power source injections including DER 
generation, if applicable; 


e) Loops and parallels; 
f) Unbalanced and balanced loads; 
g) Manually edited values; 


h) Temporary changes through jumper/cut/ground 
etc. 


j) Electrical connectivity information from the 
real-time distribution network model; 


k) Transformer tap settings; 

m) Generator voltages, real and reactive generations; 
n) Capacitor/reactor bank ON/OFF status value; 

p) HVDS and Non HVDS Network; 


q) Data from meter data repository for load 
profiling of the loads (for example, distribution 
transformers); and 


r) Saved case data. 


4.3 Characteristics of LF Application 


The following general characteristics/capabilities shall 
be provided as minimum for LF to be considered as 
compliant to this standard: 


a) The LF model shall support the different kind of 
lines/conductors at different site conditions, such 
as cable feeders, overhead lines and different kind 


IS 17648 : 2021 


of transformers having various vector groups and 
winding configurations. 


b 


wm 


Unbalanced and balanced three phase and single 
or two phase loads connected in radial and 
non-radial modes. In case reliable data is not 
readily available, balanced mode shall be more 
accurate and be used. 

Compute voltages and currents and power factor 
for each phase for every node, feeder and network 
devices (like switches, transformer etc). 


Cc 


wm 


d 


Na 


Compute each phase active and reactive loads and 
technical losses for the distribution system as a 
whole, for individual substations and feeder wise 
taking into account the telemetered data. 


e 


<~ 


Use previous save-case to make new save case or 
use new snapshots to set the base case for LF. 


f) The results of the LF application shall reasonably 
match with the operating condition in which the 
distribution system is stable that is, operating 
capability due to equipment constraint. 

The LFA shall be executed in real time and study 
mode (study mode is used to run “What If’ 
scenarios). 


ae 


g 


h 


wm 


It shall be possible to model load either as a 
percentage of system load or profile base load 
modelling. 


j) It shall be possible to model individual component 
of load i.e. Active and Reactive parts. 
4.4 Real Time Load Flow Execution 
The Real-Time LF function shall be executed: 
a) on event trigger; 
b) on periodic basis; and 
c) on demand basis. 


The event triggered LF execution shall have the highest 
priority. The study mode LF function shall be executed 
on a snapshot or save case with user defined changes 
made to these cases. The study mode execution of 
LF Function shall not affect the Real-time mode 
execution of LF function. 


4.4.1 Event Triggered Real Time LF Execution 


The LF function shall be executed by pre-defined events 
that affect the distribution system. Some of the events 
the dispatcher should choose for triggers include: 


a) Power system topology change that is, alteration 
in distribution system configuration. 


b) Transformer tap position change/capacitive/reactor 
MVAR change. 


c) Feeder over loading. 
4.4.2 Periodic Real Time LF Execution 


The real-time distribution system load flow application 
shall be executed periodically as configured by the 


IS 17648 : 2021 


dispatcher or administrator. The function shall be 
executed periodically even if there are no significant 
changes in the operating conditions, to provide 
summaries (losses, power trend etc). 


4.4.3 On Demand Real Time LF Execution 


Dispatchers should initiate the real-time LF function at 
any time through dispatcher command. 


4.4.4 Real Time LF Execution initiated by other DMS 
Applications 


Other DMS functions shall initiate the real-time LF 
function at any time as required for the execution of 
the respective functions (for example, Volt/Var control, 
FISR, OFR etc). 


4.5 Input/Output 


Main inputs for the function consist of magnitudes 
of voltages of network roots (HV or MV bus bars 
of supply transformers) and loads at MV or LV bus 
bars of distribution transformers (active and reactive 
powers, or current magnitude and power factors), for 
the considered state. Bus loads can be: 


a) Calculated by state estimation. 
b) Loaded from a save case file. 


c) Simulated as a user-specified percentage of peak 
loads, expected loads or rated loads of MV/LV 
transformers. 

d) Manually entered by the user and the same shall 
have higher priority than that of telemetered data. 

The following output capability shall be provided: 

1) Complex voltages — voltage magnitudes and 
phase angles for all nodes; 

2) Values of current and power factors for all 
sections and transformers; 

3) Active and reactive power flows in all 
sections, transformers, and shunts (consumers, 
generators, motors and capacitors); 

4 


wa 


Losses of active and reactive powers in all 
network elements; 


5) List of limit violations of voltage magnitudes, 
overloading; 


6) Voltage drops of all buses in the system; 
7) Losses; 
8 


wm 


wa 


Network portions where the LF is not 
converging and possible option to converge; 


9) Trust factor of output that is, accuracy 
declaration by the application; and 


10) 
4.6 Alarms 


The LF Application shall warn the dispatcher when the 
limit violations are detected for any element or when 


Summary of reasons of non—convergence. 


lines are de-energized. Dispatcher should be warned 
when any abnormal operating condition exists through 
SCADA/DMS displays. 


Alarms generated during Study Mode shall not be 
treated as real-time alarms but it should be displayed 
only at study mode window/Workstation at which the 
LF application is running in study mode. 


4.7 Display and Reports 


All input and output data shall be viewable through 
tabular displays and overlay on the one line network 
diagram. Tabular displays shall consist of voltages, 
currents (including phase angles), real and reactive 
powers, real and reactive losses as well as accumulated 
total and per phase losses for each substation, feeder 
and project area. All line sections that are overloaded 
and all buses that have voltage violations shall be 
highlighted in color. All loops and parallel-fed loads 
shall be highlighted in a distinct manner. 


The Load Flow results shall be presented on the 
graphical displays used for real-time dispatching as well 
as in tabular form on dedicated displays. The results of 
the load flow calculation shall be subject to the same 
limit alarm processing as other calculated data, that 
is, each calculated variable shall be tested against two 
(optionally three )pairs of alarm limits, and an alarm 
shall be generated when a limit violation is detected. 
Alarms and overloads determined by load flow shall be 
indicated to the user simply and clearly. 


5 VOLT-VAR CONTROL 


The high-quality coordination of voltages and reactive 
power flows control requires coordination of Volt and 
the Var control function. This goal is provided with the 
Volt/VAR Control (VVC) analytical application. This 
function shall have the following objective function 
quality voltage profiles, minimal losses, relaxation of 
the network capacities of reactive power flows, minimal 
reactive power demands from the supply network. 


5.1 Voltage Control 


The voltage control shall provide the capability to raise 
or lower voltage levels on the distribution feeders. 
During periods of peak demand, the voltage control 
function will be used to reduce voltage levels in order 
to reduce the overall system load. 


The operator will initiate the function by specifying the 
targeted percentage raise or drop in nominal voltage 
(generally 2.5 percent or 5 percent). The voltage 
control function shall respond by commanding on 
load tap changers (OLTCs) associated with substation 
transformers and line voltage regulators, if applicable. 
The same shall be used to take corrective action due 
to penalty provisions on power quality, reactive 
power requirements, to manage loss or for demand 
management also. 


To meet the above objective, the function shall be 
capable of: 


a) Identifying the transformers subject to remote 
control; 


b) Distinguishing those transformers whose 
controllers accept voltage set point controls from 
transformers where the tap position has to be 
controlled directly; 


c) Monitoring the controlled voltages; 
d) Monitoring the tap positions of transformers; 


e) Calculating the changes in tap position that most 
closely correspond to the requested reduction in 
nominal voltage; 


f) Estimating voltages at the critical locations 
on the feeder and the low voltage lines (that is, 
the highest and the lowest voltages delivered to 
customers) that would result from the requested 
control action; and 


g) Controlling of switched capacitors. 


When initiated, the voltage control program shall 
recommend switching action to send voltage control 
set points or tap raise or lower pulses that result in 
adjustments to the tap positions of transformers, as 
appropriate for the transformer type, to all transformers 
that are subject to control. However, no controls shall 
be sent to transformers if the resultant voltage for any 
customer affected by that transformer is estimated to 
be outside the permitted range and without dispatcher 
intervention. The voltage control shall estimate 
customer voltages automatically by calling on the 
distribution load flow. 


5.2 VAR Control 


The Var control function shall be used to limit reactive 
power flows in the related distribution network. This 
shall be accomplished by recommending the switching 
action of sending on/off control signals to the switchable 
shunt capacitor banks in the system, including those on 
feeders and in substations consistent with maintaining 
customers’ delivery voltages within defined norms 
(+5 percent of nominal), under continuously varying 
load conditions. 


To meet the above objective, the function shall be 
capable of: 


a) Identifying the switched shunt capacitors that are 
available; 


b) Monitoring substation active and reactive power 
loads and voltages; 


c) Estimating voltages at the critical locations on the 
feeder and the low voltage lines (that is, the highest 
and the lowest voltages delivered to customers); 


d) Checking power factors against desired limits, 
where the limits shall be expressed in either 
leading or lagging VAR; and 


IS 17648 : 2021 


e) Sending control signals to bring capacitors 
on-line or off-line, as appropriate, if power factors 
are outside their limits, where the limits will be 
established by distributor as per regulatory norms 
and shall be dispatcher-adjustable. 


VAR control shall execute periodically or on configured 
triggers. It shall use dead-bands to ensure that no 
unnecessary control actions are taken. VAR control 
shall use the distribution power flow calculation to 
estimate voltage effects prior to switching a capacitor 
bank, so that operator-adjustable voltage limits shall 
not be violated control shall also be skipped if the 
capacitor bank was last operated by the function 
within an adjustable time period, as per user define for 
example, 10-15 min. 


5.3 Modes of Operation 
The VVC function shall have following modes of 
reconfiguration process: 

a) Auto mode; and 

b) Manual mode. 


The dispatcher shall be able to select one of the above 
modes. These modes are described below. 


5.3.1 Auto Mode 


In auto mode, the function shall determine switching 
plans automatically and perform switching operations 
upon dispatcher validation automatically. 


5.3.2 Manual Mode 


In manual mode, the function shall determine switching 
plans automatically and perform switching operations 
in step-by-step manner. 


A filter for remote operable and manual switches shall 
be provided with switching plan, 


5.4 Reports 


Detailed reports of complete switching sequence for 
VVC operation, including voltage/VAR levels before 
switching and after switching shall be presented. 


5.5 Displays 


The User interface for VVC function shall have 
following summary displays as minimum: 


a) Network and tabular display to VVC switching; 
and 


b) Tabular display giving chronological sequence for 
VVC operation. 


6 DISTRIBUTION LOAD FORECASTING 


To support operations planning and analysis, area 
loads shall be forecast for equal interval for a day up to 
seven days in the future. The user shall be able to save 
forecasts cases, one of which shall contain the active 
forecast that should be available for study functions 
such as distribution load flow. 


IS 17648 : 2021 


The user shall be able to make adjustments to the 
active forecast. In addition, Distribution Load Forecast 
shall make adjustments to future half-hourly forecasts 
automatically. This should be based on the amount of 
mismatch between the forecasted loads and the actual 
loads of previous half-hours as they become known. 


6.1 Short-Term Load Forecasting (STLF) 


Short-term load forecasting (STLF) analytical function 
will be used for assessment of the sequence of average 
electrical loads in equal time intervals, from | to 7 days 
ahead. 


Forecast module is executed for up to next 7 days 
including weather forecast. Results are available in 
tabular and graphical form. The user shall be able to 
make adjustments to the active forecast. The adjustments 
can also be done through weather conditional data 
parameters that is, temperature, humidity, precipitation 
level, wind speed, wind direction acquired through 
telemetered sensors or manually. 


STLF will be used for forecasting of loads for the next 
short-term period (up to 7 days), to provide planning 
of the (optimal) network operation at the daily level. in 
periodic time (15 min to 1 h). 


6.1.1 Similar ay Forecasting 


A similar day forecast shall be used that is based on the 
normalized half-hourly load values stored for each of 
seven-day types. There shall be provision for storing 
day types for the last 24 months. The storage shall be 
updated each day by replacing the oldest of the same 
day type with the most current actual load curve. 


The similar day forecast shall search the 24 month 
file for the same day type whose weather conditions 
best match. It shall then present the user-entered and 
best-matched conditions, for user comparison, together 
with the chosen day’s loads as the suggested forecast. 
The user shall be able to modify any of the forecast’s 
loads manually. In addition, the user shall be able 
to scale the entire forecast by simply specifying an 
appropriate peak load value or by some percent or by 
some absolute value or by absolute total energy value 
for the day. 


Multi-day forecasts shall be constructed by permitting 
the user to define the input data for each forecast day. 


The results of the previous forecasts will be compared 
with the actual load realization. The performed 
differences will be used for updating the forecasting 
procedure parameters. 


6.2 Long Term Forecasting 


In addition to the above, Long term load forecasting 
shall also be available for at least one year. The same 
shall be calculated based on the peak load values or 
energy consumptions on weekly/monthly basis for at 
least two preceding years, array of forecasted peak 
loads imported from STLF/entered manually. 


The user shall be able to print and display the forecasts 
in both tabular and graphical form. This shall include 
the ability to display the active forecast with the actual 
loads of current and past days superimposed, energy 
consumption/peak load curves in the forecasting period. 


6.3 Results of Function 
Main input data for the LF shall be: 


a) Historical load measurements for specified 
network points, associated with corresponding 
weather conditions. 


b) Daily load curves and energy consumption from 
the past, for all type of days and seasons. 


c) Weather prognosis for the forecasting period. 

d) Special Day Types 
Main output data of the STLF shall before casted load 
for the forecasting period. 


7 FAULT IDENTIFICATION & SERVICE 
RESTORATION 
The fault identification and system restoration 


application software shall provide assistance to the 
dispatcher for detection, localization, isolation and 
restoration of distribution system after a fault in 
the system. The FISR function shall be initiated by 
any change in the network connectivity due to any 
fault. It shall generate automatic report on switching 
sequence depicting analysis/location of the fault and 
recommendations for isolation of faulty sections and 
restoration of supply. 


The FISR function shall have the ability to detect the 
presence of substation and feeder fault conditions that 
are considered permanent from the un-commanded trip 
and lockout status of circuit breakers and line recloser 
based on the analysis of the fault current recorded in 
system from relay or fault passage indicators and 
possible likely faulty equipment where the fault is. 


For a permanent substation fault, FISR shall act to 
restore power to all affected feeders by switching to 
alternative sources of power, as available by closing 
the substation’s load transfer switch or the tie-switches 
that may be used to connect the feeders to other feeders 
or substations. In this way, the effect of the outage will 
be limited to the time it takes to complete the required 
reconfiguration. 


For a permanent fault on a line section, FISR shall act 
to: 

a) Isolate the faulted section by opening the closest 
available switching element. 

b) Restore power to any healthy upstream feeder 
sections by reclosing the line’s originally tripped 
switching element. 

c) Restore power to any healthy downstream feeder 
sections by switching to an alternative available 


power source. In this way, the long-term effect of 
the outage shall be limited to only those customers 
on the faulted section. 


Once an outage is cleared, FISR shall be capable of 
returning the power system to its pre-fault configuration. 


7.1 The FISR function shall have the General 
Characteristics 


a) FISR shall be capable of handling over current, 


b 


c 


d 


e 


g 


wm 


wa 


wa 


wa 


wa 


phase-to-ground and phase-to-phase faults and is 
not restricted by their time of occurrence on one or 
more feeders. Thus, the ability to handle multiple 
faults of different types, on multiple feeders, 
shall be provided. It shall be capable to carry out 
restoration of large area after an occurrence wide 
spread faults amounting to substantial outages in 
the town. 


FISR shall be capable of allowing the substitution 
of an auxiliary circuit breaker or line recloser 
that shall temporarily function in place of a 
circuit breaker or line recloser that is undergoing 
maintenance. 


FISR, at the discretion of the operator, shall be 
capable of acting automatically. The Operator 
shall have the option, however, of implementing 
the FISR-determined switching actions through 
the system’s supervisory control and switching 
order management facilities. In this case, FISR 
shall determine the necessary switching actions 
following its automatic detection of a permanent 
fault, but shall present the switching actions to the 
Operator as a set of recommendations. 


To avoid potential difficulties during severe storm 
conditions, the operator shall be able to suspend 
FISR restoration capabilities by activating a 
single control point. The operator shall be able to 
resume FISR’s normal operation by deactivating 
the storm-mode control point. When this occurs, 
FISR shall be ready to restore power as well as 
detect and isolate faults following the next outage 
event. 


FISR shall be capable of monitoring circuit 
breaker and line recloser trips. This shall include 
discrimination between commanded and un- 
commanded trips and the determination of lockout 
conditions. 


FISR shall be capable of checking the fault 
indications from RTUs to determine the line 
section where the fault has occurred. After the 
fault has been located, FISR shall issue an event 
message that identifies the faulted feeder section. 


FISR shall be capable of isolating line faults by 
opening any available line recloser or load break 
switch that shall be necessary, however FISR Shall 
not operate any such device that has its control 
inhibit flag set or a tag set that inhibits control 
action. 


IS 17648 : 2021 


h) FISR shall be capable of determining the switching 
orders that can be used to restore power to all 
healthy feeder sections that are de-energized by 
the power system’s protective devices. Before any 
switching takes place, FISR shall utilize the results 
of distribution Power flow for recommendations 
of switching steps for restoration where in it shall 
guide the operator for amount of overloading 
in lines, bus voltage violations and amount of 
load that can be restored for various options of 
restorations. The operator shall also be to simulate 
the DPF for the recommended switching actions, 
so that the necessary violations can be displayed on 
graphical display also. If an overloaded condition 
is expected as a result of the proposed switching, 
it shall be displayed to the operator on a graphical 
display and proposed alternative switching 
sequence to avoid or minimize the overload. 


mw 


FISR shall be capable of using data derived from 
substation RTUs/FRTUs/FPIs to recognize faults 
in substation transformer banks or any fault on 
the primary side of these banks that cause loss of 
outgoing feeder voltage and current. Substation 
protective devices will normally clear these 
faults. If FISR monitors a continuous loss of 
feeder supply beyond an Operator-adjustable 
time interval, FISR shall determine the switching 
orders that can be used to reconfigure available 
tie-switches in order to connect the de-energized 
feeders to alternative energy sources, such as 
other substations and/or feeders. In order to avoid 
unnecessary reconfigurations, FISR shall use 
available substation data and relevant logic to 
safeguard against a false loss-of-feeder voltage 
signal, that is,, loss of potential due to a blown 
control fuse. 


j 


k 


pez 


FISR shall be capable of estimating and 
displaying the load that is to be restored following 
each recommended control action. In addition, 
the operator shall have access to an interactive 
environment to investigate the impact ofalternative 
restoration strategies, based on operator selectable 
objective functions, prior to the operator’s actual 
execution of a final restoration control sequence. 
This shall include comparisons based on line 
loadings, voltage profiles, load restoration levels, 
number of affected customers, etc. 


FISR shall be capable to find delay in the restoration 
of network beyond specified time (Dispatcher 
configurable) and shall be able to report separately 
in the form of pending restoration actions. 


m 


wm 


7.2 Detection of Fault 


FISR function shall detect the faulty condition of 
the network causing CB tripping due to protection 
operation or FPI indication. The circuit breakers having 
auto-reclose feature, the FISR application shall wait for 


IS 17648 : 2021 


programmer specified (settable for individual feeders) 
duration before declaring the network as faulty. On 
detection of fault in the network, an alarm shall be 
generated to draw attention of the dispatcher. 


Switching device tripping caused by SCADA/DMS 
applications shall not be considered as a faulty condition. 
FISR application need not be initiated if the quality flags, 
such as, manually replaced value and out of scan are set 
for a switching device. 


To avoid potential difficulties during severe storm 
conditions, the operator shall be able to suspend FISR 
switching sequence of restoration capabilities by 
activating a single control point. Otherwise, FISR may 
continue to operate for fault detection and isolation 
purposes. The Operator shall be able to resume FISR’s 
normal operation by deactivating the storm-mode 
control point. When this occurs, FISR shall be ready 
to restore power as well as detect and isolate faults 
following the next outage event. The same shall be 
recorded as an event. 


7.2.1 Localization of Fault 


Wherever protection signal or FPI indication is not 
available, FISR function shall determine the faulty 
section by logically analyzing the telemetered data 
(status of CBs, analog values etc) as acquired through 
SCADA system. 


An impedance-based search shall match the impedance 
values provided by a short circuit calculation algorithm 
with the set of devices regarded as faulty by FPI 
and breaker trip signal. The search algorithm shall 
determine likely faulty equipment even if no fault 
indicators are available or with a minimum of installed 
fault indicators. Impedance-based location shall able to 
decrease or eliminate the effort of manually checking 
fault indicators by identifying the likely faulted 
equipment before the crew can provide feedback 
from the field. This method may also minimize 
communications expense by leveraging impedance 
values returned from feeder head protection relays 
rather than establishing communication to a number of 
fault indicators. 


In absence of impedance based search, for exceptional 
cases an iterative method for determining fault shall be 
used for example, In case of fault, upstream breaker is 
tripped and long stretch of multiple sections are having 
no intermediate fault indicators and intermediate 
switches are not capable to trip on fault up to the closest 
NO (Normal Open) point, the dispatcher can open the 
last or any other switch before NO point & try to close 
breaker , if trips again fault is on further upstream & 
the same method is to be repeated else fault is located 
in the downstream section only. 


For the sections where protection signal or FPI 
indication is available, the same shall be derived 
through these telemetered signals. Network diagram 


identifying the faulty sections/components shall be 
displayed identifying the relevant section and various 
configurations of switch types etc. Further, following 
minimum switch types shall be usedby FISR system: 


a) Remote controllable circuit breaker with capability 
to interrupt fault currents. 


b) Non-remote controllable circuit breaker with 
capability to interrupt fault currents. 


c) Remote controllable circuit breaker with no 
capability to interrupt fault currents. 


d) Non-remote controllable circuit breaker with no 
capability to interrupt fault currents. 


e) Remote controllable disconnects. 

f) Non remote controllable disconnects. 
g) Fuse. 

h) Ground/Earth switch etc. 


7.3 System Isolation and Restoration 


Once faulty section is identified, the FISR function 
shall determine the switching plan to isolate healthy 
area from unhealthy area. FISR function shall suggest 
switching plans for restoration of power to the 
de-energized healthy sections of the network. It shall 
be done by closing NOP switch to allow the power 
from alternate source. In case more than one feasible 
switching plan exist, the dispatcher shall be guided for 
most optimum plan based on the merit order that is, 
minimum switching operations, minimum loss path, 
system operation within the safe limits of various 
network elements. The dispatcher shall have the 
option to simulate switching operations and visualize 
the effect on the distribution network by comparisons 
based on line loadings, voltage profiles, load restored, 
system losses, number of affected customers. The 
FISR function shall have feature to attain the pre-fault 
configuration on dispatcher request after repair of 
faulty sections. 


The FISR function shall have following modes of 
restoration process: and dispatcher shall be able to 
select one of these modes as described below: 


a) Auto mode of Restoration — FISR shall determine 
switching plans automatically upon experiencing 
fault and proper isolation of unhealthy network 
from healthy part of the network and perform 
restoration actions upon dispatcher validation 
automatically. 


b) Manual Mode of Restoration — FISR shall 
determine switching plans upon experiencing 
faulty state and proper isolation of unhealthy 
network from healthy part of the network. The 
switching plans shall be presented to dispatcher 
for step by step restoration. Dispatcher shall be 
allowed to introduce new steps. A filter for remote 
operable and manual switches shall be provided 
with switching plan. 


7.4 Reports 


Detailed reports of events with unique IDs complete 
switching sequence from outage to restoration, 
feeder-wise outage duration with date & time stamp, 
and quantum of served and un-served load, number of 
consumers interrupted, consumer minute interruption 
numbers and restored and network parameters limits 
violations shall be generated by FISR application. 


7.5 Graphical User Interface 


The user interface for FISR function shall have 
following summary displays: 


a) Network and tabular display to identify faulty 
network. 


b) Network and tabular display to identify remotely 
controllable devices. 


c) Network display to show plan for isolation of 
faulty sections from the network using single line 
diagram of substation or network as selected by 
the dispatcher. 


d) Tabular display for restoration plans with 
identification name and respective merit orders 
and execution of restoration plan using network 
display and single line diagram of substation. 


8 LOAD SHEDDING APPLICATION (LS) 


The load-shed application shall automate and optimise 
the process of selecting the best combination of 
switches to be opened and controlling in order to shed 
the desired amount of load. Given a total amount of load 
to be shed, the load shed application shall recommend 
different possible combinations of switches to be 
opened, in order to meet the requirement. The dispatcher 
is presented with various combinations of switching 
operations, which shall result in a total amount of load 
shed, which closely resembles the specified total. The 
dispatcher can then choose any of the recommended 
actions and execute them. The recommendation is 
based on basic rules for load shedding and restoration. 
It shall exchange data with ABT or any other power 
portfolio management application regarding real time 
overdraw and other system constraints. 


In case of failure of supervisory control for few 
switches, the total desired load shed/restore will not 
be met. Under such conditions, the application shall 
inform the dispatcher the balance amount of load to be 
shed /restore. The load-shed application shall run again 
to complete the desired load shed/restore process. 


8.1 Basic Rules for Load Shedding and Restoration 
The load shall be shed or restored on the basis of 
following basic rules. 

8.1.1 By Load Priority 


The LS shall have a priority mechanism that shall allow 
the user to assign higher priorities for express consumer 


IS 17648 : 2021 


or any other important load. The load assigned with the 
higher priorities shall be advised to be shed later and 
restore earlier than load with relatively lower priorities. 
Each load priority shall be user definable over the scale 
of at least 1-10. 


8.1.2 By 24 h Load Shed/Restore History 


The loads of equal priorities shall be advised for 
restoration in such a way that loads shed first shall be 
advised to be restored first. The application shall ensure 
that tripping operations is done in a cyclic manner to 
avoid the same consumers being affected repeatedly, 
however, priority loads shall be affected least. 
Switches, those are affected due to any other reason 
like breakdown/plan, un-plan shut down shall generate 
alarms to dispatcher to take appropriate decision. 


8.1.3 By number of Consumers Affected 


The consumer with equal priority and similar past load 
shed history shall be considered by the application in 
such a way that minimum number of consumers are 
affected during the proposed load shed. The data for 
number of consumers connected to a feeder/device 
shall be taken from consumer indexing (CI) of GIS or 
CIS. 


8.2 Modes of Operation 


The load-shed application shall operate in the following 
modes: 


a) Manual load shed/restoration; and 
b) Auto load shed/restoration. 


Each mode of operation can be enabled or disabled 
by operator independently. The load may be shed and 
restore in possible combination that is, manually shed 
and auto restore vice versa or both operations in the 
same modes. 


8.3 Manual Load Shed 


In this mode operator specifies a load to be shed in a 
project area The software shall determine and propose 
all the possible combinations of switches to be operated 
for the requested load shed considering the basic rules 
for load shed and restoration. 


In case more than one options are possible, then the 
application shall identify all such options with the 
priority of consumers along with the number of 
consumers are likely to be affected for the particular 
load shed option. The dispatcher shall select and 
execute one of these options for affecting the load shed. 


8.4 Manual Load Restoration 


In this mode operator specifies the desired load to be 
restored. The software shall determine the switches to 
be operated for the requested load restore considering 
the basic rules for load shed & restoration. 


In case more than one options are possible, then the 
application shall identify all such options with the 


IS 17648 : 2021 


priority of consumers along with the number of 
consumers are likely to be restored for the particular 
load restore option if chosen by dispatcher. The 
dispatcher shall select and execute one of these options 
for effecting the load restoration. 


The load shed application shall maintain a load restore 
timer, which shall automatically start after tripping of 
CB due to manual load shedding. An alarm shall be 
generated to remind the operator to restore the loads 
when this timer expires. For manual mode of operation, 
the dispatcher shall enter the value of load restore timer. 


8.5 Auto Load Shed 


This function should have two modes namely frequency 
based load shed and time of day based load shed as 
described below: 


8.5.1 Frequency based Load Shed 


This function should execute the tripping of breakers 
based on the system frequency automatically 
considering the basic rules for load shed and restoration. 


The software should automatically execute the 
switching operations as soon as system frequency 
reaches at load shed start (LSS_ str )frequency threshold 
and it should continue to do so unless system frequency 
crosses the load shed stop (LSS-stp) frequency limit. 
The frequency limits should be dispatcher assignable up 
to single decimal points. Once frequency crosses below 
LSS_stp limit , then load shed can only be started again 
when frequency attains LSS_ str. Limit LSS_ str should 
be lower than LSS stp and suitable validation should 
ensure prohibition of wrong entry for this variable. 


The application should integrally intact with load 
schedule/actual drawl of project area so that under draw 
and over draw of power based on frequency should also 
suggest appropriate switching. 


8.5.2 Time of day Based Load Shed 


The function should operate to shed load at the 
predefined time of the day and load to be shed. The 
software should automatically execute the switching 
operations considering the basic rules for load shed and 
restoration. 


8.6 Auto Load Restoration 


This function should have two modes namely frequency 
based load restoration and time of day based load 
restoration as described below. 


8.6.1 Frequency Based Restoration 


The function should execute the closing of breakers 
based on the system frequency automatically 
considering the basic rules for load shed and restoration. 


The software should automatically execute the switching 
operations as soon as system frequency attains load 


10 


restore start frequency limit (LSR_ str) and it should 
continue to do so as long as system frequency is crosses 
below the mark load shed restore stop frequency limit 
(LSR_stp)_. The frequency limits should be dispatcher 
assignable up to single decimal points. Once frequency 
crosses below LSR_stp limit , then load shed can only 
be started again when frequency attains LSR_ str. 


In case if fluctuation in frequency band will change 
rapidly, it should generate alarm to Dispatcher to take 
appropriate action. 


8.6.2 Time of Day Based Restoration 


The function should operate to restore load at the 
predefined time of the day and load to be restored. The 
software should automatically execute the switching 
operations considering the basic rules for load shed and 
restoration. 


8.7 Alarms/Events 


All loads shed and restore operations executed shall be 
logged in the system as events. In case the supervisory 
control fails during the operation in predefined time, an 
alarm shall be generated with the possible reason for 
the failure. 


8.8 Summary Report 


Load shed application shall generate Summary Reports 
for project area on daily basis. These reports shall be 
available online for minimum period of two days. The 
following reports shall be made: 


a) Daily Load shed report indicating, substation 
name, feeder/device name, date/time, duration of 
load shed and amount of load shed, Number of 
consumers affected based on consumer indexing 
information, mode of load shed including planned 
outages of feeders/network equipment’s. 

b) Daily alarm 

substation wise. 


summary pertaining to LSA, 


c 


wa 


Substation wise daily served, un-served power 
and energy for every 15 min time block, for the 
same aggregation of LS events and moderation for 
the 15 min block is needed to be done in system 


d 


wm 


Every load shed event shall be having a unique 
id along with the type of load shed that is, the 
reason (frequency, asset overloading or system 
overloading etc.) 


Served and un-served power for last seven days for 
every 15 min time block to calculate load forecast for 
the next day. The report shall contain a column to define 
weightage factor (multiplier) by dispatcher to calculate 
load forecast for the next day. The weightage factor is 
required to consider the type of the day such as holiday, 
festivals, rainy day, etc. Separate report for total load 
forecast of complete project area shall be generated 
from above two reports. 


9 OPERATIONS MONITORING 


The operations monitoring function shall track the 
number of operations made by every breaker, capacitor 
switch, recloser, and load break switch that is monitored 
by the system. It shall also track an associated 
contact-replacement index. Devices shall be identified 
by area of responsibility, substation, feeder, and 
device ID to provide the necessary information for 
condition-based maintenance of these devices. 


Each monitored device shall be associated with a total 
operations counter. This counter shall be incremented 
whenever the associated device changes state. When a 
multiple change (such as a trip-close-trip sequence) is 
reported by an DCU/RTU/FRTU, each transition shall 
be counted separately. In addition, a fault operations 
counter is required. This counter shall be incremented 
only for un-commanded trip operations. The date and 
time of the last operation shall be saved for each device 
when one of the counters is incremented. 


An operator with proper authorization shall be able 
to enter total operations and fault operations limit 
for each counter. An alarm shall be generated when a 
counter exceeds its limits. No additional alarms shall 
be generated if the counter is incremented again before 
it is reset. For each counter, the System shall calculate 
the present number of operations expressed as a percent 
(which shall exceed 100 percent) of the corresponding 
limit. 

The ability to reset individual counters shall also be 
provided. In addition, a user shall be able to inhibit 
operations counting for individual devices. Such 
devices shall be included in summaries based on areas 
of responsibility. Resetting and inhibiting counters 
shall be permitted only for devices that belong to the 
areas of responsibility to which the console is assigned, 
and resetting shall require the console to be assigned 
to an appropriate mode of authority. The date and time 
when each counter was last reset shall be saved. 


The counters, contact-replacement index values, and 
other related information shall be available for display 
and inclusion in reports. The user shall be able to view 
the date and time of a device’s last operation together 
with its accumulated operations data by simply 
selecting the device on any display where it appears. 


10 DISTRIBUTION OPERATIONAL 
MODIFICATION (JUMPER, GROUND & CUT) 


The functionality allows temporary modifications at 
any point in the distribution network to change the 
network configuration, to isolate faults, restore services 
or perform maintenance. A Summary shall list the 
jumpers, cuts and grounds that are currently applied. 
The function is performed by the DMS through 
connectivity analysis. Any temporary modifications 
shall not be affected due to incremental up-gradation in 
network topology. 


IS 17648 : 2021 


10.1 Jumper 


Jumpers are a means of providing a temporary, 
switchable connection between two points on the 
network. The operator shall be able to select two 
points and place the jumper with relevant details. 
The initial state of the jumper shall be set to open or 
closed. The jumper popup automatically defaults to 
show the phases available for connection between the 
two points but other partial or cross-phase connections 
shall be made if required. The popup shall warn the 
operator about abnormal connections such as not all 
phases being connected or the nominal voltage being 
different at the two connection points. Once the jumper 
has been placed the switch symbol in the centre can be 
selected and switched open or closed. The topology of 
the network model is updated accordingly. There is no 
restriction on the placement of jumpers between lines 
connected to different feeders or different substations. 


Temporary connections between phases on the same 
line segment, known as a phase jumper shall be 
supported with an alert message. This can be used 
in conditions where one phase is de-energized and is 
desired to restore customers by energizing the dead 
conductor from one of the live phases. Jumper shall 
only allow if network in de energized mode to depict 
real operational scenario. 


10.2 Ground 


Temporary grounds shall only be placed, for obvious 
reasons, on de-energized sections of a line. These 
grounds represent the mechanical grounding of lines 
for safety purposes during maintenance or construction. 


A temporary ground shall be placed on one or more 
of the available phases. It must be given a name 
and additional information shall be included in the 
description field. If a line segment is re-energized 
while a temporary ground is still applied, the ground 
will be automatically removed or alert along with 
acknowledgement to the Dispatcher would be used. 


10.3 Cuts 


Cuts facilitated in any line segment in the network. The 
cut shall be applied to one or more available phases 
of the conductor. The cut could also be applied as a 
temporary switch inserted in the line. 


a) The cut must be given a name or id number for 
identification, which is displayed as a label on the 
geographic network view. 

b) It shall be possible to select the position of the 
label relative to the cut symbol. 

c) The position can be altered after the cut has been 
placed. 

Once placed the cut symbol can be selected and 
switched on and off by the operator in the same way as 
a standard disconnect switch. Cuts can also be tagged. 


IS 17648 : 2021 


10.4 Reports and Displays 


The reports and displays shall be generated indicating 
the following: 


a) Abnormal switches in tabular display; 

b) De-energized components of network in tabular 
display; 

c) Presence of loops and parallels on network 
displays; 

d) Un-served/disconnected loads (loads affected due 
to tripping of CBs) in tabular displays; and 


e) List of temporary jumpers/cuts/grounds. 


11 OUTAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


Integrated OMS application with SCADA/DMS is 
available in modern systems and has advantages over 
the earlier separate systems. The OMS application 
shall have a graphical map display capability to include 
functionality for locating outages and crews on a 
geographic background of land containing the electric 
distribution system with user defined settings for 
display of various layers of graphical data (land, roads, 
poles, switches, all outages, predicted locations, etc) 
at various scales. The graphics system shall be able to 
have different symbols for different types of crews and 
outages and the ability to suppress the display of lower 
priority calls and include normal pan, zoom, and locate 
functionality. Outages affecting sections of primary 
shall highlight the affected circuit(s). The graphics 
system shall allow manual placement of outages. A 
method of linking raster images, vector design files, 
jpeg, bitmap or gif files, and operating procedures or 
other documents to specific objects shall be included 
which will allow selection of the object to display 
the associated document, image or file. A secon 
schematic view of feeder section open point of the 
distribution system shall be automatically generated 
from the geographic view/SCADA displays to assist 
in development of planned and un-planned switching 
procedures. 


11.1 Objective of the OMS is Intended to Provide 
Following Functions 


a) Agraphical display of the electric sub-transmission 
and distribution network with dynamic symbols 
indicating outages, crews and predicted failure 
points in 11kV or LT network. 


b 


wm 


A predictive engine to identify potential outage 
devices based on the number, type and location 
of customer outage calls and input from real-time 
system. 


c 


wa 


Optimizing wheeling energy and reliable power 
supply to customer. 


12 


d) Crew scheduling and tracking capability to 
manage crews and field personnel during outages. 


e) Delay in the restoration of network beyond 
specified time (dispatcher configurable) shall 
be reported separately in the form of pending 
restoration actions in tabular display. 


f) Sections not restored with the reasons for 
non-restoration such as overloading and voltage 
limit violations etc. shall be indicated. 

11.2 OMS Integration with other Systems 

a) Customer Care Information System (CCS); 

b) Distribution Management System (DMS); 

c) Work Force Management System (WFMS); and 

d) Meter Data Management system(MDMS). 


11.2.1 OMS from/to CCS Interface 
The following are the flows from CCS to the OMS: 


a) The OMS will receive trouble calls from the CCS 
on an interactive basis. This includes all IVR calls 
received by the CCS. 


The OMS will need to receive a subset of the 
customer information on a daily basis. This subset 
includes at a minimum the customer’s name, 
phone, premise address, and its priority code. 


b) 


c) The OMS will need to receive list of newly 
connected customers and any changes to the 
electrical network connectivity on a regular basis 
(this customer connectivity information shall go 
to the GIS first and then to the OMS via daily 


incremental transfer. 
The following are the flows of information from OMS 
to the CCS: 
1) The OMS will need to provide the following 
outage status information: 
i) confirmed outage status, 
ii) crew dispatched information, 
ili) cause of outage, and 
iv) the estimated restoration time. 
The OMS will need to provide the number of 


times the customer has been part of an outage 
for a given date range. 


11.2.2 OMS from/to SCADA/DMS Interface 


In case OMS and SCADA/DMS are separate packages, 
there shall be a two-way interface or one way between 
the Distribution Management System (DMS) and the 
OMS. All Device status data will pass from the DMS 
to the OMS for status, outage indication and network 
reconfiguration. This will help to optimize the DMS 
application. 


2) 


11.2.3 OMS from/to Work Management System (WMS) 
Interface 


There shall be an interface between the OMS and the 
future work management system (WMS) to create 
work orders for follow-up work from an outage, such 
as additional investigative work, clean-up, broken 
pole replacement, tree trimming, service and meter 
re-attachment, etc. Depending on the robustness of the 
interface, there shall be a need for an interface from 
WMS to OMS for work orders requiring switching 
orders. This functionality shall further extended for 
automate field force management. 


11.2.4 OMS from/to Meter Data management system 
(MDMS) Interface 


There shall be an interface between the OMS and the 
meter data management system (MDMS) to create no 
power supply event and last gaps information to OMS. 
The meter information shall be required to decided 
predication logic triggered and outage information. 
Integration with Outage management system (OMS) 
for last gasp events with time stamp are required 
for consumption of OMS, the MDMS is expected 
to consume the already published list of affected 
customers and then publish the exception list from 
MDMS for effective outage list preparation by OMS. 


12 OPTIMAL FEEDER RECONFIGURATION 


The Optimal Feeder Reconfiguration (OFR) function 
shall determine the optimal network configuration to 
eliminate adverse operating conditions such as line or 


Customer Care 
system 


IS 17648 : 2021 


transformer overloads. This function shall propose to 
the operators a series of switching actions that would 
enforce the reconfiguration of the distribution feeders 
reducing the system losses and equilibrating the loading 
of the primary stations. As result, loads on one feeder 
are transferred to another feeder, etc, changing line and 
supply transformer loadings. 


12.1 Objective Functions 


Following types of objective functions (tangible 
benefits) shall be supported by the OFR. The user shall 
select the desired objective function. The possible 
objectives of the control function shall be as follows: 


a) Removal of Constraint Violations — The objective 
shall be reached in the minimum number of 
switching actions. 


b) Minimize Distribution System Power Loss — 
Power losses calculated by summing up active 
power losses occurring in all line sections and 
transformers within the study boundary. 


c) Load balancing among supplying primary stations. 


d) Multi Objective — Combination of load balancing 
and loss minimization, where each objective is 
included in the total sum with user-specified or 
default weighting factors. 


To run the OFR the user shall be required to specify 
the area to be considered for feeder reconfiguration and 
the desired objective function. The results of the feeder 
reconfiguration function include switching actions, the 
values of the objective functions before and after the 
feeder reconfiguration. 


Work Force 
Management 
system 


OMS system > 


*SCADA/DMS 


Meter Data 
Management system 


e If SCADA/DMS is a separate system, 


Geographical 
Information System 


Fic. 3 SAMPLE CONCEPT OF OUTAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


IS 17648 : 2021 


12.2 Output 


The following switching operations shall be presented 
on a network diagram: 


a) Highlighted identification of the switches to be 
closed/opened; 


b) Distribution system 
reconfiguration; and 


area affected by 


c) Distribution system topology after switching. 


12.2.1 Tabular Output 


The output processing shall provide specific OFR 
results for dispatcher review through tabular displays. 
These results shall consist of following parts: 


a) The summary of power flow results shall 
include the following values before and after 
reconfiguration: 


1) objective function, 

2) total power loss, 

3) unevenness in primary station loading, 
4) violation indexes, and 

5) overload, low and high voltage. 


b) A list of switches to be opened/closed (in pairs 
for normal conditions) in the desired (optimal) 
sequence, and their impact on the objective 
function improvement shall be shown on separate 
tabular display. Dispatcher must be able to review, 
simulate and execute switching through one 
display e.g to Switching Procedure Management 
(SPM). 


12.3 Modes of Operation 

The OFR function shall have following modes of 
reconfiguration process. The dispatcher shall be able to 
select one of these modes. 

12.3.1 Auto mode 


In auto mode, the function shall determine switching 
plans automatically and perform switching operations 
upon dispatcher validation automatically. 

12.3.2 Manual Mode 


In manual mode, the function shall determine switching 
plans automatically and perform switching operations 
in step-by-step manner. 

12.4 Reports 

Detailed reports of complete switching sequence for 
OFR operation shall be presented. 

12.5 Displays 


The User interface for OFR function shall have 
following summary displays as minimum: 


a) Network and tabular display to OFR switching; 
and 


14 


b) Tabular display giving chronological sequence for 
OFR operation. 


13 DISTRIBUTION 
ESTIMATOR (DSSE) 


SYSTEM STATE 


DSSE shall provide a solution for real-time monitoring, 
control, and optimization of the network. Unlike DPF, it 
shall utilize available current magnitude and measured 
power values. It shall consistently correct incoming 
mismatched information during the estimation process, 
including topology analysis, load data, and measured 
values. 


DSSE statistically shall estimate the most probable 
active and reactive power values of the loads using 
existing measured values, switching positions, and 
initial active and reactive power consumption of the 
power system loads. This function shall: 


a) Estimate loads matching measurements using 
weighting factors for measurements and loads, 
and 


b) Detect obviously wrong measurements. 


DSSE shall calculate loads so that their values, 
initialized from load curves, scheduled loads 
and/or measured loads, best fit existing measurements 
and actual network topology. The adaptation of loads 
shall use an optimization process which minimizes the 
deviation between measured and calculated values. It 
shall take into account measurements, load curves, and 
rated outputs as weighted information. 


13.1 Determination of Load Base Values 


Different sources shall be used in DSSE for determining 
load base values, including: 

a) Load rating values, load curve values, and STLS 

values; and 

b) Measurements. 
DSSE shall adapt system loads in such a way that the 
calculated values fit the measured values and load 
information (on the basis of their respective weighting 
factor) as closely as possible. 


13.2 Trust Factor 

This factor shall mirror results and the load flow 
information available. 

13.3 Load Adaptation 


Load adaptation shall adapt loads to conforming 
measurements as accurate as possible. It shall minimize 
the residuals between measurements and their 
calculated values taking into account their respective 
weighting factors. 


14 SHORT CIRCUIT CALCULATION (SCC) 


Short circuit calculation (SCC) is used to calculate 
currents that are results of a short circuit due to a fault 


or an incorrect connection in an electric network. It 
basically solves symmetric or asymmetric faults in 
balanced or unbalanced distribution networks. SCC 
should be used to determine: 


a) The maximum short-circuit current which 
determines the rating of electrical equipment 
(normally a circuit breaker for real-time SCC). 

b) The minimum short-circuit current which can be 
a basis for the protection sensitivity checking or 
fuses selection. 

c) Fault current calculation at selected location. 

d) Earth fault current for ungrounded networks. 


14.1 SCC Calculation 


SCC should check for violations of the breaking 
capability, violation of the protections sensitivity 
settings and violation of the earth fault currents. 
Short circuit calculation should either be activated 
upon user request or automatically (after network 
changes or cyclically). The function should be able to 
simulate following fault types and each of them should 
contain fault impedance and/or grounding impedance, 
depending on user requirements: 


Three phase faults (L-L-L): 
a) Three phase faults with ground connection 
(L-L-L-G), 
b) Two phase faults (L-L), 
c) Two phase faults with ground connection (L-L-G), 
and 
d) Single phase faults, with or without neutral point 
(L-G). 
It should be able to calculate minimum and maximum 
current for the complete distribution network. 


14.2 Modes of Operation 
a) Real Time Mode — SCC calculation should 
be based on the current electrical network 
configuration. 
b) Study— SCC should work with copies of the 
database. It should be possible to simulate different 
scenarios and/or “What if” studies. 


15 


IS 17648 : 2021 


15 QUALITY OF SERVICE INDICES 


The system shall provide the ability to calculate quality 
of service indices that can be used to track and report on 
the performance characteristics of distribution network 
over various time periods specified by the user. This 
shall include quality of service indices pre-defined in the 
database or created by the user on-line. The following 
quality of service indices Shall be implemented: 


a) System Average Interruption Duration Index 
(SAIDI), 


b) Momentary Average Interruption Frequency Index 
(MAIFI), 


c) System Average Interruption Frequency Index 
(SAIFI), and 


d) Customer Average Interruption Duration Index 
(CAIDI). 


The user shall be able to view the quality of service 
indices and the variables used to calculate them. 


The calculation variables shall include any values 
available, including real-time and historical data. Tools 
shall be provided to compare sets of indices created at 
different times and over different time periods. These 
tools shall allow statistical information to be generated 
for user-selected indices. In addition, the user shall be 
able to generate, review, and obtain reports based on 
the quality of service indices. 


The quality of service indices shall be as followed. 
Given the following symbols definitions: 


Ni = number of interrupted customers per 
interruption event i; 
NT = total number of customers served; and 


ri = restoration time per interruption event i. 


The implementation of the quality of service indices 
defined as follows: 


SAIFI = È Ni/NT 


a) MAIFI = È Ni/NT, where only events of duration 
less than 5 min are counted. 


b) SAIDI =È ri Ni/NT. 
c) CAIDI =} ri Ni/Z Ni. 


IS 17648 : 2021 


IS No./Other 
Publication 


IS 16336 (Part 1) 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 
LIST OF REFFERED INDIAN/INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS 


Title 


Common information model 
(CIM) for information 


exchange in the context of 


electrical utilities: Part 1 
Companion specification 


IS No./Other 
Publication 


IEC 61970 (Part 
: 2005 


IEC 61970-552 : 


Title 


1) Energy management 
system application program 
interface (EMS-API) 
Part 1: Guidelines and general 
requirements 


Energy management system 


IEC 61968 series Application integration at By ; 

electrical utilities — System 2016 application program interface 

Interfaces for Distribution (EMS-API) — Part 552: 

management CIMXML Model exchange 

format 
ANNEX B 
( Clause 2 ) 
ABBREVIATION 
Abbreviation Details Abbreviation Details 
DSOM Distribution System Operations SCADA Supervisory Control and Data 
Model Acquisition 
NCA Network Connectivity Analysis DMS Distribution management System 
DLF Distribution Load Flow OFR Optimal Feeder Reconfiguration 
DPF Distibütion Powe Flow DSSE Distribution System State Estimator 
LF Load Flow SCC Short Circuit calculation 
CIM Common Information Model DSA Distribution Security Analysis 
VVC Volt Var Control MDMS Meter Data Management system 
STLF Short Term Load Forecasting AMI Advance metering infrastructure 
FISR Fault Isolation and Service HES Head End System 
Restoration TA Technological Address 
SPM Switching procedure Management GIS Geographical information System 
y 

LS Load Shed ABT Availability Based Tariff 
JGC Jumper Ground and Cuts CCS Customer Care System 
OMS Outage Management System WFMS Work force Management System 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 10 (10187). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


