**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 15679 (2006) : Hot tapping , stopple plugging/line 
plugging of pressurized natural gas pipelines - Code of 
practice [PCD 3: Petroleum, Lubricants and their Related 
Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 15679 : 2006 

cTR 3TRrf6tcT Ml^fclcb %f t^ %f MI^Mdl^HJ 

cf?r era tPm, i-^mQ\ ^^rPk, 

Indian Standard 

HOT TAPPING, STOPPLE PLUGGING/ 

LINE PLUGGING OF PRESSURIZED NATURAL GAS 

PIPELINES — CODE OF PRACTICE 



ICS 75.200 



© BIS 2006 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



June 2006 Price Croup 9 



Petroleum, Lubricants and Their Related Products Sectional Committee, PCD 3 



FOREWORD 

This Code was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft fmalized by the Petroleum, Lubricants 
and Their Related Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products 
Division Council. 

The procedure for cutting an opening into an operating onshore pipeline and connecting branch piping while the 
line has product under pressure and/or flowing conditions is referred to as 'Hot tapping', while the procedure to 
isolate a pipeline section, for repair or modification, without any interruption in the line flow, is called as stopple 
plugging/line plugging. Stopples act as temporary block valves, that can be installed anywhere in a piping system 
after the hot tapping operations of appropriate sizes. 

Hot tapping is needed to gain safety access to the onshore natural gas pipeline contents, for delivery to another 
source, to accept additional product from new or untapped source, to obtain information on internal pipeline 
conditions and to install pig signals/corrosion probe/chemical injection point/sampling point, etc. It is also needed 
to create bypass and to isolate a section of run pipe for repair or modification without interrupting the flow. 

Stopple plugging/line plugging is needed for tapping for branch connection, removal of stuck pig/foreign material, 
arrest leakage without much loss of product, plant modification/revamp of existing plant and disaster management. 

This operation can be carried out at different temperature, pressure, flow and on various fluids depending on the 
requirement. These can be carried out on different pipe materials. Evaluation of site specific conditions needs to 
be considered before preparation of the hot tapping operation. 

Presently API 2201 - 'Procedure for welding or hot tapping on equipments in service' is being followed, mainly 
in hydrocarbon industry, world wide. 

The API 220 1 deals with the hot tap welding procedures and hot tapping. This procedure mainly deals with the hot 
tap welding and less emphasis has been given to hot tapping. However, it doesn't contain any information related 
to the stoppling and plugging operation, operation related with installation of completion plug, safety consideration 
for hot tapping, stoppling and plugging operation of pressurized natural gas pipelines and maintenance philosophy 
for hot tapping, plugging machines and its accessories. Hence the need has been felt to frame a comprehensive 
document covering all the aspects related to hot tapping and stoppling operation. As the Indian industry has 
grown manyfolds, formulation of an internationally acceptable Indian Standard and/or Code has thus become 
necessary. 

The aim for the present Code is to cover the basic requirement of safety procedure and equipment for hot tapping 
work to be carried out on high pressure natural gas pipeline and pressure vessels. The purpose of this Code is to 
cover the requirement of material, equipment, and accessories for hot tapping and stopple plugging operations of 
high pressure pipelines. It also covers the operational safety considerations, procedures for hot tapping, welding, 
inspection and maintenance philosophy. 

In the formulation of this Code, considerable assistance has been derived from the following publications: 

API RP 2201 Safe hot tapping practices in the petroleum and petrochemical industries 

API 1 1 07 Pipeline maintenance welding practices 

API 1 104 Welding pipelines and related facilities 

SSPC-VIS-1 Steel structures painting council 

ASME B 31.4 : 2002 Code of pipeline transportation systems for liquid hydrocarbons and other liquids 

ASME B 3 1 .8 : 2003 Code of gas transmission and distribution piping systems 

ASME B 16.9 : 2003 Factory-made wrought butt welding fittings 

(Continued on third cover) 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 OCTOBER 2006 

TO 

IS 15679 : 2006 HOT TAPPING, STOPPLE 

PLUGGING/LINE PLUGGING OF PRESSURIZED 

NATURAL GAS PIPELINES — 

CODE OF PRACTICE 



{Third cover. Forward, para 2) — Insert the following new para after para 2: 

In line with the practices followed in the industry in this field, units are given in 
FPS system also. For conversion of FPS units to corresponding SI units, the 
following conversion factors are applicable: 

l"(inch] = 25 mm, for nominal sizes; otherwise T'pnch] = 25.4 nun; 
IN/m^ = 1 Pa; 1 Bar = 100 kPa; 1 psi == 6.89 kPa and tX = (t^F - 32) /1.8 

Each system shall be used independently of the other, without combining values 
in any way' 

(Page 2, clause 2.14, line 8) - Insert '(8 mm)* after U/4' and \\ 500 nun)' 
after *60'". 

{Page 2, clause 3,2-2, line 1 and wherever appears) - Substitute *shairybr 
should'. 

{Page 5, Table 2, hJote) - Substitute ' i" - 25 mm' forT'- 0.254 mm' . 

{Page 9, clause 7.6.1, line 4) - Substitute '(25 mm)';&r '(2.54 nun)'. 

(Page 9, clause 8.1, line 1) - Substitute 'shall' for 'must'. 

{Page \h clause 9.3 Jine 3) - Substitute '(10 mm)'/or '(9.84T. 

{Page 13, clause 9.10, last line) - Insert '(300 mm)' after ' 12"'. 

( PCD 3 ) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi India 



IS 15679 : 2006 

Indian Standard 

HOT TAPPING, STOPPLE PLUGGING/ 

LINE PLUGGING OF PRESSURIZED NATURAL GAS 

PIPELINES — CODE OF PRACTICE 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This Code covers the minimum requirements of 
materials, equipment and accessories for hot tapping 
and stopple plugging/line plugging operations of 
onshore natural gas pipelines, it covers the minimum 
safety requirements to be maintained during welding, 
cutting and plug setting, etc, while carrying out the 
hot tapping and stopple plugging/line plugging 
operations on pipelines. Checklists have also been 
included (see Annex A) for the purpose of carrying 
out inspection, testing of the pipelines before, during and 
after the operations, in addition to the maintenance 
schedule. 

1.2 This Code lays down the guidelines and methods 
for cutting opening into an operating pipeline and 
connecting branch piping while the line has product 
under pressure and/or flowing conditions, also for the 
replacement/modification of a section of pipeline under 
operation. 

1.3 This Code applies where hot tapping is used for 
gaining safe access to the pipeline contents for delivery 
to another source, accepting additional product from a 
new or untapped source, obtaining information on 
internal pipeline conditions and installation of branch 
connection, isolation valves, etc, on the line under 
operation. It is also applicable for isolation of a section 
of operating line for repair, relocation, addition, 
modification, etc, without interrupting the flow and 
creation of a bypass along with installation of pig 
signal, corrosion probe or coupon, chemical injection 
point, sampling point and other online devices as 
required. 

2 DEFINITIONS 

2. 1 Hot Tapping — Hot tapping is a procedure which 
involves cutting a hole in the operating pipeline under 
pressure with appropriate hot tapping machine. 

2.2 Stopple Plugging/Line Plugging — Isolation of 
a section of operating pipeline for repair or modification 
without interrupting the line flow is called as stopple 
plugging/line plugging. 

2.3 Hot Tap — The procedure for cutting an opening 
into an operating pipeline (main, storage tank, 



pressure vessel) and connecting branch piping while 
the line has product under pressure and/or flowing 
conditions. 

2.4 Hot Tap Welding — Welding that is required to 
attach a branch connection fitting (hot-tap fitting) to 
an operating pipeline. 

2.5 Cutters — The cutter is a mild steel shell with 
alloy cutting tips, silver-soldered to the cutting edge 
of the cutter shell. There are many types of cutters each 
with specific function. 

2.6 Pilots — Pilots are specially designed drills 
which are used to make the first hole into the pipeline. 
This gives the operator access to the pipeline media 
and the pipeline pressure. The pilots act as a centering 
pin for the cutter to assure a round center hole into 
the pipeline wall. It is the vehicle for recovering the 
coupon which has been removed from the pipe as a 
result of the tap. 

2.7 Adapters — Adapters are found in many shapes, 
sizes and configurations. Main function of adaptor is 
to provide housing to the cutter assembly and the 
coupon after completion of the cutting operation. 

2.8 Valve Selection — Valve selection is a function 
of the result to be attained when the hot tap is 
completed. If the hot tap is being performed to allow a 
STOPPLE or temporary bypass to be installed and also 
if the valve is later recovered, then a valve with a short 
face-to-face dimension is the best choice. 

2.9 Hydraulic Power Unit — To supply the hydraulic 
oil for operating the hot tapping machine, sandwich 
valves and hydraulic cylinders. 

2. 1 Fitting Design — Fittings come in a wide variety 
ranging from small threaded fittings to frill opening 
split tees. Depending upon the requirement the fittings 
are available and manufactured with Lock-O-Ring 
(LOR) Flange with pig guide bar/LOR completion 
plug. Some of the choices available for the pipeline 
operator are flat nipple scarfed nipple, 3 ways Tee; 
Full encirclement split Tee, Reinforced Tee, B W Tee, 
Spherical Tee, Weldolets, etc. 

2.11 Lock-O-Ring — A Lock-O-Ring completion 
plug installed in a compatible Lock-O-Ring fitting 



1815679:2006 



permits removal of the tapping valve. Reentry into the 
line at a future date is usually possible by removing 
the completion plug. 

2.12 Sandwich Valve — A sandwich valve has an 
average of 75 percent less total face-to-face dimension 
than conventional valves which means less installation 
time, easier handling and functioning in tight places 
where other equipment would be difficult or impossible 
to use. It includes other design features such as an 
oversize bore, positive shutoff, a built-in pressure 
equalizing valve, integral flange and studs. 

2.13 Stopple Plugging Machine — It is a machine 
used for temporarily blocking the flow in a pipeline 
by insertion of a stopple plugging head along with 
sealing element through a tapped hole into the 
pipeline. 

2. 1 4 Hot Tapping Machine — A tapping machine is 
basically a long tube (boring bar) inside a pipe (the 
frame). Inside the tube is a feed screw, which 
automatically extends the boring bar, whenever bar is 
rotating. Tapping machine can be driven by air or 
hydraulic motor or operated by hand. There are various 
models with different ranges of taping machine, which 
can tap from Diameter Va' to Diameter 60". Depending 
on the requirement, suitable hot tapping machine is 
selected. 

3 TYPES OF HOT TAP 

Hot tapping is generally performed at right angles to 
the cenu-e line of pipeline. However, if required, hot 
tapping can be done at other angles also. 

3.1 At Right Angle to the Centre Line of Pipeline 

Split Tee shall be installed as shovra in the Fig. 1. For 
installation of the split tee the standard welding 
procedure shall be followed. 



3.2 At an Angle Other Than 90"" 

When making a tap at any angle other than 90° between 
centre line of tapping machine and centre line of 
pipeline, a few precautions shall be noted. 

3.2.1 The pilot drill shall have a starting surface that 
is 90° to the centre line of the pilot. There is a 5° tolerance. 

3.2.2 Pilot drill should extend beyond cutter enough 
to complete pilot tap before cutter engages the pipe or 
vessel. 

3.2.3 Provision shall be made to retain the coupon. 
With normal tapping procedures, the U-rod may get 
damaged or destroyed by rotating in the angled pilot 
tap. 

3.2.4 Cutter shall have enough inside depth to allow 
room for the oblong coupon. 

3.2.5 The most common method of providing the 
starting surface is to weld an angle iron so that one leg 
of angle iron is parallel to the flange. This shall be 
parallel when measured with the length of the pipeline 
or across the pipeline. Use formula for ' T to determine 
width of angle iron for trimming (see 3.2.8). 

3.2.6 For the pilot drill to perform as a pilot or guide, 
the drill should penetrate the pipe before the cutter 
makes first contact. Minimum pilot extension can be 
determined by formula for *£' {see 3.2.8). Additional 
pilot length is not detrimental to the tap. However, extra 
long pilot drills shall be given due consideration 
concerning tapping machine adapter and size of pipe 
or vessel so that pilot does not make unplanned contact 
before tap is completed. 

3.2.7 For tapping angles up to 30° from 
perpendicular, normal tapping procedures with U-rod 
design pilots are satisfactory. A U-rod is a U-type 
clip in the pilot drill to hold the coupon. At angles 




J 



BACK-UP STRIP 




LONGITUDINAL 
WELDS 



FULL ENCIRCLEMENT RTTING 
Fio. 1 Hot Tapping at an Angle Perpendicular to the Centre Line of Pipeline 



IS 15679 : 2006 



greater than 30**, special pilots or alternate procedures 
shall be used. Usually the least expensive and most 
readily available coupon retainer is to use the following 
procedures. 

3.2.7.1 Measure from tip of pilot drill to top end of 
U-rod that is expected to retain coupon. 

3.2.7.2 Calculate tapping distance to move pilot drill 
into pipeline or vessel the distance measured in 3.2.7.1 . 
Add 1/2" (12.8 mm) for safety factor. 

3.2.7.3 Remove U-rods from pilot drill. 

3.2.7.4 Mount tapping machine on valve. Use two 
oversized bolts or other means to establish line-up that 
can be repeated. 

3.2.7.5 Tap distance determined in 3.2.7.2. 

3.2.7.6 Remove tapping machine and install new 
U-rod. 



3.2.7.7 Remount tapping machine in same alignment 
as in 3.2.7.4. 

3.2.7.8 Extend (without rotation) the cutter and pilot 
to the position of 3.2.7.5. 

3.2.7.9 Complete tap to full tapping distance. 

3.2.8 Calculate distance 'A^ as minimum cutter depth 
to complete tap. Do not attempt tap with cutter shorter 
than 'A^' inside clear dimension. If special cutter 
required, inside length should be 'N-^ Vj*" as minimum 
(see Fig. 2). 

4 COMPONENTS FOR HOT TAPPING 

4.1 Hot Tapping Machine 

Depending upon the requirement hot tapping machine 
can be selected ranging from Va' to 60". While selecting 
the hot tapping machine content of pipeline, pressure, 
flow rate, temperature, sizes, etc, need to be evaluated. 



Flange connection 




SCHEMATICS OF ARRANGEMENT FOR 

HOT TAPPtNO AT AN ANOLE OTHER THAN 90* 



Perpendicular 



Cutter 



Parallel as shown and at 90^ 



Angle Iron 



Pipeline section 



A s angle from perpendicular, 

D = outer diameter of the cutter, 

d s inner diameter of the cutter, 

E s pilot extension, 

L s width of teg of angle iron, 

N « nesting room for coupon (without safety factor), 

T s trim width of leg of angle iron, 

W s wall thickness of pipe or vessel, and 

/? = 1/2 D. 



Pilot extension, £ = /? x Tangent "^4" -^ W x Secant '*A'\ 

Nesting room for coupon, N^dx Tangent "A" -»- W x Secant ".4 ". 

Trim width of leg of angle iron, T = L x Tangent 
Angle "A". 

Tapping distance after cutler contact, TD = Dx Tangent "/I " -♦- ( W 
X Secant **i4"). 

The values of tangent and secant for the angles are given in Table 1 . 



Fic. 2 Cross Section op Hot Tapping 



IS 15679 : 2006 



Table 1 Reference Table 

(Clause 3.2.8) 



SI No. 

(1) 



Angle, Degree 

(2) 



Tangent 

(3) 



Secant 

(4) 



i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 

V) 

vi) 
vii) 
viir) 

rx) 



5 

10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 



0.087 
0.176 
0.268 
0.364 
0.466 
0.577 
0.700 
0.839 
1.000 



1.006 
1.015 
1.035 
1.064 
1.103 
1.155 
1.221 
1.305 
1.414 



NOTES 

1 For angles not shown, use next larger scale. 

2 For angles greater than 45**, check with Services Technical Section for recommendation. 

3 (1 .5 X HO may be substituted for ( W x Secant 'A*) as a safe approximation. 



4.2 Adapters 

4.2.1 Adapters for standard cutter, used for cutting 
operations with standard cutter. 

4.2.2 Adapters for stopple cutter, used for cutting 
operation with stopple cutter where line stoppling is 
required. 

4.2.3 Stopple housing, used for plugging operations 
as housing for the plugging head and sealing element. 

4.3 Valves 

4.3.1 Sandwich Valve 

4.3.2 Full bore ball valve, gate valve with inner bore 
matching with the cutter size. 

4.4 Stoppling Fitting/Split Tee 

4.4.1 Split Tee with LOR Flange, LOR Plug with 
Scarfed Nipple and Blind Flange 

4A.1 Split Tee with LOR Flange, Pig Guide Bar and 
Blind Flange 

4.4.3 Split Tee with Normal Weld Neck Raised Face 
(WNRF) Flange 

4.4.4 Threaded O-Ring Fitting with Blind Flange 

4.5 Weldolet 

4.5.1 Weldolet with LOR Flange, LOR Plug with 
Scarfed Nipple and Blind Flange 

4.5.2 Weldolet with Pig Guide Bar. LOR Plug and 
Blind Flange 

4.6 Plugging Machine 

Plugging machines are available for different ranges 
depending on the class, line pipe size, and other 
pipeline parameters. The selection of the plugging 
machine can be done on the basis, on above parameters 
and requirement. 



4.7 Plugging Head 

Plugging head can be selected depending upon the line 
pipe size and other pipeline parameters. 

4.8 Sealing Element 

Material and sizes of the sealing element can be 
selected depending on the pipeline parameters, like 
thickness and size of the pipeline. 

5 DETAILS OF TAPPING MACHINES, TOOLS 
AND ACCESSORIES 

5.1 Tapping Machines 

A variety of hot tapping machines are available with 
tapping capability of Va* to 60*\ Hot tapping machines 
are being designed as per the specifications depending 
upon the range of tapping size, boring bar travel 
distance and pipeline parameters (that is, Product, 
temperature, flow rate, pressure, etc). Generally, 
tapping machines as given in Table 2 are used. 

5.2 Plugging Machines 

A variety of plugging -machines are available with 
plugging capability of different ranges. Plugging 
machines are being designed as per the specifications 
depending upon the range of the plugging size, control 
bar travel distance, and pipeline parameters (that is, 
Product, temperature, flow rate, pressure etc). Generally, 
plugging machines as mentioned in Table 3 are in use. 

5.3 Tools 

The tools used for hot tapping and stopple plugging 
are given in Table 4. 

5.4 Accessories 

The accessories used for hot tapping and stopple 
plugging are given in Table 5. 



IS 15679 : 2006 



Table 2 Types of Tapping Machines 

(Clause 5.1) 



SI No. 

(1) 


Machine Capability, 
Diameter 

(2) 


Maximum Travel Distance of 
Boring Bar 

(3) 


Maximum Range of Pressure and 
Temperature 

(4) 


i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 

V) 


'/4" to 4" 
4" to 16" 
12" to 36" 
12" to 42" 
30" to 60" 


Up to 28" 

Up to 66" 

Up to 72" 

Up to 108" 

Up to 108", extended up 


to 130" 


Up to 1 440 psi @ 100 F and 700 psi @ 700 F 
Up to 1 440 psi @ 100 F and 700 psi @ 700 F 
Up to 1 440 psi @ 100 F and 700 psi @ 700 F 
Up to 1 440 psi @ 100 F and 700 psi @ 700 F 
Up to 1 200 psi @ 200 F 


NOTE — 


1" - 0.254 mm. 









Table 3 Types of Plugging Machines 

(Clauses.!) 



SI No. Machine Capability, 

Diameter 

(1) (2) 



Maximum Travel Distance of 
Control Bar 

(3) 



Maximum Range of Pressure and 
Temperature 

(4) 



i) 


6" to 12" 


ii) 


14" to 20" 


iii) 


22" to 34" 


iv) 


34" to 48" 



Up to 72" 
Up to 102" 
Up to 140" 
Up to 140" 



Up to 1 800 psi @ 180 F 
Up to 1 800 psi @ 180 F 
Up to 1 800 psi @ 180 F 
Uptol 800 psi @ 180 F 



Table 4 Tools 

{Clause 5.3) 



SI No. 


Tools 


Type 


(I) 


(2) 


(3) 


i) 


Cutters 


Standard cutter 

Stopple cutter 
Tank cutter 


ii) 


Drill 


Standard drill 
Pilot drill 


iii) 


Adaptors 


Adaptor for standard cutter 
Adaptor for stopple cutter 
Line stop housing 



Usage 

(4) 



Size, Diameter 

(5) 



Used for hot tapping for taking branch connection or for 2" to 60" 

the purpose except stoppling 

Used for hot tapping for the purpose of stoppling 2" to 60" 

Used for hot tapping comparatively at a flatter surface 2" to 30" 

For tapping drill %"to3" 

Used along with the saw cutter (standard, stopple, tank) 

Used for the housing for standard & tank cutter assembly 2" to 60" 

Used for the housing for stopple cutter assembly 2" to 60" 

Used for housing the plugging head alongwith the sealing Up to 48" 

element 



Tables Accessories 

(Clause 5.4) 



SI No. 


Accessory 


Type 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


i) 


Fittings 


Split tec with WNRF 
flange 

Split tee with LOR flange 

Threaded 0-Ring fitting 


ii) 


Valves 


Sandwich valve 


iii) 


Plugs 


Full bore valve (ball, gate) 
Completion plug 
Pig guide bar 



Usage 

(4) 



Size, Diameter 

(5) 



For creation of bypass, branch connection, 
where retrieval of tapping valve and 
installation of pig guide bar is not required 
Used where, stoppling, retrieval of valve, 
installation of pig guide bar is required 
Used where, for branch connection, purging 
and pressure equalization 
Used with hot tapping machine, line stoppling 
machine and installation of completion plug 
Used with hot tapping machine 
Used for retrieval of valve and seal the tapping 
Used to facilitate normal pigging operation of 
pipeline 



4" to 60" depending on the line 
pipe size and tapping size 

4" to 60" depending on the line 

pipe size and tapping size 

Vi" to 3" depending on the line pipe 

size and tapping size 

4" to 60" 

•/4" to 60" 
4" to 60" 
4" to 60" 



IS 15679 : 2006 



6 STEPS INVOLVED IN HOT TAPPING AND 
LINE/STOPPLE PLUGGING 

6.1 For Hot Tapping 

a) Welding of fittings (see 10). 

b) Installation of valves on welded fittings. 

c) Assembly of cutter and pilot drill with hot 
tapping machine. 

d) Measurements for hot tappings, stoppling and 
setting of completion plug. 

e) Installation of hot tapping machine on valve. 
Hydro-testing of complete assembly. 

g) Operation of hot tapping, 
h) Completion of hot tapping and removal of 
machine. 

6.2 Creation of Bypass, if Required 

6.3 Stoppling/Plugging 

6.4 Cutting, Modification of the Isolated Section 

6.5 Removal of the Stopple Plugs 

6.6 Setting Completion Plug 

6.7 Removal of the Valve and Installation Blind Flange 

7 PROCEDURE FOR HOT TAPPING AND LINE/ 
STOPPLE PLUGGING 

7.1 Hot Tapping 

7.1.1 Necessary arrangements for fire tender/fire 
extinguisher, etc, are to be ensured. 

7.1.2 Remove existing coal tar enamel or PE coating 
of pipeline, if any. 

7.1.3 Perform ultrasonic test to determine health of 
pipe and thickness at place of welding. 

7. 1 .4 Depending on the actual thickness ASME Hoop 
stress formula, recommendation of hot tapping 
machine manufacturer, the pipeline parameters shall 
be adjusted within acceptable limits, if required. The 
safe internal pressure of the new pipeline is to be 
reduced as per 10.6. 

7.1.5 Install fitting/stopple fitting. 

7.1 .6 Check LOR arrangement of stopple fitting before 
welding. 

7.1.7 Weld the fitting as per procedure defmed in 9. 

7.1.8 Install the spiral wound metallic gasket. 

7.1.9 Install sandwich valve/ftill bore ball/gate valve. 

7.1.10 Check for concentricity of the tapping machine 
adapter by measuring the distance from the cutter to 
the outside diameter of the raised gasket face. 



7.1.11 Assemble hot tapping machine with tapping 
adapter, saw cutter and pilot drill on cutter holder. 
Check for alignment between tapping machine adapter 
and saw cutter. Also check for concentricity of the 
tapping machine adapter by measuring the distance 
from the cutter to the outside diameter of the raised 
gasket face. 

7.1.12 Install bleeder valve on tapping machine 
adapter. 

7.1.13 Mount the hot tapping machine on the valve. 

7.1.14 Pressure test the assembly keeping sandwich 
valve open. 

7.1.15 Install the hydraulic hoses of power unit to 
tapping machine. 

7.1.16 Measure all the distances required for hot 
tapping stopple plugging, and for setting of completion 
plug (see Annex B and Annex C). 

7.1.17 Ensure that the bleeder valve is open. 

7.1.18 Start the tapping machine after bringing down 
the pilot drill to the top of pipe. Note the reading of 
measurement rod. 

7.1.19 Make a mark on the measuring rod indicating 
the distance, where the cutting shall be completed. 

7.1.20 Adjust the stopper accordingly. 

7.1.21 As soon as the pipe is punctured with pilot 
drill, gas will bleed off bleeder valve. Close the 
bleeder valve. 

7.1.22 After the tapping is complete that is, the 
marking done at second place has reached, then, stop 
the tapping machine. 

7.1.23 Disengage the clutch and lower down the 
boring bar manually, so as to ensure the completion of 
the cutting operation. 

7.1.24 After confirmation regarding the completion 
of cutting operation, disengage the clutch and lift the 
boring bar to the top position by lowering crank, 
manually depending on the features available in the 
machine. 

7.1.25 Close the sandwich valve. 

7.1.26 Bleed off the gas in the tapping machine. 

7.1.27 Remove the tapping machine (see Fig. 3). 

7.2 Create bypass, if required, as mentioned in 7.1.1 
to 7.1.24 on both sides of the pipeline section either 
by installing the prefabricated tested pipe section/ 
modified pipe sections or by opening the valve on both 
sides of the pipeline section and allowing the fiow 
through this bypass line (see Fig. 4). 



IS 15679 : 2006 



TYPICAL TAPPING SETUP FOR PLUGGING 
OPERATION 



na^MI. I 



UUu 



BLEEDER 
VALVE 

\ 



*=s 



TAPPING 
MACHINE 



gr 



EQUALI7JKTION _ 

CONNECTION I rfS^ 

\^i^S^ HOUSWO 




SANDWICH 
VALVE 




EQUALIZATION CONNECTION 

Fig. 3 A Typical Tapping Set Up for Tapping a Angle 90° to the Centre Line of the Pipeline 



7.3 Stoppling/Plugging 

7.3.1 Carry out the procedure as given in 7.1.1 
to 7.1.24, on both sides of the Pipeline Section. Install 
housing on the stopple plugging machine. Then install 
plugging head on the control bar of the stopple 
plugging machine. Now install sealing element on the 
plugging head. Take the measurements to calculate the 
lowering in distance for control bar. 

7.3.2 Install stopple plugging machine on the valve 
and connect the hydraulic hoses. Connect bladder valve 
in the housing and also connect equalization line 
with 2" (50.8 mm) tapping for pressure equalization 
across the plugging head. Disengage the bar lock clamp 
on stopple plugging machine. Equalize the machine 
with line pressure through 2" bypass line/sandwich 
valve bypass line. 

7.3.3 Open the valve. Ensure a 2" temporary bypass 
line to be open. Lower down the plugging head and by 
setting up the plugging head into the pipeline fts per 
the measurement, block the supply of the product in 
pipeline section, thus isolating the section. Here it shall 



be ensured that downstream plugging head is set first 
then upstream plugging head. 

7.3.4 Accomplishing the above 7.3.1 to 7.3.3 for both 
sides of the pipeline sections results in full supply 
through by pass line and isolation of pipeline section. 
Engage the bar lock clamp on stopple plugging 
machines. Remove the hydraulic hoses {see Fig. 5). 

7.4 Cutting, Modification of the Isolated Section 

Cutting, modification of the isolated section shall be 
done as per requirement. Also ensure that the isolated 
section has been completely sealed and verified 
satisfactorily or else it results in safe.ty hazard, injury 
to personnel and property damage. 

7.5 Removal of the Stopple Plugs 

7.5.1 After cutting and welding of the isolated Pipeline 
section with necessary modifications, remove the plugs 
from both the side^, of the pipeline section. Equalize 
the pressure across the plugging head, before its 
removal. Connect the hydraulic hoses. Unlock the bar 



IS 15679 : 2006 



Stapple 

Plugging 

Machine 



A 



Stapple 

Plugging 

Machine 



cri 




Fig. 4 Typical Set Up for Replacement of Pipeline Section with Bypass 



PLUGGING 



SET PLUCKING 
HEAD 
TYPICAL SETUP oate 




HYDRAULIC 
CYLINDER 



HOUOINO 



EQUALIACTION I 

connection Wpluging 

IHEAD 



STOPPLE 
FLUOING 



eoualiaction 
connection 



TIME 
000 




- —PLUGGING 
HEAD 

DATE 

000 

000 



LOCK-0-RING PLUG 



vV\V\^X>Ni<SN:- 




y///////////// //y 



STOPPLE PLUGGING RING STOPPLE PLUGGING OPERTION 



Fig. 5 Typical Set Up for Plugging Operation 
8 



18 15679:2006 



lock clamp on control bar before removal of the 
plugging head. Ensure that the upstream plugging head 
is removed first and then downstream the plugging 
head {see Fig. 6). 

7.5.2 Close the valves of the main bypass line to 
allow the supply of the product through the main line. 
Remove the stopple plugging machines, after closing 
the valves and venting/removal of product from 
machine. 

7.6 Setting Completion Plug 

7.6.1 Weld coupon on the scarfed nipple of the 
completion plug. Smooth the rough edges of the 
coupon with the grinder. Burn off approximately 
l"(2.S4mm) diametrically to adjust minor mis- 
alignment by downstanding legs of the coupon. 
Ensure the proper functioning of check valve on 
completion plug. Install the completion plug on the 
hot tapping machine. 

NOTE — Welding of coupon with the scraifed nipple of the 
Lock-0-Ring Plug Is required for pigable pipeline only. 



7.6.2 Install hot tapping machine on the valve. Ensure 
equalization of pressure above and below the plug 
through 2" bypass line/sandwich valve bypass line, till 
the completion of the job {see Fig. 7). 

7.6.3 Open the valve. Lower down the completion 
plug at Yneasured distance. Lock the completion plug 
with the Lock-0-rings on the LOR Flange of the split 
tee. Release the plug holder from boring bar and retract 
the boring bar. Close the valve and remove the hot 
tapping machine. 

7.7 Removal of the Valve and Installation of Blind 
Flange 

Remove the valve from the flange and put the blind 
after setting of the completion plug and removal of the 
hot taping machine. Apply the coal tar enamel or 
polyethylene coating of pipeline, if any. 

8 SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS DURING HOT 
TAPPING AND LINE/STOPPLE PLUGGING 

8.1 Pipeline conditions must be known in order to 




Fig. 6 Typical Double Stopple Set Up 



IS 15679 : 2006 



L0CK-0-RI^4G 




Fig. 7 Typical Set Up for Installing Completion Plug 



assert welding ability. The product, along with its 
velocity and temperature, and the atmospheric 
conditions at the job site play an important role during 
hot tapping and line/stopple plugging. These factors 
can affect the safety of welding. Refer to hot tap data 
sheet at Annex D. 

8.2 Knowledge of pipeline quality, including material 
specification, carbon equivalent, external and internal 
corrosion, lamination in the pipe wall, and wall 
thickness is critical. 

8.3 Welding parameters like procedures, including type 
of electrodes and size, heat input (volts, ampere, speed 
of electrode, angle of electrode) preheat and welding 
sequence shall be determined. 

8.4 Inspection before, during and after installation of 
fitting is vital. 

8.4.1 Before installation information about magnetic 
particles, inspection of pipe at fitting location ultrasonic 



inspection for possible internal corrosion and 
verification of wall thickness are necessary. 

8.4.2 During installation ensure that weld procedures 
are maintained, including precautions for keeping 
electrodes dry (Use of low-hydrogen electrodes is 
recommended). 

8.4.3 After installation, check for the magnetic particle. 
It is recommended that the welds be inspected after 
48 h of completion, to detect any possible delayed 
hydrogen cracking. 

8.4.4 Several other areas of concern shall be taken into 
account during hot-tap welding including heat-affected 
zone cracking, blow-through and unstable pipeline 
contents such as ethylene. However, it is highly 
important to check the cracks in the heat-affected zone 
of the filled weld caused by hydrogen .trapped in the 
weld metal during the rapid cooling process. 

8.4.5 Regardless of the product specifications, all hot 



10 



IS 15679 : 2006 



taps and stopple operations require equipment be 
thoroughly purged with N^ before performing any of 
the tapping operations. Depending on the product 
specifications, testing from the equipment vents might 
be required to verify that the equipment purge is 
acceptable. All equipment purging shall be vented out 
and away from confined space and personnel. 

8.5 PREVENTIVE MEASURES 

This following are the guidelines to prevent burn- 
through: 

a) Using low hydrogen electrodes and by 
checking the contents of the line for continuity 
in the flow. 

b) Heat balance between the fitting and the pipe 
shall be taken care with the help of electrode. 

c) Minimum pipe wall thickness shall be 6.35 mm 
(0.25") or greater using normal welding practice, 
as per research and industrial experience. 

d) Pressure in the pipeline should be reduced 
according to the ASME Gas piping standard, 
ASME/ANSIB31.8. 

e) Ensure that qualified welders and weld 
procedures to applicable Codes are followed. 

f) Pre-heat the area on the pipe, where fitting is 
to be installed, to remove moisture from the 
surface. 

g) Inspection and testing of the field weld is an 
important procedure and shall be performed 
as mentioned the 11. 

h) No flow conditions can allow the contents of 
a pipe to reach a higher temperature than with 
flow conditions. Pipe contents with impurities 
(oxygen) at higher temperatures are more 
likely to ignite. Flow conditions help to 
dissipate heat but serve to speed up the quench 
rate which is a factor in weld cracking 
problems {see 9.9). 

9 WELDING OPERATIONS AND THE 
PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES 

9.1 Weld procedures and welders should be qualified 
to the relevant Code, such as API 1 104, API 1 107 or 
ASME Section IX. Test certificates for each batch of 
electrodes and other welding materials shall be verified 
for the adequacy. 

9.2 The section of pipeline, on which hot tapping is 
to be installed, shall be checked for roundness after it 
has been cleaned thoroughly. The external condition 
of the pipe shall be examined for corrosion. 

9.3 An ultrasonic examination shall be performed on 
the pipeline section to be covered under hot tap fitting, 
with 250 mm (9.84") additional width on either side. 



It establishes actual wall thickness and condition of 
the pipe with respect to defects, if any. 

9.4 The weld edge areas of the fittings shall be 
thoroughly cleaned. In case of spiral or seam welded 
pipes, the welded seams are to be ground flush to ensure 
the correct fit up. 

9.4.1 The safe internal pressure of the new pipeline 
shall be reduced as per 10.6. 

9.5 In high moisture areas, surface of the pipe shall 
be preheated to eliminate the moisture, prior to the 
installation of fitting. 

9.6 Rest the top (Branch halt) of the fitting on the pipe, 
with the backing strips (if required) inserted in place. 
Then position the bottom half of the fitting, and using 
an adequate clamp. 

9.7 With respect to ambient and pipeline line 
temperature due to gas flow, resulting in cooling of 
the pipeline during welding, consideration shall be 
given for establishing the welding cycle available. This 
may be done by preheating the fitting/line to the upper 
pre-heat temperature limit as prescribed by the welding 
procedure and then timing the temperature decay to 
the lower specified pre-heat temperature limit. Oxy- 
propane rosebud torches shall be used for preheating 
the pipe. Cutting torches are not recommended. The 
heating torches shall be of sufficient size to ensure rapid 
heating of the fitting to pre-heat temperature. 

9.8 Welding electrodes recommended for this operation 
are 2.5 mm (3/32") or 3.25 mm (0.125") low Hydrogen 
A WS-E-XX 1 6 or A WS-E-XX 1 8 Pipe electrodes as per 
ASME Section II C, for the first three passes on the 
longitudinal seams and for the circumferential fillet 
welds. [In the case of fillet welds that exceed 12.5 mm 
throat depth, 4 mm (5/32") electrodes may be used after 
deposition of the first layer with 2.5 mm (3/32") or 
3.25 mm (1/8") electrodes]. 4 mm (5/32") electrodes are 
normally used for all subsequent passes after the first 
three on the longitudinal welds. 

9.9 Appropriate backing strip of suitable material may 
be provided. If required, tack weld with due pre- 
heating, at the four comers of the longitudinal seams, 
each tack being not less than 50.0 mm (2") using 
qualified procedure. Similar tack welds can be provided 
in the centre of longitudinal seams if required. Under 
no circumstances the tack welds shall be provided 
under stressed condition. The end of these tack welds 
shall be ground thoroughly to ensure that no crack 
exists at the end prior to welding. On no account shall 
the tack, or any portion of the longitudinal weld come 
into contact with the pipe. 

9.10 After positioning of the fitting by tack welding, 
prepare both ends of the tack welds by grinding. Pre- 
heat the fitting, if required, to the requisite temperature, 



11 



IS 15679: 2006 



then commence welding of the longitudinal seams as 
described in 9.7 and 9.8, that is, 2.5 mm (3/32") or 
3.25 mm (1/8") electrodes for the first three passes, 
then 4 mm (5/32") electrodes for all subsequent passes 
until completion, ensuring that welding is carried out 
diagonally in opposition to disburse weld stresses 
uniformly and to minimize the deformation. The 
circumferential seams shall also be invariably welded 
using two welders diagonally opposite; in case 
encirclement diameter is more than 12". 

9.11 On completion of longitudinal welds and 
circumferential welds, giving consideration to pre-heat 
and using 2.5 mm or 3.25 mm electrodes, complete the 
fillet welds {see 9.7 and 9.8). It is followed by welding 
of a number of buttering layers to the pipe wall, but 
not in contact with the fitting. The following run is 
then applied to the throat of the tee, between the tee 
and the innermost buttering run. The remaining weld 
sequence is then to fill the rest of the fillet. The normal 
fillet size (leg length) deposited is between 1 and 2 
times the wall thickness of main line pipe. 

9.12 The second circumferential weld is now 
performed as above (see 9.11), ensuring that the first 
circumferential weld is cooled to ambient temperature 
before the second circumferential is started. 

9. 1 3 All welds shall be finally checked for integrity, using 
either dye or magnetic particle inspection techniques. 

9.14 Temperature indicating crayons or a contact 
pyrometer are normally used to ensure correct pre-heat 
temperatures. In addition, a visual inspection is carried 
out for cracks, lack of fusion, undercuts and general 
weld quality. The hardness of a weld has been found 
to be a good indication of weld cracking probability. 
A Brinell Hardness of 215 BHM, maximum, is 
recommended for the circumferential and longitudinal 
field welds. Grinding of the cap may be required to 
achieve an accurate hardness reading. Welds over 215 
BHN indicate more extensive inspection to be carried 
out, than normally warranted. 

9. 1 5 The fitting is hydrostatically pressure tested after 
attaching to the line. Care shall be taken to ensure that 
the collapse pressure of the pipe has not exceeded. The 
test pressure shall be at least equal to the operating 
pressure of the line or vessel to be tapped. But it shall 
not exceed the present internal pressure more than 
approximately 10 percent, in order to avoid possible 
internal collapse of the pipe or vessel wall. However, 
if prevailing conditions could cause collapse of the pipe 
or vessel walls, the test pressure may be reduced. 

10 RECOMMENDATIONS BEFORE WELDING 
ON LIVE PRODUCT LINES 

10.1 In order to establish the parameters for pipeline 



wall thickness and internal line pressure, a simple 
formula based upon the calculations as to the yield 
stress of the pipeline may be used. 

10.2 It is necessary to ascertain that the flow condition 
exists within a line and diere is sufficient heat dissipation 
volume within a vessel. In addition it is reconmiended 
that any vessel should be equipped with either an 'open 
flow' system, or some pressure relief device. 

10.3 In order to establish basic welding parameters 
there may be a need to pre-heat the proposed weld area. 
This pre-heat may be to up to maximum weld 
temperature, and then cooling rates are timed to 
minimum weld temperature. With this information, the 
welder will be aware as. to the time available for him 
for individual passes. If necessary, adjustments may 
be made to the line flow rate to bring the cooling rate 
to within acceptable parameters. 

10.4 It is necessary to define rod sizes for relevant fillet 
welding, and any buttering runs that are applied to the 
line prior to nozzle attachment/full encirclement fitting 
circumferential attachment welds. Experience has shown 
that a nominal rod of the same type, if applied to a correct 
and acceptable welding procedure, will provide a weld 
pool of nominal 3 mm depth x 4 mm diameter. 

10.5 It is now necessary to define the degree of 
strength remaining in the pipe during the welding 
process. 

The formula used for defining the percentage of the 
degree of strength is: 

100 PD 
Percentage of degree of strength = • ^ ~ 

where 

P = line pressure in Bar; 

D = line outer diameter, in mm; 

20 = metric coefficient; 

S = specified minimum yield strength, in 

N/mm^; and 
T = wall thickness, in mm. 

In the case of T', wall thickness minus weld pool depth 
is indicated. 

10.6 Safe internal pressure inside the pipeline, during 
the welding operation, can also be calculated by: 



P = 2x5(/-c)x0.72/D 



where 



P » maximum allowable pressure to be maintained 

inside the pipeline during welding, in psi; 
S - specified minimum yield strength, in psi; 
/ " nominal pipe wall thickness, in inches; 
D - nominal pipe diameter, in inches; and 



12 



18 15679:2006 



c = correction factor (3/32"), allowance for heat 
metal loss of strength. 

U INSPECTION AND TESTING 

11.1 The surface of the main pipeline on which split 
tee/fitting is to be welded shall be ultrasonically tested 
to avoid welding on defective area. Magnetic particle/ 
Dye penetrant inspection shall be performed for the 
first pass and after completion of all welds. 

1 1.2 Before cutting operation, the assembly shall be 
hydrostatically pressure tested to a pressure not 
exceeding the internal pressure in the run pipe. The 
test pressure shall be maintained for a minimum 



period of 1 h. All welds found to be defective by 
hydrostatic testing or by Nondestructive testing shall 
be repaired or cut and rewelded and retested. Repair 
of a repaired weld is not permitted. 

12 MAINTENANCE 

Maintenance of all equipment shall be carried 
according to original equipment manufacturers (OEM) 
guideline and the records shall be kept. Maintenance 
through Plant Maintenance module of enterprise 
resource planning (ERP) gives an added advantage for 
scheduling and cost monitoring. Annex E is for 
information. 



ANNEX A 

{Clause 1.1) 

SUGGESTED HOT TAP CHECKLIST 



A-0 This checklist is intended to be used as a reminder 
to accomplish the steps involved in hot tap operations 
in an orderly manner. Particular circumstances of jobs 
may dictate additional preparatory steps. This checklist 
may be retained as a record of the job. 

Location 

Date 

Job 

Prepared by 



8. 



A-l BEFORE STARTING THE HOT TAP 

Each of the following considerations should be satisfied 
before starting the hot tap: 

1 . Review/follow manufacturer's instructions. 

2. Have the contents of the line or vessel to be 
hot tapped or welded been assessed, and 
Material Safety Data Sheets reviewed for 
health hazards, to assure procedure is 
appropriate? 

3. Is the material in the line or vessels stable 
under heated conditions? 

4. Has the connection been designed per 
requirements? 

5. Do the flanges, bolts, gaskets, pipe and valve 
to be installed meet the Code for the line or 
vessel to be hot tapped? 

6. Has the welding procedure specification been 
developed as covered in this section. 

7. Have approved work permits (Hot Work, 
Entry, and so forth) been obtained? 



10 



11 



12 



Review manufacturer's instructions to ensure 
that the hot tapping machine has suitable 
pressure, temperature ratings, and adequate 
cutter travel for this job. 
Has the valve been pressure tested and the 
cover fitted to assure that it will work and fit 
properly? 

Has the exact location of the hot tap been 
identified and marked on the line or equipment? 
Has the area to be welded been inspected for 
thickness and freedom from existing welds, 
laminations, hydrogen attack, or other 
metallurgical imperfections? 
If laminations or defects have been found, has 
a thorough engineering evaluation been made 
to determine if and how to proceed with the 
work? 
13. Has the metallurgy of the line or vessel been 
established, and is it compatible with the 
connecting fitting? 

Can the area support the weight of the hot 
tapping machine, and is there adequate 
hoisting and support for the hot tapping 
machine and subsequent piping? 
if post weld heat treatment of the welded area 
is required, was an appropriate review 
conducted in accordance? 
Is there sufficient external clearance to install 
the hot tapping machine and extract the cutter 
through the valve? 

Is there sufficient internal clearance to retract 
the cutter and coupon through the valve? 



14 



15 



16. 



17 



13 



IS 15679: 2006 



18. Is the hot tap fitting of the proper length to 
accommodate operation of the hot tapping 
machine? 

19. Have oxygen, combustible gas, and toxic 
atmosphere tests been conducted in the hot 
tap area? 

20. Has a fire watch been assigned and appropriate 
fire fighting equipment provided? 

2 1 . Have all personnel in the area been provided 
with appropriate personal protective equipment? 

22. Is the area to be hot tapped located below the 
liquid level of the tank, or on a line or vessel 
in which flow has been established? 

23. Is there adequate storage area and room for 
operational and emergency access? 

24. Has a procedure been prepared and in place 
to isolate the work area in the event of a 
failure? Are personnel trained to implement 
the procedure? 

25. Have the requirements been defined for weld 
inspection and for pressure testing, and is all 
of the testing equipment on hand and in good 
working condition? 

A-l BEFORE WELDING 

Each of the following considerations should be satisfied 
before welding: 

a) Are the welders qualified for the approved 
welding procedure (specification) to be used? 

b) Is preheat of the weld area required? 

c) Is the fitting properly positioned so that 
misalignment of the hot tapping machine will 
not occur? 

d) Have the pressure and temperature of the 
contained materials been reduced as much as 
the process operation will allow? 

e) Have the flow, pressure, and level parameters 
considered? 

A.3 BEFORE CUTTING 

Each of the following considerations should be satisfied 
before cutting: 

a) Has the weld been inspected and tested? 

b) Has the hot tap fitting been pressure tested? 

c) Have the hot tap valve, packing, gasket and 
bolts been checked for leakage? 

d) Have the packing or seals on the hot tapping 
machine been checked? 

e) Has the bleed off valve been checked to 
assure it will hold, is operable and is not 
obstructed? 

Are all bolts on the pilot and cutter bit tight? 



g) Are the movements of coupon catchers on the 

pilot bit Iree? 
h) Is the valve centered on the flange? 
j) Has cutting depth been calculated to avoid 

cutting the opposite side of the pipe? 
k) Has the boring bar been run through the valve 

to assure free passage? 
m) Have the hot tapping machine and valve been 

purged, if recommended? 

A-4 BEFORE REMOVING THE HOT TAPPING 
MACHINE 

JBach of the following considerations should be satisfied 
before removing the hot tapping machine: 

a) Have the manufacturer's instructions been 
followed to be sure that the boring bar is fully 
retracted before closing the hot tap valve? 

b) Has the hot tap valve been closed? 

c) Has the bleeder valve been opened? 

d) Has all of the pressure been bled off of the 
hot tapping machine before removing the bolts 
from the flange? 

e) Have provisions been made to contain or control 
any liquid or gas in the hot tapping machine? 

A-S AFTER REMOVING THE HOT TAPPING 
MACHINE 

Each of the following considerations should be satisfied 
after removing the hot tapping machine: 

a) The hot tap machine should be cleaned, 
removing the hydrocarbons/chemicals from 
the line or equipment. 

b) All rags, absorbent pads and other cleaning 
materials must be disposed off properly. 

A-6 BEFORE STARTING THE PLUGGING 
OPERATION 

Each of the following considerations should be satisfied 
before starting the plugging operation: 

a) Review/follow manufacturer's instructions. 

b) Has the bypass line of the pipeline section to 
be isolated been installed and operational? 

c) Have approved work permits (Hot work, entry, 
and so forth) been obtained? 

d) Review manufacturer's instructions to ensure 
that plugging tapping machine has suitable 
pressure, temperature ratings, and adequate 
control bar travel for this job. 

e) Has a procedure been prepared and in place 
to isolate the work area in the event of a 
failure? Are personnel trained to implement 
the procedure? 



14 



IS 15679 : 2006 



Has the sealing element been checked with 
respect to its manufacturing date and sized as 
per ID of the pipeline for maximum pressure 
retention? 

g) Does the bar lock clamp position (open/close) 
being set as per requirement? 

h) Has the bleeder valve for purging and 
equalization line, used to equalize the pressure 
across the plugging head, been installed? 

j) Check the pressure gauge installed on 

plugging head housing, 
k) Has all the measurements been taken for 

lowering the plugging head with sealing 

element inside the pipe? 
m) Inspect the plugging head component and 

perform maintenance, if required, 
n) For installing the sealing element on plugging 

head, the torque to all bolts being maintained 

as per recommendation, 
p) Has the orientation of plugging head, while 

installing on the control valve been ensured 

as per the requirement? 
q) The lip of sealing element coated with heavy 

grease or not. 
r) Has it been ensured that only new sealing 

element is used? 
s) After installing the plugging machine on 

sandwich valve, ensure the connection of 

hydraulic hoses with power unit, 
t) It is to be ensured the plugging head is first 

set at the downstream side then upstream side, 
u) Confirm bar lock clamp engaged after setting 

of the plugging head. 

A.7 CUTTING OF THE PIPELINE SECTION 

Each of the following considerations should be satisfied 
before starting the operation of cutting of pipeline 
section: 

a) Confirm the isolated section vented/drained 
completely. 

b) Ensure the sealing element holds properly and 
there is no passing of the product. 

c) Use cold cutting machine for cutting the 
pipeline section. 

d) Before welding the new/modified section 
ensure the lower explosive limit level again. 

A-8 REMOVAL OF THE PLUGGING HEAD 

Each of the following considerations should be satisfied 



before starting the operation of removal of the plugging 
head: 

a) Has the pressure been equalized across the 
plugging head? 

b) Has the bar lock clamp been disengaged? 

c) Ensure the retraction of control bar very 
slowly. 

d) Is retraction being done first to the upstream? 

e) After retracting the control bar are the 
sandwich valves closed. 

Has the removal of hydraulic hoses and 
venting of the product from plugging machine 
being ensured before removal of the plugging 
machine? 

A-9 SETTING OF THE COMPLETION PLUG 
AND RETRIEVAL OF THE SANDWICH VALVE 

Each of the following considerations should be satisfied 
before starting the setting of the completion plug: 

a) Has the O-ring groove and segment groove 
inspected and necessary maintenance done? 

b) Has the performance of check valve in 
completion plug checked? 

c) Is the coupon welded on the scarfed nipple in 
proper orientation? 

d) Have the edges of the coupon been grinded 
as per the recommendation? 

e) Has the measurement for setting the 
completion plug been taken? 

Pressure equalization channel in plug holder 
and ball check valve and seat for ball check 
valve in completion plug cleaned and free of 
dirt or ice or other depreciation. 

g) After installing the machine on sandwich 
valve has it been confirmed that equalization 
line installed with pressure gauge and the 
pressure gauge is calibrated or not? 

h) Before proceeding for setting the completion 
plug has it been ensured that the pressure of 
the product above and below the plug remains 
equalized. 

j) Before releasing the plug holder from boring 
bar has it been ensured that the two segments 
matched properly and locks are put in their 
place to hold the completion plug? 

k) Has it been ensured that before removing the 
hot tapping machine the boring bar retracted 
and the product been removed from the 
machine? 



15 



IS 15679 : 2006 



ANNEX B 

(Clause 7 A .16) 

MEASUREMENTS FOR STOPPLE PLUGGING OPERATION 



Drilling 



Reference 

for 

plug 

driling 



THREAD-0-RING 
UJ plug setting 



Tapping 





Drilling IMMSurements 

Upstream 

A 

+ B 

- Thread Malceup 

a Lower-In Distance 

-f C 

s Total Travel 

Distance 

Plug Setting Itoasurements 

Q ............. 

+ J 

+ K 

- Ttiread Makeup 

» Total 



For Stopple Plugging Operation 



Downstream 



A 
•»- B 
= Lower-In 

Distance 
+ C 
= Total Travel 

Distance 

Reference 



A 
•F B 
a Lower-in 

Distance 
+ C 
= Total Travel 

Distance 

Reference 



Upstream 



Downstream 



For Bypass Operation 



Fig. 8 



16 



IS 15679 : 2006 



ANNEX C 

(Clause 1 A. 16) 

MEASUREMENTS FOR STOPPLE PLUGGING OPERATION 



B 






JSS 



« 












i 



L.I 



U^ 






u — t:l_ 



>- 

-^ "^^ 



M x 
II \ 
H N 

n : 




-0 LOCK-0-RING 



iSSSSiSSSSi^SS^^ 



I *^^ fL « IT » r-ar IT t4i j?-J 




Stopple Plugging Operation 

Upstream Downstream 



D 
•I- B 
-I- E 
=s Total Distance 

to Set 

Plugging Head 

Reference 



For Stopple Plugging Operation 

Upstream Downstream 



F 
^ Q 
+ H 
s Total Distance 

to Set Plug 



For Bypass Operation 

Upstream Downstream 



F 
+ G 
+ H 
= Total Distance 

to Set Plug 



Fig. 9 



17 



IS 15679: 2006 



ANNEX D 

(Clause i.l) 
HOT TAPPING DATA SHEET 



D-1 PIPELINE DATA 

a) Material: carbon steel, stainless steel, etc; 

b) Pipeline size; 

c) Outside diameter; 

d) Pipe wall thickness; 

e) Pipeline operating pressure; 
Pipeline product; 

g) Product temperature; and 
h) Product flow rate. 

D-2 HOT TAP APPLICATION 

a) Size of hot tap, 

b) Number of hot tap (s) per size, 



c) Type of hot tap valve: Customer to specify, 

d) Fitting part number or description of fitting: 
hot tapping nozzle supplied by customer (•), 

e) Flange series of valve and hot tapping 
fitting: threaded ( ) 150#rf ( ) 300#rf ( ) 
600#rf(), 

Other 

Flange size. 

NOTE — Important - If this TAPPING work is to be inside 
a Plant or Refinery, we must have accurate dimensions 
perpendicular from the tap to assure clearance for our tapping 
equipment. 



0-3 INFORMATION PROVIDED BY: 



r rFon ^H 



PIPELINE 




SPLIT TEE 
HOT 



I 



Distance from pipe to nearest obstruction: 

A — Dimension from top of disc (or ball) in the closed position to the 

top of the Valve. 
B — Dimension from top of pipe to top of Flange or Valve. 
C — Bore of Valve or Fitting for selection of Hot Tap Cutter. Minimum 

ID = 

NOTE — This Hot Tap fitting is vertical and perpendicular to a horizontal pipeline. 
Angle Taps require special preparation and equipment. 

Fig. 1 Typical Set Up of Pipeline with Split Tee 



18 



IS 15679 : 2006 



ANNEX E 

{Clause 12) 

SAMPLE 1 



(Name of Pipeline Network) 


Maintenance of Hot Tapping Machine and Accessories 


O^M Base: (Name) 


Format No.: 0! 


Equipment Name: (Hot Tapping Machine Model) 


Date: 


Job Card No. 


Dated: 


Man Days: 


RH: 


SI 
No. 


Activities (QMS) 


Frequency 


Observation 


Action 


Remarks 


i) 


Operate manually 


M 








ii) 


Operate with power system 


M 








iii) 


Check for any oil leakage 


M 








iv) 


Check oil pressure (record the 
pressure) 


M 








V) 


Check the gear oil and replace, if 
required 


Q 








vi) 


Lubricate the drive tube 


M 








vii) 


Observer for abnormal sound 


M 








viii) 


Coat the boring ban with light oil 


M 








LIST HEREUNDER ANY EXTRA WORK PERFORMED OR WHICH MAY WARRANT 
ATTENTION IN FUTURE: 




Spares/Consumables Used 


SI 
No. 


Item Name 


Part No. 


Code No. 


Quantity 


Remarks 














SI 
No. 


Parameters (EMS) 


Measurable 


Observation 


1 


Lube Oil 








SI 
No. 


Parameters (OHSAS) 


Safety Adopted 


Observation 


1 


Lubricate handling 






Remarks: 


Review Remarks: 


Reviewed by: 


Inspected by: 


Name: 


Name: 


' — 




Designation: 


Designation: 





19 



IS 15679 : 2006 



SAMPLE 2 



(Name of Pipeline Network) 


Maintenance of Hot Tapping Machine and Accessories 


O&M Base: (Name) 


Format No.: 02 


Equipment Name: (Model and SI No. of Drilling Machine) 


Date: 


Job Card No: 


Dated: 


Man Days: 


RH: 


SI 
No. 


Activities (QMS) 


Frequency 


Observation 


Action 


Remarks 


i) 


Operate manually 


M 








ii) 


Operate with air motor 


M 








iii) 


Check for air pressure 


M 








iv) 


Hydro testing of M/c at 
2000 Psi 


Before use 








V) 


Observer for abnormal sound 


M 








vi) 


Clean the boring bar and 
apply light coat of lube oil 


Before and 
after use 








vii) 


Clean the M/c 


M 








LIST HEREUNDER ANY EXTRA WORK PERFORMED OR WHICH MAY WARRANT 
ATTENTION IN FUTURE: 




Spares/Consumables Used 


SI 
No. 


Item Name 


Part No. 


Code No. 


Quantity 


Remarks 














SI 
No. 


Parameters (EMS) 


Measurable 


Observation 


1 


Lube Oil 








SI 
No. 


Parameters <OHSAS) 


Safety Adopted 


Observation 


1 


Lubricate Handling 






Remarks: 


Review Remarks: 


Reviewed by: 


Inspected by: 


Name: 


Name: 


Designation: 


Designation: 



20 



IS 15679 : 2006 



SAMPLE 3 



(Name of Pipeline Networli) 


Maintenance of Plugging Machine 


O&M Base: (Name) 


Format No.: 03 


Equipment Name: (Model and SI No. of Plugging Machine) 


Date: 


Job Card No: 


Dated: 


Man Days: 


RH: 


SI 
No. 


Activities (QMS) 


Frequency 


Observation 


Action 


Remarks 





Operate with power system 


M 








ii) 


Check for any oil leakage 


M 








iii) 


Check oil pressure (record the 
pressure) 


M 








iv) 


Check the lock nut of boring bar 


M 








V) 


Check the functioning of lever/ 
switch 


M 








vi) 


Observer for abnormal sound 


M 








vii) 


Coat the boring bar with light oil 


M 








LIST HEREUNDER ANY EXTRA WORK PERFORMED OR WHICH MAY WARRANT 
ATTENTION IN FUTURE: 




Spares/Consumables Used 


SI 
No. 


Item Name 


Part No. 


Code No. 


Quantity 


Remarks 














SI 
No. 


Parameters (EMS) 


Measurable 


Observation 


1 


Lube Oil 








SI 
No. 


Parameters (OHSAS) 


Safety Adopted 


Observation 


1 


Lubricate Handling 






Remarks: 


Review Remarks: 


Reviewed by: 


Inspected by: 


Name: 


Name: 


Designation: 


Designation: 



21 



IS 15679 : 2006 



SAMPLE 4 



(Name of Pipeline Networit) 


Maintenance of Power Unit 


O&M Base: (Name) 


Format No.: 04 


Equi • ment Name: (Model and SI No. of Power Unit) 


Date: 


Job Card No. 


Dated: 


Man Days: 


RH: 


SI 
No. 


Activities (QMS) 


Frequency 


Observation 


Action 


Remarks 


i) 


Check the hydraulic oil level and 
replace, if required 


M 








ii) 


Check the diesel level and replace, if 
required 


M 








iii) 


Check the engine oil level and 
replace, if required 


M 








iv) 


Check for air filter, fuel filter, oil 
filter and replace, if required 


M 








V) 


Check the SOV 


M 








vi) 


Operate the power unit independently 


M 








vii) 


Operate power unit with Hot tapping 

M/c 


M 








viii) 


Operate power unit with Plugging 

M/c 


M 








ix) 


Clean the entire power unit 


M 








X) 


Observer for abnormal sound 


M 








xi) 


Check the condition of Hydraulic 
hoses and NRV's 


M 








LIST HEREUNDER ANY EXTRA WORK PERFORMED OR WHICH MAY WARRANT 
ATTENTION IN FUTURE: 




Spares/Consumables Used 


SI 
No. 


Item Name 


Part No. 


Code No. 


Quantity 


Remarks 














SI 
No. 


Parameters (EMS) 


Measurable 


Observation 


1 


Lube Oil 






SI 
No. 


Parameters (OHSAS) 


Safety Adopted 


Observation 


1 


Lubricate Handling 






Remarks: 


Review Remarks: 


Reviewed by: 


Inspected by: 


Name: 


Name: 


Designation: 


Designation: 



22 



IS 15679 : 2006 



SAMPLE 5 



(Name of Pipeline Network) 


Maintenance of Sandwich Valve 


O&M Base: (Name) 


Format No.: 05 


Equipment Name: (Make and SI No. of Sandwich Valve) 


Date: 


Job Card No: 


Dated: 


Man Days: 


RH: 


SI 
No. 


Activities (QMS) 


Frequency 


Observation 


Action 


Remarks 


i) 


Clean the sandwich valve 


M 








ii) 


Lubricate the valve 


M 








iii) 


Operate the valve (record operation, 
hard/smooth) 


M 








iv) 


Check all the accessories 


M 








V) 


Check the fittings & O-Ring of 
Bypass valve 


M 








LIST HEREUNDER ANY EXTRA WORK PERFORMED OR WHICH MAY WARRANT 
ATTENTION IN FUTURE: 




Spares/Consumables Used: 


SI 
No. 


Item Name 


Part No. 


Code No. 


Quantity 


Remarks 














SI 
No. 


Parameters (EMS) 


Measurable 


Observation 


1 


Lube Oil 








SI 
No. 


Parameters (OHSAS) 


Safety Adopted 


Observation 


1 


Lubricate Handling 






Remarks: 


Review Remarks: 


Reviewed by: 


Inspected by: 


Name: 


Name: 


Designation: 


Designation: 



23 



{Continued from second cover) 

ASME B 1 6.25 : 2003 Butt welding ends 

ASME II A Boiler and pressure vessels code — Ferrous material — Specification 

ASME IIB Boiler and pressure vessels code — Non-ferrous materials — Specification 

ASME lie Boiler and pressure vessels code — Specification for welding rods, electrodes and 

filler metals 
ASME Sec VIII Boiler and pressure vessels code — Rules for the construction of pressure vessels 

ASME Sec IX Boiler and pressure vessels code — Welding and brazing qualifications 

ASTM A 370 Mechanical testing of steel products 

MSS-SP-53 Quality standard for steel castings and forgings for valves, flanges and fittings and 

other piping components — Magnetic particle examination method 
MSS-SP-75 Specification for high test wrought butt welding fittings 

Assistance has also been derived from 'Hot tapping vendor guidelines' and O&M manual and In-house developed 
procedures of Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL). 

In using this Code the relevant statutory rules and the requirements framed thereunder by the respective authorities 
shall be borne in mind. 

Warning: 

a) Persons using this Code should be familiar with the normal operation/practices of hot tapping and 
line plugging. This standard does not purport to address all of the safety problems, if any, associated 
with its use. It is the responsibility of the user to establish appropriate safety and health practices 
and to ensure compliances with the existing national regulatory conditions. 

b) Compliance with this document may involve the use of some patent and/or propriety equipment/ 
accessories. BIS shall not be held responsible for identifying any or all such patent rights and takes 
no position concerning the evidence, validity and scope of the patents. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmdnious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. PCD 3 (2348). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters : 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafeir Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 33 75, 2323 94 02 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKAl A 700 054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 1 60 022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 1 3 



Western 



Branches 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAl 400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 



{ 



Telephone 

2323 76 17 
2323 38 41 



{2337 84 99,2337 85 61 
2337 86 26,2337 91 20 



{ 



260 38 43 
260 92 85 



{2254 12 16,2254 14 42 
2254 25 19,2254 23 15 

{2832 92 95, 2832 78 58 
2832 78 91,2832 78 92 



AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATl. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Printed at Ptabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2 



