RAT Alte IS 3958 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


STR атабаї а янят а чаї 


(444 FAU ) 


Methods of sampling Cosmetics 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 71.100.70 


O BIS 2021 


anda Ar Sm 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AN чая, 9 SEERNE TH HM, 4% ее - 110002 


— rent МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2021 Price Group 7 


Cosmetics Sectional Committee, PCD 19 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized 
by the Cosmetics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division 
Council. 


This standard was originally published in 1966 and first revised in 1984. 


In the first revision, relevant drawings of equipments commonly used for sampling of products in powder form, 
thick and thin emulsions and homogeneous liquid forms were included and lot sizes were rationalized and brought 
in line with IS 2500 (Part 1) : 1973. 


In this standard (second revision), definition of some terms have been added to provide more clarity to the users. 
Under classification ofthe cosmetics, aerosols have been added. Labelling requirements for the sample containers 
and training requirements for the sampler have been added. Requirements of sampling tools used for the sampling 
ofthe cosmetics has been elaborated and provided in annexure. 


For attributes and variable testing of the finished products IS 2500 may be referred. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given at Annex В. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 3958 : 2021 


Indian Standard 
METHODS OF SAMPLING COSMETICS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes methods of sampling 
cosmetics. 


1.2 Methods of sampling of toilet soaps shall be out of 
scope of this standard and sampling and shall be done 
as per IS 286. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this draft standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject 
to revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


286 : 2018 Methods of sampling and test 


for soaps (second revision) 


2500 (Part 1) : 2000/ 
ISO 2859-1 : 1999 


Sampling procedures for 
inspection by attributes: Part 1 
sampling schemes indexed 
by acceptance quality limit 
(AQL) for lot-By-Lot 
inspection (third revision) 
2500 (Part 3) : 1995/ 
ISO 2859-2 : 1985 


Sampling inspection 
procedures: Part 3 Attribute 
sampling plans indexed by 
limiting quality (LQ) for 
isolated lot inspection iso 
title sampling procedures for 
inspection by attributes 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of 
definitions shall apply. 


this standard, the following 


3.1 Acceptable Quality Level (AQL) — The AQL 
is the quality level that is the worst tolerable process 
average when a continuing series of lots is submitted 
for acceptance sampling. 


3.2 Batch — The material in a single mass obtained 
from the same raw materials and process of manufacture 


prior to packing shall be regarded as one batch. For 
instance, the material in a process vessel just before 
packing may be taken as constituting a batch. 


3.3 Composite Sample — A sample prepared by 
mixing equal quantities of material from each of the 
gross samples in a lot/Batch and intended to represent 
fully the lot as a whole. 


3.4 Cosmetics — Cosmetic means any article intended 
to be rubbed, poured, sprinkled or sprayed on, or 
introduced into, or otherwise applied to the human 
body or any part thereof for cleansing, beautifying, 
promoting attractiveness, or altering the appearance, 
and includes any article intended for use as a component 
of cosmetic. 


3.5 Gross Sample — A sample prepared by mixing the 
part or whole of the material from some or all of the 
units in a package and intended to fully represent the 
package. 


3.6 Homogeneity — A consignment is regarded as 
homogeneous when it is all of the same origin Le. 
from the same batch/lot and intended to have uniform 
character and quality, within specified limits. 


3.7 Individual Sample — A sample obtained from a 
gross sample representing a package and intended for 
determining the specified characteristics of the material 
in the package. 


3.8 Item — Anything that can be described and 
considered separately. 


3.9 Lot — In a single consignment, all the packages 
containing cosmetics of the same type and form, 
representing the same batch of manufacture, shall 
constitute a lot. In the case of a cosmetics produced by 
continuous process, it is a specific identified amount 
produced in a unit of time or quantity in a manner that 
assures its having uniform character and quality within 
specified limits. 


3.10 Lot Number/Batch Number — Lot number, 
control number, or batch number means any distinctive 
combination of letters, numbers, or symbols, or any 
combination of them, from which the complete history 
of the manufacture, processing, packing, holding, and 
distribution of a batch or lot of cosmetic product or 
other material can be determined. 


IS 3958 : 2021 


3.11 Manufacturer — The term manufacture of a 
cosmetic product means the making of any cosmetic 
product by chemical, physical, biological, or other 
procedures, including manipulation, sampling, testing, 
or control procedures applied to the product. 


3.12 Sample — A portion of a material selected in such 
a way that it represents all the characteristics of the 
material from which it is taken. 


3.13 Sample Size — Number of sampling units in a 
sample. 


3.14 Sampler — Person responsible for performing the 
sampling operations. 


3.15 Sampling Procedure — The succession of steps 
set out in this standard to ensure that the sample possess 
the essential characteristics of the Lot/Batch. 


3.16 Simple Random Sampling — Sampling where a 
sample of n sampling units is taken from a population 
in such a way that all the possible combinations of n 
sampling units have the same probability of being 
taken. 


3.17 Test Sample — A smaller sample prepared in a 
specified manner by subdivision of the gross sample. 
It has the essential characteristics of the gross sample. 


4 CLASSIFICATION 


For purposes of this standard, cosmetics shall be 
classified under four main groups, namely, solids, 
semi-solids, liquids and aerosols. They shall be further 
subdivided as indicated in Table 1. 


5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF SAMPLING 
5.1 In drawing, preparing, storing and handling 


samples, the following precautions and directions shall 
be observed. 


5.1.1 Samples shall be taken in a protected place not 
exposed to damp air, dust or soot. 


5.1.2 The sampling instrument shall be clean and dry. 


5.1.3 The samples, the material being sampled, the 
sampling instrument and the containers for samples 
shall be protected from adventitious contamination. 


5.1.4 The samples shall be placed in clean and dry 
container of material of construction (MOC) Glass, 
HDPE or other suitable and compatible material. The 
sample containers shall be of a size such that they are 
almost completely filled by the sample. 


5.1.5 Each container shall be sealed air tight after filling 
and properly labelled with appropriate details, such as 
sample type, name of material, identification code, 
batch/lot number, quantity, date of sampling, storage 
conditions, handling precautions (as applicable). In 
case of sensitive material like hygroscopic material 
proper precautions shall be taken to avoid deterioration 
of the sample due to environmental factors. 


5.1.6 The samples shall be stored in such a. manner that 
the temperature of the material does not vary unduly 
from the normal temperature and they are protected 
from light. 


5.1.7 Sampling shall be done by a person agreed to 
between the purchaser and the supplier, and in the 
presence of the purchaser or his representative and the 
supplier or his representative. 


5.1.8 The sampler needs to be adequately trained in 
the practical aspects of sampling, qualified to perform 
the sampling operation, and should have sufficient 
knowledge of substances to allow sampler to execute 
the work effectively and safely. The sampling technique 
itself can introduce bias, it is important that personnel 
carrying out the sampling should be suitably trained 
in the techniques and procedures used. Examples of 
sampling devices is also given in Annex A. 


Table 1 Classification of Cosmetics 


( Clause 4 ) 
Main Group Sub-Croup Typical Examples 
(1) (2) (3) 
Powders Skin powders, face powders, Kum Kum powders, tooth powders and Surma 
Solids 


Sticks or cakes 


Thick emulsions 
Semi-solids 


Pastes (solid/liquid dispersions) 
Homogeneous liquids 
Liquids 
Thin emulsions 


Propellent Based aerosol or Water based 


Aerosol 
aerosol 


Compressed make-ups, hair dyes, lipsticks and salves, and solid dentifrices 
Depilatories, face creams, hair creams and dressings 
Kajal, liquid make-ups, shaving creams and tooth pastes 


After-shave lotions, eye lotions, hair oils and tonics, liquid brilliiantines, nail 
polishes and varnishes, shampoos and perfumes 


Face and hand lotions, hair darkeners and dressings and Bindi 


Spray-on antiperspirants, Shaving gels and foams, deodorants 


6 SAMPLING DURING MANUFACTURE 


6.1 General 


The sampling procedure at the point of manufacture 
shall consist essentially in drawing samples of the 
finished product in bulk stage from the top, middle and 
bottom portions ofthe process vessel immediately prior 
to packing . 


6.2 Scale of Sampling 


In case of solid units such as sticks and cakes, at least 
three units shall be selected at random (see 7.3.1). In 
case of non-solids, at least three samples shall be drawn 
using appropriate sampling instruments (see 6.3), 
preferably taking the same number of samples from the 
top, middle and bottom portions of the batch. 


6.3 Sampling Instruments 


Instruments of the types described below may be 
used for drawing samples of different cosmetics. Also 
details of common Sampling Instruments are given in 
Annex A for reference. 


6.3.1 For Powders 


For drawing samples of powders, a sampling tube, 
commonly known as a ‘thief’ shall be used (see Fig. 1). 
This usually consists of two closely fitting, concentric 
tubes with matching slots that are closed by rotating 
the tubes with respect to each other. The ‘thief’ with 
the slots closed, is inserted to the desired depth in a 
given process vessel. The slots are then opened, and the 
material flows through the open slots to fill the tube. 
The slots are then closed and the ‘thief’ is withdrawn. 


IS 3958 : 2021 


6.3.2 For Thick Emulsions, Pastes and Gels 


For drawing samples of these emulsions, products, a 
sampling instrument similar to that described under 
6.3.1 may be used. However, the top end of the 
sampling tube should be connected to a suction device. 


6.3.3 For Homogeneous Liquids and Thin Emulsions 


For drawing samples of these products, a simple device 
(see Fig. 2) may be used consisting of a small bottle 
and a two-hole stopper, one hole being fitted with a 
short glass tube and the other with a glass tube slightly 
longer than the depth of the vessel. To the longer tube 
is attached a stop-cock which is kept closed while the 
bottle is lowered to the desired depth in a given process 
vessel. The stop-cock is then opened and, as the air 
escapes through the longer tube, the product enters 
the bottle and fills it. An alternative sampling device 
(see Fig. 3) consists of a tube fitted with a stopper at the 
lower end which can be closed by means of an attached 
rod that extends above the upper end of the, tube. With 
the stopper disengaged, the tube is lowered slowly into 
the vessel so that the liquid enters it with minimum 
disturbance. When the bottom of the vessel has been 
reached, the lower end of the tube is closed with the 
stopper and the tube is removed. 


6.4 Preparation of Samples 


The material of all the samples drawn from the batch 
according to 6.2 shall be disintegrated, if necessary, 
and mixed thoroughly to give the composite sample at 
the point of manufacture. The material so chosen shall 
be in a quantity about 3 times the material required 
for carrying out a complete series of tests for all the 
requirements of the specification. 


Ш 
| 


| 


ENLARGED 
SECTION AA 


All dimesnsions in millimetres 


1A SINGLE COMPARTMENT 


FIG. I CLOSED-END SAMPLING TUBE (SPEAR), UNDIVIDED ( Continued ) 


IS 3958 : 2021 


BOTTOM VIEW 
OPEN CLOSED 


1B MULTI COMPARTMENT 


FIG 1 CLOSED-END SAMPLING TUBE (SPEAR), UNDIVIDED ( Continued ) 


IS 3958 : 2021 


| ARRANGEMENT 
SECTION XX ' 


AFTER ROTATION , 


OF INNER TUBE BY 180 INNER TUBE 


CONE COMPLETELY 
CLOSED 


1C SINGLE COMPARTMENT 


FIG I CLOSED-END SAMPLING TUBE (SPEAR), UNDIVIDED ( Concluded ) 


IS 3958 : 2021 


М 140 x 1*5 
6 THICK 


CATCH 
ø 6 
GLASS TUBE 


WI DISC 


26 GLASS, 
TUBING ‘B 


GLASS BOTTLE 
100 8,200 HIGH 


IS 


All dimesnsions in millimetres 


FIG. 2 DIPPER BOTTLE 


IS 3958 : 2021 


HAND LEVER 
(OPEN POSITION) 


HAND LEVER \ 
{CLOSED POSITION) 


Fic. 3 BOTTOM-VALVED SAMPLING TUBE 


IS 3958 : 2021 


6.5 The composite sample obtained in, 6.4 shall be 
examined for all the requirements of the specification. 
The material in the batch shall be passed on for packing, 
if the composite sample satisfies all the requirements; 
otherwise not. 


7SAMPLING OF PACKAGES 


7.1 General 


The sampling procedure for packages shall consist 
essentially in selecting and drawing a sufficient number 
of unit packs. 


7.2 Lot 


In a single consignment, all the packages containing 
cosmetics of the same type and form, representing the 
same batch of manufacture, shall constitute a lot. Ifthe 
consignment consists of packages containing cosmetics 
of different types or forms or batches of manufacture, 
then the packages containing products of the same 
type, form and batch of manufacture shall be grouped 
together; each group shall constitute a separate lot. 


7.3 Scale of Sampling 


For ascertaining the conformity of a lot to the 
requirements prescribed in the specifications for 
individual cosmetics and toilet goods, tests shall be 
carried out on each lot separately. The number (л) of 
packages to be selected for drawing the samples shall 
depend on the size (N) of the lot in accordance with 
Table 2. 


Table 2 Scale of Sampling for Packages 


No. of Packages in the Lot Мо. of Packages to be Selected 


(м) (n) 

(1) Q) 
Upto 3 Each container 

4 to 50 3 

51 to 150 4 

151 to 300 5 

301 to 500 6 

501 and above 7 


7.3.1 The packages shall be selected at random 
(see IS 4905) and to ensure randomness of selection, 
random number tables shall be used. 


In case such tables are not available, the following 
procedure may be adopted: 


N units in the population are numbered 1 to N in an 
order. 


Starting from any package, count all the packages in 
one order as 1,2,3....... up 


to rand so on, where r is the integral part of N/n. Every 
rth package thus counted shall be withdrawn to give a 
sample for purposes of test’. 


7.4 Gross Sample 
7.4.1 For Powders 


From each of the packages selected as in 7.3, draw at 
random one or more containers. The material in the 
containers so chosen from the package shall be about 
three times the quantity required for carrying out a 
complete series of tests for all the requirements of the 
specification. It shall be disintegrated, if necessary, and 
mixed thoroughly to give a gross sample. 


7.4.2 For Sticks and Cakes 


From each of the packages selected as in 7.3, draw at 
random one or more sticks or cakes. The material so 
chosen from each package shall be about three times 
the quantity required for carrying out a complete series 
of tests for all the requirements of the specification. It 
shall be disintegrated in a suitable chopper and, after 
discarding the first and last chippings, the material shall 
be mixed thoroughly to give a gross sample. 


7.4.3 For Thick Emulsions, Pastes and Gels 


From each of the packages selected as in 7.3 draw at 
random a suitable number of containers and with the 
help of a suitable sampling implement, withdraw the 
material for the preparation of a gross sample. A simple 
device for withdrawing semi-solid products from jars 
consists of a glass tube about I cm in diameter and 
fitted with a piston. The piston is pulled out and the 
tube pressed in the semi-solid product; the tube is then 
withdrawn, and the sample ejected out of it with the 
help of the piston. The material so drawn from each 
package shall be about three times the quantity required 
for carrying out a complete series of tests for all the 
requirements of the specification. It shall be mixed 
thoroughly to give a gross sample. 


NOTE — In the case of emulsions and pastes, great care is 


necessary to ensure that there is no breakdown of the product . 


7.4.4 For Homogeneous Liquids and Thin Emulsions 


From each of the packages selected as in 7.3, draw at 
random a suitable number of containers, shake them 
thoroughly to ensure homogeneity of the contents and 
draw samples with the aid of a suitable instrument. The 
material so drawn from each package shall be about 
three times the quantity required for carrying out a 
complete series of tests for all the requirements of the 
specification. It shall be mixed thoroughly to give a 
gross sample. 
NOTE — In the case of liquid preparations containing alcohol 
or other volatile ingredients, great care is necessary to ensure 
that there is no loss on evaporation with resulting change in 
product make-up. 


7.5 Test Samples and Referee Samples 
7.5.1 Composite Sample 


Segregate carefully the gross samples obtained from a 
lot according to 7.3 and 7.4. From each of the gross 


samples drawn from the same lot, take a small but 
equal portion of material. Mix all these small portions 
thoroughly into a single composite mass, which should 
be of a size sufficient to carry out triplicate testing 
for all the characteristics specified under 7.5.2. This 
composite mass representing the lot shall be divided 
into three equal parts, each forming a composite 
sample; one for the purchaser, another for the supplier 
and the third as the referee sample to be used in case of 
dispute between the purchaser and the supplier. 


7.5.2 Individual Samples 


The remaining portion of material in each gross sample 
shall be divided into three equal parts, each forming 
an individual sample. One individual sample from each 
gross sample in the lot shall be taken to constitute a set 
of individual samples. One set of individual samples 
shall be for the purchaser, another for the supplier and 
the third as the referee sample to be used in case of 
dispute between the purchaser and the supplier. 


7.5.3 All the composite and individual samples shall 
be transferred to separate containers. These containers 
shall then be sealed air-tight with stoppers and labelled 
with full particulars of identification. 


7.5.4 Referee Samples 


The referee samples shall consist of a composite sample 
and a set of individual samples. All the containers 
of referee samples shall bear the seals of both the 
purchaser and the supplier and shall be kept at a place 
agreed to between the two parties. 


7.6 Number of Tests 


7.6.1 Tests for the determination of important 
characteristics, as specified in relevant specification for 
the individual materials, shall be conducted separately 
on each of the individual samples. 


7.6.2 Tests for the determination of the other 
characteristics prescribed shall be conducted on the 
composite sample. 


7.7 Criteria for Conformity 


7.7.1 For Individual Samples 


For each of the characteristics which has been 
determined on the individual samples, the mean and 
range R of test results shall be calculated as follows: 


IS 3958 : 2021 


Mean (ғ) _ sum 6fifest results 
Number (ofiTest results 


Difference between the maximum and minimum value 
of the test results. 


7.7.1.1 If the specification limit for the characteristics 
is given as a minimum, then the value of the expression 
(x -KR) shall be calculated from the relevant test results 
(see 7.6.1.4). If the value so obtained is greater than or 
equal to the minimum limit, the lot shall be declared as 
conforming to the requirement for that characteristic. 


7.7.1.2 If the specification limit for the characteristic is 
given as a maximum, then the value of the expression 
(x +KR) shall be calculated from the relevant test results 
(see 7.6.1.4). If the value so obtained is less than or 
equal to the maximum limit, the lot shall be declared as 
conforming to the requirement for that characteristic. 


7.7.1.3 If the characteristic has two-sided specification 
limit, then the values of the expression (x + KR) shall be 
calculated from the relevant test results (see 7.6.1.4). If 
the values so obtained lie between the two specification 
limits, the lot shall be declared as conforming to the 
requirement for that characteristic. 


7.7.1.4 The value of the factor K referred to in 7.5.1.1 
to 7.5.1.3 shall be chosen in accordance with Table 3 
depending upon the acceptable quality level. 


Table 3 Values of K for Different Acceptable 
Quality Level 


( Clause 7.7.1.4) 


Acceptable Quality Level Value of K 
(1) (2) 
Up to I percent 0.6 
Over | percent and up to 2 percent 0.5 
Over 2 percent and up to 4 percent 0.4 


7.7.2 For Composite Sample 


For declaring the conformity of the lot to the 
requirements for all the remaining characteristics 
determined on the composite sample, the test result 
for each of the characteristics shall satisfy the relevant 
requirement specified in the Indian Standard on the 
subject. 


IS 3958 : 2021 


ANNEXA 
( Clause 5.1.8 ) 
SAMPLING TOOLS 


A-1SCOOPS 


Small containers of solid materials may be adequately 
sampled using a spatula or scoop. The samples are 
then blended to provide a representative sample of that 
container. Figure 1 shows the recommended designs 
of scoops, which should preferably be rounded. If the 
scoop used is too small for the sizes of particle being 
sampled, large particles will roll off and testing bias 
may be introduced. On the other hand, if the scoop is 
too big, an unnecessarily large sample will be obtained 
for a given number of increments. A scoopful of sample 
should be taken in a single movement and transferred 
to the sample container. Avoid tapping the scoop to 
remove cosmetic product as this is likely to cause 
segregation of the sample. 


A-2 DIP TUBES 


Dip tubes should be used for sampling liquid and topical 
products and should be made of an inert material, such 
as polypropylene or stainless steel. A typical dip tube is 
shown in Fig. 2. 


A-3 WEIGHTED CONTAINERS 


For taking samples from large tanks and storage 
vessels, a container in a weighted carrier can be used. 
The container is designed such that it can be opened at 
the required depth. Marks on the cord used for lowering 
the container can be used to determine when the correct 
sampling depth has been reached. A typical weighted 
container is shown in Fig. 3. 


A-4 THIEVES 


Sample thieves should be used when taking samples 
from deep containers of solids. Typical thieves are 
shown in Fig. 4. The plug thief typically consists 
of a hollow tube with an inner rod that has a tip on 
the end to allow the thief to enter the powder bed in 
the closed position (see Fig. 4.1). The geometry of 
this tip can influence the sample taken; pointed tips 
distort the powder bed less than blunt-tipped probes, 
thereby reducing sampling error. Some thieves have 
a locking device that allows the sample volume to be 
set to the required sample weight, thereby reducing the 
weight variation in the sample population. A chamber 


10 


thief generally consists of two concentric tubes 
(see Fig. 4.1); the inner tube is solid except for the 
chambers in which the sample is collected. The outer 
tube is hollow with openings that can be aligned with 
the chambers in the inner tube. A well-designed thief 
will have a sharp end to minimize disruption to the 
powder bed. When it 1s inserted into a static powder 
blend a thief will distort the bed by carrying cosmetic 
product from the upper layers of the blend to the lower 
layers. The magnitude of this distortion can depend 
on whether the thief is inserted into the blend with a 
smooth, jerky or twisting action. Therefore, the correct 
sampling procedure should be defined and staff trained 
in using the appropriate technique. Thieves are also 
sometimes referred to as “double-tube spears". The 
angle at which the thief enters the powder bed can also 
influence sampling error. If a thief is inserted into the 
powder bed vertically, it can extract samples of different 
particle size from those that would be obtained using 
the same thief inserted at an acute angle. In addition the 
orientation of a chamber thief in relation to the powder 
bed (that is, whether the chamber is at the top, the 
bottom or in the middle of the thief) may also influence 
the sampling error. The material from which the thief is 
constructed, stainless steel or polypropylene, may also 
have an effect on sampling error due to static effects. 
Sampling error can also be affected by bed depth, as 
the static pressure of the bulk blend forces the material 
into the sample chamber(s). This pressure is far greater 
at the bottom of a large container than it is in the middle 
or at the top. It is quite possible that the same thief 
could extract samples of different particle size from the 
top or bottom of a static powder blend. 


A-5 SIMPLE BAG-SAMPLING SPEARS 


Simple bag-sampling spears are the most commonly 
used instruments for taking samples from bags, because 
they are relatively cheap, simple and quick. Sampling 
spears generally have a maximum external diameter of 
about 12 mm, but can be up to 25 mm in diameter. To 
obtain a good cross-sectional sample, the spear should 
be 40-45 cm in length. The tapered type of sampling 
spear penetrates bags easily. Typical spears are shown 
in Fig. 5. 


IS 3958 : 2021 


Fic. 1 SAMPLING SCOOPS FOR SOLIDS 


FIG. 2 TYPICAL Пір TUBE 


11 


IS 3958 : 2021 


Container for 
collection of 
sample 


Basket to hold 
container 


Weight 


Sampling slot 


Inner tube 
Quter tube 


(i) 


Concentric holes 


(ii) 


FıG. 4 TYPICAL SAMPLE THIEVES 


12 


IS 3958 : 2021 


А: Closed spear for sampling 


B : Closed spear for sampling 


C: Open spear 


ети 


D: Double-tube spear 


Fic. 5 TYPICAL SAMPLING SPEARS 


13 


IS 3958 : 2021 


ANNEXB 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Cosmetics Sectional Committee, PCD 19 


Organization 


Drugs Controller General (INDIA), Delhi 


All India Cosmetic Manufacturers Association, 
Mumbai 


Chemstar Limited, Mumbai 


Cavinkare Private Limited, Chennai 


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 
(CDSCO), Delhi 


Central Drugs Testing Laboratory (CDTL), Chennai 


Consumer Voice, New Delhi 


CSIR Indian Institute of Toxicological Research, 
Lucknow 


Central Drugs Testing Laboratory (CDTL), Mumbai 


Colgate Palmolive (India) Limited, Mumbai 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 


Dabur India Limited, Sahibabad 


Directorate of Food and Drugs Administration, Goa 


Drugs Control Department, Delhi 


Envisbe Solutions Pvt Limited, Mumbai 
Essential Oil Association of India (EOAI), Noida 


Food Safety and Drug Administration, Lucknow 


Food and Drugs Control Administration Gujarat, 
Gandhinagar 


Food and Drugs Administration Haryana, Panchkula 


Food and Drugs Administration Maharashtra, 
Mumbai 


Fragrance and Flavours Association of India, 
(FAFAI), Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr V. G. SOMANI (Chairman) 


Ms KAJAL ANAND 
Dr VIRENDRA V. CHAVAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL JOSHI 


Dr T. KUMAR 
Dr GIREESH KUMAR (Alternate I) 
Dr S. SANKAR KALIDAS (Alternate II) 


Dr S. P. SHANI 


Ms С. VIJAYA LAKSHMI 
Dr J. UMA MAHESWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI Н. WADHWA 


DR A. B. PANT 
Dr R. S. Ray (Alternate) 


Dr RAMAN MOHAN SINGH 
SHRIMATI S. U. WARDE (Alternate I) 
SHRIMATI SUJATA S. KAISARE (Alternate II) 


Dr Мамав V. VYAS 
SHRIMATI SHRUTI HARDIKAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI PURUSHOTTAM JADHAV (Alternate II) 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
DRM. S. КАМАТН (Alternate) 


DR PRASUN BANDYOPADHYAY 
Dr S. K. LUTHRA (Alternate I) 
SHRI SHIVAJI RAI (Alternate П) 


Ms Jyoti J. SARDESSAI 


SHRI A. K. NASA 
SHRI K. R. CHAWLA (Alternate) 


SHRI BENEDICT M. MASCARENHAS 
SHRI AJAY K. JAIN 


Dr ANITA BHATNAGAR JAIN 
SHRI DINESH KUMAR TIWARI (Alternate) 


Dr H. G. KosHIA 
SHRI V. R. SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDER KUMAR AHOOJA 
SHRI MANMOHAN TANEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI O. S. SADHWANI 


SHRI HASMUKH PATEL 


14 


Organization 


Galaxy Surfactants Limited, Mumbai 


Godrej Consumers Products Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Lever Limited (HUL), Mumbai 
Hygienic Research Institute Private Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission (IPC), Ghaziabad 


ITC R & D Centre, Bengaluru 


Indian Beauty and Hygiene Association (IBHA), 
Mumbai 


Johnson and Johnson Limited, Mumbai 


Kelkar Education Trusts (KETS) Scientific Research 
Centre, Mumbai 


Loreal India Private Limited, Mumbai 


Marico Limited, Mumbai 


Mikasa Cosmetics Limited, Ahmedabad 


Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSME), Delhi 


Ministry of AYUSH, Delhi 
Procter and Gamble, Mumbai 
PETA India, Mumbai 


The Himalaya Drug Company, Bengaluru 


Voluntary Organization In Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE), Delhi 


Bureau of Indian Standards, Jammu 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 3958 : 2021 


Representative(s) 


SHRI R. K. SINGH 
SHRI SAGAR TRAILOKYA (Alternate I) 
SHRI PRAMOD SABAT TRAILOKYA (Alternate 11) 


Ms RUPINDER KAUR RAWAT 
Dr MANOJ GAUR (Alternate) 


Ms VRINDA RAJWADE 


DR JAYASHREE ANAND 
SHRI MANOJ SARKAR (Alternate) 


Dr ANIL Kr TEOTIA 
Dr Manor Kr PANDEY (Alternate) 


DR GURUBASAVARAJA К. М. 
Dr JAMES BHASKAR (Alternate I) 
Dr JOHN Bosco STANISLAUS (Alternate П) 


Ms MALATHI NARAYANAN 


Dr DILIP TRIPATHI 
SHRI RAJNEESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


Dr 5. S. BARVE 


Ms VEENA BALGI 
Ms RUPALI TURAKHIYA (Alternate) 


Dr MITALI HEDGE 
Dr SUDHAKAR MHASKAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI PRABODH S. HALDE (Alternate П) 


Ms TRUPTI PATEL 


DR ARUN KUMAR 
Dr IZZATULLAH (Alternate) 


Dr D. С. KarocH 
SHRI GIRISH PARHATE 


SHRI MANILAL VALLIYATE 
Ms Бірті М. KAPOOR 


DR SUNDARAM RAMACHANDRAN 
Dr KRISHNAN SRIRAMAN (Alternate) 


Dr M. A.U. KHAN 


SHRIMATI NISHA BURA 


SHRIMATI NAGAMANI T., SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (PCD) 
| REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI D. UMA 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (PCD), BIS 


15 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 19 (16033). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.LP. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


