( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 8214 [Part

II) - 1976

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF SHIPS' HYDRODYNAMIC
PART II SHIP GEOMETRY

TERMS

Shipbuilding
C%air?nan
SHRI S. PARMANANDHAN

Sectional
Ministry

Committee,
of Defence

MCPD
(NHQ)

1

Representing

Members Ministry of Deface (DGI) Ministry of Shipping and Transport SHRI N. CHAKRABORTY SHRI S. RAGHAVAN (Alternak) CHIEF MECHANICAL ENGINEER, Port Consultative Organization, New Delhi CALCUTTA PORT TRUST CHIEF MECHANICALENGINEER, BOMBAYPORT TRUST (Alternate) and Iusritute of h4arine AFCO Ltd, Bombay; SUN V. G. DAMLIZ Technologists, Bombay SHRI Ii.D. PARALKAR(Altertzate) AFCO Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. T. .JOSEPH (Ahmate) Bombay SHRI I. N. PRADIIAN(:~~te?%Ut~) Institute of Marine Technologisti, S~IRI R. S. SACHDEV(Jlternale) 1 DIRECTOR 01'NAVAL ( :OSSTRUCTI~N Ministry of Defence (NHQ) Mukand Iron &r Steel Works Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. P. GOYAI. SHRI SUDARSHAN F&MAR (Alternote) Directorate Getleral of Shipping, Bombay SHRI D. B. IRAXI C!entral Institute of Fisheries Technology, Co&n SHRI G. K. KURIYAN SHRI hf. VELU (Alrernate) Indian Engineering Association, Bombay SHRI M. G. KUTTY Indian National Shipowners' Association, Bombay SHRI I. N. PRADHAN Institute of Marine Engineers, Bombay PRESIUENT SHRI P. C. KC.W.R (Xfernate) Ericson & Richards, Bombay SHRI T. S. RAJAN Indian Register of Shipping. Bomba) SIIRI H. S. RAO Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay 6.4~ D. S. RUPA SHRI S. SUNDARAM (Alternate) Directorate General of `Tcclmical Development, SIERI R. SARAIUGAHA~IN New Delhi
CDR S. P. AGARWALA

(Continued on page 2j
Q

Copyright 1977
INSTITUTION

INDIAN

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 8214 (Part

II) - 1976

Members B. R. SAWARKAR SHRI P. R. Govn (_4lternute) SIIRI W. R. D. SAXTON
MADHoK &RI S. G. SCUAEFWR SHRI K. SHARMA SHRI A. K. SEN SHRI D. S. SHETIX
SIlRI D.

Representing Cochin Shipyard Ltd, Cochin Lloyd's Register American Bureau of Shipping, of Shipping, Bombay Bombay

SI~I

(Altim&)

(Alternate)

SHRI M. G. KUTTY (Alternate) (Alternate)

Garden Reach Workshops Ltd, Calcutta Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam SF India Ltd, Calcutta Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay Director General, IS1 (&-o&o A4ertdxr) Secretary

SHRI G. SINHA SHRI H. SVENSSON

SHRI T. PI'. SUJAN SHRI P. S. DAS, Director (MCPD)

Assistant Director

SHRI V. K.

SEHCAL (MCPD),

IS1

2

IS : 8214 (Part II) - 1976

Indian Standard
SHIPS' GLOSSARY OF HYDRODYNAMIC
PART II 0. SHIP GEOMETRY

TERMS

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part II) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 27 October 1976, after the draft finalized by the Shipbuilding Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council.
0.2 The object of this standard is to specify the technical and scientific terms used in ship geometry, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic terms and to facilitate the exchange of information particularly at international level, and the ease of understanding as regards to documents relating to naval architecture. 0.3 The terms are represented by symbols alphabetical order for ease of interpretation. which have been arranged in

0.4 No rules are laid down as to whether subscripts are to be shown by capital or lower case letters, although the letters shown in this standard are in the preferred style. 0.3 When required, the suffixes M and S should be introduced between quantities referring to model and ship respectively. 0.6 This standard are: Part Part Part Part Part I III IV V VI Basic is being issued in six parts. quantities and propulsion to distinguish

The other parts in the series

Resistance Sea keeping

Manoeuvrability Strength and vibration 8 on `TerminoTowing Tank

0.7 While preparing this standard, current work by ISO/TC logy of profiles and hydrodynamic terms' and International Conference (ITTC) has also been considered.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard
(Part II) deals with terms related 3 to geometry of ship.

IS : 8214 (Part

II) - 1976

2. TERMINOLOGY
SL

SYMBOL

TERM After perpendicular tion area sec-

DEFINITION

No.
2.1 2.2
44

SYMBOL OF SI UNIT

A BL.

Area of ram bow in longitudinal plane Area of transverse crosssection of a bulbous bow (full area port and starI;oard)

2.3

A BT

2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7

A, A, A, A,

Forward perpendicular section Area, midship section

area

Area of transom (full area port and starboard) Area exposed to wind

2.8

A,

Area, waterplane

2.9

Area, ma&mm section

transverse

2.10 2.11

Centre of buoyancy from aft perpendicular Centre of waterplane from aft perpendicular

Ship transverse cross-sectional area at the aft pcrpendicular The area of the ram projected on the middle line plane forward of the fore perpendicular* T~becr;;;~tional area at perpendicular. Where the water lines are rounded so as to terminate on the forward perpendicular, A,, is measured by continuing the area curve forward to the perpendicular, ignoring the final rounding* Ship transverse cross-sectional area at the fore perpendicular Area of the immersed midship section, midway between fore and aft perpendiculars Cross-sectional area of transom stern below the load waterline Area of portion of ship above waterline projected normally to the direction of relative wincl Horizontal plane area en. closed between the intersection line of free water surface with the ship hull Ship transverse cross-section having the maximum immersed area Distance of centre of buoyancy from aft perpendicular Distance of centre of waterplane from aft perpendicular

m2

mp

m m

*Below the load waterline the stem contour sometimes recedes aft of the fort perpendicular before projecting forward to define the outline of the ram or fore end of the bulb. In such instances, this area should be calculated using as datum the aftermost vertical tangent to the contour Instead of the fore perpendicular. tAkernatively, the position of the centre of buoyancy B may be expressed in terms of the co-ordinate axes with an appropriate suffix, for example, X,, Y, and Z,. The position of other items, such as the centre of gravity G, metacentre M and centre of flotation F could also be treated in the same way.

4

IS : 8214 (Part II) - 1976
SL

TERM

DEPINITION

No.
2.12 2.13 Centre of gravity perpendicular Beam (or breadth) of ship from aft moulded Distance of centre of gravity from aft perpendicular Maximum moulded breadth trallsvers? at maximum section measured at right angle with the plane of symmetry Centre of gravity of water displaced Breadth measured on the drsigned waterline at the midway between section, fore and aft perpendiculars Breadth measured on the designed waterline at the maximum transverse section n Distance from the crntrr or buoyancy H to the transvCrse metarrntrr ;\I

SYMBOL OF SI Usm m

m

2.14 2.15

Centre of buoyancy Breadth of midship section

-

2.16

Breadth of maximum verse section

trans-

-

2.17 2.18

R. E. Froude's efficient

breadth

coof

of

m

Metacentre above centre buoyancy

2.19 2.20 2.21 2.22 2.23

Longitudinal metacentre above centre of buoyancy Block coefficient Coefficient ofinerlia ofwaterplane, longitudinal Coefficient of inertia of waterplane, transverse Midship section coefficient (midway between forward and after perpendiculars) Longitudinal prismatic? coefficient Prismatic coefficient? afterbody Prismatic coefficientt entrance Prismatic body coeficien tt fore-

m

im

v

-

2.24

2.26 2.25 2.27

v (afterbody)/.j 4, L [or v (afterbody)/& A, L] v (entra,uze)/`4, L,: [or v (entrance)/& IJ V (forebody)/& A, L [or v (forebody)/& A,, I.1

-

*Alternatively, the position of the centre of buoyancy 13 may be expressed in terms of the co-ordinate axes with an appropriate suffix, for example, X,. Y, and Z,. The position of other items, such as the centre of gravity G, metaceutre M and centre of flotation F could also be treated in the same way. ?The prismatic coefficient should generally be based upon maximum-section area rather than on midsection area, but it should be clearly stated which area has been used. Whatever ship length considered appropriate may be used for this and other coefficients, but this length should be clearly indicated and stated.

5

IS : 8214 (Part II) - 1976
SL TERhl
DEFINITION %-MBOL OF

NO.
2.28
Prismalic coefficient* run lor v (-)/Ax L,

SI UNIT

-

V (run)/AH Ll

2.29 2.30 2.31 2.32 2.33

Prismatic

coefficiellt*

vertical

V A,
A, LB Cs = c,= C,, = m s

Designed load waterline efficient

co-

Non dimensional wetted surface coefficient Maximum transverse coefficient section

-

A, Bx T, s 1/z

Wetted surface coefficient of Taylor
Volumetric coefficierlt

2.34 2.35

v i3
Vertical height at midship from base line to the upper deck beam line From the freeboard markings to the freeboard deck, according to official rules Centroid of waterplane at which the vessel floats Distance of centroid of water plane from forward perpendicular Distance of centre of buoyancy from forward perpendicular Distance of centre of gravity from forward perpendicular f,,= g

m
m

Depth, hull

moulded,

of a ship

2.36 2.37 2.38 2.39

Freeboard Position ofcentre of flotation Centroid of waterplane from forward perpendicular (:entre of buoyancy from forward perpendicular Centre of gravity from forward perpendicular Area coefficient for ram bow Taylor sectional area coefficient for bulbous bow Centre of gravity

m

m

2.40

m

2.41 2.42 2.43

In

fm =

A,,

A,

-

Point at which the weight of the ship is supposed to act

*The prismatic coefficient should generally be based upon maximum-section area rather than on midsection area, but it should be clearly stated which area has been used. Whatever ship length considered appropriate may be used for this and other coefficients, but this length should be clearly indicated and stated. tAltematively, the position of the centre of buoyancy B may be expressed in terms of the The position of co-ordinate axes with an appropriate suffix, for example, X,, Y, and Z,. other items, such as the centre of gravity G, metacentre M and centre of flotation F could also be treated in the same way.

6

IS : 8214 (Part II) - 1976
SL NO. SYMBOL

TERM

SYMBOL SI

OP

UNIT *Il

2.44

GM* a`* Gz :
`E

Metacentric

height

2.45

Longitudinal height Righting

metacentric

2.46 2.47

arm or lever half

Distance from the centre of gravity G to the transverse metacentre M Distance from the centre of gravity G to the longitudinal metacentre M, Angle of waterline at the bow with reference to centreneglecting local plane, shape at stem Angle of waterline at stern with reference to centreneglecting local plane, shape at stern frame About transverse axis through centre of flotation Second polar moment of area of a plane-surface related to a point in the plane axis longitudinal About through centre of flotation Distance from the centre of buoyancy B to the mouldetl base or keel K Distance from the centre of gravity G to the moulded base or keel K Distance from the transverse th R metacentre M to moulded base or keel K

Angle of entrance,

m -

2.48

Angle of run, half

m4

2.49 2.50 2.51 2.52

Longitudinal moment of inertia of water plane Polar moment of inertia Transverse of water Centre of moulded moment of inertia plane buoyancy above base or keel

Inil m4 m4 m

I* iTB*

2.53

E;G*

Centre of gravity above moulded base or keel Metacentre above base or keel moulded

m

2.54

m

2.55 2.56 2.57 2.58

KM,*
L L* LE

metacentre Longitudinal above moulded base or keel Length of a ship Length Length of afterbody of entrance

Reference length of a ship I$enzintilaztween the Length of the shipbody from midship section to after end From the forward perpendicular to the forward end of parallel middle body, or maximum section Length of the shipbody from midship section to forward end -

2.59 2.60

L, L OA

Length Length,

of forebody overall

the position of the centre of buoyancy B may be expressed in terms of the *Alternatively, The position 01 co-ordinate axes with an appropriate suffix, for example, X,, Y, and Z,. other items such as the centre of gravity G, metacentre M and centre of flotation 1: could also be treated in the same way.

IS : 8214 (Part II) - 1976
SL No. 2.61 2.62 2.63 2.64
TERM

DEFINITION Length of constant transverse section From section of maximum area or after end of parallel middle body to WL termination or other designated point Longitudinal distance between extreme points of a waterline for a particular draught and trim J,ength at the waterline corresponding to the maximum load condition in cahn water L 1 V3 Point where a vertical line. dralvn through the ceutre of buoyancy when a ship is heeled, intersects the vertical line through the ccntre of gravity when it is iloating in equilibrium. Transverse metacentre is approximately constant for angles of heel up to J 0' and is generally known as `initial metacentre' .\ metacentre which exists for longitudinal inclination and is analogous to transvrrsr metacentre s og The intercept of the tangent to the sectional area curve at the bow on the midship ordinate expressed as a ratio of the midship ordinate* -

SYMBOL

OF

SI UNIT m m 111 m

0verall submerged length I,ength of parallel middle body Length betwren J~erJ~endiculars I,ength of run

2.65

I,eng;h of waterline in general

m

2.m

Lrngth lint

on designed

watrr-

m

-

2.67

2.m

R. 1:. Froude's length coefficient or length displaccmen t ratio Traruvcrsr mctaccntre

-

2.69

AT,,

I,ougituclinal

rnctacrntre

--

2.70 2.71 2.72

s @ t

1vctted

surface

In3 -

R. E. Froude's wetted surfacr coefficient Taylor tangent curve to the area

2.73

T

Draught,

moulded,

of ship

m

*If the sectional area at thr end ordinate is not zero (for example, when there is a bulbous bow) both intercepts should be diminished by that area in evaluating t.

IS : 8214 (Part II) - 1976
SL

SYMBOL
Draught,

TERM aft

DEFINITION Draught measured at the inafter tersection of the perpendicular with the baseline (if the ship has a sloped or raked keel, it is measured at the intersection with the keel line) Draught measured at the lowest part of the ship or its appendages Draught measured at the intersection of the forward perpendicular with the baseline (or the keel line if the ship has a sloped or raked keel) Draught measured at the For a ship mid-section. with straight keel T _ Y T 3 V.W Ship dimension/model mension T, + TA 2

SYMBOL

OF

No. 2.74 TA

SI UNIT m

2.75

T,

Draught

extreme

m

2.76

T,

Draught,

forward

m

2.77

T,

Draught, mean or mid-length

m

2.78 2.79

0 A

R. E. Froude's efficient Displacement Scale ratio Displacement Permeability

draught

co-

N m3 -

weight

2.80 2.81 2.82

h v II

di-

volume volume

The ratio of the volume of water entering a compartment to the volume of the compartment

INDIAN ON SHIPS' IS

STANDARDS

HYDRODYNAMIC

TERMS

:
I)-1976 II)-1976 IV)-1976 V)-1976 VI)-1976 Glossary Glossary of ships' hydrodynamic terms: Part I Basic quantities Glossary of ships' hydrodynamic terms: Part II Ship geometry Glossary of ships' hydrodynamic terms: Part IV Sea keeping Glossary of ships' hydrodynamic terms: Part V Manoeuvrability Glossary of ships' hydrodynamic terms: Part VI Strength and vibration of ships' propellers

8214 (Part 8214 (Part 8214 (Part 8214 (Part 8214 (Part 8215-1976

