Wala Al IS 18267 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


IEEE E At TATE WA & 
ada — far 


Food Serving Utensils Made from 
Agri By-products — Specification 


ICS 97.040.01 


© BIS 2023 


ARA AT SAT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Er DA una HA, 9 ertet IE SIX AMT, Ay fått - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2023 Price Group 8 


Agriculture and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Agriculture 
and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 20 had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council. 


The demand for the disposable/one time use food serving utensils in the gatherings and social activities have 
increased in the recent years, due to the advantage of no cleaning efforts after the usage. Most of such disposable 
utensils are polythene based and ultimately non-degradable, posing environmental concerns. Use of degradable, 
preferably biodegradable materials for the manufacture of such disposable utensils has gained importance over 
the years. Many agricultural based materials, usually leaves, sheaths, etc. are preferred for making the utensils in 
the form of plates, cups, bowls, etc as per requirement. Such materials are the waste or by-products of cultivation 
practices and available at no or low cost. The leaves/sheath are collected from the fields, as fallen or removed 
after the harvest of the economic part of the plant/crop. 


In the recent years, the number of manufacturers of degradable utensils has increased across the country. These 
manufacturers produce the utensils as per their standards and quality. Formulation of a standard on the subject 
will guide the manufacturers and the consumers on the quality standards and ensure uniform standards across the 
country. 


Significant assistance has been drawn with respect to testing methodology of various parameters from 
GB 18006-2008 (National Standard of the People's Republic of China) during preparation of this standard. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex K. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 18267 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


FOOD SERVING UTENSILS MADE FROM 
AGRI BY-PRODUCTS — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies the requirements and 
methods of test for use of agricultural by-products 
as raw materials for making food serving utensils. 


1.2 The standard also provides guidance on the 
general manufacturing process employed for 
making utensils of different shapes and sizes related 
to food serving. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 1060 Methods of sampling and 
(Part 2) : 1960 test for paper and allied 
products: Part 2 


IS 2491 : 2013 Food hygiene — General 
principles — Code of 


practice (third revision) 


IS 3748 : 2022 Tool steels — Specification 


(third revision) 

IS 14595 : 1998 Food hygiene — 
Microbiological criteria — 
Principles for establishment 
and application 


ISO 287 : 2017 Paper and board — 
Determination of moisture 
content of a lot — Oven- 
drying method 


ISO 18593: 2018 Microbiology of the food 


chain — Horizontal 
methods for surface 
sampling 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.0 For the purposes of this document, the following 
terms and definitions apply. 


3.1 Agriculture or Agro Based Material — The 
biological materials/resources that contain cellulose, 
hemicelluloses and lignin. They generally include 
wood, agricultural crop residues, water plants, 
grasses and other plant substances. 


3.2 Agricultural By-Products — The 
resources/materials of agro base, left after the 
conversion or utilization in to major products and that 
can be further utilized for conversion/utilization. 


3.3 Agricultural Wastes — The 
resources/materials left after conversion/utilization 
of agro-based materials that find less scope for 
further utilization/conversion. They can be further 
utilized by burning, decomposing, etc. 


3.4 Biodegradable Material — Degradable 
material that is decomposed using microorganisms, 
like fungi and bacteria. 


3.5 Decomposing/Decomposition — Process by 
which dead organic substances are broken down into 
simpler organic or inorganic matter such as carbon 
dioxide, water, simple sugars and mineral salts. 


3.6 Decomposers — Organisms that facilitate 
decomposition are known as decomposers. 


3.7 Degradable Material — Material capable of 
being degraded or degrading; especially capable of 
being readily decomposed naturally by chemical 
action. 


3.8 Food Serving Utensils — Set of vessels used 
for the purpose of serving the cooked food to others. 
These include the containers, for holding the 
cooking foods, hand tools for handling and 
distribution of foods and other accessories for use by 
the consumers to handle and consume food. 


NOTE — The term ‘Utensils’ used here is meant for single 
use utensils only. 


3.9 Mechanical Strength — The strength of the 
object to withstand the applied load against failure 
or deformation. It may be the strength required to 
overcome / prevent bending, crushing, breaking, etc. 


3.10 Microbial Load — The number and type of 
microorganisms contaminating an object or 
organism. Microbial loads are typically expressed in 
units such as colony-forming units (CFUs) of 


IS 18267 : 2023 


microorganisms per unit mass or volume. 


3.11 Sheath — The basal part ofa leaf that encircles 
the stem is called sheath. The matured/well grown 
sheath falls when fully dried up. 


3.12 Water Absorption — The amount of 
water/moisture absorbed by the biological material 
upon immersion/soaking in water over a time. It is 
expressed as ratio of mass of water to mass of 
material and preferably in percentage. 


3.13 Warping of Plates — A distorting effect that 
can result when a piece of wood/the object made of 
ligno-cellulosic material dries unevenly. As the 
moisture leaves, the fibers of flat surface will 
contract slightly and change to a curved or 
misshapen surface because the fibers are contracting 
at different rates that then shift the overall lay of the 
fibers. 


4 RAW MATERIALS 


4.1 Leaves and sheath of plants and trees having 
wider area should be utilized for the manufacture of 
food serving utensils like plates, cups/bowls. Some 
of the commonly used plant species whose leaves 
and sheath used in making plates and cups/bowls are 
given in Table 1. 


5 MANUFACTURING PROCESS 


The process involved in manufacturing of food 
serving utensils from agricultural by-products is 
given in Annex A for guidance. 


6 STANDARD UTENSILS AND DIMENSIONS 


6.1 The utensils made from agricultural by-products 
like, plates are generally made in round, elliptical, 
square and rectangular shapes either plain or with 
compartments. The utensils are made in various 
sizes and dimensions according to the requirements 
of the customers. Some of the examples of the food 
serving utensils and available in various sizes and 
shapes are sown in Fig. 1. The dimensions of the 
various utensils generally used are given in Table 2. 


7 REQUIREMENTS 
7.1 General Requirements 


The following general requirements shall be 
followed in the production and handling of 
agricultural by- products based utensils. 


a) The utensils shall be made only from the 
agricultural by-products; 


b) The utensils shall be clean, well dried and 
free from any dust, dirt, foreign materials, 


etc and ready to use; 


c) No chemicals, colours (synthetic or natural), 
resins, adhesives, etc. shall be used in the 
manufacture of utensils; 


d) The surface of the utensil shall be smooth 
and free from any dent/damage that will 
cause leakage of food materials from the 
utensil; 


e) The patches of discoloration and change in 
colour of the leaves shall be ensured as 
natural formation and not related to any 
plant disease or microbial activity; 


f) The surface of the utensil coming in contact 
with food materials shall be free from any 
damage caused by insects and 
microorganisms; 


g) The edges of the utensils shall not be sharp, 
which will cause inconvenience during 
handling; 


h) It shall be ensured that, the utensils are free 
from damage along the folding in the 
formation process; 


j) In both the manual and machine stitching 
methods of manufacturing, it shall be 
ensured that mid ribs/twigs/any part of the 
plants/thread used for joining is firmly 
placed and does not get into the food 
material being served; and 


k) The utensils should be arranged by staking 
and packaged as per the requirement of the 
customer/market and occupy less space and 
preferably wrapped with moisture proof 
material to avoid moisture absorption by the 
utensils. 


7.2 Performance Requirements 


7.2.1 When measured, the deviations in the 
dimensions of utensils shall be within the tolerance 
given in Table 2 when tested as per Annex B. 


7.2.2 The moisture content of the utensils will not be 
more than 10 percent dry basis when removed from 
the package. The percent moisture absorption 
(increase in moisture content) will not be more than 
5 percent dry basis, when completely immersed in 
water for 10 minutes as per the method given in 
Annex C. 


7.2.3 The surface of the food serving utensils will be 
tested for the presence of the microorganism. The 
total plate count of the microorganisms on the 
surface showed shall be below 5 cfu/cm? when 
tested as per ISO 18593. 


7.2.4 During the bending test of the utensils 
performed, if there is no break with more than 6 mm 
long, the board may be classified as fair. If the board 
shows no fibrous break, it is classified as good when 
tested as per Annex D. 


7.2.5 The load-bearing performance tested for the 
disposable tableware such as food boxes, bowls and 
cups, changes to the height thereof before and after 
bearing a load shall not exceed 5 percent when tested 
as per Annex E. 


7.2.6 There must be no cracks or splits to any of the 
three samples of utensils dropped freely, facing 
bottom-down, from a height of 0.8 m, onto a level 
cement floor when tested as per Annex F. 


7.2.7 For disposable tableware where the container 
part and its lid are hinged together, there must be no 
cracks or damage after the folding lid fitting test on 
all three samples when tested as per Annex G. 


7.2.8 There must be no deformations or smears or 
leakages to the disposable tableware such as boxes, 
cups and bowls, which are intended to contain hot 
dishes, hot food and hot drinks, during the hot-water 
resistance test and hot-oil resistance test when tested 
as per Annex H. 


7.2.9 For disposable tableware such as boxes, bowls 
and cups which have the function of containing 
liquid, after the water leakage test, there must be no 
water leakage when tested as per Annex J. 


8 MARKING AND PACKING 
8.1 Packing and Marking 


8.1.1 The utensils will be packed suitably in 


IS 18267 : 2023 


numbers of 10, 20, 25, 50 or according to the market 
requirement or consumer’s choice. 


8.1.2 Each utensil may be pasted with a sticker using 
non-toxic glue in a location not coming in contact 
with food materials; preferably at outside bottom 
will be appropriate. Whenever, it is not possible to 
provide the sticker in each piece, it may be placed as 
conspicuously visible in the bulk package. 


The sticker shall provide the following information: 


a) Manufacturers name or recognized 
trademark, if any; 

b) Batch or code number; 

c) Type of raw material; 

d) Type of product and sizes (in mm); 

e) Date of manufacture; 

f) Best Before (Month and Year format); 

g) Suitability of usage/application 
(Dry/Wet/Both — applications); 

h) Declaration stating ‘For single use only’; 
and 

i) Any other information required under the 
Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) 
Rules, 2011. 


8.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder and the products 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


IS 18267 : 2023 


Table 1 Leaves and Sheaths of Plants and Trees Utilized for the Manufacture of 
Food Serving Utensils 
(Clause 4.1) 


SI No. Species Material Process/Method 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Flame of forest Butea monosperma Leaves Joining by stitching/cold/hot 
(Lam.) Taub pressing. 
ii) Teak (Tectona grandis) Leaves Joining by stitching/cold/hot 
pressing. 
111) Almond (Terminalia Catappa) Leaves Joining by stitching/cold/hot 
pressing. 
iv) Banana (Musa spp.) — green Leaves Cold pressing. 
v) Banana (Musa spp.) — dry Leaves Hot pressing. 
vi) Banyan tree (Ficus benghalensis) Leaves Joining by stitching/cold/hot 
pressing. 
vil) Fig (Ficus auriculate) Leaves Joining by stitching/cold/hot 
pressing. 
viii) White fig (Ficus virens) Leaves Joining by stitching/cold/hot 
pressing. 
ix) Jack (Artocarpus heteropgyllus) Leaves Joining by stitching/cold/hot 
pressing. 
x) Taro (Colacasia esculanta) Leaves Joining by stitching/cold/hot 
pressing. 
xi) Kanak champa (Pterospermum Leaves Joining by stitching/cold/hot 
accerifolium) pressing. 
xii) Sal (Shorea robusta) Leaves Joining by stitching/cold/hot 
pressing. 
xiii) Maloo creeper (Panera vahalii) Leaves Joining by stitching/cold/hot 
pressing. 
xiv) Sacred lotus (Nelumbo nucifera) Leaves Joining by stitching/cold/hot 
pressing. 
xv) Badam (Terminalia catappa) Leaves Joining by stitching/cold/hot 
pressing. 
xvi) Chandada (Macaranga peltata) Leaves Joining by stitching/cold/hot 
pressing. 
xvii) Bagasse Pulp Moulding by cold/hot pressing. 
xviii) Areca nut (Areca catechu) Sheath Hot pressing. 


IS 18267 : 2023 


FIG. 1c Cup FIG. 1D FORK FIG. 1E SPOON 


FIG. 1F PACKAGING CONTAINERS 


IS 18267 : 2023 


FIG. 1G PLANTAIN LEAVES BASED UTENSILS 


FIG. 1 VARIOUS TYPES OF FOOD SERVING UTENSILS FROM LEAVES/SHEATH 


IS 18267 : 2023 


Table 2 Dimensions of the Various Utensils Made From Leaves 


(Clause 5) 
SI No. Source/Leaf Utensil Shape Dimension in mm Serving 
(Plate/Cup) Type 
(Wet or 
Diameter Length Breadth Depth Rim Dry) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
i) Areca Plates Round 305 +2 = 2542 10+2 Wet and 
leaf dry 
sheath 
254 +2 E = 232 10+2 Wet and 
dry 
203 +2 5 = 232 10+2 Wet and 
dry 
152 4.2 u 35+2 05+2 Wet and 
dry 
102 +2 u = 35 +2 05+2 Wet and 
dry 
Square = 254 +2 254 +2 20 +2 05+2 Wet and 
dry 
T 203 +2 203 +2 20 +2 05+2 Wet and 
dry 
Fr 152 +2 152 +2 20+2 05+2 Wet and 
dry 
Tray with lid Square = 254 +2 254+2 20+2 05+2 Wet and 
dry 
a 203 +2 203 +2 20 +2 05+2 Wet and 
dry 
Containers Square with lid Holding capacity — 250 ml Wet and 
with lid Holding capacity — 500 ml dry 
Holding capacity — 750 ml 
Holding capacity — 1 000 ml 
ii) Bagasse Snacks plate Square 156 156 20 Weight: 11 g 
Mini meal Square 206 206 20 Weight: 15 g 
Dinner plate Square 256 256 20 Weight : 127 g 
180 ml bowl Rectangular 105 65 35 Weight: 15 g 
250 ml bowl Rectangular 300 90 35 Weight : 07 g 
4 Rectangular 305 255 30 Weight : 36 g 
5 Rectangular 130 90 35 Weight : 36 g 
500 ml Rectangular 237 132 40 Weight: 15 g 
750 ml Rectangular 287 157 40 Weight : 21 g 


IS 18267 : 2023 


SI No. Source Disposable Shape Dimension in mm Serving 
/Leaf crockery type 
Diameter Length Breadth Depth Rim Weight Thicknes 
s 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) M (8) (9) a0 AN (12) 

i) Bagasse Plain plate Circular 260 3 F 23 10 18.42g 0.5 Dry 

il) Bagasse Compartmental Circular 260 = = 23 10 18.80 g 0.5 Dry 

plate (3 section) 
111) Bagasse Plain plate Circular 145 u = 15 5 6.35 g 0.5 Dry 
(small) 

iv) Areca Bowl plain Rectangular - 110 105 16 43 934g 1.5 Dry 

v) Wheat Plain plate Circular 250 7 E 26 10 27.92g 0.6 Dry 
straw 


NOTE — For utensils having a holding capacity, there shall not be any negative tolerance. However, the positive tolerance may be 


allowed up to 10 percent of the holding capacity. 


IS 18267 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 5) 


MANUFACTURING PROCESS 


A-1 GENERAL 


Leaves and sheaths are used in making the food 
serving utensils, mainly the plates and cups/bowls. 
The leaves being smaller in size and inadequate to 
hold the required quality of food materials are joined 
together to reach adequately larger size. The leaves/ 
sheath in larger size and adequately thick to form 
into a desired shape are then mechanically pressed, 
either cold or hot. The processes generally involved 
in making the plates and cups/bowls from these 
materials is provided hereunder for guidance. The 
various methods employed for making the food 
serving utensils include: 


a) Stitching; 

b) Pressing; 

c) Stitching and pressing; and 
d) Moulding from pulp. 


A-2 STITCHING 


Stitching is followed to join the smaller size leaves 
to make into usable from in large size. Number of 
small leaves are used to reach a larger area of the 
surface. They are held together by stitching. Both 
manual and machine stitching are followed in 
forming a larger size leaf. 


A-2.1 Manual Sitching 


Small size leaves are placed together by the side 
with an overlap and fixed using mid ribs/twigs/any 
part of the plants, which can be used like a pin, 
which is called as stitching. At intervals of 10 mm 
to 15 mm, manual stitching is done using these twigs 
for a length of 5 mm to 10 mm. The final required 
shape of the leaf, rectangular, round, elliptical, 
square, etc., will be formed during the stitching 
itself. After stitching the leaves will be dried, either 
shade drying or moderate sun drying, to less than 
10 percent moisture content without much shrinkage 
or wrinkles. These stitched leaves after drying will 
be stacked and bundled in convenient numbers as 
per the market requirement. A view of the 
hand/manually stitched leave is shown in Fig. 2A. 


A-2.2 Machine Stitching 


To reduce time taken in manual stitching and avoid 
the use of twigs/other portions of plant materials, 
machine stitching is done using thread. The type of 


thread used depends on the manufacturers, may be 
cotton, nylon, polyester, etc. The nylon and 
polyester threads are stronger with higher life; 
however, the cotton thread is used to achieve 
degradation along with leaves. During stitching the 
leaves will be at intermediate moisture level with 
flexibility for stitching and followed by drying, 
either shade drying or moderate sun drying. After 
drying these stitched leaves will be stacked and 
bundled in convenient numbers as per the market 
requirement. A view of the machine stitched leave is 
shown in Fig. 2B. 


A-3 PRESSING 


The leaf either as single or many leaves joined 
together by manual or machine stitching, will be 
pressed mechanically in a mould of desired shape 
and formed into plate. Depending on the nature of 
the leaves, cold pressing or hot pressing will be 
followed. Suitable mould/dies will be made 
according to configuration following the guidelines 
of IS 3748. 


A-3.1 Cold Pressing 


Mechanical pressing of leaf or leaves on a mould of 
desired size and shape is done by applying the force 
through hand or pedal (foot). This method is suitable 
for the green leaves of less thickness. To join the 
leaves together no adhesive or glue is preferred. 
Wet/green leaves when placed together with overlap 
or number of leaves together, on the mould and 
pressed, they form the plate according to the shape 
of the mould. Upon drying they form into plates with 
moderate strength. 


A-3.2 Hot Pressing 


Leaves having thickness more than 2 mm will be 
formed into desired shape by pressing with heat. 
Force may be applied with hand using a screw press 
or by foot (pedal). The moulds will be provided with 
electrical heaters on both bottom and top surfaces. 
The heaters used are of capacity 750 W to 1 000 W 
may be element type, foil/filament type, heating 
ropes, band heaters, etc depending on the 
configuration of mould and provisions available. For 
the application of load on the mould, 
hydraulically/pneumatically operated press is used. 
The temperature of the mould in the range of 100 °C 
to 120 °C is maintained and controlled through a 


IS 18267 : 2023 


stem type or capillary type thermostat or digital 
temperature controller. The cycle of plate formation 
involves pressing the moulds, heating, holding and 
releasing. The leaves/sheath in dry nature as 
transported to the site will be soaked in water for 
20 minutes to 30 minutes to reach a moisture content 
of 15 perecent to 20 perecent db., followed by 
cleaning the surface using nylon brush in running 
water. After allowing for the surface moisture to get 
drained, the leaf will be manually straightened and 
made free from wrinkles and rolling, placed in the 
mould. When the moulds reach the set temperature 
pressed to the required level of force /load, normally 
1.5 tonnes to 2 tonnes, as per the provision given in 
the machine, for 30 seconds to 40 seconds. Leaves 
with thickness less than 2 mm are placed together 
upto 3 numbers and formed into plates/ cups by hot 
pressing for duration less than followed for areca 
leaf plates. Hydraulic power pack operated by 1 hp 
is provided and upto 5 units can be connected to a 
pack. In the modern presses, the holding time is set 
through a timer to alert the operator to release the 
plate from the mould. The formed plate is checked 
for the formation and damages, trimmed of excess 
sheath/leaf and dried in an oven at 90 °C to 100 °C 
for 10 minutes to 20 minutes. The surface is cleaned 
and packaged by shrink wrapping in bundles of 
50 numbers or as per the domestic market 
requirement. A hot press for making plate from plant 
leaves/arecanut sheath is shown in Fig. 3. 


A-4 STITCHING AND PRESSING 


To make plates from green leaves of less thickness, 
number of smaller leaves are joined by manual or 
machine stitching. These plates when required to 
form into any configuration, they will be either cold 
or hot pressed in the mould. An example of these 
types of plates is shown in Fig. 4. 


A-5 MOULDING FROM PULP 


In this method, the agricultural materials will be 
made into pulp by wet grinding. The pulp in the 
appropriate consistency will be placed in the mould 
of desired configuration and the utensil is formed. 
On setting with the shape and partial drying, the 
utensil will be de-moulded and shade dried. The 
disadvantages are, time consuming process, heavier 
in nature and poor strength unless made heavier. 
Normally leaves will not be wet ground and pulped 
for making plates since they leave the chlorophyll 
and the bitter taste to the utensils, which are 
undesirable for food applications. Mostly the non- 
leafy parts of the plants will be used for making 
utensils through this process. A food serving 
moulded plate is shown in Fig. 5. 


A-6 HYGIENE CONDITIONS 


All the utensils shall be manufactured under strict 
hygienic conditions as prescribed in IS 2491. 


FIG. 2A HAND/MANUALLY STITCHED LEAVES 


10 


IS 18267 : 2023 


FIG. 2B LEAVES STITCHED WITH MACHINE 


FIG. 2 MANUAL AND MACHINE STITCHED LEAVES 


FIG. 3 HOT PRESS FOR MAKING LEAF PLATES 


11 


IS 18267 : 2023 


FIG. 4A MANUALLY STITCHED AND HOT FIG. 4B MACHINE STITCHED AND HOT PRESSED 
PRESSED 


FIG. 4 STITCHED AND HOT PRESSED PLATES FROM LEAVES 


FIG. SA MOULDED FROM PULP FIG. 5B MOULDED FROM LEAVES 


FIG. 5 PLATES MADE By HOT PRESS 


IS 18267 : 2023 


ANNEX B 


(Clause 7.2.1) 


MEASUREMENT OF DIMENSIONS 


B-1 The dimensions of the utensils will be measured 
using the Vernier calliper, screw gauge and any 
suitable measurement system to least count of 
0.5 mm. Measurement will be done with minimum 


ten numbers of samples and the mean will be taken. 
The deviation will be within the tolerance specified 
in Table 2. 


ANNEX C 


(Clause 7.2.2) 


MOISTURE CONTENT AND WATER ABSORPTION ESTIMATION 


C-1 PROCEDURE 


Place the replicated samples of test piece of leaf, 
about 10 g to 20 g in a thermostatically controlled 
ventilated hot air oven maintained at temperature of 


(not exceeding 24 hours), does not exceed 
0.1 percent. From the wet and dry weights of the 
samples, calculate the moisture content and express 
in percentage dry basis. The moisture content can be 


| 3 determined as per ISO 287. 
105 °C 2 °C. Dry the samples until the difference 
between two successive dryings and weighing 
ANNEX D 
(Clause 7.2.4) 


BENDING TEST OF THE UTENSILS 


D-1 This test applied to paper and allied products as 
per IS 1060 (Part 2) is modified for adoption to test 
the bending strength of leaf/agri-material made 
utensils. 


D-2 Procedure 


Prepare a square test piece at least 60 mm x 60 mm 
and fold by fingers along the diagonal so that the 
inner surfaces are in contact completely. Unfold and 
repeat the folding along the same crease in the 


13 


opposite direction until the other surfaces are in 
contact completely. Repeat the test with a second 
test piece. Record any visible fibrous breaks or 
cracks on the surface of the folded test piece after 
each crease is made. Report the average number and 
length of the visible breaks on the surface. If no 
break is more than 6 mm long, the board may be 
classified as fair. If the board shows no fibrous 
break, it is classified as good. 


IS 18267 : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 7.2.5) 
LOAD BEARING PERFORMANCE 


E-1 Load-bearing tests only apply to disposable 
tableware such as food boxes, bowls and cups which 
can be held in the hands or may be stacked while 
containing food; it is not a requirement for 
disposable tableware such as knives, forks, spoons, 
chopsticks, dishes, plates or any disposable 
tableware having an outer holder. 


E-2 PROCEDURE 


For the test, two smooth glass plates of size 


measure the height between the top surfaces of the 
first glass plate to the bottom surface of the second 
glass plate. Determine the variation rate of the 
weight loading using formula. The arithmetic 
average value of the variation rates from the two 
samples is regarded as the variation rate of the 
weight loading. 


Ho. H 


W = x 100% 


o 


200 mm x 150 mm x 3 mm, a weight of 3 kg and a where 
steel rule with accuracy of 1 mm are required. W = the variation rate of the weight load 
Extract two samples, position the main body of the of the sample, as a percentage (%); 
samples up-side down on one of the glass plates, and i i | 
put another glass plate onto the base of the samples. Ho = the height before weight loaded, in 
Measure the height between the top surfaces of the millimeters (mm), and 
first glass plate to the bottom surface of the second H = the height after weight loaded, in 
glass plate. Place the 3 kg weight onto the centre of millimeters (mm). 
the second glass plate. After one minute, accurately 
ANNEX F 
(Clause 7.2.6) 
DROP PERFORMANCE 


F-1 PROCEDURE 


At a normal temperature, allow the samples to drop 
freely, facing bottom-down, from a height of 0.8 m, 
onto a level cement floor. Check if the samples are 


intact. Use three different samples for this test. 
There must be no cracks or splits to any of the three 
samples. 


ANNEX G 


(Clause 7.2.7) 


FOLDING LID FITTING PERFORMANCE 


G-1 PROCEDURE 


The folding lid fitting test only applies to disposable 
tableware where the container part and its lid are 
hinged together. For disposable tableware where the 
container and its lid are separated in two parts or 
disposable tableware with no lid, such as food 


14 


boxes, bowls, cups, plates, dishes, knives, forks, 
spoons or chopsticks etc, the lid-body folding test 
is not a requirement. Continuously open and shut 
the lid of a hinged-lid container sample for 
15 minutes, then check for any cracking or damage 
at the hinge. Repeat with three different samples to 
conduct this test. 


IS 18267 : 2023 


ANNEX H 


(Clause 7.2.8) 


HOT-WATER RESISTANCE & HOT- OIL RESISTANCE 


H-1 PROCEDURE 


Place two samples onto an enamel plate lined with 
filter paper, fill completely with hot water at a 
temperature of 95 °C + 5 °C (use hot water at 
100 °C for instant noodle cups) or hot cooking oil 
(drinking sets only require a temperature resistance 
test with hot water at 100 °C). Move the samples and 
leave them to stand in a thermostat container at 
60 °C for 30 minutes, then check the samples for any 
deformation or any traces of smeared discolouration 
or leakage. After the hot-water resistance test, there 
shall be no deformations, peelings or wrinkles to the 
disposable tableware. For disposable tableware that 


functions as a vessel, there shall be no deformations, 
smears or leakages. There must be no deformations 
or smears to, or leakages of, either sample. The 
hot-water resistance test applies only to disposable 
tableware such as boxes, cups or bowls which are 
intended to contain hot dishes, hot food and hot 
drinks, for disposable tableware such as plates, 
dishes, knives, forks or chopsticks which do not 
require heat resistance, the hot-water resistance test 
is not a requirement, for any disposable tableware 
which is marked as non-heat resistant, the hot-water 
resistance and hot-oil resistance tests are also not a 
requirement. 


ANNEX J 


(Clause 7.2.9) 


WATER LEAKAGE RESISTANCE 


J-1 PROCEDURE 


Place two samples onto an enamel plate lined with 
filter paper, fill completely with hot water, at a 
temperature of 23 °C + 2 °C, leave the samples 
standing for 30 minutes, then check the samples for 
any deformations there to or any traces of smears or 
leakage at the bases thereof for disposable tableware 


15 


such as boxes, bowls and cups which have the 
function of containing liquid, after the water leakage 
test, there must be no water leakage. For disposable 
tableware which is marked as not for containing 
liquid or any other disposable tableware which has 
no liquid-containing function, water leakage 
resistance is not a requirement. 


IS 18267 : 2023 


ANNEX K 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Agriculture and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 20 


Organization 


Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Agriculture Machinery Manufacturers Association, Pune 


CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar 


Dr Panjabrao Deshmukh Krishi Vidyapeeth, Akola 


Essen Multipack Limited, Rajkot 


ICAR - Central Institute for Research on Cotton 
Technology, Mumbai 


ICAR — Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, 
Bhopal 


ICAR — Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering and 
Technology, Ludhiana 


ICAR — Central Institute of Women in Agriculture, 
Bhubaneswar 


ICAR - Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, 
Bengaluru 


Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 
Indosaw Industrial Products Private Limited, Ambala 
Cantt. 


Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, Rahuri 


Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture, 
New Delhi 


National Committee on Precision Applications in 
Horticulture, New Delhi 


National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship 
and Management, Sonipat 


National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship 
and Management, Thanjavur 


North Eastern Region Farm Machinery Training and 
Testing Institute, Biswanath Charali 


16 


Representative(s) 


DR SHYAM NARAYAN JHA (Chairperson) 


DR SURENDRA SINGH 
SHRI MITUL PANCHAL (Alternate) 


DR RAVI GUPTA 


DR SUCHITA V. GUPTA 
DR BHAGYASHREE N. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILDIP WAGH 


DR V. G. ARUDE 


DRS. K. GIRI 
DR RAVINDRA NAIK (Alternate) 


DR SANDEEP MANN 
DRR. K. VISHWAKARMA (Alternate) 


DR SACHIDANANDA SWAIN 
ER CHAITRALI S. MHATRE (Alternate) 


DR A. CAROLINA RATHINA KUMAR 
DR S. BHUANESWARI (Alternate) 


DR KANCHAN K. SINGH 
DR PANNA LAL SINGH (Alternate) 


DR VINOD H. KALBANDE 


PROF VIKRAM PARASHARAM KAD 


SHRIC. R. LOHI 
SHRI Y. K. RAO (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND ZAMBRE 


DR P. K. NEMA 


DR S. BHUVANA 


DRP. P. RAO 
SHRI S. G. PAWAR (Alternate) 


IS 18267 : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 


Northern Region Farm Machinery Training and Testing SHRI MUKESH JAIN 
Institute, Hisar 


Osaw Agro Industries Private Limited, Ambala SHRI JAGDISH SINGH 


Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana DR SANDHYA SINGH 
DR MANINDER KAUR (Alternate I) 
DR ROHIT SHARMA (Alternate II) 


Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore DR R. THIRUPATHI 
DR P. RAJKUMAR (Alternate I) 
DR P. SUDHA (Alternate 11) 


In Personal Capacity (12/36 Sowbhagya Nagar, A Block DR R. VISVANATHAN 
Civil, Aerodrome Post, Coimbatore - 641014) 


In Personal Capacity (8/22, 5th Cross Ramalinga Nagar DR K. ALAGUSUNDARAM 
South Extension Triuchirappali - 620017) 


In Personal Capacity (CD 223, Ansal Golf Link 1, Greater SHRI PITAM CHANDRA 
Noida - 201315) 


In Personal Capacity (MIG - 154, E-7 Sector Aerea Colony, SHRIS. D. DESHPANDE 
Bhopal - 462061) 


In Personal Capacity (320 Ist E cross HRBR layout 3rd SHRI JIX ANTONY 
block St Thomas Town Post, Bangalore - 560084) 


BIS Directorate General SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/ 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio) | 


Member Secretary 
SHRI DEBASISH MAHALIK 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
AND 
SHRI PRADEEP SHARMA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(FOOD AND AGRICULTURE), BIS 


17 


IS 18267 : 2023 


Panel On Food Serving Utensils Made from Agri By-Products — Specification, FAD20/P-18 


Organization Representative(s) 


In Personal Capacity (12/36 Sowbhagya Nagar, DRR. VISHWANATHAN (Convener) 
A Block Civil, Aerodrome Post, 
Coimbatore - 641014) 


ICAR - Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering DR NAGHIKET O TWALIWALE 
and Technology, Ludhiana DR THINGUJAM VIDYA LAKSHMI DEVI 


Indosaw Industrial Products Private Limited, DR VINOD H. KALBANDE 
Ambala Cantt. 


In Personal Capacity (CD 223, Ansal Golf Link 1, DR PITAM CHANDRA 
Greater Noida - 201315) 


18 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 20 (17785). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www .bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No.4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


