( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard

MACHINETOOLS-ERGONOMICS ANTHROPOMETRKTERMINOLOGY
UDC 621.9 : 001.4 : 65.015-11 : 572.087

@I BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
~ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

November 1991

Price Group 7

Machine Tools Basics and Modular Units Sectional

Committee,

PE 03

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Machine Tools Basic and Modular Units Sectional Committee had been approved by the Production Engineering Division Council. Anthropometry is the subject which is concerned with human body measurements. Such body measurements include body dimensions, range of motion and muscle strength. To ensure man-machine compatibility, it is essential to use the anthropometric data of the user~population in the design of the machine tools. The basic list specified in this standard is intended to serve as a guide for ergonomists who are required to define population group and apply their knowledge to the geometric design of the equipment places where people work and live. This standard may be used in conjunction with national regulations or agreements to assure harmony in defining population groups. This standard contains static measurements only. Dynamic measurements are, however, being made to collect data on dynamic measurements. are not covered here. Efforts

While preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been taken from data supplied by different ergonomic institution and ISO/DIS 7250 `Basic list of anthropometric measurements', issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ).

IS

13214 11991

Indian Shmdard

MACHINE TOOLS -ERGONOMICS ANTHROPOMETIUCTERMINOLOGY
1 SCOPE
This standard provides a basic list of anthropometric terminology and measurements for use in the establishment of common comparative definitions of population groups, in machine tool activities. 2 DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this standard, definitions shall apply. 2.1 Population Group A group of people having some common environment or activity. These groups may be as diverse as geographic populations, persons having similar activity or specified groups. 2.1.1 Percentile Statistrcs, any of the points dividing a range of data into hundred equal intervals and indicating the percentage of a distribution falling below it. 2.2 Terms Used in Basic List
2.2.1 Anatomical Planes and Orierltat ion 2.2.4 Acromion

The most lateral point of the lateral edge of the spine of the scapula. 2.2.5 Phalanges
The bones of the fingers and the toes.

2.2.6 Sagital the following Pertaining to anteroposterior ( front to back ) median plane of the body, or to plane parallel to the median. 2.2.7 Metacarpal Pertaining to the long bones of the hand between the carpus ( wrist bones ) and the phalanges. 3 MEASURING TOOLS The standard measurement tools which are recommended are the anthropometer, sliding calipers, spreading calipers, scale and tape measure. The anthropometer is a specified tool for measuring linear distances between points on the body and standard reference surfaces such as the floor or a seat platform. Sliding and spreading calipers are used for measuring the breadth and depth of body segments as well as the d~istance between body marks. A tape measure is used for measuring body circumferences. 3.1 Measurements may preferably be taken ort right-hand-side of the normal subject.

Shall be as given in Fig. 1 of Annex A.
2.2.2 Anatomical and Anthropometric Land Marks

Shall be as given in Fig. 2 of Annex A. 2.2.3 Linkage Sysiem in Human Body Shall be as given in Fig. 3 of Annex A.

IS 13214 : 1991 4 BASIC LIST OF ANTHROPOMETRIC

TERMINOLOGY 4.1 Standing Posture 4.1.1 Body Height This is the vertical distance from the floor to the top of the head. The subject stands erect with heels together and looks straight ahead. 4.1.2 Eye Height This is the vertical distance from the floor to the inner corner of eye. The subject stands erect and look straight ahead. BODY HEIGHT

4.1.3

Shoulder Height

SHOULDERHEIGHT

This is the vertical distance from the floor to the uppermost point on the lateral edge of the shoulder ( acromion ) with the subject standing erect. 4.1.4 Elbow Height This is the vertical distance from the floor to the depression at the elbow between the bones of the upper arm and forearm. The subject stands erect with his arms hanging naturally, at his sides.

4.1.5 Knuckle Height

~This is the vertical distance from the point where the middle finger hand meets the palm. The subject with his palm flat against the side 41.6 Maximum Body Depth

the floor to of the right stands erect of his thigh.

This is the maximum horizontal distance tween the vertical planespassing through most anterior and posterior points on trunk.

bethe the

41.1

Maximum Body Breadth

This is the maximum breadth of the body, including arms with the subject standing erect with his arms tightly pressed against the body with dorsiflexsion of the palms.

IS 13214: 1991 4.1.8 Hip Breadth

This is the maximum horizontal distance across the hips. The subject stands erect with his heels together.

.EADTH

4.1.9

Total Arm Span

This is the maximum horizontal distance across the tips of extended middle fingers with subject standing erect and arms stretched on sides.

4.1.10 Forward Arm Reach This is the horizontal distance from the posterior surface of the right shoulder to the tip of the extended middle finger. The subject stands erect with heels, buttocks and shoulders against the wall and right arm -and hands extended forward horizontally to their maximum length.

ORWARD

ARM

REAC

4

IS 13214: 1991 4.1.11 Arm Length
ARM LENGTH

This is the distance from the top of acromion to tip of the extended middle finger. The subject stands erect with his arms by the side of the body. 4.1.12 Shoulder to Elbow This is the vertical distance from the top of the acromion to the tip of elbow. The subject stands erect with the arms by the side of the body.

4.1.13 Elbow to Wrist

This is the distance between the tip of the elbow and the outside projection of the distal end of ulna. The subject stands erect with his arms by the side of the body. 4.1.14 Elbowto Finger Tip This is the distance between the tip of the elbow and the tip of the extended middle finger. The subject stands erect with his arms by the side of his body.

IS 13214:1991 4.2 Sitting Posture 4.2.X Sitting Height This is the vertical distance from the sitting surface to the top of the head. The subject sits erect, looks straight ahead w,ith his knees and ankles forming right angles. 4.2.2 Eye Height This is the vertical distance from the sitting surface to the inner corner of the eye. The subject sits erect and looks straight ahead.
SITTINGHEIGHT

4.2.3 Shoulder

Height I

SHOULDERHEIGHT

This is the vertical distance from the sitting surface to the uppermost point on the lateral edge of the shoulder with the subject sitting erect. 4.2.4 Elbow Height This is the vertical distance from the sitting surface to the bottom of the right elbow. The subject sits erect with his upper arm vertical at his side and his forearm at a right angle to the upper arm.
[ ELBOW-HEIGHT

4.2.5 Knee Height This most near with is the vertical distance from floor to upperpoint of the knee ( top of muscle mass lower end of femur ). The subject sits erect knees and ankles at right angles.
THIGHHEIGHT

4.2.6 Thigh Height This is the the top of abdomen. and ankles vertical distance from the floor to the thigh at its intersection with the The subject sits erect with his knees at right angles.

KNEEHEIGH

IS 13214: 1991 4.2.1 Buttock Knee Length

This is the horizontal distance from the most posterior point on the buttocks to the most anterior point on the knee. The subject sits erect with hisk nees and ankles at right angles. 4.2.8 Buttock Popliteal Length This is the horizontal distance from the plane of the most posterior point on the buttocks to the back of the lower leg at knee. The subject sits erect with his knees and ankles at right angles.

TTOCK POPLITEAL U'M-OCK KNEE

4.2.9

Popliteal Height

This is the vertical distance from floor to the underside of the thigh immediately behind knee. The subject sits erect with his knees and ankles at right angles and the bottom of his thighs and the back of his knees barely touching the sitting surface.

,--+-&&HEIGHT

4.2.10

Buttockleg Length

This is the horizontal distance from the most posterior point on the buttocks to the base of the heel. The subject sits erect with his legs as forward as possible on a horizontal surface.

IS13214:1991 4.2.11 Hip Breadth
This is the maximum horizontal distance across the hips. The subject sits erect with his knees and ankles right at angles land his knees and heels together.

EADTH

4.2.12

Shoulder to Shoulder Breadth

SHOULDER BREADTH

TO

This is the maximum horizontal distance across the deltoid muscles. The subject sits erect with his upper arms touching his sides and his forearms extended horizontally.

SHOULDER

4.2.13

Elbow to Elbow Breadth
ELBOW TO ELBOW BREADTH

This is the; maximum horizontal distance across the lateral surface of the elbows. The subject sits erect with his upper arms vertical and touching his sides and his forearms extended horizontally.

8

IS 13214 : 1991 4.2.14 FowArm-Hand
Length

Thus is the horizontal distance from the tip of the right elbow to the tip of middle finger. The subject sits erect with his upper arm vertical at his side and his forearm, hand and fingers extended horizontally.

4.3 F-oot Length This is the horizontal distance from the back of the heel to the tip of the longest toe. The subject stands with his weight equally distributed on the both feet. 4.4 Foot Breadth This is the maximum horizontal distance across the foot at right angles to the long axis.

FOOTLENGTH

9

IS 13214 : 1991 4.5 Hand Length Distance from end of small wrist bone at base of thumb to tip ofmiddle finger of right hand when the palm is up with fingers extended and together. 4.6 Hand Breadth ( At Thumb ) This is the maximum breadth across the plane ( at right angles to the long axis of the hand ) at the knuckle of the thumb of the right hand with the fingers extended and the thumb lying along side and the plane of the hand. HANDLENGTH

4.7 Hand Breadth ( At Metacarpale ) This is the maximum breadth across the ends of metacarpal bones ( where the fingers join the palm ) of the index and little fingers of the right hand held straight and stiff with the finger together.

L HANDBREADTH
(AT METACARPLE) HAND THICKNESS

4.8 Hand Thickness This is the maximum distance between the dorsal and palmier surfaces of the knuckle of the middle finger where it joins the palm of the right hand when the fingers are extended.
I

4.9 Index Finger Length The distance from the tip of the second finger to the proximal skin furrow of the joint between proximal phalange and metacarpal. 4.10 Index Finger Breadth, Proximal The maximum distance between the media! and lateral of the second finger in the region of the joint between medial and proximal phalanges. 4.11 Waist Height ( Trochanteric Height ) Vertical height of the waist ( trochanteric protuberation ) that is, from the hip bones to floor. 10

IS 13214: 1991

ANNEX A

(Clauses 2.2.1, 2.2.2 and 2.2.3
LATERAL s

)

LATERAL

PROXIMAL

PSUPERIOR

>

INFERIOR CORONALPLANE r,

SAGITTALPLANE /

FIG. 1

ANATOMICAL

PLANES ANDORIENTATIONS

11

IS 13214 : 1991

f-7-l
k%d ACROMION /

-

SUPRASTERNALE

STERNUM

MUSCLE HUM

RADIALE

TROCHANTERION

MALLEOLUS

r
r
`.,

FiBULA

FIG. 2

ANATOMICAL ANDANTHROPOMETRICLANDMARKS

12

1s 13214: 1991

HEAD (TRANSTHORACIC) f-7 NECK

FOREARM

SHANK

-MI\

I/

\

THIGH

'1

FIG. 3

LINKAGE SYSTBMIN HUMAN

BODY

13

Standard Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bweao of Indian Standards BlS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of good+ and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in any BIS has the copyright of all its publications. form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. PE 03 ( 4883 )

Amendments lssued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Z&far Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices :

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone
i 331 01 13 75 31

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : 1 14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola d ALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 160036 600113

87 86 62

53 38 43 235 02 16 632 92 95

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches
: AHMADABAD.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAK. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERARAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at New India Printinr Pre<%zTIndia

