HRA ATP IS 7445 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


waters — eran fear 


(TEC GRÜEITT) 


Acetone — Code of 


Safety 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 17.080.80 


© BIS 2022 


UR AAG ORT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS HAF, 9 JET RE MHL HPT, Ag facet - 110002 
MA) MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2022 Price Group 7 


IS 7445 : 2022 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


FOREWORD 


“This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on recommendation of the Chemical Hazards Sectional 
Committee and approval of the Chemical Division Council”. 


Acetone is the most important member of the homologous series of aliphatic ketones and is well established in many industries, 
both as a solvent and as an intermediate in chemical synthesis. Because of its high flammability, a complete knowledge and 
understanding of the hazards involved is an essential prerequisite to any one handling acetone. The elimination of accidents is 
vital to public interest. Accidents produce social and economic loss, and impair individual or group productivity. Realization 
of this loss has led the authorities to devote a good deal of attention to safety education. Apart from general precautions, some 
typical precautions are required to be taken during manufacture, storage, and handling of acetone. This code describes the 
properties of acetone and nature of hazards associated with it. The standard also prescribes safety measures for controlling 
hazards and essential information on symptoms of poisoning, first-aid, medical treatment, storage, handling, labelling and 
employee safety. This standard is intended to guide the users in the recognition of these hazards and in establishing safe 
handling procedures. 


The properties of acetone listed in Clause 4 have been taken from literature and have been included for information only. 
Moreover, these properties pertain to pure acetone. BIS has published a separate standard IS 170 : 2020 on the requirements 
and the methods of sampling and test for acetone intended for industrial purposes. 


This standard was first published in 1974. With a view to update the standard based on the experience of last five decades and 
on the currently available data the Committee felt a need to revise the standard. In this revision general properties, safety 
measures for controlling hazards, and essential information on symptoms of asphyxiation, first-aid, medical treatment, storage, 
handling, labelling and employee safety have been incorporated. 


The various clauses of the standard have been aligned with the format being applied for all Indian Standards on Code of safety 
of chemicals. 


In the preparation of this code of safety assistance have been derived from the following publications: 


a) Chemical safety data sheets — SD-16, Manufacturing Chemists Association 1825 Connecticut Avenue, Washington 
D.C. 2009; 

b) Sax’s Dangerous Properties of Industrial Materials, Volume Three, Tenth Edition, Richard J. Lewis Sr., Wiley- 
Interscience Publication, 2000; 

c) IPCS-International Program on Chemical Safety, 2004 edition; and 

d) AERB SAFETY GUIDELINES NO. AERB/SG/IS-3. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


IS 7445 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
ACETONE CODE OF SAFETY 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This code describes the properties of acetone, the 
nature of hazards associated with it and essential 
information on storage, handling, packing, labelling, and 
disposal of waste, cleaning and repairing of containers, 
selection and training of personnel, personal protective 
equipment, and first-aid. 


1.2 This code does not, however, deal with specifications 
for design of buildings, chemical engineering, plants, 
method and ingredients used in the manufacture, 
equipment for waste disposal and operation control. 


NOTE — Attention of the users of this code is directed to the fact 
that the production, storage, transport, import and export of 
acetone in India is controlled by the Chief Controller of Explosives 
of the Government of India under 'The Inflammable Substances 
Act 1952". 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed below contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revisions, 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the standards: 


IS No. Title 

1260 (Part 1) : Pictorial marking for handling and 

1973 labelling of Goods: Part 1 Dangerous 
Goods 

2925 : 1984 Specification for industrial safety 


helmets (second revision) 


4155 : 1966 Glossary of terms relating to chemical 
and radiation hazards and hazardous 
chemicals 

8519: 1977 Guide for selection of industrial safety 
equipment for body protection 

8520 : 1977 Guide for selection of industrial safety 
equipment for eye, face and ear 
protection 

8807 : 1978 


Guide for selection of industrial safety 
equipment for protection of arms and 
hands 


10667 : 1983 Guide for selection of industrial safety 
equipment for protection of foot and 
leg 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given in IS 
4155 shall apply. 


4 PROPERTIES 
4.1 General Information 


The most hazardous property of acetone is its extreme 
flammability. Acetone burns with yellow bright flames. At 
temperatures greater than acetone's flash point, air 
mixtures of acetone may explode or cause a flash fire. 
Vapours can flow along surfaces to distant ignition sources 
and flash back. Static discharge may also ignite acetone 
vapours, though acetone has an extremely high ignition 
initiation energy point and therefore accidental ignition is 
rare. Exposure to high vapour concentrations may cause 
eye, nose and throat irritation, and narcotic (anaesthetic) 
symptoms such as headache, drowsiness, and 
incoordination. Acetone liquid produces transient eye 
irritation 


4.1.1 Chemical Name — Acetone. 
4.1.2 Common Name and Synonyms 


Acetone, dimethyl ketone, Dimethyl carbonyl, Propanone, 
2-Propanone, ß ketopropane and Pyroacetic spirit, Ketone 
propane. 


4.1.3 Uses 


Acetone is a good solvent for many plastics and some 
synthetic fibres. It is used for thinning polyester resin, 
cleaning tools used with it, and dissolving two- 
part epoxies and superglue before they harden. Itis used as 
one of the volatile components of 


some paints and varnishes. As a heavy-duty degreaser, it is 


IS 7445 : 2022 


useful in the preparation of metal prior to painting 
or soldering, and to remove rosin flux after soldering. 


4.2 Identification 

4.2.1 Formula — C3H50. 

4.2.2 CAS Number — 67-64-1 

4.2.3 UN Number — 1 090 

4.2.4 UN Class — 3 (Flammable Liquid) 

4.2.5 Hazchem Code — 2YE 

4.3 Physical Properties 

4.3.1 General 

The material is stable under normal ambient and 
anticipated storage and handling conditions of temperature 
and pressure. 

4.3.2 Molecular Mass — 58.08 g/mol 

4.3.3 Physical State — Liquid. 

4.3.4 Colour — Colourless. 

4.3.5 Odour — Pungent, Irritating, Floral, Cucumber Like 
4.3.6 Boiling Point — 56.05 °C at 760 mmHg. 

4.3.7 Melting Point — (-) 94.7 °C. 

4.3.8 Vapour Density (Air = 1) — 2.0 

4.3.9 Specific Gravity — 0.784 5 g/cm? at 25 °C 

4.3.10 Viscosity at 25°C — 0.295 mPa.s 


4.3.11 Vapour Pressure at 25°C — 30.6 kPa. (~229.518 
mmHg) 


4.3.12 Heat of Combustion — 853.6 kcal. 
4.3.13 Refractive Index — 1.358 8 


4.3.14 Solubility in Water — Soluble in All Proportions in 
Water. 


4.3.15 Solubility in other solvents — Miscible in Benzene, 
Diethyl Ether, Methanol, Chloroform, Ethanol. 


4.3.16 Light Sensitivity — No Change. 


4.4 Chemical Properties 
4.4.1 Reactivity 


Incompatible materials — Bases, oxidizing agents, 
Reducing agents. 


Acetone reacts violently with phosphorous oxychloride. 
Acetone may form explosive mixtures with chromic 
anhydride, chromyl chloride, hexa-chloromelamine, 
hydrogen peroxide, nitric acid and acetic acid, nitric acid 
and sulfuric acid, nitrosyl chloride, nitrosyl perchlorate, 
nitryl perchlorate, permonosulfuric acid, potassium tert- 
butoxide, thiodiglycol and hydrogen peroxide. 

Acetone shall be stored in gas-tight steel receptacles 
conforming to Petroleum Rules and fitted with suitable 
filling apparatus and well-fitting airtight screw plugs or 
screw caps. 


4.4.2 Polymerisation — Will not occur 
4.4.3 Allotrope Formation — Not Available 
4.4.4 Corrosion Properties 


Acetone corrodes Carbon Steel and 13 Cr Steel. For 
Carbon steel corrosion rate is over 1.0 mm/yr (serious 
corrosion). For 13 Cr Steel, corrosion rate is 0.1 mm to 1.0 
mm/yr. 


4.5 Fire and Explosion Hazard Properties 

4.5.1 Ignition Temperature — Not Available 

4.5.2 Auto Ignition Temperature — 465 °C. 

4.5.3 Flash Point — (-) 20 °C. 

4.5.4 Upper Explosive Limit — 12.8 Volume Percent 

4.5.5 Lower Explosive Limit — 2.6 Volume Percent. 

4.5.6 Fire Risk 

Acetone is highly flammable and its vapours form 
explosive mixtures with air. Explosive concentration of 


acetone may be ignited at low energy levels of accumulated 
static charges. 


5 HEALTH HAZARD AND TOXICITY 
INFORMATION 


5.1 General Information 


5.1.1 Acetone acts primarily as a depressant of the central 
nervous system. Signs of toxicity following severe 
intoxication may include ataxia, sedation, and coma 
Respiratory depression, gastrointestinal disorders 
(vomiting and hematemesis), hyperglycemia and 
ketonemia, acidosis and hepatic and renal damage may also 
occur. Ingestion of 10 ml to 20 ml (8 g-16 g) is generally 
not toxic. Consumption of 20 g/day for several days 
resulted in slight drowsiness. 


5.1.2 The hazards of acetone include irritation to the eyes, 
nose, throat, and lungs if the acetone vapour comes into 
contact with the person. If acetone is ingested, it can cause 
irritation to the stomach, and consequently lead to 
vomiting. The vapor released during the ingestion can also 
cause more severe damage 


5.2 Routes of Entry 


5.2.1 Skin 


Repeated dermal exposure to liquid acetone can cause 
defatting and drying of the skin, and brittle nails. Chemical 
burns may develop after prolonged exposure. Prolonged 
contact with skin may cause redness, itching, irritation and 
eczema/chapping, and cracking of the skin. 


5.2.2 Eyes 


Acetone and its vapours are mildly irritating to the eyes and 
mucous membranes. Corneal erosions are a rare effect after 
high concentration exposure. It is characterized by a 
burning sensation, redness, tearing, inflammation, and 
possible corneal injury. 


5.2.3 Ingestion 


In an unlikely event if acetone is ingested it could cause 
systemic toxicity with symptoms like headache, lethargy, 
slurred speech, lack of coordination. Higher amount of 
ingestion can be life threatening. Irritating, may cause 
nausea, stomach pain and vomiting. 


IS 7445 : 2022 
5.2.3 Inhalation 


Inhalation of vapours may cause nausea, vomiting, 
headache, excitement, faintness, fatigue, and bronchial 
irritation may result from inhalation exposure. With high 
concentration exposures, systemic toxicity can occur 
similar to that seen with ingestion. May cause irritation to 
the mucous membranes and upper respiratory tract. In high 
concentrations, vapors and aerosol mists have a narcotic 
effect and may cause headache, fatigue, dizziness and 
nausea. 


5.2.4 Long term effects 


Systemic toxicity most commonly occurs after ingestion or 
prolonged or high concentration inhalation, rarely after 
extensive dermal exposure. Repeated or prolonged 
exposure to the substance can produce target organs 
damage. 


5.3 Toxicity information 


Acetone is highly volatile. Available toxicity values areas 
following: 


a) Threshold Limit Value (TLV (TWA)) — 2 400 
mg/m? 


b) Short Term Exposure Limit (STEL) — 1 780 mg/m? 
for 8h 


c) Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health (IDLH) 
— 2 500 mg/m3 


d) Lethal Dose 50 (LD50) (median dose) — 5 800 
mg/kg (rat, oral) 3 000 mg/kg (mouse, oral), 5 340 
mg/kg (rabbit, oral) 


e) Lethal Dose low (LDLo) (lowest published) — 45 
455 ppm (mouse, 1 h) 


f) Inhalation (Rat) LD50 — 5 620 mg/kg 
5.4 Antidote 
There is no data available. 
5.5 Health effects 
5.5.1 Signs and Symptoms 


Mild acetone poisoning symptoms are headache, slurred 
speech, lethargy, lack of coordination, sweet taste in 


IS 7445 : 2022 


mouth. Severe systems are very rare and include coma, low 
blood pressure, deep stupor. 


5.5.2 Acute Toxicity 
5.5.2.1. Systemic effect 


Acetone if swallowed is harmful to the skin in your mouth 
and the lining of your oesophagus. Symptoms can 
be headache dizziness, confusion, nausea, internal injury 
and stomach pain or vomiting drunkenness loss of 
coordination difficulty breathing low blood pressure rapid 
heartbeat fainting. 


5.5.2.2 Local effects 


Contact with acetone, it has the ability to damage your skin 
through the depletion of moisture and oils, leaving it dry, 
brittle, and likely to peel. This would only be considered a 
minor result of exposure to acetone. Prolonged or repeated 
skin contact may cause drying, cracking, or irritation. High 
vapor concentrations may cause drowsiness and irritation 
of the eyes or respiratory tract. 


Eye Contact — Causes moderate to severe irritation. 
Symptoms include sore, red eyes, and tearing. The vapour 
also irritates the eyes. 


5.5.3 Chronic Toxicity 
5.5.3.1 Systemic effects 


Can cause dry, red, cracked skin (dermatitis) following 
skin contact. Frequent or prolonged contact may defat and 
dry the skin, leading to discomfort and dermatitis. May 
harm the nervous system. Conclusions cannot be drawn 
from the limited studies available. 


5.5.3.1.1 Carcinogenicity — Not available 


5.5.3.1.2 Teratogenicity/embryotoxicity — Not known to 
harm the unborn child. 


5.5.3.1.3 Reproductive toxicity — Not known to be a 
reproductive hazard. 


5.5.3.1.4 Mutagenicity 


Not known to be a mutagen. Humans repeatedly exposed 
to >750 ppm acetone (>1 782 mg/m?) in an occupational 
setting reported irritation of the mucous membranes 
including conjunctivitis, pharyngitis, inflammatory 
bronchitis, and gastroduodenitis. 


5.5.3.2 Local effects — There are no usual chronic local 


effects. 


6 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 
6.1 Availability and Use 


6.1.1 While personal protective equipment is not an 
adequate substitute for good, safe working conditions, 
adequate ventilation and intelligent conduct on the part of 
employees working with acetone, it is in many instances 
the only practical means of protecting the worker, 
particularly in emergency situations. One should keep 
firmly in mind that personal protective equipment protects 
only the worker wearing it, and other unprotected workers 
in the area maybe exposed to danger. 


6.1.2 Eye/Face Protection — Wear chemical safety 
goggles and face shield when contact is possible. 


6.1.3 Skin Protection — Avoid repeated or prolonged skin 
contact. Wear chemical protective clothing e.g. gloves, 
aprons, boots. 


6.1.4 The correct usage of personal protective equipment 
requires the education of the workers in proper 
employment of the equipment available to him. Under 
conditions which are sufficiently hazardous to 

require personal protective equipment, its use should be 
supervised and the type of protective equipment 

selected should be capable of control over any potential 
hazards. 


6.2 Non-Respiratory Equipment 
6.2.1 Eye and Face Protection 


Chemical splash protection as per IS 8520 category H-4. 
Use of goggles along with full face shield is 
recommended. Face shield should be of sufficient length 
to cover the neck portion. 


6.2.2 Head Protection 


Hard hats should be worn where there is danger of falling 
objects. If hard hats are not considered necessary, soft- 
brimmed hats or caps may be worn to give protection 
against liquid leaks and splashes (see IS 2925). 

6.2.3 Foot and Leg Protection 


Leather safety shoes with built-in steel toe caps are 
recommended for workers handling drums and cans of 
acetone. Alternately rubber gumboots must be used while 
handling acetone. Leather leg guard is recommended. 
Shoes should be thoroughly cleaned and ventilated after 
contamination (see IS 10667). 


6.2.4 Body, Skin and Hand Protection 


Clothing made of impervious materials may be worn to 
protect the body against the splashes. Rubber gloves should 
be worn for hand protection. Fireproof overalls should be 
worn when operations involving acetone fires are 
encountered (see IS 8519 and IS 8807). 


IS 7445 : 2022 


6.3 Respiratory Equipment 


6.3.1 The respirator should be selected (upper limit 
devices) based on Assigned Protection Factor (APF) as 
specified in Table 1. 


Table 1 Respirator Selection 
(Clause 6.3.1) 


SL No. Assigned Protection Factor (APF) Respirator Selection 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 10 (Up to 2 500 ppm) Any chemical cartridge respirator with organic vapor 
cartridge(s), or Any supplied-air respirator. 
ii) 25 Any powered, air-purifying respirator with organic vapor 
cartridge(s) 
111) 50 Any air-purifying, full-facepiece respirator (gas mask) 
with a chin-style, front or back-mounted organic vapor 
canister; or any self-contained breathing apparatus with a 
full facepiece. 
6.3.2 Escape tanks. Water lines should be provided to allow instant 


Air purifying full face-piece respirator with a high 
efficiency particulate filter. Appropriate escape type self- 
contained breathing apparatus. 


7 STORAGE, HANDLING, LABELLING AND 
TRANSPORT 


7.1 General 


All personal handling acetone should use proper personal 
protective equipment. Appropriate fire fighting equipment 
should be available in the vicinity while handling acetone. 
Persons handling acetone should have adequate training in 
use of fire fighting equipment. 


7.2 Storage 


7.2.1 Storage of any combustible material should not be 
allowed in the building. Acetone storage tanks should be 
grounded to prevent danger by lightening. 


7.2.2 Storage tanks may be constructed of stainless steel. 
The storage tanks should be placed in retaining basins, also 
to be constructed of concrete or welded steel. The basins 
should be adequate to retain the full contents of the tank or 


flooding of basin. 


7.2.3 Sealed tanks should be equipped with frangible discs 
or safety valves set to release at a predetermined pressure. 
End of pressure relief line should go out through flame 
arrester to a safe area. 


Vent line of tank should go to a cooled condenser to 
condense the vapours and return it back to tank. An ample 
safety factor should be allowed to protect the tank itself. 
Vent of condenser should go to safe area through flame 
arrestor. Firefighting facilities applicable to the type of 
tank protected. This can include fire loops with hydrants 
and monitors in the storage area, foam systems for the 
individual tanks, and deluge spray systems to keep the 
exposed surfaces of tanks cool in case of fire in an adjacent 
tank. 


7.2.4 Storage and handling facilities shall be sited in well 
ventilated areas to prevent the accumulation of pockets of 
acetone vapour. 


7.2.5 Pipelines shall be supported by steel stianchions or 
concrete sleepers. Wood shall not be used. Pipelines shall 
have adequate electrical continuity and shall be earthed. 


IS 7445 : 2022 


7.3 Handling 
7.3.1 General 


7.3.1.1 Areas where acetone is handled shall be posted with 
NO SMOKING?’ and other appropriate warning signs, as 
required by the operations. 


7.3.1.2 If leaks or spills occur, only properly trained 
personnel shall remain in the area. Leaking containers shall 
be removed to an isolated, well-ventilated area and the 
contents transferred to other sound containers. All spills 
shall be flushed away promptly with water. Excessive 
quantities of acetone shall not be permitted to enter drains 
or sewers where there is danger of vapours becoming 
ignited. 


7.3.1.3 All empty tanks or other containers which have 
contained acetone, except when they are opened for the 
purpose of cleaning them and rendering them free of 
acetone vapour, shall be kept securely closed unless they 
have been thoroughly cleaned. 


7.3.2 Tanks 


7.3.2.1 Protection against electrostatic charges which can 
cause ignition. This may include the bonding and 
grounding of the tank, piping, and other ancillary 
equipment and the use of bottom or dip-pipe loading to 
minimize material splashing in the tank. 


7.3.2.2 In case flexible hoses is to be used, it should be 
metal braided hose of appropriate pressure rating. 
Upbraided hose should not be used. 


7.3.2.3 As Acetone is a solvent, the selection of compatible 
material must prevent the material itself being dissolved. 
Acetone is a polar solvent and must not be combined with 
similar materials such as PVC, 

natural rubber as these elastomers will inherently fail. 
Compatible materials include most metals, 
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) and tetrafluoroethylene 
(ETFE). 


7.3.2.4 Acetone is generally pumped from storage tank 
using suitable pumps. Acetone can be filled in small 
containers by gravity ensuring containers and transfer 
pipes are grounded to avoid fire due to static charge. 


7.3.2.5 One storage tank equal in capacity to the largest 
tank in use should be kept free at all times to transfer 
acetone in case of emergency. 


7.3.2.6 Empty drums/containers shall be stored where they 
will be safe from unauthorised interference and shall be 
securely closed. It shall be recognized that a container 
which is empty with only enough of the volatile flammable 
liquid remaining to wet the inside, may be more dangerous 
from the stand point of explosion in the container than the 
container when filled with liquid, owing to the larger 
volume of explosive mixture that it contains. 


7.4 Labelling 


7.4.1 Each container (including tankers) should carry an 
identifying label or stencil as depicted in IS 1260 (Part 1). 
The storage containers shall be labelled or marked to 
identify as follows: 


a) Contents of the container; 

b) Name and address of the manufacturer or importer of the 
hazardous chemical; and 

c) Physical, chemical and toxicological data as per the 
criteria given in the relevant schedule of the Manufacture, 
Storage and Import of Hazardous Chemicals Rules, 1989. 
While referring to the statutes, the stipulations given in the 
subsequent amendments of those statutes shall be taken 
into account. 


Manufacturers name with label warnings required by 
regulations or ordinances form part of the label or placard. 


7.4.2 Each drum shall be labelled as follows: 


"DANGER! EXTREMELY FLAMMABLE LIQUID 
AND VAPOR. VAPOR MAY CAUSE FLASH FIRE. 
HARMFUL IF SWALLOWED OR INHALED. CAUSES 
IRRITATION TO SKIN, EYES AND 

RESPIRATORY TRACT. AFFECTS CENTRAL 
NERVOUS SYSTEM ". 


7.4.3 Each tanker and each railroad car carrying one or 
more containers of acetone must bear the "DANGEROUS" 
placard in addition. 


7.5 Transport 


Containers generally used for transport of acetone are: 
a) Tankers 
b) Metal Barrels or Drums or Containers. 

7.5.1 Unloading Tankers 


Unloading stations should be equipped with safety 
showers. The truck should be spotted accurately and 
levelled. Stoppers/pegs should be used to avoid movement 
of truck during unloading. Supplier's instructions for 
unloading should always be followed and all caution 


markings on both sides of trucks should be read and 
observed. 

Tanker unloading should be preferably to tank at same 
level or at lower level. Truck should not be unloaded to a 
tank at higher elevation. 


7.5.2 Unloading Drums 


Unloading can be done by gravity/siphoning or using a 
pump. Ensure that all fittings are tight. Ensure piping and 
containers are grounded to avoid build-up of static charge. 


7.5.3 Driver 


Only driver trained in flammable material handling should 
be employed for transportation of acetone. 
Driver should carry TREM card when vehicle is on road. 


NOTE — If transport of the hazardous chemical is involved it shall 
be carried out in accordance with the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 
1989. While referring to the statutes, the stipulations given in the 
subsequent amendments of those statutes shall be taken into 
account. 


S. SPILLAGE, LEAKAGE AND WASTE 


DISPOSAL 
8.1 General 


All personal attending to spill/leak should use proper 
personal protective equipment and fire fighting equipment 
while handling acetone. 


8.2 Spillage 
8.2.1 Genera/Information 


Proceed with caution. Restrict access to area. Keep 
unprotected personnel away and upwind of spill area to 
avoid vapour inhalation. Avoid contact with spilled 
product. Protect sewers and waterways from contaminated 
runoff. Notify proper authorities. Keep inert absorption 
media readily available. 


8.2.2 Land Spill (Spill on Land) 
8.2.2.1 Containment 


Acetone may be contained by building dikes, digging pit or 
barrier using earth, and or similar materials. Absorb bulk 
material with fly ash, cement powder or commercial 
sorbents. Remove contained product as soon as possible to 
prevent spread of contamination. Remove trapped material 
using suction hoses. 


IS 7445 : 2022 


8.2.2.2 Consequences 


Any acetone that escapes may get vapourised or get 
absorbed in soil or get mixed in waterways. 


8.2.2.3 Mitigation 


Area cleared of spilled acetone should be flushed with 
water. 


8.2.3 Water Spill (Spill in Water) 
annot be recovered. 
8.2.3.1 Containment 


Stop use of water. Notify proper authorities to stop water 
intake or to monitor water for contamination. Spilled 
product will get dissolved in water. 


8.2.3.2 Mitigation 


Acetone is completely miscible in water. Dilution of 
contaminated water or holding contaminated water till 
acetone evaporates. In case concentration of acetone is 
high, contaminated water to be collected and to be sent for 
distillation to separate acetone. 


8.3 Leakages 
8.3.1 General Information 


In case of any leak of acetone from a drum or tank, isolate 
all ignition sources from immediate area. Do not touch or 
walk-through spilled material. Stop leak 1f 1t can be done 
without any risk. Arrange to transfer the contents to another 
tank or drum in case leak cannot be stopped. 

Leak from a pipeline or storage vessel-Acetone will form a 
pool of liquid on the ground. The liquid now can be 
restricted with earth and then absorbed using absorbents. 


8.3.2 Leak from the Tanker 


If possible, apply a sealant (suitable like M-seal) for minor 
leak. In case of major leaks, arrange to transfer the material 
in another tanker or fill in barrels/drums. Dripping leaks 
should be collected in smaller containers. 

8.3.3 Caution 


Eliminate all ignition sources (no smoking, flares, sparks 
or flames) from immediate area. Use PPEs while handling 
acetone. Remain upwind to avoid acetone inhalation. Use 
grounded pipes or containers to avoid static charge igniting 
acetone. 


IS 7445 : 2022 


8.4 Waste Disposal 


8.4.1 Disposal of container and material should be as 
hazardous waste. The disposal of waste acetone and of 
materials contaminated with it shall be carried out 
according to state and local regulations regarding health 
and pollution. Waste shall not be discharged to drains. 
Generally, this waste goes to incinerator having scrubber 
for scrubbing evolved gases. Waste also can be sent to 
‘Recyclers’ who recover the acetone by distillation. 


8.4.2 Water contaminated with acetone should be treated 
before allowing it to flow out of the plant. 


8.4.3 Returnable drums should be thoroughly washed 
inside and outside with water, drained and cover tightly 
before returning. Non-returnable containers, before 
scrapping, should be thoroughly washed with water until 
all traces of acetone is removed. 


9 FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE FIGHTING 
9.1 General 


9.1.1 Acetone is combustible. In case of insufficient 
ventilation and/or in use, may form flammable/explosive 
vapour air mixture. 

Solvent vapours are heavier than air and may spread along 
floors. Places which are not ventilated, e.g. unventilated 
below ground level areas such as trenches, conduits and 
shafts, are particularly prone to the presence of flammable 
substances or mixtures. Vapours are heavier than air, 
spread along floors and form explosive mixtures with air. 
Vapours may form explosive mixtures with air. 


9.1.2 The detection system shall be able to sense the 
presence of smoke or heat during the initial growth period 
of fires. Various types of detectors which operate at 
predetermined temperatures or which detect the smoke 
photo-electrically or electronically are employed to suit 
individual risks. Detectors are made to operate audible or 
visual alarms or both. They are also linked to the fire 
authority control room. Good as they are, automatic 
detection systems only detect the fire after it has started. 
Since fire patrols often discover conditions which might 
lead to a fire and correct them in time, consideration shall 
be given to establishing regular fire prevention patrols in 
addition to automatic systems. 

All personal engaged in fire-fighting operation must use 
appropriate PPEs to prevent exposure. 


9.2 Prevention 


9.2.1 Fires are controlled by exclusion of air, using water, 
sand or carbon dioxide extinguishers. High pressure water 


should not be used, as it would scatter the material, causing 
secondary fires. 


9.2.2 Move container from fire area if without risk. Use 
water from side and from safe distance to keep fire exposed 
containers cool. 


9.3 Fire fighting 


Use water sprays, alcohol resistant foam, dry extinguishing 
powder, BC-powder, carbon dioxide to fight fire. Do not 
use water jet. 


10 TRAINING 


10.1 Safety in handling acetone depends upon the 
effectiveness of employee education, training and 
supervision. The education and training of employees to 
work safely and to use the personal protective equipment 
and other safeguards provided for them is a responsibility 
of supervisor. Employee education and training should 
emphasize the need of safely handling acetone according 
to the methods outlined in the manual, in order to avoid 
spilling or splashing, leaks, burns, inhalation of the vapour 
of burning material, or ingestion. Unauthorised and 
untrained employees should not be permitted in areas 
where acetone is being handled. 


10.2 Before being placed on the job, all new employees 
should be instructed and trained to maintain a high degree 
of safety in handling procedures. Older employees should 
be re-instructed and trained periodically. 


10.3 Each employee shall know the location, purpose and 
maintenance of personal protective equipment (PPEs) and 
be thoroughly trained when and how to use it. Each 
employee shall know the location of safety showers, 
fountains for flushing the eyes, and hose lines. 


10.4 Only reliable, dependable and properly trained 
employees shall be given the responsibility of all 
operations involving storage, handling, transport and 
emergency management involving acetone. 


10.5 Employee should be trained to report to the proper 
authority all suspected leaks or equipment failure. 


10.6 They should be instructed to inform to supervisors any 
signs of illness or skin related problems. 


10.7 Each employee should know what to do in emergency 
and the first-aid measures and should realize the necessity 
for the prompt application of first aid in case of contact 
with acetone or exposure to the vapours. 


11 HEALTH MANAGEMENT, FIRST-AID AND 
MEDICAL TREATMENT 


11.1 Health Monitoring 
11.1.1 Personal Hygiene 


11.1.1.1 Employees should bath daily after finishing work. 
They should report any abnormality related to any 
inhalation or ingestion of acetone to medical department. 


11.1.1.2 Food should not be stored or eaten near the place 
where acetone is being handled. 


11.1.2 Physical Examination 
11.1.2.1 Pre-placement physical examinations 


Pre-placement medical examination should be directed 
toward medical fitness of employees for particular 
occupation. 


11.1.2.2 Periodic examination 


Periodic medical examination aim to detect susceptible 
workers for whom corrective actions are required before 
they develop overt occupational diseases. Meanwhile 
safety and health measures at work should be reviewed for 
necessary remedial actions. 

11.1.2.3 Medical examination 


An annual physical examination should be conducted for 
each employee who is constantly exposed to acetone. He 
should be instructed to report any illness, or any disorder 
of skin that he experiences. Liver function test and 
complete blood count on annual basis is recommended. 


11.2 First Aid 
11.2.1 General Principles 


First-aid treatment should be started at once in all cases of 
contact with acetone in any form otherwise further damage 
may result. Refer all injured persons to a physician even 
when the effect appears to be slight. Give the physician a 
detailed account of the accident. 

First aider must move the affected person to safe, well- 
ventilated area. First aider also should use PPEs. 


11.2.2 Contact with Skin 


Immediate rinse the skin with water. This may be 
accomplished by the copious use of running water. Take 
off contaminated clothing. Provide fresh air. In all cases of 
doubt, or when symptoms persist, seek medical help. 


IS 7445 : 2022 


CAUTION — It should be remembered that small amounts 
of ingestion or inhalation may not show any harm in an 
adult person. The affected person should be kept in 
observation for some time to know development of any 
symptoms. 


11.2.3 Contact with Eyes 


If even minute quantities of acetone enter the eyes they 
should be thoroughly washed immediately and copiously 
with water for a minimum of 15 min. The eyelids should 
be held apart during the eye washing to ensure contact of 
water with entire tissue of the surface of the eyes and lids. 
Afterwards, send the affected person to physician or 
preferably an eye specialist. 


11.2.4 Ingestion 


If acetone is swallowed, rinse the mouth with water 
immediately. Induce vomiting. Immediately shift affected 
person for medical help. Treatment of acetone poisoning 
may include stomach pumping, IV fluids, blood tests and a 
breathing tube, depending on the severity of ingestion. 


11.2.5 Inhalation 


11.2.5.1 Inhalation of acetone can irritate nose and throat. 
At high concentration can harm the nervous system. 


Medical help must be provided in case headache, slurred 
speech or lethargy. 


11.2.5.2 Burning acetone in confined area may cause a 
depletion of the oxygen from the air to a sufficient extent 
to cause asphyxiation. The patient should be removed at 
once to fresh air and effective artificial respiration initiated 
immediately if breathing has ceased. A physician should be 
called at once. 


11.2.6 First-Aid Kit 


No additional requirement in first aid kit. Flushing of skin 
or rinsing of mouth is only first aid in case of acetone 
poisoning. 

11.3 Medical treatment 


Washing of skin or eyes using large amount of water. 
Stomach wash by medical professionals. 


12 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 


Additional information essential for particular equipment 
used for handling of acetone, Security measures to be taken 
while handling of acetone etc as essential for controlling 
hazards may be collected and applied. 


IS 7445 : 2022 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity 


Alkali Manufacturers Association of India, Mumbai 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Centre for Fire, Explosives and Environmental Science, 
Gol, Min Of Def 

Crop Care Federation of India, New Delhi 

Defence Research and Establishment, (DRDO), Gwalior 

Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Gol 

Department of Space(ISRO), Bengaluru 

Directorate General Factory Advice Service and 
Labour Institutes, Mumbai 

Gas Industries Association 


Hindustan Unilever Limited, Mumbai 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 


ANNEX A 


(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


10 


Representative(s) 


SHRIK. S. RAMPRASAD (Chairperson) 


SHRIK. SRINIVASAN 
SHRIH. S. DAS (Alternate) 


MISS GARIMA SINGH 
SHRINISHITH GOSH (Alternate) 


DR DANDAMUDI USHARANI 
DR PRASANNA VASU (Alternate) 


DR M. SURIYANARAYANAN 


SHRIS. P. DOBHAL 
DR AARTI BHATT (Alternate) 


SHRIP. N. KARLEKAR 
DR J. C. MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


DR PRABHAT GARG 
DR VIRENDRA VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


DR VISHAL CHOUDHARY 


SHRI MURALEEKRISHNAN R. 
MISS LAKSHMI V. W. (Alternate) 


SHRI H. M. BHANDARI 
SHRI P. G. SATPUTE (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KHER 
SHRI ANOOP TANDON (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY HARLAKA 
SHRI RAKESH WADALKAR (Alternate) 


DR K. K. SATPATHY 


DR C. NANDI 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR BANKUPALLI SATYAVATHI 
DR SRIPADI PRABHAKARC (Alternate) 


DR NEERAJ ATRAY 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR KANUJIA (Alternate) 


DR SACHIN GUNTE 


Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


Ministry of Environment and Forest, New Delhi 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 


National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad 


National Institute of Technology, Thrichi 


National Safety Council , Navi Mumbai 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate (Min of Pet and Natural Gas), 
Delhi 

Pesticides Manufacturer and Formulators Association of India 

Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation, Nagpur 

Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 

Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 

Tata Chemicals Limited, Mithapur, Distt, Jamnagar 

In personal capacity (1-4/2/6, Parijat C.H.S., Spaghetti, 


Sector-15, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, 410210) 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 


IS 7445 : 2022 


PROF SANDIP ROY 


Dr D. K. PATEL 
DR SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


PROF (DR) G. D. YADAV 
DR B. M. BHANAGE (Alternate) 


SHRI VED PRAKASH MISHRA 
DR DINESH RUNIWAL (Alternate) 


DR VIJAY V. BOKADE 
DR M. MUTHUKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR B. RAVICHANDRAN 


PROF S. P. SIVAPIRAKASAM 
SHRI D. SREEJITH MOHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI A. Y. SUNDKAR 
SHRIK. D. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDAR M. MAHAJAN 


DR ARCHANA KUMARI 
DR SANDIP SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRIM. K. JHALA 
DR YOGESH KHARE (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAMMAD 
SHRI DEVANG MEHTA (Alternate) 


DR JAGDISH KUMAR 
DR DEEP SHANKAR CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI SNEHASHISH A. CHAKRABORTY 
SHRID. K. THAKUR (Alternate) 


SHRIS. SOUNDARARAJAN 


SHRI AJAY K. LAL, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (CHD) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


MISS SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (CHD), BIS 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication 8 Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:CHD 07 (19871). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


