URAT AAP IS 7881 (Part 2) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


faced grdan A daftra Rue 
ECAC] 
UTT 2 ta 


(TEC JRIH) 


Glossary of Terms Relating to 
Builders’ Hardware 
Part 2 Latches 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.190 


© BIS 2022 


UR AAG R 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS Uda, 9 TSIgX Ms VHX HPT, Ay facet - 110002 
Ven’ ë MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2022 Price Group 5 


Utensils, Cutlery and Domestic Hardware Sectional Committee, MED 33 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Utensils, 
Cutlery Domestic Hardware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional 
Council. 


This standard was first published in 1976. This revision has been taken place to keep pace with the latest 
technological developments and accordingly new definitions have been added. 


This standard is published in two parts. Other part in this series is : 
Part 1 Locks 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 7881 (Part 2) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO BUILDERS’ 
HARDWARE 


PART 2 LATCHES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 2) covers definitions of 
terms relating to latches. The definitions of any 
device which incorporates a key-operated 
mechanism are not covered in this standard. 


2 GENERAL TERMS 


2.1 Dimensioning of Latches — The method of 
measuring and describing the length, height, 
thickness and size of latches. 


2.2 Face of Door — The plane surface of a door on 
either side as distinct from the edges. 


2.3 Handed Latches 


a) Latch for which the hand should be stated 
when ordering and which cannot be 
readily converted from one hand to the 
other. 


b) Latches which are supplied to the 
purchaser in equal numbers of each hand. 


2.4 Handing of Latches — The rules for 
determining and describing the relationship of each 
one of the following with the others : 


a) The directions of opening of hinges or 
sliding doors. 


b) The inside and outside of the door, and 


c) The latch which is intended to be affixed to 
the door. 


2.5 Latch — A device, openable from both sides 
and generally self-engaging, for holding closed a 
door, gate or the like. It consists of movable part 
falling by gravity or sliding or moving by means of 
a spring into a retaining member of some sort, the 
moving part of the device being operated by handle 
and not by a removable key. 


2.6 Left-Hand Latch 


a) A latch intended to be fitted to that edge of 
an inward opening hinged door which is on 


the left hand of a person viewing the door 
from the outside. 


b) A latch intended to be fitted to that edge of a 
cupboard, wardrobe or locker hinged door 
(that is outward opening) which is on the left 
hand of a person viewing the door from the 
outside. 


c) A latch intended to be fitted to that edge of a 
sliding door which is on the left hand of a 
person viewing the door from the outside in 
such a position that the door moves to the left 
in closing. 


2.7 Left-Hand Reverse Bolt Latch — A reverse 
bolt latch intended to be fitted to that edge of an 
outward opening door which is on the left hand of a 
person viewing the door from the outside. 


2.8 Outside (of Door) — Any of the following 
sides of a door : 


a) The external side of a door in an external 
wall; 


b) The corridor side of a room door; 


c) The side of a communicating door on 
which the hinge knuckles are not seen 
when the door is closed; 


d) The side of either of two doors facing the 
space between them; or 


e) The room side of a closet’ cupboard or 
wardrobe door. 


NOTE — The outside of a sliding door, a door across a 
corridor or leading into or out of a vestibule or lobby 
cannot always be determined as it depends on individual 
circumstances. 


2.9 Reverse Bolt Latch — Except as qualified in 
the note below, a latch in which the spring bolt has 
the bevel set to suit an outward opening door. 


NOTE — The term ‘reverse bolt latch’ is used for latches 
intended to be fitted to doors which always open 
outwards, for example cupboard, wardrobe and locker 
doors. 


IS 7881 (Part 2) : 2022 


2.10 Right-Hand Latch 


a) A latch intended to be fitted to that edge of 
an inward opening door which is on the right 
hand of a person viewing the door from the 
outside. 


b) A latch intended to be fitted to that edge of a 
cupboard, wardrobe or locker hinges door 
(that is outward opening) which is on the 
right hand of a person viewing the door from 
the outside. 


c) A latch intended to be fitted to that edge of a 
sliding door which is on the right hand of a 
person viewing the door from the outside in 


LATCHBOLT THROW 


such a position that the door moves to the 
right in closing. 


2.11 Right-Hand Reverse Bolt Latch — A 
reverse bolt latch intended to be fitted to that edge 
of an outward opening door which is on the right 
hand of a person viewing the door from the outside. 


2.12 Backset — Distance between centre of 
follower and front of face plate (see Fig. 1). 


2.13 Lockset — Distance from front of lock to end 
of lock (see Fig. 1). 


2.14 Centre Distance — Distance between centre 
of follower and key hole (see Fig. 1). 


Body OF LOCK 


FOLLOWER 


DEADBOLT THROW 


Center Distance 
Lock Size 


m 


Lockset 


FIG. 1 LLUSTRATION OF BACKSET, LOCKSET AND CENTRE DISTANCE 


3. TERMS RELATING TO LATCH PARTS 


3.1 Bevelled Forend (Splayed Forend) — A 
forend shaped to fit the closing edge of a door 
which is not at right angles to the face of the door. 


3.2 Bolt — The part of a rim or mortice latch 
which provides the fastening by protruding from 
the latch case to engage in staple or striking plate. 


3.3 Bolt Spring — A spring which shoots out the 
spring bolt of a latch. 


3.4 Bush — A sleeve or ferrule replacing the metal 
round the follower to give additional strength or 
bearing. 


3.5 Case — That part of a latch, usually box-like in 
form, into which the bolt action is assembled. 


3.6 Catch 


a) A device to hold the spring bolt of a latch in 
the ‘in’ or ‘out’ position or both. 


b) A hook or catch plate fixed to a gate post 
into which the bar of a gate latch or thumb 
latch falls to hold the gate closed. 


3.7 Double Forend — A combination of an inner 
forend and an outer forend. 


3.8 Flush Slide — A sliding device, having no 
projection and with a recess for the finger or 
thumb, which operates a catch, slide bolt or the 
like. 


3.9 Follower — The part of a latch action which, 
when turned by the spindle withdraws the spring 
bolt. 


3.10 Follower Spring — Any spring, in an easy 
action, acting upon the follower but not on the bolt. 


3.11 Forend — The part of a mortice latch, or that 
part of the case of a rim latch, through which the 
bolt protrudes. 


3.12 Inner Forend — That forend which is 
attached to the case of a mortice latch when a 
double forend is used. 


3.13 Jumbo Bolt — A slide bolt in a rim latch. 


3.14 Keep — A component of a gate latch or 
thumb latch through which the latch bar passes, so 
shaped as to contain the latch bar and limit its 
vertical movement. 


3.15 Latch Bar — The part of a thumb latch or 
gate latch which is pivoted so as to lift from the 
horizontal position and disengage from the catch 
when actuated by the thumb bit or other means. 


3.16 Latch Bolt — That bolt of a rim or mortice 
latch which is held in the shot position by a spring 
or by a weight, which is withdrawn by turning the 
handle or is pushed in by contact with the striking 
plate or staple. 


3.17 Lip (of Striking Plate) — A projection from 
the side of the striking plate, bent when fixed, 
which projects the frame and facilitates the 
depression of the head of the latch bolt. 


3.18 Locking Turn — A small handle, lever or 
knob which is turned manually to operate a catch. 


3.19 Outer Forend (Face Plate) — That forend, 
often having a decorative purpose, which is fixed to 
the inner forend of a mortice latch to form a double 
forend. 


3.20 Reversible Bolt — A bevelled spring bolt 
which is designed so that it may be turned over in 
the case to make the latch suitable for use in either 
direction of door opening. 


3.21 Roller Bolt — A latch bolt having a roller 
instead of a bevel. 


3.22 Rounded Forend — A forend shaped to 
follow the rounded edge of a swing door. 


3.23 Round-Ended Forend — A flat forend, of a 
mortice latch, with semi-circular ends to facilitate 
machine morticing. 


IS 7881 (Part 2) : 2022 


3.24 Slide Bolt — A small supplementary bolt of a 
latch, which is generally operated by finger or 
thumb only from the inside of the door. 


3.25 Spring Bolt — A spring operated latch bolt. 


3.26 Staple — A box-like fitting fixed on a door 
jamb into which the bolt of a rim latch shoots. 


3.27 Striking Plate — A plate, fixed to a door 
jamb or frame, into which the bolt or a rim latch or 
mortice latch engages. 


3.28 Thumb Bit (Thumb Lift) — A component of 
certain types of door furniture and latches usually 
associated with a vertical pull handle. The thumb 
bit is a lever pivoted on a horizontal axis at, or near 
the surface of the door and immediately above the 
pull handle. The end nearest the pull handle is 
spoon shaped for operation by the thumb. The other 
end projects into or through the door to operate a 
latch bar or latch bolt. 


4. TERMS RELATING TO LATCH BOLT 
ACTIONS FOR RIM AND MORTICE 
LATCHES 


4.1 Action of Latch Bolt — The means whereby 
movement of the handle : 


a) Always results in movement of the latch 
bolt but movement of the bolt by 
slamming does not result in the movement 
of the handle; and 


b) Stores up energy by compressing one or 
more springs or by raising a weight, the 
release of which returns the latch bolt and 
handle to their original position. 


4.2 Anti-thrust Action — A special action used in 
night latches, whereby the latch bolt when engaged 
in the staple or striking plate, is prevented from 
being forced back by end pressure applied to the 
bolt head. Contact with the striking plate or staple 
depress an auxiliary plunger which releases a pawl 
behind the bolt head thereby securing the bolt. 
Turning the handle or key disengages the pawl 
before withdrawing the bolt. 


4.3 Crank Action — A two-way action for 
horizontal locks or latches employing a spindle 
pivoted member (the crank) between follower and 
bolt. The follower when turned in either direction, 
acts upon the crank, swinging it always in the same 
direction. The movement of the crank withdraws 
the bolt. Crank action may be either plain action or 
easy action. 


4.4 Easy Action — Any action so sprung that, for 
easy closing of the door, only light pressure is 
applied to the spring bolt and, on turning the handle 


IS 7881 (Part 2) : 2022 


to open the door, additional pressure is applied to 
the follower to overcome friction or the weight of 
any additional handles. Easy actions usually emply 
two or more separate springs. 


4.5 Frog Action — A two-way action for upright 
locks, latches, catches and night latches allowing 
the bolt head and follower to lie on the same 
horizontal centre line. The end of the bolt latch is 
U-shaped with the follower lying between legs. 
Turning the follower in either direction engages 
one leg or the other and withdraws the bolt against 
the pressure of the spring. 


4.6 Geared Motion Action — An action in which 
the rotation of the follower imparts a linear motion 
to the bolt by means of a rack and pinion. 


4.7 Lift Up Action — An action in which vertical 
movement of a component part of the latch 
withdraws the latch bolt. 


4.8 One-Way Action — Any action permitting the 
follower to be turned from its original position in 
one direction only. One-way actions are usually 
confined to upright locks designed for use with 
lever handles. 


4.9 Palace Motion Action — An improved crank 
action intended to give a uniform handle pressure 
for clockwise or anticlockwise turning and a high 
standard of performance. The follower when turned 
in one direction, withdraws the bolt but when 
turned in the other direction acts upon the crank 
and the movement of the crank withdraws the bolt. 


4.10 Plain Action — Any action in which a single 
spring serves not only to operate the spring bolt but 
also to return the follower to its original position. 


4.11 Runner Action — A two-way action for 
locks or latches employing a single sliding member 
(the runner) between follower and bolt. The 
follower when turned in either direction, acts upon 
the runner, sliding it always in the same direction 
against the pressure of the bolt spring. The 
movement of the runner withdraws the bolt. A 
runner action may be either plain action or easy 
action. 


4.12 Scotch Spring Action — A two-way action, 
having a flat steel spring tapering in thickness (the 
scotch spring) of which one end is riveted to the 
case and the other bears on a pivoted arm close to 
the pivot. The action of the spring is transmitted to 
the spring bolt through the pivoted arm which is 
held in contact with the follower by the spring. 
When the follower is rotated in either direction the 
arm swings and withdraws the bolt. The disposition 
of the components make scotch spring action 
particularly suitable for use in two-bolt 


locks, but such actions are seldom employed for 
latches. 


4.13 Two-Way Action — Any action permitting 
the follower to be turned from its original position 
in either direction. Two-way actions are intended 
primarily for use with knobs and to enable a latch 
to be used as a left-handed latch or a right-handed 
latch without alteration. 


4.14 Weighted Action — Any action in which the 
energy to return the latch bolt and handle to their 
original positions is provided by a falling weight. 


5. TERMS RELATING TO TYPES OF 
LATCHES 


5.1 Barrack Latch — A robust type of Suffolk 
latch. 


5.2 Canadian Latch — A thumb latch of which 
the pull handle is cranked and is removable from 
the plate for reversing the hand. The thumb bit is 
retained behind the pull handle and plate and is not 
pivoted on a separate rivet. The keep is fixed to the 
edge and not the face of the door and the catch in 
the corresponding position on the frame. 


5.3 Colonial Latch — A particular arrangement of 
an automatic gate latch. 


5.4 Garden City Latch — A thumb latch, the pull 
handle of which is fixed at its ends to the door and 
having in addition the means to hold the latch bar 
in the closed position. 


5.5 Gate Latch 
a) Any latch designed for holding a gate closed. 


b) A latch having a spring bolt, follower and 
associated latch action and designed for 
fitting to a metal gate. 


5.5.1 Automatic Gate Latch — A device fixed to 
a gate post, having a pivoted thumb piece, which 
rides over a bar or arm on the gate, thus keeping 
the gate in the closed position. On releasing the 
thumb piece the gate can be opened. 


5.5.2 Field Gate Latch 


a) Any one of a wide variety of gate latches of a 
suitable size and strength for large gates. 


b) A latch consisting of a rod fixed vertically to 
the edge of the closing stile of a gate and 
retained by a catch fixed to the gate post. 


5.5.3 Mortice Gate Latch — A gate latch 
consisting of components similar in function to the 
surface gate latch but so arranged that the latch bar 


passes through a slot in the closing stile of the gate. 
The catch is in the form of a notched plate. 


5.5.4 Surface Gate Latch — One of a variety of 
latches fixed to the surface of a gate consisting 
essentially of : 


a) A horizontal Bar — the latch bar pivoted to 
the closing stile of the gate and frequently 
provided with a handle to lift the latch bar. 


b) A member — the keep through which the 
latch bar passes and so shaped as to contain 
the latch bar and limit its vertical movement. 


c) A hook — the catch fixed to the gate post 
into which the latch bar falls to hold the gate 
closed. 


5.6 Gothic Latch 
a) A heavy, ornamented, Suffolk latch; and 


b) An ornamented surface gate latch usually 
with a ring handle. 


5.7 Mortice Latch — Any catch for fixing a 
mortice cut in the closing edge of the door. 


5.7.1 Tubular Mortice Latch — A mortice latch 
having a case so shaped in cross section that it will 
fit in a round hole drilled in the edge of the door. 


5.8 Narrow Case Latch 


a) Any mortice latch for a door having narrow 
stiles. The case of the latch is usually 50 mm 
less in length. 


IS 7881 (Part 2) : 2022 


b) A rim latch intended to be fixed to a narrow 
rail of a panelled door. The case is usually 
less than 75 mm in height. 


5.9 Norfolk Latch — A thumb latch having a 
vertical pull handle fixed to a plate and the pivot 
point of the thumb bit lying behind the plate. 


5.10 Panic Latch — A reverse bolt rim latch or a 
mortice latch for outwardly opening emergency 
exit doors. The door is secured by the spring bolt of 
the latch which is radially released by light 
pressure on a horizontal bar, the cross bar, 
extending the full width of the inside face of the 
door. 


5.11 Rim Latch — A latch for fixing to the face of 
the door, having a beveled spring bolt and usually 
incorporating a jumbo bolt. 


5.12 Shop Door Latch — Any latch specially 
made for the narrow stile of a shop door, operated 
by lever handle or thumb bit. 


5.13 Sliding Door Latch — A mortice latch 
having a clutch bolt. 


5.14 Suffolk Latch — A thumb latch having a 
vertical pull handle fixed to a plate and a pivot of 
the thumb bit lying in front of the plate. 


5.15 Thumb Latch — A door latch consisting, on 
one side of the door, of a vertical pull handle 
surmounted by a thumb bit and on the other side by 
a latch bar, a catch and a keep. 


IS 7881 (Part 2) : 2022 


ANNEX A 


(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


UTENSILS, CUTLERY DOMESTIC HARDWARE SECTIONAL COMMITTEE, MED 33 


Organisation(s) 


In Personal Capacity (A-504, K.G Chandra Vista, 
OMR, Opposite to Satyabhama University, 
Sholinganallur), Chennai 


Aligarh Locks Manufacturers and Traders 
Association, Aligarh 


Anna Aluminium Ltd, Cochin 


Butterfly Gandhimati Appliances Ltd , Chennai 


Central Electrochemical Materials Science 


Division, Karaikudi 


Central Public Works Department , New Delhi 


Consumer Voice, New Delhi 


Delhi Test House , New Delhi 


D. P. Garg and Company Private Limited , Noida 


Federation of Hardware Manufacturer’s and 
Traders Welfare Association, Gurugram 


Godrej and Boyce Manufacturer’s Company 
Limited, Mumbai 


Hamilton Housewares Private Limited, Mumbai 


Hawkins Cookers Limited , Thane 


Representative(s) 


SHRI G. SHANMUGANATHAN (Chairperson) 


SHRI P. L. SHIROMANI 


SHRI DHRUV MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI K. CHANDRASHEKRAN PILLAI 


SHRI V. THULASIDHARAN ( Alternate ) 


SHRI K. SHANMUGAVELU 
SHRI A. BASKAR ( Alternate I) 


SHRI A. VIJAIMIRATHARAJ (Alternate II) 


DR S. VASUDEVAN 


DR S. MURALIDHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SURINDER KUMAR 


SHRI RK SARASWAT (Alternate) 


SHRI B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
SHRIM. A. U. KHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH GOEL 


SHRI ROHIT GOEL (Alternate) 
SHRI SANDIP GARG 


SHRI TAKSHAY BANSAL 
SHRI NAVEEN HANDA (Alternate I) 


SHRI VIKAS NARWAL (Alternate IT) 


SHRI K. SHITU R. GAIKAR 


SHRI VINAYAK G. NALGIRKAR ( Alternate ) 


SHRI SANJAY MORESHWAR MHATRE 
SHRI INDUPRAKASH SINGH (Alternate) 
SHRI VIKAS SURENDRA KUMAR BHATIA 


(Young Professional) 


SHRIB. S. SETHI 


Organisation(s) 


Hindalco Industries Limited, Disttt, Sonbhadra 


Jindal Stainless Limited, Hisar 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA) , Kanpur 


MSME Testing Centre, New Delhi 


National Metallurgical Laboratory , Jamshedpur 


Pritam Internationl, Baddi 


Royal Kitchen Appliances Private Limited , 


Sonepat 


Sat Rattan Engineering Works, New Delhi 


Sriram Institute for Industrial Research, New Delhi 


Steel Authority of India, Salem 


TTK Prestige Limited , Bengaluru 


In Personal Capacity (179, Sri Sai, 13th Cross, 
Ananthnagar Phase 1, Electronic City Post), 
Bengaluru 


BIS Directorate General, New Delhi 


IS 7881 (Part 2) : 2022 


Representative(s) 
SHRI RAHUL PATHAK (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVINDER MALI (Young Professional) 


DR VIVEK SRIVASTAVA 


SHRIMATI MANALI KHANDELWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI BISWABASU ROY CHOWDHURY 


SHRIMATI NISHA GOEL (Alternate) 


ER M. SATYANARAYANA 


SHRIS. J. KOLARKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUSHANT KUMAR SOM 


SHRI SUVANKAR SANTRA (Alternate) 


DR S. GHOSH CHOWDHURY 


DR K. L. SAHOO (Alternate) 


SHRI RAHUL KHERA 


SHRI ROHIT KHERA (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH AGARWAL 


SHRI G. L. KHERA 


SHRI RAHUL KHERA (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK KUMAR 
SHRI ANEESH KUMAR ( Alternate I) 


SHRI PUNEET KAPOOR ( Alternate IT) 


SHRI L. SIVAKUMAR 


SHRI SUNIL KUMAR MURATHIA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANTO VIMAL ANAND 


SHRI RAJASEKARAN S. (Alternate) 


SHRI B. VISWANATH SHENOY 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD 
(MED) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex- 


Officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI CHANDAN GUPTA 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (MED), BIS 


This page has been intentionally left blank. 


This page has been intentionally left blank. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 33 (18971). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


