INATA Ah IS 5502 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Arda ATT Sha de Tey — 
TAT EMT 
(TAT JETO ) 


Smooth-Wheeled Diesel Road 
Roller — General Requirements 
( Third Revision ) 


ICS 91.220 


© BIS 2023 


dit gtt st 
Ly BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


WM WH, 9 get Me TH AM, 28 Keelt. 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2023 Price Group 6 


Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee, MED 18 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 


Smooth-wheeled diesel road rollers are generally employed for compaction of different types of soils under 
various conditions, initial rolling and finish rolling of bitumen macadam, water-bound macadam, hot and cold 
asphalt, and to improve the condition of subgrade, sub-base and the base of pavements. Their selection is governed 
by the types of jobs and the characteristics of the material to be compacted. In general, they are the best type for 
use where crushing action is needed. This standard is intended to deal with the essential features of smooth- 
wheeled diesel road rollers to serve as guidance to both the manufacturer and the purchaser. 


This Indian Standard was first published in 1969 and subsequently revised in 1980 and 1988. This standard is 
being revised again to keep pace with the latest technological developments and international practices. Also, a 
new clause for performance requirements of road roller has been added with this revision. BIS certification 
marking clause has been modified to align with the revised Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the preparation of this standard is listed in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules 
for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5502 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
SMOOTH-WHEELED DIESEL ROAD ROLLER — 


GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard lays down the requirements for 
the material, size, design, construction and 
performance of smooth-wheeled diesel road rollers. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through their reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibilities of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards listed in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Line Pressure — The load on the roll divided 
by the width of the roll expressed as N/mm. 


3.2 Nominal Weight — The nominal weight of a 
road roller without ballast corresponds to the dead 
weight with its basic equipments. 


3.3 Operating Weight — The operating weight of 
a road roller without ballast corresponds with the 
dead weight with its basic equipment including the 
weight of all tools, with a full fuel tank and, if 
applicable, sprinkling water tank half full, full 
hydraulic oil tank and an addition of 75 kg for the 
operator. 


3.4 Overlap of Rolls — The portion of the track 
covered by the front roll being repeated by one of 
the rear rolls. In the case of a three-wheeled roller, it 
is 50 mm minimum. 


3.5 Rolling Width — The total width of the road 
covered by the front and rear roller. 


3.6 Tandem Roller — Machine having two rolls of 
approximately the same width, set one behind the 
other so that they operate in succession on the same 
track. 


3.7 Turning Radii 
3.7.1 Turning Radius (Outer) — The radius of the 


circle described by the outer edge of the front roll 
while the roller is executing its sharpest practicable 
turn. 


3.7.2 Turing Radius (Inner) — The radius of the 
circle described by the inner edge of the rear roll 
while the roller is executing its sharpest practicable 
turn. 


3.8 Turing Circle — This corresponds to the 
diameter of the circle which will enclose the 
outermost projection of the roller with all its basic 
equipment while executing its sharpest practicable 
turn. 


3.9 Wheel Base — The horizontal distance between 
the centres of the front and rear axles. 


4 SIZES 


The sizes of the roller shall be designated by the 
nominal weight of the equipment (unballasted). This 
shall be of the following size: 


1.5 tonnes to 3 tonnes, 4 tonnes, 6 tonnes, 8 tonnes 
and 10 tonnes. 


NOTES 
1 The operating weight of the roller shall be within 


+5 percent of the nominal weight. 


2 In sizes 4 tonnes, 6 tonnes, 8 tonnes, and 10 tonnes, the 
provision shall be made for 20 percent to 30 percent of 
ballasting. 


5 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 The roller shall be so designed that it can operate 
satisfactorily without damage in the following 
conditions and also not suffer any damage if kept 
idle under the following conditions: 


a) Temperature between - 10 °C to 60 °C; 


b) 100 percent relative humidity at any 
temperature up to 29 °C; and 


c) Wind velocity up to 120 km/h. 


5.2 If specified by the purchaser the roller shall be 
able to work at atemperature between - 30 °C to 
60 °C. In case no test is carried out for the above 
conditions, the manufacturer shall give a warranty 
(for a period of 12 months from the date of 
commissioning or 18 months from the date of 
supply, whichever is earlier) for the performance of 
equipment in the above conditions. 


IS 5502 : 2023 


6 MATERIALS 


6.1 Materials used for the construction of smooth- 
wheeled diesel road roller shall comply with the 
requirements given under 6.1.1 to 6.1.12. 


6.1.1 Steel Sections, Bars and Plates 
Shall conform to IS 2062. 

6.1.2 Mild Steel Sheets 

Shall conform to IS 1079. 

6.1.3 Steel Casting 


Shall be of suitable grades conforming to IS 2707 
and IS 1030. 


6.1.4 Carbon Steel Forgings 

Shall be of suitable class conforming to IS 2004. 
6.1.5 Grey Iron Castings 

Shall be of suitable grade conforming to IS 210. 
6.1.6 Rivet Bars 

Shall conform to IS 1148 or IS 226. 

6.1.7 Springs 


Shall be manufactured from a suitable grade of wire 
conforming to IS 4454 (Part 1). 


6.1.8 Steel Tubes 


Shall conform to IS 1239 (Part 1) and IS 1239 
(Part 2). 


6.1.9 The clutch plate shall be of carbon steel 
hardened and tempered to a minimum tensile 
strength of 686 N/mm”. 


6.1.10 The stalk (K Pin) shall be of carbon or alloy 
steel with a minimum tensile strength of 617 N/mm’. 
All gears of inter shaft, first inter shaft, and final 
drive pinion shall be of alloy steel quenched and 
tempered to a minimum tensile strength of 
686 N/mm. The teeth of the gears shall be 
case/surface hardened to hardness between 57 RC to 
60 RC to a depth of 1 mm to 1.5 mm. The second 
and third inter shaft and differential shaft shall be of 
carbon or alloy steel having a minimum tensile 
strength of 617 N/mm’. The differential bevel 
wheels shall be of alloy steel hardened and tempered 
to a minimum tensile strength of 921 N/m?. 


6.1.11 The bevel pinion shall be of alloy steel 
suitably heat treated, case/surface hardened between 
44 RC to 48 RC to a depth of 0.8 mm to 1.1 mm and 
the tensile strength shall not be less than 686 Nimm", 


6.1.12 The front and behind axles shall be of carbon 
steel conforming to IS 1570 (Part 2) with a minimum 
tensile strength of 617 Nimm? 


7 CONSTRUCTION 


7.1 The construction of the smooth-wheeled diesel 
road roller shall, in general, be robust and capable of 
withstanding continuous strain likely to be imposed 
during the operation over rough, rocky or soft 
grounds. 


7.1.1 All parts of the roller requiring frequent 
replacement or constant attention or periodic 
servicing shall be easily accessible without 
dismantling any fittings or parts. 


7.2 Main Frame 


The main frame shall be made of structural steel 
with rolled steel channels (or other suitable sections) 
cross-braced and stayed or all-welded plate chassis 
made of a suitable thickness of mild steel plate to 
form a rigid unit to ensure perfect alignment of the 
engine and transmission throughout the life of the 
road roller. 


All main working parts, that is, engine, steering 
head, radiator, gearbox, differential gears, rear axle, 
etc, shall be carried on the main frame and shall not 
be attached to the superstructure. The pressure 
balancing device shall also be housed within the 
frame members. 


7.3 Pressure Balancing Device 


The pressure balancing device shall comprise a 
heavy trolley-borne weight with the arrangement of 
being clamped at the desired position and shall be 
movable along the length of the main frame so that 
with the weights in the forward position and the 
appropriate quantity of ballast in the rollers, 
pressures per unit contact area in front and rear could 
be equalized for surface finishing. 


7.4 Clutch 


The clutch shall be of the heavy automotive double- 
acting single-plate, quick release type controlled by 
a single-hand lever. A forward or backward 
movement of the lever shall give a corresponding 
direction of travel to the roller in any gear setting. 
The lever controlling the clutch shall be locked in 
the selected position-forward, neutral or reverse by 
a spring-loaded clutch which engages in a notched 
quadrant. The different positions of the lever shall 


be obtained by releasing the spring-loaded clutch. 
The clutch shall be of steel and its lining shall be 
brass wire woven. The pressure ring used in such 
clutches shall be cast iron. In an alternative design 
of cone clutch, the clutch drum shall be of cast iron 


and the clutch cone shall be of aluminium casting 
provided with a clutch lining of brass-wire woven 


type. 


7.4.1 If required, the hydraulic coupling may be 
provided. The hydraulic coupling unit shall 
generally be fitted between the engine and clutch to 
ensure the smooth take-up of the drive, and to reduce 
shocks to the engine and transmission while 
scarifying. 


7.5 Fore-carriage Assembly 


The arrangement of steering from the fore-carriage 
shall be robust and ensure uniform pressure over the 
width of the front rolls. The arrangement shall 
ensure adequate articulation of the steering roll 
about the trunnion pins so that it may accommodate 
up to a minimum 13° inclination without disturbing 
the stability of the machine. The fork shall be of cast 
steel conforming to IS 1030 or of fabricated steel 
conforming to IS 226 and shall be machined after 
proper seasoning in the case of the former. The 
steerage quadrant shall be of cast steel conforming 
to IS 1030 or carbon steel conforming to IS 2004 
having a minimum tensile strength of 539 Nimm", 
The fore-carriage shall be of cast steel conforming 
to IS 1030 or fabricated steel conforming to IS 226. 


The front roller assembly shall be fitted into this unit 
and after assembling its clearance with the fore 
carriage shall be at least 12 mm for the smooth 
operation of the machine. 


7.6 Rolls 


Front and rear rolls shall not be less than 22 mm and 
32 mm thick respectively and shall be fabricated 
from a heavy section of heavy steel section of mild 
steel plates conforming to IS 226 and shall be 
electrically welded. The hubs shall be fitted with 
renewable bushes. The rolls shall be so designed that 
they can be ballasted with sand and water. 


8 ENGINE 


8.1 The prime mover shall be a diesel engine 
conforming to class B of IS 10000 (Part 7). The 
engine shall have adequate horsepower, capable of 
operating the road roller, as mentioned in 8.1.1. 


8.1.1 The roller shall be capable of giving its full 
output up to 1 500 m altitude, but space shall be 
available to mount a higher horse-power engine to 
cater for operation up to 5 000 m when so required. 


8.2 The diesel engine shall be provided, with hand 
or electric or hydraulic or spring starting gear. The 
electric starter, when provided, shall be on a 


IS 5502 : 2023 


12 V/24 V electric system. Arrangements may also 
be available for hand cranking when electric or 
hydraulic or spring starters are provided. 


9 FUEL SYSTEM 


The fuel tank shall be of sufficient capacity to 
provide a minimum of 8 h (depending upon size) 
running on full load. The filling orifice shall 
incorporate a removable filter and shall be of such 
size and so placed that filling by jerry can, without 
the aid of a funnel, presents no difficulty. 
Alternatively, a hand-operated semi-rotary pump 
shall be provided. A captive filler cap shall be 
provided for the filling orifice and the method used 
for venting the tank to the atmosphere shall be such 
that no fuel spillage occurs when the machine is 
travelling with the tank completely full. The 
draw-off from the fuel tank to the engine shall leave 
5 percent dead volume below it at any operating 
angle up to 12 degrees. A plug shall be provided for 
completely draining the tank. A fuel gauge or 
dipstick calibrated in litres shall be fitted to the tank. 
If required, a hand-operated semi-rotary pump shall 
be fitted to the plant in a position suitable for 
pumping fuel from containers on the ground to the 
fuel tank. The pump shall be completed with a hose 
and suction strainer which shall be of such diameter 
as to admit entry to the 50 mm opening in the 
180 litre drum. The suction hose and strainer shall 
be secured in such a position as to keep it dry and 
free from road dirt. Fuel filters of adequate capacity 
shall be incorporated into the system. 


10 RADIATOR 


A radiator of adequate capacity shall be provided in 
water-cooled engines as recommended by prime 
mover manufacturers to keep the temperature of the 
coolant always within the permissible limits. The 
temperature of the coolant shall not exceed a 
temperature of 12 °C below the boiling point. The 
radiator shall be resiliently mounted to withstand 
road shocks transmitted through the frame. A drain 
tap shall be provided in the radiator. 


11 POWER TRANSMISSION 


11.1 The power from the prime mover shall 
normally be transmitted to the rear rolls in the case 
of a three-wheeled roller. However, the provision 
shall be made for locking the differential when 
working on soft ground, or on steep gradient when 
using a scarified or to overcome wheel spin 


11.2 The road rollers except those in size 1.5 tonnes 
to 6 tonnes shall be provided with a minimum of 
three road speeds in forward and reverse direction, 
the range of speeds shall be as given in Table 1. 


IS 5502 : 2023 


Table 1 Limits of Road Speeds for Power Transmission 
(Clause 11.2) 


SI No. Size of Roller Gear Speed, Forward and Reverse 
(tonne) 
First Gear Second Gear Third Gear 
(km/h) (km/h) (km/h) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 1.5 to 6 1.5 to 1.9 2.50 to 3 — 
ii) 8 and 10 1.70 to 2.25 2.75 to 3.50 6 to 10 


11.3 Switchover from forward traverse to reverse 
traverse shall be with the help of a clutch which 
can be operated while the roller is moving. Provision 
shall be made for locking the clutch in both positions 
to prevent inadvertent operation. 


12 GEARBOX 


12.1 Gearbox shall be of cast iron or FG 200 of 
IS 210 or fabricated from welded mild 
steel plates. All gears of inter shafts shall be of alloy 
steel. 


12.1.1 A hydrostatic transmission may be used with 
or without a gearbox. In such a case suitable 
arrangement should be provided to tow the machine 
in case of emergency. 


12.2 Differential Shafts 


When the final drive is through the differential 
shafts, its pinions, bevel wheels and bevel pinion 
shall be of steel as specified in 5.1.11. 


13 BALLASTING 


13.1 Ballasting shall be done by the addition of sand 
or water or any other suitable material to 
the rolls which shall be made hollow. Filler holes 
provided in each roll shall be so placed as 
to facilitate easy filling and complete draining of the 
rolls. 


WHEEL BASE 


13.2 The weight distribution on the front and rear 
rolls of the roller unballasted shall be 
within the following limits: 


a) 30 percent to 40 percent of the weight of the 
machine on the front rolls; and 

b) 60 percent to 70 percent of the weight of the 
machine on the rear roll(s). 


14 BRAKES 


Fully self-wrapping, internal/external, 
expanding/contracting, shoe/band type brakes 
acting on the machined inner/outer surfaces of the 
brake drum shall be provided using suitable brake 
lining and controlled by a foot pedal or by a hand 
wheel or lever independently. The hand brake, 
which is operated by a screw-type hand wheel or 
lever, shall be placed to the driver’s left hand or right 
hand side as the case may be. This brake may be 
used for parking as well as to assist the foot brake 
while the roller is going down a steep gradient. 
Adjustment for wear on the brake lining shall be 
provided. The foot brake shall be capable of 
stopping the roller instantaneously. 


15 STEERING 


15.1 Turning radii in the case of three-wheeled 
rollers (see Fig. 1) shall not be more than the values 
specified in Table 2. 


FIG. 1 TURNING RADII OF THREE-WHEELED ROAD ROLLER 


IS 5502 : 2023 


Table 2 Turning Radii for Three-Wheeled Roller 
(Clause 15.1) 


SI No. Size of Roller Turning Radius-Inner (R;) Turning Radius-Outer (Ro) 
(tonne) (mm) (mm) 
0) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 1.5 to3 2 200 3 400 
ii) 4 and 6 2 900 4 400 
111) 8 and 10 3 450 5 800 
15.2 Power Steering operator from the sun and the rain. End and side 


If desired by the purchaser, the power steering 
system may be provided with rollers of sizes 
8 tonnes and 10 tonnes. The system may be 
hydraulic power steering or mechanical power 
steering. In both the systems, there shall be an 
arrangement of disconnecting power units and 
reinstating hand steering quite simply. 


16 GRADIENT 


Rollers of all sizes shall be capable of operating on 
a gradient of 1 in 5 in both ballasted and unballasted 
conditions at the first gear speed on firm, hard and 
even sub-soil in forward or reverse drive. 


17 WATER SPRINKLING 


17.1 Water sprinkling system shall be provided for 
front and rear rolls with a separate control. 


17.2 The minimum capacity of the water tank shall 
be as given in Table 3. 


Table 3 Minimum Capacity of Water Tank 
(Clause 17.2) 


SI No. Size of Roller Minimum 
(tonnes) Capacity of 
Water Tank 
(litres) 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Up to 1.5 50 
ii) Above 1.5 and up to 6 100 
iii) Above 6 200 
18 DRIVER’S SEAT 


18.1 An adjustable and comfortable seat shall be 
provided for the driver. 


18.2 The engine fitted in the front side and any other 
fitting to the sides of the machine shall be 
such that the operator shall have clear vision at all 
sides of the machine from his sitting position. 


19 AWNING AND CAB 


19.1 Suitable, robust sheet steel awning with heat- 
insulating lining shall be provided to protect the 


curtains shall be provided. 


19.1.1 Other types of awnings may also be fitted 
provided equivalent performance is ensured. 


19.2 Cab 


If required, a cab may be provided in place of the 
awning. The cab shall be of fabricated steel 
construction and fitted with large safety glass 
windows on all four sides. The cab shall completely 
enclose the operator’s station. Windscreen wipers 
shall also be fitted. Provision for exhaust outlet pipe 
shall be in the rear corner of the cab. If desired by 
the purchaser, a suitable heating arrangement may 
be provided. 


20 ACCESSORIES 
20.1 Scarifier 


If required by the purchaser, two or more types shall 
be provided for rollers of sizes 8 tonnes and 
10 tonnes. These shall be fitted behind one of the 
rear rolls. 


20.2 Scraper 


Spring-loaded or fixed bar-type scrapers to act in 
either direction shall be fitted for rear roll and front 
roll. The scraper shall cover the full width of the roll. 
Elongation holes in the blades shall permit 
adjustments of the gap between the blade and roll 
surface. Blades shall be reversible to ensure 
maximum life. Spring pressure shall be adjusted by 
means of a spring retaining nut for spring-loaded 
scrapers. 


21 CONTROLS 


21.1 Following controls shall be provided and 
shall be easily accessible to the operator: 


a) Starting and stopping arrangement for prime 
mover; 

b) Gear shifting lever; 

c) Parking brake lever; 

d) Forward or reverse clutch; 

e) Pedal brake; 

f) Water sprinkler valves; 

g) Accelerating lever; 


IS 5502 : 2023 


h) Hand steering wheel; 

j) Differential lock; 

k) Heater button (cold starting device), if 
required; and 

m) Control for wiper, if fitted. 


21.2 Instruments 


The following instruments shall be provided: 


a) Ammeter; 
b) Oil pressure gauge; and 
c) Oil temperature gauge, if required. 


21.3 Optional Instruments 


The following instruments may be provided: 


a) Water temperature gauge; 
b) Fuel gauge; and 
c) Hour meter. 


22 LIFTING AND TOWING ARRANGEMENT 


Each roller shall be fitted with a suitable means at 
only the rear end of the roller for towing purpose. 


23 LUBRICATION 


Adequate lubrication of all moving parts shall be 
provided keeping the maintenance schedule as 
simple as possible. 


24 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


24.1 Safety guards for moving parts shall be 
provided. The parts, which are exposed to the 
atmosphere and are liable to become defective due 
to dust, shall be covered adequately. 


24.2 Reflectors at front and rear, near and offside of 
the roller, shall be provided to show the 
presence of the roller at night to the other vehicles 
using the road. 


24.3 Two travelling electric lights at the front and 
one at the rear end of the roller shall be provided. 


25 TOOLS AND INSTRUCTION MANUALS 


A strong toolbox with a lock and a key, containing 
the necessary tools for normal running adjustments 
and lubrication of the machine together with an 
instruction manual, operator manual along with the 
maintenance schedule and an inventory of the tools 
shall be provided along with the roller. A spare parts 
book shall be supplied. 


26 FINISHING 


All exposed parts of the roller shall be painted with 


suitable anti-corrosive protective paint. 


27 MARKING 
27.1 Rating Plate 


Each roller shall have a rating plate firmly attached 
to some part which will not be easily removable. The 
plate shall have clearly marked on it the following 
information: 


a) Manufacturer’s name and address; 

b) Month & Year of manufacture; 

c) Machine name & model number; 

d) Roller size; 

e) Diameter of the rollers; and 

f) Line pressure under the rollers with and 
without ballast. 


27.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this Standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
product(s) may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


28 INFORMATION 


The following particulars shall be given with each 
roller: 


a) Unballasted weight; 

b) Water, sand, etc, ballasted weight; 

c) Forward and reverse speed; 

d) Specification of the engine; 

e) Line pressure on the front and rear rolls; 

f) Rolling width; 

g) Diameter of rear roll; 

h) Width of rear roll; 

j) Diameter of front roll; 

k) Width of front roll; 

m) Wheelbase; 

n) Overlap of rolls; 

p) Length; 

q) Height with awning or cab; 

r) Turning radius — Inner and turning radius 
— Outer; 

s) Turning space; 

t) Fuel tank capacity; 

u) Sprinkler tank capacity; 

v) Hydraulic oil tank capacity, if used; and 

w) Capability for negotiating gradient 
specifying the surfaces. 


IS No. 
IS 210 : 2009 


IS 1030 : 1998 


IS 1079 : 2017 


IS 1239 


(Part 1) : 2004 
(Part 2) : 2011 


IS 1570 (Part 2) : 


1979 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Grey iron castings — Specification 
(fifth revision) 


Carbon steel castings for general 
engineering purposes — 
Specification (fifth revision) 

Hot rolled carbon steel sheet, plate 


and strip — Specification (seventh 
revision) 


Steel tubes, tubulars and other 
wrought steel fittings — 
Specification: 


Steel tubes (sixth revision) 
Steel pipe fittings (fifth revision) 


Schedules for wrought steels: Part 2 
Carbon steels (unalloyed steels) (first 
revision) 


IS No. 
IS 2004 : 1991 


IS 2062 : 2011 


IS 2707 : 1996 


IS 4454 (Part 1) : 


2001 


IS 10000 
(Part 7) : 1980 


IS 5502 : 2023 


Title 


Carbon steel forgings for general 
engineering purposes — 
Specification (third revision) 


Hot rolled medium and high tensile 
structural steel — Specification 
(seventh revision) 


Carbon steel castings for surface 
hardening — Specification (fourth 
revision) 


Steel wire for mechanical springs — 
Specification: Part 1 Cold drawn 
unalloyed steel wire (third revision) 


Methods of tests for internal 
combustion engines: Part 7 
Governing tests for constant speed 
engines and selection of engines for 
use with electrical generators 


IS 5502 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee, MED 18 


Organization 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 
of Defence, New Delhi 
AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 


Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Ajax Engineering Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Ammann Apollo India Private Limited, Jagudan, 
Gujarat 


Atlas Copco India Limited, Pune 

B. G. Shirke Construction Technology Limited, Pune 

Caterpillar India Private Limited, Chennai 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

Directorate General Border Roads, New Delhi 

Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 
of Defense, New Delhi 


Epiroc Mining India Limited, Nashik 


Escorts Construction Equipment Limited, Faridabad 


Indian Construction Equipment Manufacturers 


Association, New Delhi 


IRCON International Limited, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


BRIG P. K. SHRIVASTAVA (Chairperson) 


SHRI ROHITASH BARUA 
SHRI KULDEEP SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI G. K. CHOUDHARY 
SHRIR. L. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SYED MOHAMMED RIAZ NAWAZ 
SHRI JORLIN P V (Alternate D 
SHRI MANJUNATH D JAGGAL (Alternate II) 
SHRI KRISHNA KISHORE (Alternate II) 


SHRI GIRISH DIXIT 
SHRI ASHISH PATEL (Alternate I) 
SHRI MANAN RAJPURA (Alternate II) 
SHRI PRASAD DAYA (Alternate II) 
SHRI GEETESH MAKADIA (Alternate IV) 
SHRI ARPAN PATEL (Alternate V) 
SHRI KARTIK TRIVEDI (Alternate VI) 


SHRI VIJAY SHARMA 
SHRI YOGESH TULJAPURKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A D BHOSALE 
SHRI SUNIL KEDAR (Alternate) 


SHRI K. REJI JOSE 
SHRI RAMESH VISHWANATHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI DILIP KUMAR JHA 
SHRI KRISHNAJI SINGH (Alternate) 


DR SUVIR SINGH 
DR BANTI A. GEDAM (Alternate) 


CoL AMIT BHARDWAJ 


COL RAVI LOGANATHAN 
LT COL S. TALEWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VENKATESAN BASHYAM 
SHRI MUTTANNA JAPANNAVAR (Alternate) 


SHRI FAIZ AHMAD 
SHRI ASHOK CHAUHAN (Alternate D 
SHRI LAXMI CHAND TYAGI (Alternate II) 
SHRI K. V. KRISHNAMURTHY 


SHRI RANDHIR GUPTA 
SHRIS. K. RAY (Alternate) 


Organization 


Jaypee India Limited, Kolkata 


John Deere India Private Limited, Mumbai 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Bengaluru 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, 


New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Faridabad 


Schwing Stetter (India) Private Limited, New Delhi 


Volvo Construction Equipments India Private 


Limited, Bengaluru 


Wirtgen India Private Limited, Pune 


In Personal Capacity (D-24, Amar 
New Delhi) 


Colony, 


In Personal Capacity (Flat no. 3052, Prestige 
Shantiniketan, Whitefield main road, Bengaluru) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 5502 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI KUMAR M. MEHTA 
SHRI RAHUL KUMAR TEOTIA (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTHIK KALIAPPAN 
SHRI RAJ ANAND (Alternate) 


SHRI K. KESHAVA 
SHRI M. SURESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI K C SHARMA 
SHRI JITENDRA KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI KAPIL KUKREJA 
SHRI SAURABH BHATNAGAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV SHALIA 
SHRI VARADHARAJAN R. (Alternate) 
SHRI V. R. SAI PRASAD POLIPALLI 


SHRI K. RAGHURAMAN (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK BHOIR 
SHRI PARUL ARORA (Alternate) 


SHRI SATANDER KUMAR 


SHRI S. N. MAHAJAN 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (MECHANICAL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI LOKRAJ MEENA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSITANT DIRECTOR 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 18 (19024). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern ` :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


