Waa Waa IS 16777 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


Чат otic ent ТЫТАТ — tifa 
" 


Laying of Paver Blocks — Code 
of Practice 


ICS 93.080.20 


© BIS 2019 


ads res emi 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM чач, 9 Fergus їч HM, 45 14691–110002 
Lm МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2019 Price Group 8 


Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee, CED 05 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Flooring, 
Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Interlocking concrete block pavement has been extensively used in a number of countries for quite some time. 
This standard gives recommendations for the laying of interlocking concrete paving blocks intended for roads, 
industrial areas and other paved surfaces subjected to all categories of static and vehicular loading and pedestrian 
traffic. This standard has been formulated for laying of such interlocking concrete block pavements, giving suggested 
procedures for laying practices and patterns for different requirements and situations of applications, construction 
practices, and for their use. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of the standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result ofa test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of specified value in this standard. 


IS 16777 : 2019 


Indian Standard 
LAYING OF PAVER BLOCKS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers laying of interlocking concrete 
paver blocks intended for roads, industrial areas and 
other paved surfaces subjected to all categories of static 
and vehicular loading and pedestrian traffic. This 
standard also covers recommendations for drainage and 
maintenance of such pavements. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard listed below contains provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
15658 : 2006 Precast concrete blocks for 
paving — Specification 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Arris — Part of a block where two faces meet, 
which can be bevelled, rounded, chamfered or splayed. 


3.2 Aspect Ratio — The ratio of length to thickness of 
a paver block. 


3.3 Backing Layer — Layer of concrete on the lower 
face ofa two-layer paver block, made of material same 
as or different from that used in the wearing layer of 
the block. 


3.4 Basket Weave or Parquet — A laying pattern 
where two or more pavers are placed side-by-side. 
Adjacent pavers are placed side-by-side, but turned 90° 
and alternated 90" throughout the pattern. 


3.5 Base Course — A material of designed thickness 
placed on a sub-base or a sub-grade to support a surface 
course. A base course can be compacted aggregate, 
cement or asphalt stabilized aggregate, asphalt or 
concrete. 


3.6 Bed Face — That surface of a paver block which, 
when paved, comes in direct contact with the bedding 
material. 


3.7 Bedding Sand — A layer of coarse, clean sand 
that is screeded smooth for bedding the pavers. The 
sand can be natural or manufactured, that is, crushed 


from larger rocks, and should conform to the grading 
requirements. 


3.8 California Bearing Ratio (CBR) — The ratio 
expressed in percentage of force per unit area required 
to penetrate a soil mass with a circular plunger of 50 mm 
diameter at the rate of 1.25 mm/min to that required 
for corresponding penetration in a standard material. 
The ratio is usually determined for penetration of 2.5 
and 5 mm. Where the ratio at 5 mm is consistently 
higher than that at 2.5 mm, the ratio at 5 mm is used. 


3.9 Chamfer — A 45? bevelled edge around the top of 
a paver unit usually 2-6 mm wide. It allows water to 
drain from the surface, facilitates snow removal, helps 
prevent edge chipping, and delineates the individual 
paving units. 


3.10 Colour — Appearance of a paver block due to 
pigment used in concrete, other than natural cement 
colour. 


3.11 Complementary Product — A precast usually 
of the shape of part of a block, used for fitting into 
gaps remaining in a block-paved area, for complete 
coverage of paved surface. 


3.12 Crown — The slightly convex shape of a road 
cross-section. It is beneficial to surface drainage and 
interlock. 


3.13 Deflection — The temporary movement of a 
pavement structure due to traffic loads. 


3.14 Deformation — A change in the shape of the 
pavement. 


3.15 Equivalent Single Axle Loads (ESALs) — 
Summation of equivalent single axle loads (100 kN) to 
combine mixed traffic to a design traffic load for the 
design period. 


3.16 Edge Paver — A paving unit that is made with a 
straight, flush side, or cut straight for placement against 
an edge restraint. 


3.17 Edge Restraint — Device that serves to prevent 
lateral movement of paving units and to prevent loss 
of the laying course material. 


3.18 Face Mix or Hard Facing — The application of 
a thin layer of fine aggregate and cement to the top 
surface ofa concrete paver. The layer is often coloured 
and is used to provide a more intensive appearance, 
greater abrasion resistance, or provide a base for a 
textured finish. 


IS 16777 : 2019 


3.19 False Joints/Grooves — Regularly shaped 
depressions on the wearing layer of a paver block. 


3.20 Format — Work dimensions of a paver block, 
specified in the order of overall length, overall width 
and thickness. 


3.21 Half Stone — A half of a paver. 


3.22 Hard Edges — A field of pavers that is restrained 
against a visible edge restraint or curve, thus visually 
reinforcing the edge of pavement. 


3.23 Herringbone Pattern — A pattern where joints 
are no longer than the length of one and one-half pavers. 
Herringbone patterns can be 45° or 90° depending on 
the orientation of the joints with respect to the direction 
of the traffic. 


3.24 Interlocking/ Dentated/ Inter-connected Paver 
Blocks — Cement concrete paver blocks, which key 
into one another on some or all vertical faces, when 
paved in any pattern. 


3.25 Interlocking Mechanism — The mechanism, 
which allows adjacently paved blocks to key into one 
another and facilitate the sharing of shear, bending and 
thrust forces between adjacent blocks in a paved system. 


3.26 Intermediate Restraint — Device that is used to 
provide restraint of paving units at intervals of the 
paving surface. 


3.27 Joint Sand — Sand applied to fill the joints 
between paving units. 


3.28 Joint Sand Stabiliser — Liquid penetrating or 
dry mix applied or materials that provide early 
stabilization of joint sand. 


3.29 Joint Spacing — The distance between pavers 
subsequently filled with joint sand. 


3.30 Joint Width — Distance between adjacent paving 
units or units and restraint. 


3.31 Lean Concrete — Concrete of low cement content 
(150 kg/m? of concrete) used as a structural base 
material or as flow able fill in utility trenches. 


3.32 Length — Shortest distance between farthest 
opposite vertical faces of a parallelepiped enclosing a 
paver block, excluding the dimensions due to any spacer 
nibs. 


3.33 Layer or Cluster — A group of paver 
manufactured in a laying pattern, generally placed by 
mechanical equipment. 


3.34 Laying Face — Working edge of the surface 
course to which paving unit are being placed. 


3.35 Laying Course — Layer of sand on which paving 
units are bedded. 


3.36 Laying Pattern — The sequence of placing 
pavers such that the installed units create a repetitive 
geometry. Laying patterns may be selected for their 
visual or structural benefits. 


3.37 Moisture Content — The percentage by weight 
of water contained in the pore space of soil, sand or 
base, with respect to the weight of the solid material. 


3.38 Multicoloured Paver (Colour Blend) — A paver 
with two or more colours. The appearance is usually 
variegated. 


3.39 Pavement Structure — A combination of sub- 
base, base course, and surface course placed on a sub- 
grade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the 
roadbed. 


3.40 Paver Block — Solid, un-reinforced pre-cast 
cement concrete paving units used in the surface course 
of pavements, with minimum horizontal cross-section 
of 50 mm from any edge in any direction, having aspect 
ratio not more than four, except for complementary 
products. 


3.41 Permeable Interlocking Pavement — Concrete 
pavers with wide joints (10 mm to 30 mm) ora pattern 
that creates openings in which rainfall can infiltrate. 
The openings can be filled with aggregate or topsoil 
and grass. The pavers are typically placed on an open- 
graded aggregate base, which stores runoff. 


3.42 Plan Area — Horizontal area bounded by the 
vertical faces of a paver block, excluding the area due 
to any spacer nibs. 


3.43 Plate Compactor — A mechanical device 
required for making compacted or stabilized layers 
according to provisions of applicable specifications. 


3.44 Pumping — The ejection of saturated bedding 
and joint sand, through joints or cracks or along edges 
of pavers when a load is applied. 


3.45 Road Base or Base Course — One or more layers 
of material placed above the sub-base that constitutes 
a structural element of a flexible or composite 
pavement. 


3.46 Running or Stretcher Bond — A laying pattern 
with continuous joint lines in one direction and pavers 
are staggered from one row to the next. 


3.47 Side Face — That face of a paver block which is 
generally in the vertical direction when paved and which 
faces adjacent block. 


3.48 Skid Resistance — Resistance to relative 
movement between a vehicle tyre and the trafficked 
surface of a pavement. 


3.49 Soft Edges — A field of pavers with no visible 
edge restraint that meets grass or other vegetation, thus 
giving a soft appearance to the edge. 


3.50 Stack Bond — A laying pattern in which the joints 
in both directions are continuous. 


3.51 Sub-base — One or more layers of material placed 
immediately above the sub-grade. 


3.52 Sub-grade — The soil upon which the pavement 
structure and shoulders are constructed. 


3.53 Spacer Nibs — Small protruding profiles on the 
vertical face of a paver block used as a device for 
keeping minimum joint gap while paving blocks. 


3.54 Squareness — Normally between the vertical 
faces of a paver block and the horizontal wearing 
surface, and parallelism between wearing surface and 
lower horizontal surface. 


3.55 Surface Course — Layer of interlocked a paving 
unit that acts as a wearing surface and forms part of the 
structure of the pavement. 


3.56 Surface Relief — Regularly shaped protrusions 
on the wearing surface of a paver block. 


3.57 Surface Texture — Microscopic and macroscopic 
features of the wearing face of a paver block. 


3.58 Thickness — Vertical distance between the upper 
face and bed face of a paver block. 


3.59 Wearing Face — That surface of a paver block 
which, when paved, faces the atmosphere and which is 
directly subjected to loading and movement of vehicle 
tyres or pedestrian traffic. 


3.60 Wearing Face Area — Horizontal area bounded 
by the vertical faces of a paver block, minus the area 
reduced due to the presence of arris. 


3.61 Wearing Layer — Layer of concrete or mortar 
on the upper face ofa two- layer paver block, made of 
material same as or different from that used in the 
backing layer of the block. 


3.62 Width — Shortest distance between nearest 
opposite vertical faces or corners of a paver block. 


3.63 Work Dimension — Any dimension of a paver 
block specified for its manufacture, to which the actual 
dimension should conform, within specified permissible 
tolerances. 


4 MATERIALS 
4.1 General 


The quality of materials, cement concrete strength, 
durability and dimensional tolerance, etc, 1s of great 
importance for the satisfactory performance of block 
pavements. These aspects and the block manufacturing 
process itself, which immensely affect the quality of 
paving blocks, are broadly outlined in 4.2 to 4.6 
describing the desired engineering properties of 
bedding/joint filling sand layer beneath the block; the 
base course and sub-base materials. 


IS 16777 : 2019 


4.2 Precast Concrete Paver Blocks 


The precast concrete blocks for paving shall be 
conforming to IS 15658. 


4.3 Bedding Sand 


The quality and thickness of bedding sand are of utmost 
important for ensuring good riding quality and service 
life of block pavements. Non-uniform thickness of 
bedding sand layer results in serious irregularities in 
surface profile that may include excessive differential 
deformation and uneven surface riding quality of the 
block pavement. The desired gradation of bedding sand 
shall be as given in Table 1. 


Use of single-sized or gap graded sand or sand with 
excessive amount of fines or plastic fines shall be 
avoided. Sand particles with sharp edge shall preferably 
be used as this sand posses a higher strength and resists 
the migration of sand particles under the block to less 
frequently trafficked areas. Even though sharp sand is 
relatively more difficult to compact than rounded one. 
The use of sharp sand is preferred for the heavily 
trafficked pavements. The bedding sand shall be free 
from deleterious materials. 


Table 1 Gradation for Bedding Sand 
(Clause 4.3) 


SI IS Sieve Size Percent Passing 
No. 
(1) Q) (3) 
i) 9.52 mm 100 
ii) 4.75 mm 95-100 
iii) 2.36 mm 80-100 
iv) 1.18 mm 50-95 
v) 600 micron 25-60 
vi) 300 micron 10-30 
vii) 150 micron 0-15 
viii) 75 micron 0-10 


4.4 Joint Filling Sand 


The gap between two paving blocks (preferably 3 mm 
and not more than 4 mm wide) needs to be filled with a 
dry sand, relatively finer than the bedding sand. The 
gradation of the joint filling sand shall be as given in 
Table 2. 


It is necessary to restrict the fines (silt and/or clay 
passing 75 micron sieve) to 10 percent, since excessive 
fines make joint filling very difficult. It is not advisable 
to use cement in the joint filling sand as it adversely 
affects the desired flexibility characteristics of the 
paving block layer. The joint filling sand shall be as 
dry as possible; otherwise complete filling of joints will 
be difficult. To overcome the problem of efflorescence 
on the surface of paving block layer, the joint filling 
sand should be washed to remove soluble salts. 


IS 16777 : 2019 


Table 2 Gradation of Joint Filling Sand 


(Clause 4.4) 

SI IS Sieve Size Percent Passing 
No. 

(1) (2) (3) 

1) 2.36 mm 100 

ii) 1.18 mm 90-100 

iii) 600 micron 60-90 

iv) 300 micron 30-60 

v) 150 micron 15-30 

vi) 75 micron 0-10 


4.5 Base Material 


The properties of the base materials and layer play a 
vital role in the structural integrity and performance of 
concrete block pavements similar to other types of 
pavement Although, local availability and economics 
generally dictate the choice of base material at the 
design stage, the commonly used materials considered 
suitable for base courses are unbound crushed rock, 
water-bound macadam, wet mix macadam, cement 
bound crushed rock/granular materials, and lean cement 
concrete/ dry lean concrete as per MORTH 
specifications. The climatic and environmental factors 
also need to be considered during the choice of a base 
material. 


4.6 Sub-base Material 


Generally, a sub-base is warranted where commercial 
traffic is expected. The quality of sub-base materials is 
inferior to the base materials and includes natural 
gravels, cement treated gravels and sands and stabilized 
sub-grade materials. 


5 CONCRETE BLOCKS AND THEIR SHAPE 
5.1 General 


The evolution of block shapes is marked by four clear 
stages. In the first stage the block shapes and sizes were 
designed to imitate the stones and bricks, which they 
were meant to replace. In the second stage the block 
sizes were more or less retained, but their shapes were 
refined to provide interlocking on some faces. In the 
third stage, blocks capable of interlocking on all faces 
were introduced. In fourth stage which was recently 
introduced, block shapes in ‘L’ and ‘X’ formats capable 
of still better interlocking and suitable for mechanical 
paving are being tried out. These blocks are yet to be 
introduced in India. 


Present day interlocking blocks have evolved in shape 
after observing their performance. The three phases in 
the evolution of the shape of the blocks are shown in 
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. The blocks further can be grouped 
into three categories as under: 


a) CategoryA : Dentated units are designed 


to key into each other on all 
four faces and which, by their 
plan geometry when keyed 
together, resist the widening 
of joint. These blocks are 
generally capable of being 
laid in herringbone bond 
pattern. 

: These blocks are dentated on 
only two sides. Their 
dimensional accuracy of 
laying helps in bringing about 
the interlock effect on other 
faces. Generally, with some 
exception, theses blocks can 
only be laid in stretcher bond. 


b) Category B 


: These are not dentated type 
but depend on dimensional 
accuracy for interlocking 
effect. These blocks can be 
laid only in stretcher bond. 


c) Category C 


6 PATTERNS FOR LAYING BLOCKS 


The paver blocks can be placed to different bonds or 
patterns depending upon requirement, some popular 
bonds commonly adopted for block paving are: 


a) Stretcher or running bond, 
b) Herringbone bond, and 
c) Basket weave or parquet bond. 


The typical layouts of these bonds are given in Fig. 3. 
7 TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION 


7.1 Manual Methods 


In the traditional manual method, the sand is screeded 
and a skilled worker (called a pavior) levels the sand 
and then embeds the block using a hammer; he works 
backwards so as to have a continuous view of the 
completed pavement in order to obtain a good finish. 
A pavior, along with an assistant, can lay 50 to 75 m? 
of paving per day. 


An alternative to the above method, the block pavers 
(generally semi-skilled labourers) work on the 
completed surface, moving forward. 


For optimum output, it is advantageous to select an easy 
fitting block shape, with the desirable size being that 
which can be easily accommodated in the worker’s 
hand; in addition, the block should be chamfered for 
easy handling. 


The optimum output of finished pavement varies widely 
with training of workmen, over a wide range from a 
low of 20 to a high of 120 m?/man-day; the higher 


IS 16777 : 2019 


1A INITIAL COST AND SIZE SIMILAR TO PAVING BRICK 


a 


TUN 


^: 
K 


" 


" 


1B DENTATED TO PROVIDE KEY WITH ADJOINING UNITS, 
RETAINING ESSENTIALLY BRICK DIMENSIONS 


1С NEW SHAPE FOR BETTER PERFORMANCE UNDER TRAFFIC 
AND PERMITTING MECHANICAL LAYING OF BLOCKS 


1D 'X' SHAPED BLOCK FOR BETTER INTERLOCK 
AND FASTER MECHANISED PAVING 


Fic. 1 EVOLUTION or Basic SHAPES OF BLOCK 


outputs being for industrial hard standings where 
intrusion like manholes, etc, are minimal. To keep up 
the speed of work, it is important to maintain an 
adequate supply of paving blocks to the laying site for 
manual paving. Ordinarily, hand pushed trolleys are 
adequate for the purpose, but for large projects 
employing a number of laying teams, use of powered 
trolleys is preferable. 


Care must be taken to see that paving blocks are not 


tightly butted against each other, otherwise there could 
be non-uniformity in the laying patterns and the blocks 
may spall or even crack. 


Since each workman may produce slightly different 
joints widths, it is desirable to rotate workman along 
the workface, and also periodically interchange the 
personnel laying and transporting blocks. 


The average joint width can be measured and checked, 
by determining statistically the represented value of 


IS 16777 : 2019 


CATEGORY 
A 


CATEGORY 
B 


CATEGORY 
C 


HERRINGBONE 


LOAD DISTRIBUTION STUDIES 
OR TRAFFIC TESTS 


NOTES (1) SUITABLE FOR VARIETY (2) SUITABLE ONLY FOR BLOCKS KNOWN TO HAVE HAD 
OF BONDS INCLUDING STETCHER BOND 


Fic. 2 DIFFERENT CATEGORIES OF BLOCKS 


average length and breadth of blocks at the project site 
and then obtaining average distance between joints, say 
40 blocks apart; or it can be done by measuring joints 
widths directly, using a calibrated, hardened steel 
mandrel which is forced into joints at a series of 
randomly selected locations, to obtain a statistically 
representative figure. 


7.2 Mechanised Methods 


Mechanised laying requires the use of specialized 
equipment for transporting and placing clusters of 
paving blocks. The size of paving block cluster suitable 
for paving, is usually 0.3 to 0.5 m? in area for hand- 
operated equipment; for fully mechanized equipment, 
the cluster surface area can be up to about 1.2 m2. These 
cluster are designed to maintain a joint space of about 
3 mm between blocks, when clamped together. 


Since the blocks are placed in separate cluster, there 
exists the possibility of damage, if joints between 
adjacent cluster run uninterrupted throughout the 
pavement. To overcome this problem, cluster may be 
arranged so that the joints are periodically staggered 
both along and across the cluster axis or link blocks 
are installed by hand across these joints. 


Mechanised laying must be coordinated with the 
manufacturer, so that the blocks are delivered stacked on 
pallets in the required pattern; spacing ribs may be cast on 
the sides of blocks to preserve the required joint spacing. 


8 CONSTRUCTION OF CONCRETE BLOCK 
PAVEMENT 


8.1 Sequence of Operations 


The sequencing of operations (see Fig. 4) for 


construction of block pavement should be as follows: 


a) Installation of sub-surface drainage structures. 

b) Levelling and compaction of sub-grade and 
profile checking. 

c) Provision and compaction of sub-base course 
(where needed). 


d) Provision and compaction of base-course and 
checking for correct profile. 


e) Installation of edge restraints. 

f) Provision and compaction of coarse bedding 
sand and profile checking. 

g) Paving of blocks and construction. 

h) Application of joint sealing sand and 
compaction. 

j) Cleaning of surface. 

k) Filling any remaining empty portions in the 
block layer especially near edge restraint 
blocks with in-situ concrete. 

8.2 Paving Job Planning 

Proper job planning, use of proper techniques and 
coordination of materials handling, paving and 
compaction teams can greatly enhance efficiency and 
economy of paving job. 

The following are some of the key factors in job 
planning and cost control: 

a) Ensure that edge restraints are properly 
located to minimize cutting of blocks. 

b) Use cut blocks and end blocks, wherever 
needed. 

c) Spread bedding sand mechanically, when 
possible. 


3A STRETCHER OR RUNNING BOND 


СК 
с TAS 
2 УУУУ 
55556 


3C 45° HERRINGBONE BOND 


ius, 


3E PARQUET DERIVATED 


IS 16777 : 2019 


3D 90* HERRINGBONE BOND 


5 


ЗЕ DOUBLE - V 


wi nu 


3G DOUBLE HERRINGBONE 


Fic. 3 Various LAYING 


РАТТ 


3H HERRINGBONE 


ERNS — (Continued) 


IS 16777 : 2019 


EE. 


3J HERRINGBONE BOND 3K HERRINGBONE BOND 


3L HERRINGBONE BOND 


_ 


3N CROSS-JOINT BOND 3P CROSS-JOINT BOND 


3Q GRASS PAVER BLOCKS (TYPICAL) 


Fic. 3 VARIOUS LAYING PATTERN 


d) 


g) 


Locate pavement start lines and subsequent 
development of the laying face to ensure that 
a laying face continues in one general 
direction. 

Use guidelines to control regularity of bond. 
Anticipate and plan detailing of the pavement 
at perimeters and obstructions and aprons of 
manholes, drainage pits, etc. 

Placing of bedding sand, joint sealing sand 
and concrete block deliveries so as to 
minimize repeated handling. 


IS 16777 : 2019 


h) Use suitable trolleys or buggies to ease 
transport of blocks from delivery points to the 
laying face. 

j) Locate and phase paving and compaction 

teams to facilitate orderly progress of work. 

Use manually light weight wooden hammer 

or poles for compaction/positioning of blocks 

or layers. 


Do not allow traffic or pedestrian movement on block- 
paved surface until compaction is completed. 


SITE ACCESS AND STARTING POINT 


Fic. 4 SEQUENCING OF 


9 


—— СОМА AK KKK KA 
LESSEE 
222927» 2222222222 
"un 7 
TI 55555555560 и 
= uz 
ШЕ es 
& O < < Ба 22% 
a 2222 T. 
== CU ш 
Пл MN 
сш 
o 8 p: "EE 
Zor CELE. 246 
222 [> SSSR 20 
225 RAE УУУ ARR] 
5 EATER РУМА 
5 58 555555555554) З 
Soo гу 5 S ге 
sen ae 
өші O 
А 10, : 
БЕ š 
š 
Q o 
2658 » В 
5859 : 
Бањ Е 
D 
z 
СВЕ D 2% 
892 29 
о2о m 
582 ТЕ: 
с) 0 
nS 


LAYING 


IS 16777 : 2019 


8.3 Construction of Sub-grade 


This is the foundation layer on which the block 
pavement is constructed. Like in conventional 
pavements, the water table should be at a minimum 
depth of 600 mm below the sub-grade. It should be 
compacted in layers of 150 or 100 mm thickness. The 
prepared sub-grade should be graded and trimmed to a 
tolerance of + 20 mm of the design levels, and its 
surface evenness should have a tolerance of within 
15 mm under а 3 m straight edge. 


8.4 Construction of Base and Sub-base Layers 


The requirements for construction of block pavement 
up to the base course level are the same as for flexible 
pavement. Sub-surface drainage structures should be 
installed before compaction of sub-grade. Compacted 
sub-grade should provide a stable working platform 
for subsequent construction. Base course should be 
constructed in layers of 100 mm to 150 mm compacted 
thicknesses. The surface evenness of the base course 
should be checked to ensure that the variation is within 
5 mm of the design profile. Any undulation in the base 
course profile will be reflected on the block surfacing. 
Bedding sand should not be used as filler to correct 
base course profiles. The base course should be 
extended on both sides of the pavement, at least just 
beyond (about 60 cm) the positions of edge restraints. 


For granular base course, when ingress of water into 
the base course is expected under worst moisture 
conditions, a bituminous primer should be applied to 
the base course surface at the rate of 0.3 to 0.6 litre/m2. 
Continuous and uniform bitumen cover should be 
obtained. For compaction of areas inaccessible to 
normal compaction equipments, vibrating plate 
compactors must be used. At the edge where plate 
vibrator can not reach, manual compactor shall be used. 
For typical locations like areas adjacent to walls, 
lampposts, manholes, grated gully pits and other surface 
inlets, provision of cement bound or lean concrete base 
course is recommended to limit the potential for future 
settlement. After completion of base course 
construction, edge restraints should be installed. 


8.5 Edge Restraint Blocks and Kerbs 


Concrete blocks on trafficked pavements tend to move 
sideways and forward due to braking and maneuvering 
of vehicles. The tendency to move sideways has to be 
counteracted at the edges by special edge blocks and 
kerbs. The edge block should be designed such that 
the rotation or displacement of blocks is resisted. These 
are to be made of concrete of high strength to withstand 
the traffic wheel loading without getting damaged. 
These members should be precast or constructed in-situ 
with continuing kerb paving machine to have at least a 


10 


28 day characteristic compressive strength of 30 MPa 
or flexural strength of 3.8 MPa. As far as possible the 
edge blocks should have vertical face towards the inside 
blocks. A few typical edge blocks are also shown in 
Fig. 5. Where plate vibrators are also inaccessible, 
Durmat or manual compactor using small size plate 
hammer may be used. 


The road kerbs provided on the edge of the road also 
serve the purpose of edge blocks as shown in Fig. 6. In 
case the kerbs are not provided, it has to be replaced by 
edge strips. In case of heavy traffic 150 mm x 150 mm 
plain cement concrete (M-25) may also be provided 
over dry lean concrete to give further confinement of 
blocks. In between the edge restraint blocks cement 
mortar (1 : 3, cement : coarse sand) may be used in 
place of sand for sealing of units. 


8.6 Bedding Sand 


A layer of sand bedding is provided between block 
pavement and base for the following reasons: 


a) Provide a cushion between the hard base the 
paving blocks; 
b) Base or sub-base will have some permitted 
surface unevenness. By providing a layer of 
sand bed, the paved block can be levelled 
perfectly; 
Sand bed acts as a barrier and does not allow 
propagation of cracks formed in base/ sub- 
base; and 


с) 


d) Sand also helps to keep lower part of the joint 
filled with sand and provides added 


interlocking effect. 


The sand bedding thickness should be reasonably 
constant and all level and slopes should be made in 
sub-base. For heavy traffic area, sand bedding should 
be 30 to 50 mm thick (uncompacted). Vibration in 
thickness of bedding sand should not exceed 5 mm in 
any case. If sand bedding thickness varies above 5 mm 
it will definitely result in undulation/ unevenness of 
paving surface. 


For block pavement to perform satisfactorily, it is 
necessary that the lower layers are profiled to proper 
level and finish and that the bedding sand layer is of 
uniform thickness. Varying thickness of sand bed 
ultimately results in uneven surface of the pavement. 


8.7 Placing and Screeding of Bedding Sand 


The thickness of the sand bed after compaction should 
be in the range of 20-40 mm, whereas, in the loose 
form it can be 25 to 50 mm. It is preferable to restrict 
the compacted thickness to 20-25 mm to reduce the 
risk of any localized precompaction, which would affect 
the final block surface level. Bedding sand should not 


IS 16777 : 2019 


DISH DRAIN AS 
EDGE STRIP 


KERB AND CHANNEL 


5A 


кене їй m m 
|| I | 
LI 1| 
l {| 
EI l| 


i ШЕНІ 
SAND BED ~ "ad 


MASONRY 
EDGE STRIP 


Bits ie кез 
КС 


OR 
MANHOLE 
Fic. 5 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM FOR EDGE RESTRAINT BLOCKS 


УУУУ 


СО О О ОФ 
6A SINGLE STRETCHER COURSE 6B DOUBLE STRETCHER COURSE 


МАМА ААЛУ >> 


X 
RRR 
ЭУУ»»э»эээ» 


6C SOLDIER COURSE 


Fic. 6 USE oF Вгоск AT EDGES 


11 


IS 16777 : 2019 


be used to fill-up local depressions on the surface of a 
base or sub-base. The depressions if any, should be 
repaired with same material in advance before placing 
sand. 


The sand of specified gradation to be used, should be 
uniformly in loose condition and should have uniform 
moisture content. Best moisture content is that when 
sand is neither too wet nor too dry and has moisture of 
6 to 8 percent. Requirement of sand for a day’s work 
should be prepared and stored in advance and covered 
with tarpaulin or polythene sheets. 


The processed sand so obtained is spread with the help 
of screed boards to the thickness. The screed boards are 
provided with nails at 2-3 m apart which when dragged 
gives the desired thickness. The length of nail should 
take into account the surcharge to be provided in the 
uncompacted thickness. Alternatively, the screed can be 
dragged on edge strips kept on both sides as guide. 


8.8 Laying of Blocks 


Blocks can be laid generally by manual labour but 
mechanical aids like hand-pushed trolleys can expedite 
the work. 


Normally, laying should commence from the edge strip 
and proceed towards the inner side. When dentated 
blocks are used, the laying done at two fronts will create 
problem for matching joints in the middle. Hence, as 
far as possible, laying should proceed in one direction 
only, along the entire width of the area to be paved. 


While locating the starting line, the following should 
be considered: 


a) Onasloping site, start from the lowest point 
and precede uphill on a continuous basis, to 
avoid downhill creep in incomplete areas. 


b) Incase of irregular shaped edge restraints or 
strip, it is better to start from straight string 
line as shown in Fig. 7. 

c) Influence of alignment of edge restraints on 


achieving and maintaining laying bond. 
8.9 Establishing the Laying Pattern 


In relation to the starting line, the blocks should be 
placed at the correct position to achieve the final 
orientation as required by the laying pattern. If the edge 
restraint and suitably oriented, the first row of blocks 
can abut it. For irregular-shaped and unfavorably 
oriented edge restraints, a string line should be 
established a few rows away to position the first row 
as shown in Fig. 7. 


With the help of gauges, the joint width specification 
(2 to 4 mm) should be checked in the first few square 
metres, where it should be ensured that the block 
alignment is correct. The laying patterns and face should 
be established (see Fig. 8) to permit fast and easy laying 
without the necessity of forcing a block between 
previously positioned blocks. To start with, full blocks 
should be used; only subsequently, cutting and in filling 
at edge be permitted. Under no circumstances should 
the block be forced or hammered into the bidding sand 
at this stage of lying. For cutting paving blocks, 
hydraulic or mechanical block cutters, or power saws 
are used. Cut units less than 50 mm minimum dimension 
should not be used, as these are difficult to cut 
accurately and can be dislodged under traffic. Where 
space does not permit use of a larger segment, use 
premixed concrete or a sand-cement mortar of same 
grade of blocks instead. 


The control over alignment, lying pattern and joint 
widths can be maintained by the use of chalked string 
lines, at about 5 m intervals. 


_ STRING 
LINE 


Fic. 7 STARTING AT IRREGULAR SHAPED EDGE RESTRAINT 


12 


IS 16777 : 2019 


8A AXIS OF UNITS NOT PARALLEL TO EDGE RESTRAINTS-ONLY 
ONE OPERATOR CAN WORK ON THE LAYING FACE 


8B AXIS OF UNITS PARALLEL TO EDGE RESTRAINTS-MORE 
THAN ONE OPERATOR MAY WORK ON THE LAYING FACE 


Fic. 8 ESTABLISHING LAYING FACE FOR BLOCKS IN HERRINGBONE BOND 


8.10 Typical Pavement Composition 


A few typical compositions normally used are given in 
Table 3. 


8.11 Drainage 


Block pavement with joints filled with sand is not a 
waterproof layer and hence care has to be taken to drain 
out the water seeping through the joints in initial stage of 
the construction. This water can find way to sand bed 
below, base, sub-base and sub-grade layers. Unless these 
layers are free draining, appropriate drainage arrangement 
has to be provided. The drainage provided generally 
consists of sub-surface drains surrounded by filter material 


or geotextile, which would allow the water to pass through 
and at the same time prevent the escape of bedding/jointing 
sand. The water collected is to be taken through 80 mm 
diameter perforated pipe. Typical sub-surface drainage 
arrangement used in block pavement is shown in Fig. 11. 
Drainage system with no fines concrete provided below 
the sand bed is shown in Fig.12. 


Across fall of 2 percent slope is generally sufficient to 
drain the surface run-off but it is desirable to provide 3 
percent cross fall in the case of heavily trafficked roads 
to avoid formation of water puddles. The block 
pavement should be at least 5 mm above the manholes, 
side drains, etc. 


IS 16777 : 2019 


Table 3 Catalogue for Pavement Thickness 
(Clause 8.10) 


51 Traffic and Road Type Sub-grade CBR 
No. 
Above 10mm 5-10 mm 
0) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Cycle tracks, pedestrian footpaths Blocks 60 60 
sand bed 20-30 20-30 
base 200 200 
ii) a) Commercial traffic axle load repetitions less than 10 msa Blocks 60-80 60-80 
sand bed 20-40 20-40 
b) Residential streets WBM/WMM base 
granular sub-base 250 250 
200 250 
iii) a) Commercial traffic axle load repetitions less than 10-20 msa Blocks 80-100 80-100 
sand bed 20-40 20-40 
b) Collector street, bus and truck parking areas WBM/WMM Base 250 250 
granular sub-base 200 250 
iv) a) Commercial traffic axle load repetitions less than 20-50 msa Blocks 80-100 80-100 
sand bed 20-40 20-40 
b) Arterial streets WBM/WMM Base 250 250 
Or WBM/WMM Base 150 150 
and DLC over it? 75 75 
granular sub-base 200 250 
NOTES 


1 Thickness of layers given above is in mm. 

2 Granular sub-base should have at least 150 mm layer at the bottom which is drainable. 

3 A typical cross-section is given in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10. 

4 If the sub-grade soil has a CBR of less than 5, it should be improved by suitable stabilization technique to bring the CBR value to 5. 
5 msa denotes repetitions in million standard axles. 


1 [n case of roads having inadequate drainage or heavy rainfall areas (above 1 500 mm per annum). 


60 THICK 
BLOCKS 


20 TO 30mm SAND BED 


адот: ` 
2 bas a ^ A 


Г 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


200 BASE LAYER OF 
WBM/WMM/CRUSED 
ROCK/SOIL-CEMENT 


COMPACTED EARTH 


Fic. 9 TYPICAL CROSS-SECTION OF BLOCK PAVEMENT USED iN SIDEWALKS/FooT-PATHS/C AR-PARKS/C YCLE TRACK 


80-100 THICK 
BLOCKS 


—20 TO 30 SAND BED 


THICKNESS OF BASE 
AS PER TABLE 1 


THICKNESS OF SUB 
BASE AS PER TABLE 1 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 10 TYPICAL CROSS-SECTION OF BLOCK PAVEMENT USED IN HEAVILY TRAFFICKED ROADS 


14 


IS 16777 : 2019 


SAND BADDING 
WITH GEOFABRIC 0.5% — — SLOTED 


SEWER 


< 


CEMENT TREATED BASE 


100 cm PERFORATED PIPE 
DRAIN 80 mm min. 


Fic. 11 SUB-SURFACE DRAINAGE IN A BLOCK PAVEMENT 


CROSS-FALL 3% 


SUB-GRADE 
SAND BED 


NO-FINES 
CONCRETE BLOCK 


12A 


GEOTEXTILE 
SURROUNDING 
THE BLOCK 


GRADED AGGREGATE 
FILTER DRAIN OR 
GEOTEXTILE FIN DRAIN 

OR NO-FINES CONCRETE 
BLOCK WITH GEOTEXTILE CROSS-FALL 3% 
SURROUNDING THE BLOCK 


PERFORATED PIPE 


12B 


Fic. 12 SURFACE DRAINAGE IN A BLOCK PAVEMENT 


15 


IS 16777 : 2019 


8.12 Detailing Block Pavements 


Essentially, there are three important aspects in 
detailing. These are illustrated in 8.12.1 to 8.12.3. 


8.12.1 Curves 


It is necessary to cut the paving units to fit the edge 
restraints. Rectangular blocks ofa similar or contrasting 
colour as an edging have been used to minimize the visual 
effects of small errors in block cutting. To avoid unsightly 
and potentially weak joints, it is often preferable to 
change the laying pattern at the curve. The curve itself 
can be installed in herringbone bond and yet the 
pavement can revert to stretcher bond on the approaches. 


8.12.2 Pavement Intrusions 


On some pavements, like in city streets, there could be 
several intrusions, like, manholes, drainage gulleys, etc. 
where mating these intrusions with the pavement is 
desirable. Figure 13 shows how this should be done 
around a manhole. 


Around intrusions, it is good practice to lay along both 
sides of the intrusion simultaneously so that closure is 
made away from the starting workface, rather than 
carrying the pavement around the intrusion to return to 
the original laying face (see Fig. 13) to avoid 
accumulation of closing error. 


8.12.3 Changes in Alignment 


Changes in alignment of a road pavement can 
sometimes be achieved by the use of special blocks. 
However, it is generally easier to choose a block that 
can be installed in herringbone bond and simply cut 
the blocks to fit the edge restraints. Where aesthetic 
requirements of shape of the paving unit dictate the 
use of stretcher bond, then only a 90° shape change in 


LAYING 
DIRECTION 


alignment can be achieved without cutting the blocks. 
At intersections, if a herringbone bond laying pattern 
is adopted, the paving can proceed without the need 
for construction joints. An alternative to this is to install 
a shoulder (support) course of rectangular paving units 
between the main roadway and the side streets; this 
permits different laying patterns to be used in two 
roadways. 


8.13 Joint Filling 


The importance of complete joint filling cannot be over- 
emphasised. Unfilled or partially filled joints allow 
blocks to deflect, leading to loose blocks, possibly 
spalling the edges and a locally disturbing bedding sand 
layer. 


After the compaction of the bedding sand has been 
completed (and some bedding sand has been forced up 
in the joints between blocks), the joints should be 
completely filled with sand meeting the desired 
specifications. The joints filling sand should be 
stockpiled at suitable locations for convenience. There 
should be minimum delay in joints filling; the end of 
the day’s work should in any case complete the process. 


The operation of joints filling comprises of spreading 
a thin layer of the joint filling sand on the block surface 
and working the sand into each joints by brooming. 
The sand should be broomed or spread over the surface 
with a small surcharge. 


Dry sand and dry blocks are best for the filling of joints, 
as damp sand tends to stick at the very top of the joints; 
also, if the blocks is wet and the sand dry, the sand will 
again stick at the joint top. Hence, if either the block or 
sand is wet, one may get a false impression of the joints 
being full, but the next rain will reveal that they are 


LAYING 
DIRECTION 


Ш 
Ш 


LAYING FACE 


LAYING FACE 


MANHOLE MANHOLE 


Fic. 13 LAYING AT MANHOLE 


16 


actually hollow. If the weather does not allow sand and 
blocks to be dry, the joints filling sand should be washed 
in by light sprinkling of water. In this, case, several cycles 
of application of sand, water-sprinkling and plate 
compaction will be necessary to completely fill the joints. 


Joints between blocks are filled by fine sand. Normally, 
the bottom 20 to 30 mm of the joint gets filled with 
bedding sand, whereas, the reminder space has to be 
filled with jointing sand by brooming it from the top. 
The joints are normally 2 to 4 mm wide. 


8.14 Compaction 


For compaction of the bedding sand and the blocks 
laid over it, vibratory plate compactors are used over 
the laid paving units; at least two passes of the vibratory 
plate compactor are needed. Such vibratory compaction 
should be continued till the top of each paving block is 
level with its adjacent blocks. It is not good practice to 
leave compaction till end of the day, as some blocks 
may move under construction traffic, resulting in the 
widening of joints and corner contact of blocks, which 
may cause spalling or cracking of blocks. These should 
be minimal delay in compaction after laying of paving 
blocks to achieve uniformity of compaction and 
retention of the pattern of laying; however, compaction 
should not proceed closer than 1m from the laying face, 
except after completion of the pavement. 


During vibratory compaction of the laid blocks, some 
amount of bedding sand will work its way into the joints 
between them; the extent of sand getting worked up 
into the joints will depend on the degree of pre- 
compaction of sand, the force applied by the block 
compactor. Standard compactors may have a weight of 
about 90 kg, plate area of about 0.3 m? and apply a 


IS 16777 : 2019 


centrifugal force of about 15 kN, while heavy duty 
compactors may weigh 300-600 kg, have a plate area 
of about 0.5-0.6 m? and apply a centrifugal force of 
30-65 kN. Where the bedding sand has been pre- 
compacted and for heavily trafficked block pavements, 
heavy-duty compactors should be used. After 
compaction by vibratory plate compactors, some 2 to 
6 passes of a vibratory roller (with rubber coated drums 
or those of static weight less than 4 tonne and nominal 
amplitude of not more than 0.6 mm) will further help 
in compaction of bedding sand and joint filling. 


8.15 Laying and Surface Tolerances 


While the laying, the surface tolerances, given in Table 4 
may be observed. 


9 OPENING TO TRAFFIC 


Until all the joints are completely filled, no traffic should 
be permitted over the block pavement. In case of lime or 
cement treated layers in the pavement, it must be ensured 
that these are given proper specified time preferably at 
least 14 days to cure, before traffic is permitted. The block 
pavement should be inspected frequently, to ensure that 
any incompletely filled joints, exposed by traffic and/or 
weather are promptly filled. Such frequent inspection 
should be continued till dust and detritus from the roadway 
tightens the surface of the joints. 


10 MAINTENANCE 


10.1 General 


Like any other work, block pavement also should be 
maintained to give long service. The maintenance 
requirement of block pavement is minimal. The block 
pavement requires initial maintenance soon after its 


Table 4 Laying and Surface Tolerances 
(Clause 8.15) 


SI Layer/Item Tolerance 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Sub-grade 42 „таш of nominated level 
ii) Select sub-grade/Sub-base 12mm of nominated level 
iii) Base course = mm of nominated level 10 mm deviation from a 3 m straight 
edge 
iv) Plane deviation: 
a) From any 3 m line 10 mm (maximum) 
b) From any 10 m line 20 mm (maximum) 
v) Vertical deviation from 3 т line at kerbs intrusions, +3 nm 
channels, edge restraints elsewhere 
vi) Maximum difference in surface level between adjacent +10 m 
paving units > 
уп) Deviation of finished surface level from designated level ТШ mm 


уш) a) Joint width range 
b) Percentage of joints outside range 


c) Nominal joint width 


2 mm to 4 mm 
10 percent maximum along 10 m line 
3mm 


IS 16777 : 2019 


laying, say after a week or two for checking sand in the 
joints. Subsequently, the maintenance is in the form of 
replacing any damaged block/blocks or raising the settled 
section, if any repair especially after laying a cable duct 
is much simpler in the case of block pavements. The cut 
area can be reinstated without any blemish. 


10.2 Initial Maintenance 


After about a week of laying the blocks there is a need 
to inspect the surface to check for any loss of sand at 
joints. Wherever sand level has dropped down it should 
be reinstated. This type of inspection should continue 
for two to three months till the sand level is stabilized 
and topping up is no more required. With time, the joints 
receive fine dust and detritus thus making them 
waterproof. During rains these joints may allow weeds 
to grow but these normally should get eliminated with 
the traffic. In case, it does not get eliminated these may 
have to be controlled by spraying herbicide or by manual 
removal. Annual inspection, however, will be required. 


10.3 Storage of Blocks 


For the purpose of reinstating damaged blocks it is 


18 


necessary to stockpile a small percentage of blocks from 
the lots used in the construction. The size and colour 
of the blocks may be difficult to obtain at a later 
matching with the original blocks. For important 
projects, it is normal to stockpile blocks from 1 percent 
to 3 percent initial supply for subsequent use. 


10.4 Coating and Cleaning 


As part of preventive maintenance, blocks can be sealed 
using compounds, like, silicone, acrylics and silica 
fluorides for enhancing the colour, reducing absorptive 
nature of the blocks and for improving surface 
toughness. These coating have life of 1 to 3 years and 
hence they have to be repeated as per the requirement. 
The most durable of these chemicals is solvent-borne 
acrylics, which are abrasion resistant and also minimize 
chemical effects of spillage even at 60°C. 


Cleaning of block pavement can be done by mechanical 
brooms, compressors or even by manual means. For 
removing certain stains, chemicals, like, oxalic, and 
phosphoric acids, etc, are used. Sometimes it may be 
expedient to replace the block where stains have 
penetrated to a greater depth. 


IS 16777 : 2019 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee, CED 05 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (L/109, Sarita Vihar, New Delhi) 


Ardex Endura India Pvt Limited, Bengaluru 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Carborundum Universal Limited, Chennai 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute, Naroda 
CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Choksi Laboratories Limited, Indore 


Construction Chemicals Manufacturers Association, Navi Mumbai 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Border Roads, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Ultratech Cement Limited, Mumbai 
Gyan Construction Company, Mumbai 


H. R. Johnson (India) Limited, Dewas 


Indian Council of Ceramic Tiles & Sanitaryware, New Delhi 


Institution of Engineers (India), New Delhi 


Lloyd Insulation (India) Pvt Limited, New Delhi 


Mapie Construction Products India Pvt Limited, Bengaluru 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, New Delhi 


Modern Tiles & Marble, New Delhi 


Morbi Dhuva Glaze Tiles Association, Morbi 


Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, Mumbai 


МҮК Laticrete India, Hyderabad 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


SHRI Азнок KHURANA (Chairman) 


Suni K. P. PAULSON 
Suri GoPINATH KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. Gupta 
Suri РАМКА) Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri R. RAJAGOPALAN 
Dr N. RAMASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH KUMAR KAUSHAL 
Suri ARUN Kumar Tyaci (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. SINGH 
Suri ACHAL Kumar Mirtat (Alternate) 


Dr SATYENDRA МАТН Misra 
Dr RAKESH KUMAR 


Suri R. D. MATHUR 
Suri RAMESH Basappa (Alternate) 


SHRI UPEN PATEL 
SHRI SAMIR SURLAKER (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. SWARUP 
Suri Ravi Jain (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (ОМК) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (P) (Alternate) 


CoL INDRA KUMAR ЈАССІ 


Suri J. K. BHAGCHANDANI 
Suri AKHILESH Maurya (Alternate) 


Suri B. KUMAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri G. S. PATNAIK 
Suri ARUN Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUN Rao 
Suri Р. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 


Suri К. К. КАРГА 


Suri Монт KHANNA 
Suri K. K. Mirra (Alternate) 


Dr С. S. Ravi SHANKAR 
Suri Авнілт Dutta (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI MALA МОНАХ 
SHRIMATI Namrata Кони (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHASH KAPOOR 
SHRI Kameswar Rau (Alternate) 


Suri NILESH JETPARIA 
Suni JERAM МАРНАУ Kavar (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr P. ARJUNAN 
Suri N. RADHAKANTH (Alternate) 


Dn S. K. BREJA 


SHRI S. C. JINDAL 
Suri R. P. KHANDELWAL (Alternate) 


IS 16777 : 2019 


Organization Representative(s) 


National Test House, Kolkata Suri D. V. S. PRASAD 
Suri ALOKE Dev (Alternate) 


National Tiles Corporation, Panchkula ӛнкі PREM CHAND GUPTA 
Suri S. R. Gara (Alternate) 


New Delhi Municipal Corporation, New Delhi REPRESENTATIVE 
Premier Polyfilm Limited, Ghaziabad Dr SANJEEV K. VERMA 
Sarı К. К. Макар (Alternate) 
Research, Designs and Standards Organization, Ministry of EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (Wonks) 
Railways, Lucknow SHRI AsHUTOSH KUMAR (Alternate) 
Responsive Industries Limited, Mumbai SHRI RISHABH AGARWAL 


SHRI ABHISHEK AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Shriram Institute of Industrial Research, New Delhi Dr P. K. KAICHER 
Dr Laxmi Rawat (Alternate) 


Somany Ceramic Ltd, Bahadurgarh Suri С. С. TRIVEDI 
Dr Авнотовн Сокі (Alternate) 


Super Tiles and Marble Private Limited, Mumbai Suri ASHOK RAJPUROHIT 
SHRI SUDHAKAR Moni (Alternate) 


Xebec Design and Facilities Private Limited, New Delhi SHRI DEEPAK GAHLOWT 
SHRI SAMIR BANERII (Alternate) 
BIS Directorate General Suri SANJAY Pant, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (Civil Engg) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
Scientist ‘C’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


20 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 05 (7958). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14C.1.T. Scheme УП M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


