IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999
( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard

ELECTROTECHNICALVOCABULARY
PART 39 DEPENDABILITY ( OF ELECTRONIC AND ELECTRICAL ITEMS

Second Revision )

ICS 01.040.3 I

0 BIS 1999

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI I 10002
September 1999

Price Group

9

Reliability

of Electronic

and Electrical

Components

and Equipment

Sectional

Committee,

LTD 3

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 39) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. This standard was first issued in 1974. This revision philosophy and concepts in the field of reliability. has been undertaken to bring it in line with the latest

A brief introduction to the philosophy governing the choice of terms and their definitions aspects is given in Annex A for information and guidance.

relating to reliability

While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Pub 50 (191) : 1990 `International Electrotechnical Vocabulary -Chapter 19 1: Dependability and Quality of Service', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission.

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999

Indian Standard

ELECTROTECHNICALVOCABULARY
PART 39 DEPENDABILITY (
1 SCOPE This standard (Part 39) deals with terms and their definitions relating to reliability, maintainability and availability of electronic and electrical items. 2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 2.1 Basic Concepts 2.1.1 Item Entity -Any part, component, device, sub-system, functional unit, equipment or system that can be individually considered.
NOTES 1 An item may consist of hardware, software or both, and may also in particular cases, include people. 2 A number of items, for example, a population of items or, a sample, may itself be considered as an item.

OF ELECTRONIC

AND ELECTRICAL

ITEMS

Second Revision )
2.1.12 Operation - The combination of all technical and administrative actions intended to enable an item to perform a required function, recognizing necessary adaptation to changes in external conditions.
NOTE -By external conditions are understood, service demand and environmental conditions. for example,

2.1.13 Modification (ofan Item) -The combination of all technical and administrative actions intended to change an item. 2.1.14 Failure Mode and Effects Analysis - A qualitative method of reliability analysis which involves the study of the failure modes which can exist in every sub-item of the item, and the determination of the effects of each failure mode on other sub-items of the item and on the required functions of the item. 2.1.15 Failure Modes, Effects and Criticality Analysis - A qualitative method of reliability analysis which involves failure modes and effect analysis together with a consideration of the probability of occurrence and for a ranking of the seriousness of the effects. 2.2 2.2.1 Performance Service Related Performance (see also Fig. 1)

2.1.2 Repaired Items - A repairable in fact repaired after a failure. 2.1.3 Non-repaired Item repaired after a failure.
NOTE A non-repaired

item which is

An item which is not
or not.

item may be repairable

2.1.4 Service A set of functions user by an organization.

offered to a

2.1.5 Required Function A function or a combination of functions of an item which is considered necessary for the provisioning of a given service.
NOTE - An item may perform a required function without being energized.

2.2.1.1 Quality of service -The collective effects of service performance which determine the degree of satisfaction of a user of the service.
NOTE - The quality of service is combined aspects of service support operability performance, serveability integrity and other factors specific to characterized performance, performance, each service. by the service service

2.1.6 Functional Mode -A subset of the whole set of possible functions of an item. 2.1.7 Instant of Time scale. A single point on a time

NOTE - The time scale may be continuous as calender time, or discrete, for example, number of use cycles.

2.1.8 Time Znterval - The part of a time scale between, and described by, two given instants of time. 2.1.9 Duration - The difference points of a time interval. between the end

2.2.1.2 Serveability peflormance - The ability of a service to be obtained within specified tolerances and other given conditions when requested by the user and continue to be provided for a requested duration.
NOTE - Serveability performance may be subdivided into the service accessibility performance and the service retainability performance.

2.1.10 Accumulated Time The sum of time durations characterized by given conditions over a given time interval. 2.1.11 Measure (in the Probabilistic Treatment oj Dependability) -A function or a quantity used to describe a random variable or a random process.
NOTE - For a random variable, examples of measures are the distribution function and the mean.

2.2.1.3 Service accessibility performance - The ability of a service to be obtained, within specified tolerances and other given conditions, when requested by the user.
NOTE - For example, in telecommunication this takes into account the transmission tolerance and the combined aspects of propagation performance, trafficability performance and availability performance.

1

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 2.2.1.4 Service retainability performance The ability of a given service, once obtained, to continue to be provided under given conditions for a requested duration.
NOTE - For example, in telecommunication this takes into account the transmission tolerance and the combined aspects of propagation performance, trafficability performance and availability performance of the related system. NOTE -- A limiting state of an item may be characterized by the end of the useful life, unsuitability for any economic or technological reasons, etc.

Dependability - A collective term used to describe the availability performance and its influencing factors, reliability performance, maintainability performance and maintenance support performance.

2.2.2.3

2.2.1.5 Service support performance - The ability of an organization to provide a service and assist in its utilization.
NOTE - An example of service support performance in telecommunications is the ability to provide assistance in commissioning a basic service, or a supplementary service such as call waiting service or directory enquiry set&e.

2.2.2.4 Capability - The ability of an item to meet a service demand of given quantitative characteristics under given internal conditions.
NOTES 1 Internal conditions refer, for example, to any combination of faulty and non-faulty sub-items. 2 For some services this is called trafticability performance.

2.2.2.5

TrafSicability pelformance

2.2.1.6 Service operability performance -The ability of a service to be successfully and easily operated by a user. 2.2.1.7 Service integrity - The degree to which a service is provided without excessive impairments, once obtained.
NOTE-For a telecommunication by'the transmission performance service this is characterized of the system used.

The ability of an item to meet

a given size and other internal conditions.

a traffic demand with characteristics, under given
for example, sub-items. to any

NOTE - Internal conditions refer, combination of faulty and non-faulty

2.2.1.8 Transmission performance - The ability of a telecommunication system to reproduce an offered signal under given conditions, when this system is in an up-state. 2.2.2
2.2.2.1 Item Related Performance

2.2.2.6 Availability (performance) - The ability of an item to be in a state to perform a required function under given conditions at a given instant of time or over a given time interval, assuming that the required external resources are provided.
NOTES 1 This ability depends on the combined aspects of the reliability performance, the maintainability performance and the maintenance support of an item. 2 Required external resources, other than maintenance resources do not affect the availability performance of the item. 3 The term `availability' is used as an availability performance measure.

Effectiveness (pe$ormance) -The ability of an item to meet a service demand of given quantitative characteristics.
NOTE - This ability depends on the combined aspects of the capability and the availability performance of the item.

2.2.2.7

Reliability (performance) - The ability of an item to perform a required function under given conditions for a given time interval.
NOTES 1 It is generally assumed that the item is in a state to perform this required function at the beginning of the time interval. 2 The term `reliability' is used as a measure of reliability performance.

2.2.2.2

The ability of an item to perform a required function under given conditions of use and maintenance, until a limiting state is reached.

Durability

-

I

SERVICEABILITY

PERFORMANCE

I

DEPENDABlL.1l-f

FIG.

1 PERFORMANCE 2

CONCEPTS

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 2.2.2.8 Maintainability (performance) - The ability of an item under given conditions of use, to be retained in, or restored to a state in which it can perform a required function, when maintenance is performed under given conditions and using stated procedures and resources.
NOTE - The term `maintainability' of maintainability performance. is used as a measure

2.3.2.5 Minor defect, impelfection than a major defect.
NOTE A minor defect may be critical

A defect other
or non-critical

2.3.2.6 Defective (item) - An item which contains one or more critical defects. 2.3.2.7 Critical defective (item) - An item which contains one or more critical defects. 2.3.2.8 Major defective (item) - An item contains one or more major defects. which

2.2.2.9

Maintenance support performance - The ability of a maintenance organization, under given conditions, to provide upon demand the resources required to maintain an item, under a given maintenance policy.
NOTE - The given conditions are related to be item itself and to the conditions under which the item is used and maintained.

2.3.2.9 Minor defective (item) - An item which contains one or more minor defects but no major defect. 2.3.2.10 Design defect A defect inadeqtiate design of an item. due to an

2.2.2.10 Propagation performance (in telecommunications) - The ability of a propagation medium, in which a wave propagates without artificial guide, to transmit a signal within the given tolerances.
NOTE - The given tolerances signal level, noise, interference may apply to variations levels, etc. in

2.3.2.11 Manufacturing defect - A defect due to nonconformance (in manufacture) to the design of an item or to specified manufacturing processes. 2.3.3
Failure

2.3

Events

and States

The termination of the ability of an item to perform a required function.
1 2 is 3 of After failure the item has a fault. `Failure' is an event, as distinguished from `fault', which a state. This concept as defined does not apply to items consisting software. only.

2.3.1

Interruptions

2.3.1.1 Interruption (of service); break (of service) Temporary inability of a service to be provided persisting for more than a given time duration, characterized by a change beyond given limits in at least one parameter essential for the service.
NOTES 1 An interruption of a service may be caused by disabled states of the items used for the service or by external reasons such as a high service demand. 2 In tel~ommunication, an interruption of a service is generally an intermption of the transmission, which may be characterized by an abnormal value of power level. noise level signal

2.3.3.1 Critical failure - A failure which is assessed as likely to result in injury to persons, significant material damage or other unacceptable consequences. 2.3.3.2 Non-critical failure - A failure of an item which is not assessed as likely to result in injury to persons, significant material damage or other unacceptable consequences. 2.3.3.3 Misuse failure - A failure due to application of stresses during use which are beyond the stated capabilities of the item. 2.3.3.4 Mishandling failure - A failure caused by incorrect handling or lack of care of the item. 2.3.3.5 Weakness failure - A failure due to weakness in the item itself when subjected to stresses within the stated capabilities of &e item.
NOTE A weakness may either be inherent or induced.

distortion, error rate, etc. 2.3.2 . Defect Any departure requirements. of a characteristic of an item from

NOTES 1 The requirements

may or may not be expressed in the form

of a specification.
2 A defect may or may not effect the ability of an item to perform a required function.

2.3.2.1

Bug -

A software

defect.

2.3.2.2 Critical defect - A defect that is assessed as likely to result in injury to persons, cause significant material damage or other unacceptable consequences. 2.3.2.3 Non-critical a critical defect.
defect -

2.3.3.6 Design failure - A failure inadequate design of an item.

due

to an

A pefect other than

2.3.3.7 Manufacturing failure - A failure due to nonconformance (in manufacture) to the design of an item or to specified manufacturing processes. 2.3.3.8 Ageing failure: wearout failure - A failure whose probability of occurrence increases with the passage of time, as a result of processes inherent in the item. 3

2.3.2.4 Major defect -A defect that is likely to result in a failure or to reduce materially the usability of the item for its intended purpose.
NOTE A major defect may be critical or non-critical.

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 2.3.3.9 Sudden failure - A failure that could not be anticipated by prior examination or monitoring. 2.3.3.10 Gradual failure : drift failure - A failure due to a gradual change with time of given characteristics of an item.
NOTE - A gradual failure may be anticipated by prior examination or monitoring and can sometimes be avoided by preventive maintenance.

2.3.4.1 Critical fault - A fault which is assessed as likely to result in injury to persons, significant material damage or other unacceptable consequences. 2.3.4.2 Non-criticalfault - A fault of an item which is not as assessed likely to result in injury to persons, significant material damage or other unacceptable consequences. 2.3.4.3 Majorfault - A fault which affects a function considered to be of major importance. 2.3.4.4 Minor fault a function considered A fault which does not affect to be of major importance.

2.3.3.11Cataleptic failure; catastrophic failure - A sudden failure which results in a complete inability to perform all required functions of an item. 2.3.3.12 Relevant failure - A failure that should be included in interpreting test or operational results or in calculating the value of a reliability performance measure.
NOTE The criteria for the exclusion should be stated.

2.3.4.5 Misuse fault - A fault due to application of stresses during use which are beyond the stated capabilities of the item. 2.3.4.6 Mishandling fault A fault caused by incorrect handling of or lack of care of the item. 2.3.4.7 Weakness fault - A fault due to a weakness in the item itself when subjected to stresses within the stated capabilities of the item.
NOTE Weakness may be either inherent or induced.

2.3.3.13 Non-relevant failure -A failure that should be excluded in interpreting test or operational results or in calculating the value of a reliability performance measure.
NOTE The criteria for the exclusion should be stated.

2.3.3.14Primary failure - A failure of an item not caused either directly or indirectly by the failure or the fault of another item. 2.3.3.15Secondary failure - A failure of an item, caused either directly or indirectly by the failure or the fault of another item. 2.3.3.16 Failure cause - The circumstances during design, manufacture or use which have led to a failure. 2.3.3.17 Failure mechanism The physical, chemical or other process which has led to a failure. 2.3.3.18 Systematic failure; reproducible failure A failure related in a deterministic way to a certain cause, which can only be eliminated by a modification of the design or manufacturing process, operational procedures, documentation or other relevant factors.
NOTES 1 Corrective maintenance without modification will usually not eliminate the failure cause. 2 A systematic failure can be induced at will by simulating the failure cause.

2.3.4.8 Design fault design of an item.

A fault due to an inadeqaute

2.3.4.9 Manufacturing fault A fault due to nonconformance in manufacture to the design of an item or to specified manufacturing processes. 2.3.4.10 Ageing fault; wearout fault - A fault resulting from a failure whose probabililty of occurrence increases with the passage of time as a result of processes inherent in the item. 2.3.4.11 Programme-sensitive fault A fault that is revealed as a result of the execution of some particular sequence of instruction. 2.3.4.12 Data-sensitive fault - A fault that is revealed as a result of the processing of a particular pattern of data. 2.3.4.13 Complete fault; function preventing fault A fault characterized by complete inability to perform all required functions of an item.
NOTE-The criteria for a complete inability have to be stated.

2.3.3.19Partial failure - A failure which results in the inability to perform some, but not all, required functions. 2.3.3.20 Degradation failure A failure which results in both a gradual failure and a partial failure. 2.3.4
Fault

2.3.4.14 Partial fault - A fault characterized by the inability of an item to perform some, but not all, required functions. 2.3.4.15
fault Persistent fault; permanent fault; solid

action
-

A fault of an item that persists until an of corrective maintenance is performed.

The state of an item characterized by inability to perform a required function, excluding the inability during preventive maintenance or due to lack of external resources or other planned actions.
NOTE - A fault is often the result of a failure of the item itself, but may exist without prior failure

2.3.4.16 Intermittentfault; volatilefault; transientfault A fault of an item which persists for a limited time duration following which the item recovers the ability to perform a required function without being subjected to any action of corrective maintenance.
NOTE Such a fault is often recurrent.

4

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 2.3.4.17 Determinate fault - For an item, which produces a response as a result of an action, a fault for which the response is the same for all actions. 2.3.4.18 Indeterminate fault - For an item, which produces a response as a result of an action, a fault such that the error affecting the response depends on the action applied.
NOTE An example would be a data-sensitive fault.

2.3.6

Item Related States The state when an item is

2.3.6.1 Operating state -

performing

a required

function.

2.3.6.2 Non-operating state -The state when an item is not performing a required function. 2.3.6.3 Standby state - A non-operating (see 2.3.6.8) during the required time. 2.3.6.4 Idle state; free state up-state during the non-required up-state

2.3.4.19 Latent fault yet been recognized.

An existing fault that has not

A non-operating time.

2.3.4.20 Systematic fault systematic failure.

A fault resulting

from a

2.3.4.21 Fault mode - One of the possible states of a faulty item, for a given required function.
NOTE - The previous is now deprecated. use of `failure mode' in this sense

2.3.6.5 Disabled state; outage - A state of an item characterized by its inability to perform a required function, for any reason. 2.3.6.6 disabled required planned
External disabled state -

2.3.4.22 Faulty item has a fault. 2.3.5
2.3.5.1 Errors

Pertaining

to an item which

That subset of the state when the item is in an up-state, but lacks external resources or is disabled due to other actions than maintenance.

and Mistakes

Error - A discrepancy between a computed, observed or measured value or conditions and the true, specified or theoretically correct value of condition.
NOTE - An error can be caused by a fault item, for example, a computing error made by a faulty computer equipment.

2.3.6.7 Down state; internal disabled state - A state of an item characterized by a fault or by a possible inability to perform a required function during preventive maintenance.
NOTE This state relates to availability performance.

2.3.6.8 Up-state - A state of an item characterized by the fact that it can perform a required function, assuming that the external resources, if required, are provided.
NOTE This state relates to availability performance.

2.3.5.2 Execution error; generated error Error produced during the operation of a faulty item. 2.3.5.3 Interaction error (man-machine) - An error in the response of an item caused by a mistake during its use. 2.3.5.4 Propagated error - An error in the response or erroneous data input to a non-faulty item. 2.3.5.5 Mistake; human error-A produces unintended result. human action that

2.3.6.9 Busy state - The state of an item in which it performs a required function for a user and for that reason is not accessible by other users. 2.3.6.10 Critical state - A state of an item assessed as likely to result in injury to persons, significant material damage or other unacceptable consequences.
NOTE - A critical but not necessarily. state may be result of a critical fault,

I I I
I I

UP STATE

-

1 _ I I I

DOWN STATE

I

L
I I -

DISABLED STATE -I

I I
I

I I

INTERNAL DISABLED IDLE STATE BUSY STATE EXTERNAL DISABLED STATE

STATE

SUBJECT TO PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE

FAULT

FIG. 2 CLASSIFWATION 5

OF ITEM STATES

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 2.3.6.11 Fuilure state - The condition of an item characterized by the lack of ability to perform required functions. 2.4 Maintenance The combination of all technical and administrative actions, including supervision actions, intended to retain an item in, or restore it to, a state in which it can perform a required function.
NOTE item. Maintenance may include a modification of the

of analysis techniques using centralized supervisory facilities and/or. sampling to minimize preventive maintenance and to reduce corrective maintenance. 2.4.9 Scheduled Maintenance - The preventive maintenance carried out in accordance with an established time schedule. 2.4.10 Unscheduled Maintenance The maintenance carried out, not in accordance with an established time schedule, but after reception of an indication regarding the state of an item. 2.4.11 On-site Maintenance; In Situ Maintenance; Field Maintenance - Maintenance performed at the premises where the item is used. 2.4.12 Off-site Maintenance performed at a place different is used.
NOTE -An centte.

2.4.1 Maintenance Philosophy A system of principles for the organization and execution ofthe maintenance. 2.4.2 Maintenance Policy - A description of the interrelationship between the maintenance echelons, the indenture levels and the levels of maintenance to be applied for the maintenance of an item. 2.4.3 Maintenance Echelon; Line of Maintenance A position in an organization where specified levels of maintenance are to be carried out on an item.
NOTES 1 Examples of maintenance echelons arc: field, repair shop, manufacturer. 2 The maintenance echelon is characterized by the skill of the personnel, the facilities available, the location, etc.

Maintenance from where the item

example is the repair of a subitem at a maintenance

2.4.13 Remote Maintenance - Maintenance item performed without physical access personnel to the item.

of an of the

2.4.14 Automatic Maintenance Maintenance accomplished without human intervention. 2.4.15 Deferred Maintenance Such corrective maintenance which is not immediately initiated after a fault recognition but is delayed in accordance with given maintenance rules. 2.4.16 Elementary Maintenance Activity - A unit of work into which a maintenance activity may be broken down at a given indenture level. 2.4.17 Maintenance Action; Maintenance Task - A sequence of elementary maintenance activities carried out for a given purpose.
NOTE - Examples are fault diagnosis, fault locahzation, function checkout, or combinations thereof.

2.4.4 Indenture Level (for Maintenance) - A level of subdivision of an item from the point of view of a maintenance action.
NOTES 1 Examples of indenture levels could be subsystem, a circuit board, a component. 2 The indenture level depends on the complexity of the item's construction, the accessibility to subitems, skill level of maintenance personnel, test equipment facilities, safety consideration, etc.

2.4.5
actions

Level of Maintenance to be carried

The set of maintenance out at a specified indenture level.

NOTES 1 Examples of a maintenance action arc replacing a component, a printed circuit board, a subsystem, etc. 2 The criteria for deciding a level of maintenance can be complexity of the item's construction, accessibility to parts of the item, skill level of maintenance personnel, test equipment facilities, safety considerations, etc.

2.4.18 Repair - That part of corrective maintenance in which manual actions are performed on the item. 2.4.19 Fault Recognition -The recognized. event of a fault being

2.4.6 Preventive Maintenance - The maintenance carried out at predetermined intervals or according to prescribed criteria and intended to reduce the probability of failure or the degradation of the functioning of an item.
Corrective Maintenance - The maintenance carried out after fault recognition and intended to restore an item to a state in which it can perform a required function. 2.4.7

2.4.20 Fault Localization;Fault I ocation (deprecated in this sense) -Actions taken to identify the faulty subitem or subitems at the appropriate indenture level. 2.4.21 Fault Diagnosis - Actions taken for fault recognition, fault localization and cause identification. 2.4.22 Fault Correction - Actions taken after fault localization to restore the ability of the faulty item to perform a required function. 2.4.23 Function Check-Out-Actions taken after fault correction to verify that the item has recovered its ability to perform the required function. 6

2.4.8 Controlled Maintenance - A method to sustain a desired quality of service by the systematic application

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 2.4.24 Restoration; Recovery - That event when the item regains the ability to perform a required function, after a faulty. 2.4.25 Supervision; Monit0rin.g -Activity, performed either manually or automatically, intended to observe the state of an item.
NOTE - Automatic supervision may be performed internally or externally to the item.

is performed on an item, either automatically manually, excluding logistic delays.

or

NOTE - A maintenance action may be carried out while the item is performing a required function.

2.5.2.4 Preventive maintenance time - That part of the maintenance time during which preventive maintenance is performed on an item including technical delays and logistid delays inherent in preventive maintenance. 2.5.2.5 Corrective maintenance time - That part of the maintenance time during which corrective maintenance is performed on an item including technical delays and logistic delays inherent in corrective maintenance. 2.5.2.6 "Active preventive maintenance time - That part of the active maintenance time, during which action of preventive maintenance are performed on an item. 2.5.2.7 Active corrective maintenance time - That part of the active maintenance time during which actions of corrective maintenance are performed hn an item. 2.5.2.8 Undetected fault time - The time interval between failure and recognition of the resulting fault. 2.5.2.9 Administrative delay (for corrective maintenance) - The accumulated time during which an action of corrective maintenance on a faulty item is not performed due to administrative reasons. 2.5.2.10 Logistic delay - That accumulated time during which a maintenance action can not be performed due to the necessity to acquire maintenance resources, excluding any administrative delays.
NOTE-Logistic delays can be due to, for example, travelling to unattended installations, pending tival of spare parts, specialists, test equipment, information and suitable environmental conditions.

2.4.26 Maintenance Entity -Any subitem of a given item which can have a fault and which, by alarm or any other means, can be unambiguously identified for replacement or repair. 2.4.27 Function-Affecting Maintenance A maintenance action during which one or more required functions of item under maintenance are interrupted or degraded. 2.4.28 Function-Preventing Maintenance - Function affecting maintenance that prevents a maintained item from performing a required function by causing complete loss of all the functions. 2.4.29 Function-Degrading Maintenance Functions affecting maintenance degrades one or more of the maintained item, but not to such extent as to cause complete loss of all functions. 2.4.30 Function-Permitting Maintenance - Such a maintenance action that does not interrupt or degrade any of the required functions of a maintained item. Maintenance action during which one of the required functions of the item under maintenance are interrupted or degraded. 2.5 Time Concepts 2.5.1 Interruption Related Times

2.5.1.1 Time between interruptions - The time duration between the end of one interruption and the beginning of the next. 2.5.1.2 Interruption related times -The of an interruption. 2.5.2 2.5.2.1 which either delays Maintenance Related Times time duration

252.11 Fault correction time - That part of active corrective maintenance time during which fault correction is performed. 2.5.2.12 Technical delays - The accumulated time necessary to perform auxiliary technical actions associated with the maintenance action itself. 2.5.2.13 .Check-out time - That part of active corrective maintenance time during which function check-out is performed. 2.5.2.14 Fault diagnosis rime - The time during which fault diagnosis is performed. 2.5.2.15 Fault localization time; fault location time (deprecated) That part of active corrective maintenance time during which fault localization is performed. 2.5.2.16 Repair lime 7

Maintenance time -The time interval during a maintenance action is performed on an item manually or automatically, including technical and logistic delays.

NOTE - Maintenance may be carried out while the item is performing a required function.

2.5.2.2 Maintenance man-hours (MMH) -The accumulated durations of the inditidual maintenance times, expressed in hours, used by all maintenance personnel for a given type of maintenance action or over a given time interval. 2.5.2.3 Active maintenance time - That part of the maintenance time during which a maintenance action

That part of active corrective

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 maintenance time during performed on an item. 25.3 Item State Related which repair actions are failure intensity for a repaired item or the instantaneous failure rate for a non-repaired item is considerably higher than that during the subsequent period. 2.5.4.7 Constant failure intensity period - That possible period in the life of a repaired item during which the failure intensity is approximately constant. 2.5.4.8 Constant failure rate period - That possible period in the life of a non-repaired item during which the failure rate is approximately constant. 2.5.4.9 Wearout failure period - That final period, if any, in the life of an item during which the instantaneous failure intensity for a repaired item or the instantaneous failure rate for a non-repaired item is considerably higher than that during the preceding period. 2.6 Service Related Measures 2.6.1 Interruption 2.5.3.6 Idle time; free time -The time interval during which an item is in a free state. 2.5.3.7 Disabled time - The time interval which an item is in a disabled state. during 2.6.1.2 Mean interruption duration -The of the interruption duration. expectation Related The

Times during

2.5.3.1 Operating time - The time interval which an item is in an operating state.

time The time interval 2.5.3.2 Non-operating state. during which the item is in a non-operating 2.5.3.3 Required time - The time interval during which the user requires the item to be in a condition to perform a required function. 2.5.3.4 Non-required time -The time interval during which the user does not require the item to be in a condition to perform a required function. 2.5.3.5 Stand-by time - The time interval which an item is in a stand-by state. during

2.6.1.1 Mean time between interruptions expectation of the time between interruptions.

2.5.3.8 Down time - The time interval during which an item is in a down state. 2.5.3.9 Accumulated down time - The accumulated time during which an item is in a down state over a given time interval. 2.5.3.10 External disabled time; external loss time The time interval during which an item is in an external disabled state. 2.54 Reliability Pelformance Measure Related Times

2.6.1.3 System down time - This is defined as the duration for which the service is not available even for single subscriber/trunk. 2.6.1.4 Group down time - This is defined as the duration for which service is not available for more than 960 subscriber/l 20 trunks simultaneously.The size of the group is specified by DOT as an operator and may be different for other operators. 2.6.1.5 Line down time - It is defined as average duration per subscriber/trunk for which the service is not available. At the time of calculating this figure the total system down time as well as group down time is also taken care of. 2.6.2 Service Support Peformance time The the instant a that provides the instant of

2.5.4.1 Time to first failure - Total time duration of operating time an item, from the instant it is first put in an up-state, until failure. 2.5.4.2 Time to failure - Total time duration of operating time of an item, from the instant it is first put in an up-state, until failure or from the instant of restoration until next failure. 2.5.4.3 Time between failures - The time duration between two consecutive failures of a repaired item. 2.5.4.4 Time to restoration;time to recovery - The time interval during which an item is in a down state due to a failure. 2.5.4.5 Use&l life -Under given conditions, the time interval beginning at a given instant of time and ending when the failure intensity becomes unacceptable or when the item is considered unrepairable as a result of a fault. 2.5.4.6 Early failure period - That early period, if any, in the life of an item, beginning at a given instant of time and during which the instantaneous 8

2.6.2.1 Mean service provisioning expectation of the duration between potential user requests an organization the necessary means for a service, and time when those means are furnished.

2.6.2.2 Billing error probability - The probability of an error when billing a user of a service. 2.6.3 Service Operability Per$ormance

2.6.3.1 Service user mistake probability -Probability of a mistake made by a user in his attempt to utilize a service. 2.6.3.2 Dialing mistake probubililty -The probability that the user of a telecommunication network makes dialing mistakes during his call attempts.

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 2.6.3.3 Service user abandonment probability - The probability that a user abandons the attempt to use a service.
NOTE - Abandonments may be caused by excessive user mistake rates, by excessive service access delays, etc.

instant of time, assuming resources are provided.

that the required

external

2.7.1.3 Mean availability [A (t,, t,)] - The mean of the instantaneous availability over a given time interval (t,, tJ.
NOTE - The mean availability availability A(r) as is related to the instantaneous

2.6.3.4 Call abandonment probability The probability that a user abandons the call attempt to a telecommunication network. 2.6.4 Service Accessibility Performance

2.6.4.1 Service accessibility; service access probability - The probability that a service can be obtained within specified tolerances and other given operating conditions when requested by the user. 2.6.4.2 Mean service access delay -The expectation of the time duration between an initial bid by the user for the acquisition of a service and the instant of time the user has access to the service and it is obtained within specified tolerances and other given operating conditions. 2.6.4.3 Mean access delay (of a communication) The expectation of the time duration between the first call attempt made by a user of a telecommunication network to reach an other user or a service and the instant of time the user reaches the wanted other user or service, within specified tolerances and under given operational conditions. 2.6.4.4 p-fractile access delay (of a communication) - The p-fractile value of the duration between the first call attempt made by a user of a telecommunication network to reach an other user or a service and the instant of time the user reaches the wanted other user or service, within specified tolerances and under given operational conditions. 2.6.5 Service Retainability Performance

2.7.1.4 Mean unavailability u(t,, of the instantaneous unavailability interval (t,, tJ.
NOTE The mean unavailability instantaneous unavailability U(t) as: 12 u (t,J*)=& 2

tJ - The mean over a given time
is related to the

(0 dt ' I t,

2.7.1.5 Asymptotic availability [A] - For modelling purposes, the limit, if this exists, of the instantaneous availability when time tends to infinity.
NOTE - Under certain conditions, for instance constant failrate and constant repair rate, the asymptotic availability may be expressed by the ratio of mean up time to the sum of mean up time and mean down time.

2.7.1.6 Asymptotic unavailability [ Ul -For modelling purposes, the limit, if this exists, of the instantaneous unavailability when the time tends to infinity.
NOTE-Under certain conditions, for instance constant failure rate and constant repair rate, the asymptotic unavailability may be expressed by the ratio of the mean down time to the sum of the mean up time and mean down time.

2.7.1.7 Asymptotic mean availability [A] For modelling purposes, the limit, if this exists, of the mean availability over a time interval (t,, tJ when t2 tends to infinity.
NOTE When such a limit exists, it is not dependent on 1,.

2.6.5.1 Service retainability - The probability that a service, once obtained, will continue to be provided under given conditions for a given time duration. 2.6.5.2 Connection retainability (in telecommunication) - The probabililty that a connection, once obtained, will continue to be provided for a communication under given conditions for a given time duration. 2.7 Availability 2.7.1 Availability Performance

2.7.1.8 Asymptotic mean unavailability [u] - For modelling purposes, the limit, if this exists, of the mean unavailability over a time interval (t,, tJ when t2 tends to infinity.
NOTE When such a limit exists it is not dependent on 1,.

2.7.1.9 Mean up time (MUT) of the up time.

-

The expectation

2.7.1.10 Mean accumulated down time (MADT) The expectation of the accumulated down time over a given time interval. 2.7.2 Reliability Performance

2.7.1.1 Instantaneous availability [A(t)] - The probability that an item is in a state to perform a required function under given conditions at a given instant of time, assuming that the required external resources are provided. 2.7.1.2 lnstantanepus unavailability [U(t)] - The probability that an item is not in a state to perform a required function under given conditions at a given 9

2.7.2.1 Reliability [R(t,, t,)]- The probability that an item can perform a required function under given conditions for a given time interval.
NOTES 1 It is generally assumed that the item is in a state to perform this required function at the beginning of the time interval. 2 The term `reliability' is also used to denote the reliability performance quantified by this probability.

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 2.7.2.2 Instantaneousfailure rate [ h (t)] -The limit, if this exists, of the ratio of the conditional probabililty that the instant of time, T, of a failure of an item falls within a given time interval (r + St), and the length of this interval, St, when St tends to zero, given that the item is in an up-state at the beginning of the time interval.
NOTE - In this definition T may also denote the time to failure or the time to first failure, as the case may be.

given conditions of use, can be carried out within a stated time interval when the maintenance is performed under stated conditions and using stated procedures and resources.
NOTE - The term `maintainability' is also used to denote the maintainability performance quantilied by this probability.

2.7.2.3 Mean failure of the instantaneous interval (t,, rJ.
NOTE-The rate as:

rate [h

(t,, t,)] - The mean failure rate over a given time
failure

mean failure rate relates to instantaneous

Instantaneous repair rate [H(t)] - The limit if this exists, of the ratio of the conditional probability that the corrective maintenance action terminates in a time interval, (t, r + St) and the length of this time interval, St, when 6? tends to zero, given that the action had not terminated at the beginning of the time interval. 2.7.3.3 Mean repair rate jI(t,, tJ The mean of repair rate over a given time interval

2.7.3.2

h(t,,t2)=L
4 -t2

It,

tr

h(W

the instantaneous ($9 `*)

2.7.2.4 Instantaneous failure intensity z(t) - The limit, if this exists, of the ratio of the mean number of failures of a repaired item in a time interval (r, t + &), and the length of this interval, St when the length of the time interval tends to zero.
NOTE formula The instantaneous as: failure intensity is expressed by

NOTE - The mean repair rate is related to instantaneous repair rate as:

2.7.3.4

Mean

maintenance

n&n

hours

-

The

Z(f) = &

+

E[N(t + St) -N(t)] St

expectation

of the maintenance

man hours.
The expectation

where N(f) is the number of failures in the time interval (0, t), E denotes the expectation. 2.7.2.5 Mean failure intensity T(t,, ?J - The mean of the instantaneous failure intensity over a given time interval (t,, t,).
NOTE-The mean failure intensity is related to instantaneous failure intensity z(t) as: t2 1 z (t) dt z (t,,t,)=t2- t1 5r,

2.7.3.5 Mean down time (MDT) of the down time. 2.7.3.6 Mean repair time (MRT) of the repair time. 2.7.3.7 p-fractile repair time of the repair time.

The expectation

The p-fractile

value

2.7.3.8 Mean active corrective maintenance time The expectation of the active corrective maintenance time. 2.7.3.9 Mean
time to restoration; mean time recovery (MTTR); mean time to repair (deprecated) to -

2.7.2.6 Mean time to first failure (MTTFF) expectation of the time to first failure.

-

The

2.7.2.7 Mean time tofailure (MTTF) - The expectation of the time to failure. 2.7.2.8 Mean time between failures of the time between failures.
2.7.2.9 Failure The expectation

The expectation

of the time to restoration.

2.7.3.10 Fault coverage - The proportion of faults of an item that can be recognized under given conditions. 2.7.3.11 Repair coverage - The proportion of faults of an item that can be successfully removed. 2.7.4
2.7.4.1 Maintenance Mean Support Performance delay (MAD) -

rate acceleration factor -

The ratio

of the accelerated testing failure rate to the failure rate under stated reference test conditions.
NOTE - Both failure rates refer to the same time period in the life of the tested items.

administrative

The

2.7.2.10 Failure intensity acceleration factor - In a time interval of given duration, whose beginning is specified by a fixed age of a repaired item, the ratio of the number of failures obtained under two different sets of stress conditions. 2.7.3
2.7.3.1 Maintainability Performance

expectation

of the administrative

delay. p-fractile

2.7.4.2 p-fractile administrative delay -The value of the administrative delay. 2.7.4.3 Mean logistic delay (MLD) -The of the logistic delay. 2.7.4.4 p-fractile logistic delay -The of logistic delay. 10

expectation

Maintainability [M(t,, t,)] -The probability that

p-fractile value

a given

active maintenance

action, for an item under

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 2.8 2.8.1 Test, Data, Design and Analysis Test ,Concepts 2.8.1.12 Maintainability demonstration A maintainability verification performed as a compliance test. 2.8.2 Data Concepts

2.8.1.1 TestAn experiment carried out in order to measuke, quantify or classify a characteristic or a property of an item. 2.8.1.2 Compliance test - A test used to show whether or not a characteristic or a property of an item complies with the stated requirements. 2.8.1.3 Determination test-A test used to establish the value of a characteristic or a property of an item. 2.8.1.4 Luboratorv test - A comDliance test or a determination test made under -prescribed and controlled conditions which may or may not simulate field conditions. 2.8.1.5 Field ted A compliance test or determination test bade in the field where operating, environmental, maintenance and measurement conditions present at the time of test are recorded. 2.8.1.6 Endurance test - A test carried out over a time interval to investigate how the properties of an item are affected by the application of stated stresses and by their time duration or repeated application. 2.8.1.7 Accelerated test-A test in which the applied stress level is chosen to exceed that stated in the reference conditions in order to shorten the time duration required to observe the stress response of the item, or to magnify the responses in a given time duration.
NOTE - To be valid, an accelerated test shall not alter the basic fault modes and failure mechanisms, or their relative prevalence.

2.8.2.1 Observed data - Values related to an item or a process obtained by direct observation.
NOTES I Values referred to could be events, time instants, time intervals, etc. 2 When data is recorded all relevant conditions and criteria should be stated.

2.8.2.2 tests.

Test data -

Observed

data obtained

during

2.8.2.3 Field dara field operation.

Observed data obtained

during

2.8.2.4 Reference data - Data, which by general agreement may be used as a standard or as a basis for prediction and/or comparison with observed data. 2.8.3 Design Concepts

2.8.3.1 Redundancy - In an item, the existence of more than one means for performing a required function. 2.8.3.2 Active redundancy That redundancy wherein all means for performing a required function are intended to operate simultaneously. 2.8.3.3 Standby redundancy - That redundancy wherein a part of the means for performing a required function is intended to operate, while the remaining part(s) of the means are inoperative until needed. 2.8.3.4 Fail safe - A design property of an item which prevents its failures from resulting in critical faults. 2.8.3.5 Fault tolerance - The attribute of an item that makes it able to perform a required function in the presence of certain given subitem faults. 2.8.3.6 Fault masking - The condition in which a fault exists in a subitem of an item but cannot be recognized because of a feature of the item or because of another fault of the subitem or of another subitem. 2.8.4 Analysis Concepts used

2.8.1.8 Step stress test - A test consisting of several increasing stress levels applied sequentially for periods of equal time duration to an item. 2.8.1.9 Screening test - A test or a set of tests intended to remove or detect defective items or those likely to exhibit early failures. 2.8.1.10 Time acceleration factor - The ratio between the time durations necessary to obtain the same stated number of failures or degradations in two equal size samples, under two different sets of stress conditions involving the same failure mechanisms and fault modes and their relative prevalence.
NOTE - One of the two sets of stress conditions be a reference set. should

2.8.4.1 Prediction -The process of computation to obtain predicted value(s) of a quantity.

NOTE - The term `predicfion' may also be used to denote the predicted value(s) of a quantity.

2.8.1.11 Maintainability verification - A procedure applied for the purpose of determining whether the reauirements for maintainability oerformance measures fo; an item have been achieked or not.
NOTE appropriate The procedures may range from analysis data to a maintainability demonstration. of

2.8.4.2 Reliability model - A mathematical model used for prediction or estimation of reliability performance measures of an item. 2.8.4.3 Fault modes and effects analysis; failure modes and effects analysis (deprecateA) (FMEA) A
qualitative 11 method of reliability analysis which

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 involves the study of the fault modes which can exist in every subitem of the item and the determination or the effects of each fault mode on other subitems of the item and on the required functions of the item. 2.8.4.4 Fault modes, effects and criticality analysis; failure modes, effects and criticality analysis (deprecated) (FMECA) Fault modes and effect analysis together with a consideration of the probability of occurrence and a ranking of the seriousness of the fault.
Fault tree analysis; failure tree analysis (deprecated) (FTA) -An analysis to determine which

2.8.4.15 Maintainability allocation; maintainability apportionment -A procedure applied during the design of an item intended to apportion the requirements for maintainability performance measures for an item to its subitems according to given criteria. 2.8.5
2.8.5.1 Improvement Processes (for reliability) -

Learning process

in experience by personnel which reliability performance of an item. 2.8.5.2 Burn in

Growth improves the

2.8.4.5

fault modes of the subitems or external events, or combinations thereof, may result in a stated fault mode of the item, presented in the form of a fault tree (see 2.8.4.8). 2.8.4.6 Stress analysis - A quantitative or qualitative determination of the physical, chemical or other stresses an item experiences under given conditions. 2.8.4.7 Reliability showing, for one cornpIe& item, how by the blocks, or fault of the item.
block diagram -

a) For a repairable hardware - A process of increasing the reliability performance of hardware employing functional operation of every item in a prescribed environment with successive corrective maintenance at every failure during the early failure period.
item A type of b) For a non-repairable screening test employing the functional operation of an item.

Block diagram or more functional modes of a faults of the subitems represented combinations thereof, result in a

2.8.5.3 Reliability growth -A condition characterized by a progressive improvement of a reliability performance measure of an item with time. 2.8.5.4 Reliability improvement A process undertaken with the deliberate intention of improving the reliability performance by eliminating causes of systematic failures and/or by reducing the probability of occurrence of other failures. 2.8.5.5 Reliability and maintainability management The administration of the functions and activities necessary to determine and satisfy the reliability performance and maintainability performance requirements of an item. 2.856 Reliability and maintainability assurance The implementation of adequate, planned and systematic actions necessary to provide confidence that an item will satisfy given reliability performance and maintainability performance requirements.
NOTE - Reliability and maintainability assurance aims at making sure that the reliability performance and maintainability performance will be what it should be. This includes a continuing evaluation of adequacy and effectiveness with a view to having timely corrective measures and feedback initiated where necessary. A specific reliability and maintainability assurance involves the necessary plans and actions to provide confidence through verifications, audits and evaluation.

2.8.4.8 Fault tree -A logic diagram showing which fault modes of subitems or external events, or combinations thereof, result in a given fault mode of the item. 2.8.4.9 State-transition diagram- A diagram showing the set of possible states of an item and the possible one step transitions between these states. 2.8.4.10 Stress model - A mathematical model used to describe the influence of relevant applied stresses on a reliability performance measure or any other property of an item. 2.8.4.11 Fault analysis - The logical, systematic examination of an item to identify and analyze the probability, causes and consequences of potential faults. 2.8.4.12 Failure analysis - The logical, systematic examination of a failed item to identify and analyze the failure mechanism, the failure cause and the consequences of failure. 2.8.4.13 Maintainability prediction - An activity performed with the intention of forecasting the numerical values of a maintainability performance measure of an item, taking into account the maintainability performance and reliability performance measures of its subitems, under given operational and maintenance conditions. 2.8.4.14 Maintenance tree -A logic diagram showing the pertinent alternative sequences of elementary maintenance activities to be performed on an item and the conditions for their choice. 12

2.8.5.7 Reliability and maintainability control-The operational techniques and activities that are employed to satisfy given reliability performance and maintainability performance requirements of an item. 2.8.5.8 Reliability and maintainability programme -A documented set of time scheduled activities, resources and events serving to implement the organization structure, responsibilities, procedures, activities, capabilities, and resources that together ensure that an item will satisfy given reliability performance and maintainabi!ity performance relevant to a given contract or project.

IS 1885 (Part 2.8.5.9

39) : 1999

Reliability and maintainability plan - A document setting out the specific practices, resources and activities necessary to ensure that an item will satisfy given reliability performance and maintainability performance requirements relevant to a given contract or project. 2.8.5.10 Reliability and maintainability audit - A systematic and independent examination to determine whether the activities and results comply with planned arrangements and whether these arrangements are effectively implemented and are suitable to achieve reliability performance and maintainability performance objectives. 2.8.5.11 Reliability and maintainability surveillance -The continuing observation of the status of procedures, methods, conditions, products, processes and services and analysis of records to assure that reliability performance and maintainability performance requirements will be met.
NOTE - Reliabihty and maintainability surveillance is often carried out by the customer or third parties to ensure that the contractual requirements are being met.

chosen as the statistical model of the population which this sample is taken.

from

NOTE - The result may be expressed either as a single numerical value, a point estimate, or as a confidence interval.

2.9.5 Intrinsic (Inherent) Qualifies a value determined when maintenance and operational conditions are assumed to be ideal. 2.9.6 Operational - Qualifies a value determined under given operational conditions. 2.9.7 Mean (Average) a) The value obtained random variable. as the expectation of a

b) An integral whose magnitude depends on a [ime during a given interval divided by the time interval itself. 2.9.8 P-fractile -The value obtained as the p-fractile of the distribution of a random variable. 2.9.9 Instantaneous - Qualifies a value, at a given instant of time, of a time dependent variable quantity. 2.9.10 Steady State - Qualifies a value determined for conditions of an item when characteristic parameters of the item remain constant.
2.10 Statistical Aspects of Reliability

2.8.5.12 Design review -

A formal and independent examination of an existing or proposed design for the purpose of detection and remedy of deficiencies in the requirements and design which could effect such things as reliability performance, maintainability maintenance support performance performance, requirements, fitness for the purpose and the identification of potential improvements.
NOTE - Design review by itself is not sufficient proper design. to ensure

2.10.1 Mathematical

2.9

Measure

Modifiers ideal value which characterizes defined in the conditions which when that quantity is observed, determination.

Concept and Expressions for Reliability and Its Associated Terms The probability of failure of an item within a period of time can be expressed by the cumulative distribution function of times of failures.
2.10.2

2.9.1 True - The a quantity perfectly exist at the moment or the subject of a

Q-Percentile

Life (for Non-repaired

Items)

NOTE - This value could be arrived at only if all causes of measurement error were eliminated and the population was infinite. In the case of a finite population, the complete population must be considered.

2.10.2.1 Observed Q-percentile life - The length of observed time of which a stated proportion (Q percent) of a sample of items has failed.
NOTES 1 The criteria for what constitutes a failure should be stated. 2 The Q-percentile life is also that life at which (100 percent) reliability is observed.

2.9.2 Predicted - Qualifies a value assigned to a quantity, before the quantity is actually observable, computed on the basis of earlier observed or estimated values of the same quantity or of other quantities using a mathematical model.
NOTE - A predicted term `prediction'. value may also be designated by the

2.10.2.2 Assessed Q-percentile life -The

Q-percentile life determined as a limiting value or values of the confidence interval with a stated confidence level, based on the same data as the observed Q-percentile life of nominally identical items.
NOTES 1 The source of the data should be stated. 2 Results can be accumulated (combined) only when all conditions are similar. 3 The assumed underlying distribution of failures against time should be stated. 4 It should be stated whether a one-sided or two-sided interval is being used. 5 Where one limiting value is given. this is usually the lower limit.

2.9.3 Extrupolated - Qualifies a predicted value based on observed or estimated values for one or a set of conditions, intended to supply to other conditions such as time, maintenance and environmental conditions. 2.9.4 Estimated - Qualifies a value obtained as the result of the operation made for the purpose of assigning, from the observed values in a sample, numerical values to the parameters of the distribution 3

2.10.2.3 Extrapolated Q-percentile life - Extension by a defined extrapolation or interpolation of the

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 observed or assessed Q-percentile life for stress conditions different from those applying to the assessed Q-percentile life and for different percentages.
NOTE-The validity of the extrapolation should be justified. NOTE - Engineering and statistical assumption as well as the bases used for the computation (observed or assessed) should be stated.

of an item, the computed Q-percentile life based on the observed, assessed or extrapolated Q-percentile lives of its parts.

2.10.2.4 Predicted Q-percentile life - For the stated conditions of use and taking into account the design

ANNEX A (Foreword)
PHILOSOPHY A-l PRINCIPLES are more precise than are literature and it is, therefore, restrictions in the meaning compared with current use. and arranging the terms of which the following GOVERNING RELIABILITY TERMS AND CONDITIONS

Some of the definitions sometimes found in current advisable to be aware of of some of the definitions The manner of selecting involve several principles are the most important:

A-2.1.1 In practice some kinds of failure are more important than others, and one should be able to make a distinction between them. This is done in this standard by adding an adjectival modifier to the word `failure', for example, complete failure, misuse failure, etc. A-2.1.2 A failure term applies only to the item under consideration but if the failure is judged in terms of its effect on another item, the use of a different adjectival modifier may be necessary. Thus a complete failure of a particular part of an item may cause only a partial failure of the complete item. A-2.1.3 The need to use the appropriate adjectival modifier -When dealing with data, it is important to use the appropriate failure term. For example, in the case of failure data from the equipment in the field, it is important to distinguish between parts which fail as a result of misuse, and those which fail as a result of a weakness in the part itself. Failure statements should, therefore, indicate which kind of failure is being considered. A-3 RELIABILITY A-3.1 Probabilistic CHARACTERISTICS Nature of Reliability

a> The starting point for the choice and definition of each term is a clarification of the concept involved. b) The terms are logically related to one another as far as possible, and their definitions are consistent. c) Where several numerical versions of a term are possible, each version is given a separate title and its relationship to the other variations is described. d) Due to the widely varied circumstances to which reliability terms can be applied the words `under stated conditions' are used to remind readers that in every case the relevant conditions shall be stated to whatever extent is judged necessary. e> The terms are grouped under conceptual headings rather than being given in alphabetical order so as to enable a common arrangement to be `used for any language. A-2 FAILURE TERMS

Reliability is concerned with the probability of future events based on past observations. Any reliability characteristic term may thus be used in respect of what has been observed and what may happen, the latter use being defined in terms of a probability. A-3.2 Variations of Reliability Characteristics

A-2.1 The word `failure' is the basic term denoting the termination of required performance. It is applied to item in all circumstances. 14

The significance of reliability characteristics, for example, failure rate, depends on the amount of data collected, the statistical treatment, and the technical

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 assumptions made in particular circumstances. A different name is used when statistical treatment differs, but in any case the set of assumptions and circumstances shall be stated. For example, the term `observed failure rate' relates to the failure rate observed under a given set of circumstances and the definition requires that the number of specimens, duration, failure definition, etc, should all be stated. If these data are subjected to appropriate statistical treatment the result is the limiting values of a confidence interval with a stated confidence level. This is called assessed failure rate. The extension of this approach to other variations of the reliability characteristic terms is shown in Annex B. Where the adjective `assessed' is used, this is to be understood in the statistical sense. A-3.3 Achieved Characteristics and Required Reliability example, major and minor partial failures. Developments of this hind may be made by building up on this terminology as a foundation. A-5 MEANING OF THE TERM `ITEM'

The word `item' is used to denote any electronic or electrical part, component, sub assembly, equipment, sub-system or system that can be individually considered and separately tested. The word `item' is also used to denote items, population of items, sample, etc, where the context justifies its use. Where the expression `repair item' is used, it means an item which is repaired when it fails. Similarly the term `non-repaired item' means an item which will not be repaired when it fails. A-6 `HARDWARE' TERMS

The four variations (observed, assessed, extrapolated and predicted) of a reliability characteristic may be used in respect to what has been achieved or to what is required. Thus a statement of a requirement may be made as a target for the observed, assessed, etc, failure rate. A-4 PRACTICAL VOCABULARY APPLICATION OF THIS

The choice, definition and relationship of principle `hardware' terms such as component part, equipment, system, etc, are strongly influenced by the viewpoint adopted in different countries, and in different organizations. It has been found impracticable to provide a universally acceptable set of `hardware' terms, and definitions. Therefore, in any practical reliability study involving `hardware' terms, the definitions and hierarchy of the terms used should be stated, and should not be changed during the study. A-7 `TIME' CONCEPT

These terms and definitions are essentially a guide for use with different kinds of electronic and electrical items. In practice, some of the terms shall be given greater precision by being defined in accordance with the characteristics of the item under consideration. Thus, the criteria of a partial failure of a transistor, for example, would usually be given as the limit values (or changes) in gain or leakage current. In some cases further subdivisions may be desirable, for

In definitions where `time' is used, this parameter may be replaced by distance, cycles, or other quantities or units as may be appropriate. This concept may cover any duration of observation of the considered items either in actual operation or in storage, readiness, etc, but it excludes down time due to a failure.

ANNEX B (Clause A-3.2)
STATISTICAL B-l GENERAL B-l.1 The distribution of times to failure of items which are not repaired, or the distribution of times between failures for items which are repaired, form the basis of definitions of reliability characteristic terms. These times are random variables which must be treated according to the usual methods of probability calculus. B-l.2 Where `time' is used, this quantity can be replaced by distance, cycles or other quantities or units as may be appropriate. It may cover any duration of observation - either in actual operation or in storage, readiness, etc - but it excludes down time due to a failure. 15 ASPECTS OF RELIABILITY B-l.3 For probability stated value distribution a continuous random variable X the that its value is less than or equal to a x is given by the value of its `cumulative function' F(x), where 0 5 F(x) 5 1 B-l.4 The probability by: density functionAx) is defined

dF(x) fix) = -&-If x denotes time, then it is defined within the range from zero to infinity, so that Ax) dx = F(f), and

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 m j@)dr = 1 I B-l.5 The concept of true values arises from an assumption that it is possible to describe reality by relevant mathematical models. The true values are characteristics of such a model. In practical situations, they can never be obtained by observations. B-l.6 These values could also be thought of as those which would be obtained from the complete population taking into account the relevant part of the life histories of the items (The origins of the lives do not necessarily occur at the same instant). In this case, the true values are often called population values. B-l.7 Often it is either impractical or impossible to observe the complete population in order to obtain the population values. In some cases, it is necessary to perform tests which are destructive In other cases, the complete or degrading. population is not available at the time of the tests. For these reasons, items are taken from the population to form a sample. Observations are made on the sample in order to obtain statistical estimates of the true population values. Estimates are valid only if the sample is a random one. If observations were made on several samples, the estimates would vary from one sample to another, that is, the estimate is a random variable which itself has a distribution. B-l.8 The `observed' terms are defined in this Annex. Their values can be used as statistical estimates of the true reliability characteristics. Values of the `assessed' terms, at stated confidence levels, are derived from the corresponding cumulative distribution function (if its form is known). B-l.9 The times to failure of items, or the number of failures, in a sample, during a stated period of time, are the most commonly recorded quantities either during tests or during operation of equipment in the field. To obtain valid observed and assessed values of the reliability characteristics, which are representative of the population, all the relevant details (sample size, duration, stress conditions and failure criteria) must be truthfully recorded.
NOTE - This should be given in the relevant individual specification (see, for exampk, IS 7412).

B-2 THEORETICAL EXPRESSIONS FOR THE TRUE RELIABILITY CHARACTERISTICS B-2.1 General Expressions

B-2.1.1 The life of an item which is not repaired or time between failures for an item which is repaired is a random variable denoted by X. B-2.1.2 As mentioned in B-l.5 and B-l.6 values could reflect two concepts: the true

a) As mathematical model (this would indicated by single asterisk,*); and

be

b) Population values (this would be indicated by double asterisks, **). B-2.1.3 In the case of both repaired or non-repaired items, the failure characteristics may depend on the age of the items. Practical application of reliability characteristics involves a given age, that is, a given period in their life histories. In practice, it may often be necessary to refer the age of an item not to the true beginning of its life, but to an arbitrary moment `time zero'. B-2.1.4 For repairable items, the reliability characteristics are valid for the period after the preceding repair. B-2.2 True Reliability B-2.2.1 True Reliability (as mathematical model, *) The true reliability, R(t), is the probability, P, of an item surviving for a duration t, that is, its life x exceeds the duration t. It is given by : R(t) = P(x>t) It is related to commulative distribution function, fl.x) by : R(t) = 1 - F(x) B-2.2.2 True Reliability (in terms ofpopulation **) The true reliability is given by : values,

R (0 =

$

N(I)

where N(0) =-number of items in a population at time zero, and N(t) = number surviving at time t. B-2.3 True Failure Rate and Instantaneous Rate Failure

B-1.10 The observed reliability characteristics may be extrapolated (or interpolated) by defined methods to cover durations and stress conditions differing from those for which the original observation were obtained. The observed, assessed or extrapolated reliability characteristics of parts may be used for the prediction of reliability characteristics of complex items. B-l.11 B-5. A list of symbols used in this Annex is given

B-2.3.1 The true failure rate z (t,, tJ for a period of time from t, to t2 is the quotient of the'conditional probability at the instant t,, that an item will fail within the period, given that it has survived for time t, and the time period, that is: z (fl,fZ) = B-2.3.2 function 16 P(t1 < x I t2 / x > t,) t2 - t1 distribution

It is related to the cumulative and the true reliability by:

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999

z (t1, tz)

=

F(tt)-

F(h)

life

is given by:

(tz-h)-[l-F(h)]
=

R(h) - R(h) (tz-fl)R(h)

1

N(O)

where where z(t) is the true instantaneous failure rate. xi is life of ith item. B-2.5 True Mean Time Between Failures and True Mean Time to Failure The true mean time between failures m(t,, tJ and the true mean time to failure mF(t,, t ) are the mathematical expected values of the time ;between failures (for repaired-items), or of the time to failure (for nonrepaired items), respectively. The values so obtained will in general depend on the time period (t,, tJ over which they are computed. B-2.6 Constant Failure Rate

B-2.3.3 The true instantaneous failure rate at instant t, z(t), is a mathematical concept. It is the limit of the true failure rate as the interval r, to r2 tends to zero, and it is given by: z(t) =
NOTE -

lim z ($9 fr) tr, - Q-+ 0
z(f)

is also known as hazard rate.

B-2.3.4 It is related to the true reliability, the probability density function, fit), by: z(t) = &)/R(t)

R(t), and

= - [l/R(t)J.dR(t)/dt
since j(t) =

B-2.6.1 When the failure rate is assumed constant with numerical value (as it is usual in reliability engineering), that is, the times to failure are distributed exponentially. The true reliability is expressed as:

dF(t)/dt = - dR(t)/dt

R(t) = exp
The true reliability assumed:

[

B-2.3.5 In terms of population values, the true failure rate, often called mean or average failure rate, is

It,z(t)dt 1

r>

becomes, when constant failure is

zct,, `2) =

W,) - Nt,) (5 - fJ Mt,)

R(t) = exp (-k)
so that and F(t) = 1 -R(t)

B-2.3.6 There is no population value of instantaneous failure rate. This does not detract from the usefulness of the mathematical concept. B-2.4 True Mean Life

= 1 - exp (-ht)

fit) = h exp (-At)

The true mean life becomes:

B-2.4.1 The true mean life, m,_(0, w), is the expected value E(X) of the life of an item. It is given by: mi_ (0, 00) = E(x> or mL (0, CO) = E f(x)
0

dx

B-2.6.2 In this case also the true mean life mL, the true mean time between failure and the true mean time to failure mF are numerically equal to the reciprocal of the true failure rate, for the exponential distribution: that is, m,, = m = mF = l/h B-3 EXPRESSIONS FOR THE OBSERVED RELIABILITY CHARACTERISTICS B-3.0 The observed reliability characteristics are estimates of the true reliability characteristics, appropriate to the form of the cumulative distribution of times to failure. B-3.1 Cumulative Time

If tR(t) approaches zero as t goes to infinity, mL (0, co) can be expressed by: m B-2.4.2 mi, (0, coo) = I0

R(t) dt

B-2.4.3 The true mean life mL (t,, "p)measured from a time t, is given by: i XflMx
`II-

B-2.4.4

In terms of population

values, the true mean 17

The observed failure rate, mean time to failure and mean time between failures are all defined in terms

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 of cumulative time. This is the sum of the times during which all the individual items under observation have been subjected to the stated stress conditions during a stated period in their lives (excluding any down time), for example, it may be expressed by: B-3.2.1.1 If at the instant the value of of time, t^:, the observations or tests are terminated of occurrence of the rth failure, & then the reliability for this observed period is given by: n-r+1 R (ii)=.., llisr which is determined by the test plan (that is, by the sample size n and the number of failures r chosen before hand). time; which fail during the B-3.2.1.2 These expressions give the estimates which are valid only for the durations of observations (t, to t2 or ii) and the part of the life`of the items during which the observations were made. Any extension to different parts of lives can be made only if the form of the distribution is known. B-3.2.2 Observed Reliability of a Repaired Item or Items The observed reliability is given by: i where for which the 9 = total number of occasions performance was observed or tested, r= total number of occasions when the item or items failed to perform satisfactorily for the whole duration of t", and t " = duration of the period for which the reliability of the item or items was observed or tested. B-3.2.2.1 If an item is repaired after a failure, then the next period t" starts with the moment of the resumption of the test or operation, even if the time of successful operation before the failure and the duration of the repair were shorter than t". For example, for the case illustrated in the following diagram: A 4 = 10, r = 3, R (t") 7 = E
(t")

for

and lljlk

where pi c O, vi < w and T = total cumulative r= k= h= 0= number of items observation; number without

of items added or withdrawn failing during the observation; for the

number of items which survive whole period w;

duration of the stated period in the lives of the items; duration for which the ith failed item was subjected to the stated stress conditions, within the period w; and

of a repaired item or items

-

(9-r)
4

vi = duration for which the jth non-failed item, added or withdrawn during the observations, was subjected to the stated stress conditions, within the period w.
NOTE - This definition is correct in itself for the case of items having constant failure rate. In other cases it may be necessary to refer the duration of stresses Cp, vj, CD)to the relevant parts of the lives of items.

B-3.2

Observed

Reliability

B-3.2.1 Observed Reliability of Non-repaired Items The observed reliability of non-repaired by: items is given

TZ=

number of items in the sample at time t,, and

r = number of items which failed during the period of time from t, to t2.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(6)

(7)

(6)

(9)

DENOTES

SATISFACTORY

STATE

OF THE

ITEM

DENOTES

UNSATISFACTORY

STATE

OF THE

ITEM

18

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999

1, 2, . . . . . 10 are the numbers of the consecutive occasions for which the performance was observed or tested.
This can be re-drawn:

B-4 ASSESSED RELIABILITY CHARACTERISTIC TERMS B-4.0 The values of the assessed reliability characteristics are the limits of confidence intervals, which may be one-sided or two-sided at stated confidence levels. They are based on the same observations as the corresponding observed characteristics, and they depend on the observations, the choice of confidence level and, generally, on assumed underlying distribution. The meaning of the confidence intervals, confidence levels, etc, are as defined in 7.0.1 of IS 1548. B-4.1 General Case - Assessed Reliability for Non-Repaired and Repaired Items

!kASION

I

DURATION OF SATISFACTORY PERFORMANCE

'
2

H

s
6

Assessed reliability values for both non-repaired items fobservations terminated at time t2) (see B-3.2.1) and repaired items may be obtained from the limits of confidence intervals for a binomial distribution, using recognized methods. When they are obtained in this way, they are independent of the form of the distribution (such as, Binomial and Poisson) of the times to failure during the stated period of time. B-4.2 General Case Assessed Mean Life

B-3.2.2.2 Great care should be exercised in applying this estimate to durations other than f" when the failure rate can be considered or suspected to be varying with the age of the item. B-3.3 Observed Failure Rate, Mean Time to Failure and Mean Time Between Failures The observed failure rate, mean time to failure and mean time between failures are estimated for the true values for the case of the exponential distribution. In this case, the observed given by: failure rate, i, may be

For non-repaired items, the assessed mean life may be based on the sample size and the observed times to failure of all the items in the sample, using accepted statistical methods for mean values of random variables. The underlying probability distribution used should be selected on the basis of relevant past experience and of the distribution of the lives of the items in the same. B-4.3 Special Case Constant Failure Rate

In the case of the exponential distribution of lives or times between failures (that is, constant failure rate); mL = m = mF =i(see B-2.6) Thus the assessed mean life, the assessed mean time between failures and the assessed mean time to failure are numerically equal. The confidence limits which give the assessed values may be derived from the x2 distribution. However, other approaches are also possible. B-4.3.1 For the one-sided interval, at confidence level (1 - a), the limits may be written ms a for the assessed mean time between failures and h scI for the assessed failure rate, where msp 5 m 5 O"

For repaired items, the observed mean time between failures, & is given by:

hi/r (Unbiased when observations fixed number of failures). B-3.4 Observed Mean Life items, the observed are terminated after a

For a sample of non-repaired mean life is given by:

and

0 I h I h s,a

ii,,=-&
n

1 "
r=,

where x. is the life of the ith item, and n is the size of the slamole. 19

B-4.3.2 For the two-sided interval at confidence level (1 - a), the limits may be written m,, and mM,=for the assessed mean time between failures and A,,,, and &,, a for the assessed failure rate,

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 where m m,a I m I mM,a and &l&aI 1 I &I,, surviving time 0; at time t;

N(0)= Number of items in a population at
TO,, f*J = True (average) failure rate for period

B-4.3.3 The assessed reliability may be obtained from the assessed mean time between failures or the assessed failure rate, using the expression R(r) = exp (- ht) = exp (-t/m) Let y(v) be the value of 2 (for v degrees of freedom) for which y is the probability that 2 > x',(v) that is, PW ' xz,Wl

of time t, to tz; z(t) = True instantaneous instant t; failure rate at

m,(t,,~)

= True mean life for a period of time
from t, to infinity;

E(x) = Expected value of X,
xi = Life of the ith item in a population

= Y

or sample;

The expressions

which shall be used to obtain the confidence limits depend on the criterion for stopping the observations. B-4.3.4 For a fixed value of r, and a cumulative time T which is observed when this value is reached: 1 2T

m(t,, t2) = True mean time between

failures for a period of time from rt to f2; of time from t, to f2;

m&t,, f2>= True mean time to failure for a period
A= True constant failure Numerical value; rate -

mL = True constant mean life value; m m,a= -AM(1 = 1

Numerical

1

2T XL* (2r) 2T

m=

True constant mean time between failure - Numerical value;

mF = True constant mean time to failureNumerical value; T= r= n= Cumulative Number time;

m M,a=~ - 3n.a= X:4(24 B-4.3.5 For a fixed cumulative time of observations, T, and a number of failures, r, which are observed during this time: 1 m E.(Iz-z h I.u 1 m

of failures;

2T
x: (2r + 2) 2T i i<q q

Number of items in a sample at the beginning of the period of observations; = Observed reliability for a period of time from t, to ri (time truncated); = Observed failure rate (constant);

mrl= -hM,_ = &(2r+2) 1
h m,u

2T
Xtdm)

m M,X z-z

iiL = Observed mean life (constant failure rate); rit= Observed mean time between failure (constant failure rate); to failure of the

B-5 LIST OF SYMBOLS USED IN THIS ANNEX B-5.1 Only the symbols which are repeated more than once are listed here:

sir; = Observed mean time (constant failure rate); xyv>

x=
X=

Continuous

random

variable;

Value of X (usually the life of an item in this standard):
=

= Value of x2 (for v degrees freedom) for which r is probability that x2> x_i(v) = Confidence level, c;

F(x)

Cumulative of x;

distribution density

function of x;

1-o

m> = Probability t = Time;
R(t) = Reliability

function

for time t;

PQ

= Probability of event E; N(t) = Number of items in a population
20

m,, m M,< = m Ma 1 h ".(I h m.o = h Mr 1 c=

Assessed constant mean time between failures at confidence level 1 -a (single, lower and upper limits); Assessed constant failure rate at confidence level l-a (single, lower and upper limits); and Confidence level, 1 -a.

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999

ANNEX C ( Clause 2.1.1.6)
RELATIONS BETWEEN PERFECT, FAILURE AND FAULT CONCEPTS Fault Critical fault Non-critical fault Major fault Minor fault Misuse fault Mishandling fault Inherent weakness fault Design fault Manufacturing fault Ageing fault Program-sensitive fault Data sensitive fault Complete fault Partial fault Persistent fault Intermittent fault Fault Determinate fault Indeterminate fault Latent fault Systematic fault

Defect Critical defect Non-critical defect

Failure Critical failure Non-critical failure

-

Design defect Manufacturing -

defect

Misuse failure Mishandling failure Inherent weakness failure Design failure Manufacturing failure Ageing failure Sudden failure Gradual failure Cataleptic failure Relevant failure Non-relevant failure Primary failure Secondary failure Failure cause Failure mechanism -

Bug

-

21

IS 1885 (Part 39) : 1999 LIST OF SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS

W)

Instantaneous

failure rate

Vri9`2)
PW PO,? f2>
A

Mean failure rate [in time interval (t,, t,)] Instantaneous repair rate

Mean repair rate [(in time interval (r,, r,)] Asymptotic Instantaneous Asymptotic availability availability mean availability [(in time interval (t,, f,)]

A(t) i i ($9 $1
FMEA FMECA FTA MADT MART MAD MDT MLD MMH MRT MTBF (in Eng) MTTFF MTIR MDT

Mean availability

Fault modes and effect analysis Fault modes, effects and criticality Fault tree analysis Mean accumulated down time analysis

Mean active repair time Mean administrative Mean down time Mean logistic delay Maintenance man-hours delay

Mean repair time Mean operating time between failures

Mean time to first failure Mean time to restoration Mean up time Number Reliability Asymptotic unavailability of failures [(in time interval (I,, r,)]

NO,, 1,)
RO,, `J

u

Instantaneous unavailability Asymptotic mean unavailability Mean unavailability [in time interval Instantaneous failure intensity

(t,, f,)]

Mean failure intensity

[in time interval

(t,, t,)]

22

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. LTD 3 (1349)

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Central Offices : Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17 323 38 41 85 61 91 20

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110 002

1

Eastern

: l/l4 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi CALCUTTA 700 054 : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022

{

337 84 99,337 337 86 26,337

Northern

I Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 1 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, MUMBAI 400 093 Marol, Andheri (East)

60 38 43 602025

235 02 16,235 04 42 235 15 19,235 23 15

832 92 95,832 78 58 8327891,8327892 1

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed

at : Prabhat OEset Press, New Delhi-2

