**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 10025 (1981) : Polish liquid (white) for canvas footwear 
[CHD 23: Lac, Lac Products and Polishes] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 10025 • 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
POLISH, LIQUID ( WHITE ), FOR 
CANVAS FOOTWEAR 



UDC M)V92 1 -404-202 : fi8j'3B'2 







^ebrumAS^ ' 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 AUGUST 1992 

TO 

IS 10025:1981 SPECIFiCATiON FOR POLISH, LIQUID 

(WHITE), FOR CANVAS FOOTWEAR 

{Page 4, clause 33) — Subsiitule ibe following Tor tbc existing clause: 

'33 Colour — Tbc liquid shall be wbilc in colour. It may be tinted using a 
suitable colourant and nuy ronlain an optical brigtitening agent for perceived 
wbjienjngcffccl.' 

( Page 5, clause 4.1 ) — Substitute tbc following for tbc existing clause : ^ 

'4.1 Tacking — Tbc liquid sball be supplied in sound clean containcis made 
of glass or plastic. Tbc package may be of 120 g or 1(X) ml capacity or as agreed 
to between tbe supplier and ibc purchaser. A suitable fell or sponge applicator 
may also be provided. 

4.1.1 Tbc containers may be packed in lots in cartons and Ibc cartons in turn 
shall be packed m card -board or wooden boxes or as agreed to between tbc 
purchaser and ibc supplier.' 

{Page 6, clause A-1.1 ) — Insert tbe following at tbe end of tbe clause: 

'The clean liquid shall almost be colourless.' 



( CUD 023 ) 



KepiogTiphy UaiU BIS, New Oellu, lodU 



IS : 10025 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECrFICATION FOR 

POLISH, LIQUID ( WHITE ), FOR 

CANVAS FOOTWEAR 

Polishes Sectional Committee, CDC 48 

Chairman Representing 

Dk D K. Muhthy Mmi->trv of Defencu ( DGI ) 

MemieTi 

Shki O. p. GuPTi ( Alternate to 
Dr D, K. Murthy ) 
Si!i!r P. B. Ghosh Dastidati Bata India Lid, Batanagar 

Shri SuNii. Sarkah ( Alternate ") 
ShkiR. D. Kawatra Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shui P. MijuMDBR National Test House, Calcutta 

Shhi p. K CttAKBABORTY ( Alternate ^ 
Shui B S Nahayana Reckitt & Colman of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri D. Dasgupta { Alternate ) 
Sniii G. Natarajan Iht Wa\pol Industries Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri R. P Gu¥tk \ Alternate J 
Dk Rajindeii L m. Aniar Industries, Delhi 

Represemt \TiTE Cientral Lea thc-r Research Imtitule ( CSIR), Madras 

Shhi P SATYAifAHAYANAS Developuient Commissioner, Small Scale Indusines, 

New Delhi 
SiiBi Shyam GiMBHiR Billy Boot Polish Co, Delhi 

Sum Din Dayal Sharma ( AlleriiaU ) 
Db Habi Bhagwak, Director General, ISI ( Ex-i^io Member ) 

Director ( Chem ) 

Secretarji 

Shri S. Dasoipta 
Deputy Director ( Chem ), ISI 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Cofifright 1982 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Thii publication is protected under the Induin Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act 



IS : 10025 - 1981 



( CoHtmaid from page 1 ) 

Footwear Polishes Subcommittee, CDC 48 : 1 



Coniitner 
Shri G S. Rama Iyek 

Members 
Shbi S. C. Bakshi 

Shri D. Da3 GurTA 
ShbiJoga SinQh 
Shki S, K. Mitba 
Da Rajindeh Lal 

Ria'RESENT A TIVB 

Dr a. K. Seh 

Shri P. N Aoakwatj 



RepTtsenting 
Central Leather Research Institute ( CSIR ), Madras 



Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Reckitt & Colman of India Ltd, Calcutta 
Delhi State Police, Delhi 
Baca India Ltd, Batanagar 
Amar Industries, Delhi 
Tanneries & Footwear Corporation of India Ltd, 

Kanpur 
Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 
Alternate ) 



IS : 10025 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
POLISH, LIQUID ( WHITE ), FOR 
CANVAS FOOTWEAR 

0. FOREWORD 

0,1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 30 November 1981, after the draft finalized by the Polishes 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 

0.2 Indigenous production of liquid canvas footwear polish for white 
canvas shoes is developing rapidly. In order to help the manufacturers 
to prepare a product of acceptable quality, the Committee has prepared 
this standard. 

0.3 Clauses 3.3 and 4.1 of this standard calls for agreement between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding ivhether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded ofTin accord- 
ance with IS : 2-li60*. The iiumber of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the ipecified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 



1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and the methods of samp- 
ling and test for liquid polish suitable for application to white canvas 
footwear. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 8171- 
19761 shall apply. 



•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revued ) 

tGlossary of terras relating to polishes and other related materials. 



IS : 10025 - 1981 

3. REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 GompoBition — The polish shall consist essentially of a suspension 
of finely divided particles in liquid media containing suitable binder. It 
shall be free from dirt and materials deleterious to cotton fabric or likely 
to cause irritation to the skin. 

3.2 Odour — The liquid shall not have a disagreeable odour. 

3.3 Colour — The liquid shall be white in colour. In the case of bulk 
supplies, the colour shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and the 
supplier. 

3.4 Consistency — The liquid shall be a smooth homogeneous mass, 
free from lumps. It should be pourable and spreadable evenly in thin 
layers at all normal temperatures of usage. 

3.5 Stability of Suspension — The liquid polish shall pass the test 
as prescribed in A-1. 

3.6 Applicability — When applied to the surface of cleaned canvas 
footwear free from dirt or gritty material, the polish shall spread evenly 
'ihd the coated surface shall dry in a reasonable time under normal 

room condition, as prescribed in A-2, The coated surface shall show 
no sign of deformity. 

3,6.1 The dried film of polish on the canvas surface shall be non- 
tacky, free from cracks or flaking and shall exhibit a smooth, white 
surface which is resistant to gentle rubbing by dry fingers or a soft 
brush. 

3.7 Water Soluble Colours — The liquid shall not contain any water 
soluble colours, when tested as prescribed in A-4, 

3.8 The material shall also comply with tlie requirements given in 
Table 1 . 





TABLE 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR POLISH, UQUID (WHITE), 
FOR CANVAS FOOTWEAR 


Si. 
No. 


Cll Ml Al"rElllS.Tir ReQUI KKMENT 


Metbou oi- TiiS'i, 

Rep to Cl No. in 

Appendix A 


(1) 


12) (3) 


(4) 


') 


Non-volatile matter, percent 20 
by mass. Mm 


A-3 


ii) 


pU 6 5 to 8 5 


A-4 



IS : 10025 - 1981 

3.9 Keeping Quality — The product shall show no signs of microbial 

growth on the surface of the liquid or on the surface of the container. It 
shall retain the properties specified in this standard for one year from 
the date of manufacture, when stored in original sealed containers under 
cover at atmospheric temperature ( 21 to 38°C ). 

4. PACKING AND MARKING 

4.1 Packing — The liquid shall be supplied in sound clean containers, 
preferably of 200 ml capacity having a screw cap to prevent evaporation. 
A suitable felt or sponge applicator may also be provided. The 
containers shall normally be repacked in lots of 48 containers or other- 
wise as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 

4.2 Marking — The containers shall be legibly marked with the 
following: 

a) Name of the material; -« 

b) Manufacturer's name and trade-mark, if any; 

c) Net mass of the material when packed; 

d) Month and year of manufacture; 

e) Batch No /Code No., 

f ) Direction for use and storage; and 

g) Other provisions of Packaging Commodity Act. 

4.2.1 The container may also be marked with the LSI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The usp i>f the ISI Cerufication Mart is governed by the provuions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regu- 
lations made thereunder The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the require- 
ments nf that standard under a weiJ-defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
rontrol which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI 
marked products ale also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors 
may be obtoined from the Indian Standards Institution. 

5. SAMPLING 

5.1 The method of drawing representative samples of the material and 
the criteria for conformity shall be as prescribed in Appendix B. 



IS : 10025 ■ 1981 

APPENDIX A 

( Clauses 3.3, 3.6, 3,7, and Table 1 ) 

METHODS OF TEST FOR POLISH, LiQpID 
(WHITE), FOR CANVAS FOOTWEAR 

A-O. QUALITY OF REAGENTS 

A-0.1 Unless specified otiierwise, puie chemicals and distilled water 
( see IS : 1070-1977* ) shall be used for tests. 

Note — 'Puri.' chemicals' shall moan chemicals that do not contain inpurities 
which affect the results of anaKsis 

A-1. TEST FOR STABILITY OF SUSPENSION 

A-1.1 Procedure — Stir the contents ofthe container and tiansfer to a 
<;lear stoppered graduated glass cylinder of 100 ml capacity. Shake the 
liquid gently lo prevent frothing to disperse the pigments uniformly. 
Allow the cylinder lo stand on the bench at room temperature for 
6 hours. The liquid shall not show separation of clear liquid at the top 
and the pigments .shall not settle down leaving more than a 3 ml layer 
of clear liquid at the lop. 

A.2. TEST FOR APPLICABILITY 

A-2.1 Procedure — Use a canvass cloth measuimg approximately 
100 X. 100 mm free from dust and dirt for the test Appiv the liquid 
polish in a thin film to the smooth side of llie canvas wjlh a felt or 
sponge applicator evenly. Allow the polish to dry for 6 houri at room 
temperature. Examine the surface for tackiness, freedom from cracks 
and/or flaking 

A-2<2 The dried film shall not show undue signs of pigment removal 
when gently rubbed with lingers, or a soft brush. 

A-3. DETERMINATION OF NON-VOLATILE MATTER 

A-3.1 Pracednre — Weigh accurately about 5 g of the well mixed 
sample in a tared flat bottommed dish of about 80 mm diameter. First 
heat to dryness on a steam bath and then in an air oven to constant 
mass at lOo'C. 



•Specification forwatei forgtneial laboratory use ( second revisioa ). 

6 



IS : 10025 - 1981 
A-3.2 Calculation 

Non-volatile matter content, ( M — M ) 
percent by mass = \-,f ,,-{- X 100 

where 

Ml = mass in g of the dish, 

M3 = mass in g of the dish and poiishj and 

Mj = mass in g of the dish and the residue. 

A-4. DETERMINATION OF pH AND TEST FOR SOLUBLE 
GOLOtJRING MATTER 

A-4.1 Procedure — Dilute 5 ml of the liquid polish with water to 
100 ml and shake the mixture unifocmly in a stoppered glass cylinder. 
Allow to stand for i hour and measure the pH of the liquid using a 
standard /H indicator paper or a. pH meter. 

A-4,1.1 Filter or centrifuge the liquid obtained in A-4.1. The cleais*. 
fluid shall be colourless. 



APPENDIX B 

{ Clause 5.1 ) 

SAMPLING OF CANVAS FOOTWEAR POLISH, 
LIQUID ( WHITE ) 

B-1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF SAMPLING 

B-1.0 In drawingj preparing, storing and handling of test samples, the 
follovvintr precautions and directions shall be observed. 

B-1.1 Samples shall be taken in a place not exposed to dust or soot. 

B-1.2 The sampling instmmeni shall be clean and dry when used. 

B-1.3 Precautions shall be taken to protect the samples, the material 
being sampled, the sampling instrument ani the containers for samples 
from adventitious cantamination. 

B-1.4 Samples shall be placed in clean, dry and air-tight glass containers 
or other suitable containers on which the material has no action. 

B-l.S The sample containers shall be of such size that they are almost 
completely filled by the sample. 



IS 1 10025 - 1981 

B-1.6 Each sample conlainer shall be tealed air-tight after filling and 
marked with full details of sampling, the date of sampling and the 
month and year of manufacture of the mateiiai, 

B-1.7 Samples shall be stored in such a manner that the temperature of 
the materia) does not vary unduly from (he normal (emperalure. 

B-2. SCALE OF SAMPLING 

B-2<0 For determining conformity of a consignment to this specification, 
samples shall be selected so as to be representative of the consignment. 
Samples drawn in compliance with an agreement between the purchaser 
and the supplier shall be held to be representative of the consignment. 
In case of dispute, the folloviing scheme is recommended to serve as 
guide. 

B-2.1 Lot — A]\ the containers in a single consignment of the material 
drawn from the same batch of manufacture and the same size, shall 
constitute a lot. If a consignment is declared or known to consist of 
different batches of manufacture or different sizes of contamers, the 
containers belonging to the same batch and size shall be grouped 
together and each group shall constitute a separate lot. 

B>2.1.1 Samples shall be tested for each lot for ascertaining conformity 
of the material to the requirements of this specification. 

B-2.2 The number of containers (n) to be chosen from a lot shall depend 
upon the size of the lot (JV) and shall be in accordance with Table 2. 



TABi^ 2 NUMaER OF CONTAISERS TO B£ SELECTED 

Lot SjZE Xo orCo>'T'iM; s to 

BE .StLfETEIJ 

jV n 

ti; (2) 

Vp to 500 10 

501 to 1000 15 

1 001 and above 20 



B-2.3 These containers shall be chosen at random from the lot and in 
order to ensure the randomness of selection, a random number table 

8 



IS : 10025 - 199] 

shall be used. In case such tables are not available, the following 
procedure shall be adopted: 

Arrange all the containers in the lot in a synematic manner and 
starting from any container, count them as 1 , 2, 3. , up to r and so 
On, where r is the integral part of Njn. Every rth container thus 
counted shall be withdrawn to give sample for test. 

Note — For details of this procedurp as well 3s other methods of random selection, 
reference may be made to IS 4905-19C8*. 

B.3. PREPARATION OF COMPOSITE SAMPLE 

B-3.1 Shake well each of the containers selected according to B-2<3 and 
pour out some quantity of liquid such that the total quantity obtained 
from all the containers provides rnaterial sufficient [or all the tests 
( about 500 g ). Thoroughly mix the material drawn from the selected 
containers so as to form composite sample. Divide the composite 
iample into three parts, each sufficient for carrying out the intended tests 
and transfer themtothe clean and dry sample containers. Send oneeach 
of these to the purchaser and the supplier. Reserve the third composite 
sample as referee sample bearing the ieals of the purchaser and the 
supplier. Keep the refeiee sample at a place agreed to between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 

B-4. NUMBER OF TESTS AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

B-4.1 Tests for all the characteristics shall be done on the composite 
Sample. 

B-4.2 The tot shall be declared as conformins^ to this specification if the 
test results satisfy the corresponding requirements laid down in this 
spedij cation. 



♦Methods for random sampling. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 



VnfU 



QfTANrCTY 


^J^?^T 


SvMnoL 


Length 


metre 


m 


Mass 


kilogram 


kg 


Time 


serond 


s 


Electric curretil 


ampere 


A 


Thermodynamic 


Itelvin 


K 


temperature 






Luminom intensity 


candela 


cd 


Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 


Supplementary Unlta 






QjJ/iNTrXY 


Unit 


SVMBOI. 


Plane angle 


radian 


rad 


Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 


Derived Units 






«^ QcTANTiry 


UwrT 


Symbol 


Force 


newton 


N 


Energy 


joule 


J 


Power 


watt 


W 


Flux 


webei 


Wb 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


Frequency 


hertz 


Ha 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


Preffiure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 



DEFIfriTtON 

1 N = 1 kg.m/s" 
1 J = 1 Nm 

1 W - 1 J/s 

1 Wb = 1 V.S 
I T = 1 Wb/m> 

1 Hz = 1 c/s (3-') 
1 S - 1 A/V 

1 V - 1 W/A 
I Pa - I N/m' 



PU8L|6aT|0NS of INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
INDIAN STANDARDS 

Over 10 000 Indian Standards covering various subjects have t>e«f) 
lisued so far. Of these, the standards belonging to the Chemical 
Group fall under the following categories: 

Acids 

Adh«sives 

Alcohols and illlad pfoducti 



Alkalis 

Brushware 

Cararnicuvara, enamslvvaia and 

laboratory porcelain 
Chemical hazards and safety 
Chsmicals, inorganic ( miacelianeoja ) 
Chemicals, organic ( miscsllsraous ) 
Coal and coke 
Coal carboiiizarion producta 
Coaled fabrics 
CotmeTics and torlal aoodi 
Dental mfltenals 
Drying oils 
Dye intermediates 
Electroplating chemicals 
Explosive and pyrotechnic mainiiali 
Fsrtllizere 

Fillers, sioDDsrs and outties 
Footwear 

Glass and glassware 
Industrial gases 
Inks BniJ allied producta 
(.aboratory glassware thermomeleri 

and related apparatus 
Lac and Isc products 
Leather, leather goods and leather 

dressings 

OTHER 



Lintets and allied products 
Lubricants and related products 
Oil pastes 
Oils and tats, oleaginoua seeds and 

rtuits 
Painters' materials ( miscellaneous ) 
Paper and lis products 
Paper and pulp board packaging 

materials 
Pertumary materials, natural and 

synthetic 
Petroleum and patroleum products 
Photogrsphic ctiemicali 
Pigments and extanden 
Plastics 
Polishes 
Printing inks 

Heariy mixeO paints and enamels 
Robber and rubber products 
SoHPE snd other surfacs activa 

agents 
lannirig matsriala and allied 

products 
Thermal insulaiion maioridls 
Thinners and solvunls 
Varnishes and lacquars 
Water and water trestmenr 
Water based painis 
Unclassified 



PUBLICATIONS 

ISI Bjiletin ( Published Every Month ) 

Single Copy 

Annual Suhsctiption ... 
Standards Monthly Additions 

Single Copy 

Annual Sjlfiscription 
Annual Reports ( from 1248-4& Onwards ) 
ISI Handbook, 19S0 



Rs 1' 



Rs 


4-M 


Rs 


K-« 


Re 


0-Jo 


Rs 


jOfl 


■OS to TOt 


Rs 


KS-oo 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Manak Bfiavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Maig, NEW DELHI 110002 



Telephone* : IS 80 21, 27 01 31 

fiegional Offices 

Western : Novelty Chambers, Grant Road 
Eastern : 5 Chownnghee Approach 
Southern 'GIT. Camous. Adyar 
Northern ; B69, Phase Vil 



Telegrams 



Manaksa 

Tele. 



BOMBAY 400007 37 

CALCUTTA 700072 27 

MADRAS 600020 41 

SAS NAGAR 

( MOHALl ) 160051 



fisthe 
phone 
97 29 
50 90 
24 42 



AHMADABAD 380001 
BANGALORE 560002 



Branch Officts: 

'Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur 

•F' Block, Unity 8ldg, Narasimharaja Square 

Gangotri Complex, Bhadbhada Road, T.T, Nagar BHOPAL 462003 

22E Kalpana Area BHUBANESHWAR 751014 

6-8-56CL N. Gupta Marg HYDERABAD 500001 

R 14 Yudhistei Marg, C Scheme JAIPUR 302005 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar KANPUR 208005 

Patliputia Industrial Estate PATNA 800013 

Hantex BIdg { 2nd Floor ), RIy Station Road TRIVANDRUM 695001 



2 03 91 
2 7«49 

6 27 ie 

B36 27 
22 10 83 
6 98 32 
4 72 92 
6 28 08 
3227 

Friii(i:d ai Fnutuifrsph, riew Delhi, Indid 



