**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 3800 (1983): Batting Gloves [PCD 22: Sports Goods] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Tift ^FTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 685-43 : 68563584 



IS : 3800 -1983 




Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
BATTING GLOVES 

( First Revision ) 



( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 



1. Scope — Covers materials, dimensional and constructional requirements for cricket batting gloves. 

2. Dimensions — Covered in Fig. 1 are optional and figure is for guidance only. 



o 

Q. 
<0 



250 mm 




FIG. 1 BATTING GLOVES 



3. Materials — Shall conform to Table 1 . 



Sf No. 



Item 



TABLE 1 MATERIALS FOR MANUFACTURE OF BATTING GLOVES 

Material Requirements 



i) Glove body 



a) White sheepskin 



b) White knitted fabric 



ii) Protection 



Spiked rubber 



Chrome tanned or semichrome tanned 
sheepskin, having effective and non- 
toxic fungicide. It shall show no 
growth of mildew when examined 
visually and shall be fat lacquered or 
oiled or both and grain side shall be 
smooth finished. (See LP : 2 of |S : 
6191-1971 Methods of micro- 
biological colour fastness and micro- 
scopical tests for leather.) 

Yarn used in the manufacture of 
knitted fabric shall be evenly and 
uniformly twisted. The fabric shall 
have a uniform texture. It shall 
generally, comply with the require- 
ments given in 3.1. 

The base rubber shall have a mini- 
mum thickness of 1 mm and the 
spikes height of 10 mm (excluding 
the thickness of base rubber). 



Adopted 31 October 1983 



© January 1984, ISI 



Gr 2 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARS 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 3800 -1983 

3.1 Knitted Fabric — It shall also generally comply with the following requirements. 

Count of Yarn {Approx) Number of Waies Number of Courses 

Universal {Cotton) per 5 cm per 5 cm 

15tex (39 s) 104 112±2 

3.2 The thickness of sheepskin at palm and back of gloves shall be 0'8 mm minimum and for fingers 
0'6 mm minimum. 

3.3 The thread for stitching of gloves shall be polyamide/cotton core-spun having following require- 
ments: 

TkL — 50 

Nominal Count and Construction — Nm 50/2 Z/Finishing Twist 

finish — Glace 
Single Thread— 2*6 kg 
Breaking Strength 

4. Requirements— Spiked rubber or padded sponge rubber sheepskin rolls shall be secured to the 
backs of all fingers (including thumb) of the right-hand glove but only on four fingers of the left-hand 
glove. The right-hand glove shall have a rubber tip on the thumb. The gloves shall be tight on the 
hands and fit the hands and the roots of the fingers of the hands properly. The open type gloves shall 
have elastic-cum-velcro straps and the closed fabric type gloves shall have elastic bands at the wrists. 
The stitching shall be strong and the general workmanship shall be of good quality. The gloves shall 
be comfortable to wear and shall give freedom of movement to the fingers and the wrists of the bats- 
men. On the left-hand glove, padding on the thumb shall not be provided and the padding on the 
fingers shall be lowered by about 30 mm so as to leave the top phalanges of the glove without padding. 

4.1 In the closed-type gloves, the padded sides of the glove may be made of knitted cotton lace for 
ventilation, at the option of the purchaser. 

5. Marking — Each batting glove shall be legibly and indelibly marked on the inside of the wrist or at 
a suitable place outside, with the manufacturer's name, initials or registered trade-mark. 

5.1 ISI Certification Marking — Details available with Indian Standards Institution. 

6. Packing— Batting gloves shall be kept in pairs, tied together and packed in accordance with the 
best trade practice or according to the instructions of the purchaser. 

7. Sampling — Sampling and criteria for acceptance for batting gloves shall be as agreed to between 
the purchaser and the supplier. A recommonded scheme for the same is given in Appendix A. 



A P P E N D I X A 

(Clause 7) 

RECOMMENDED SAMPLING SCHEME AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY FOR BATTING GLOVES 

A-1. LOT 

A-1.1 In any consignment all the pairs of batting gloves of the same pattern and manufactured 
from the same raw materials shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. 

A-2. SELECTION OF SAMPLE 

A-2.1 The number of pairs of batting gloves to be selected at random for inspection from each lot 
shall be in accordance with col 1 and 2 of Table 2. 



IS : 3800- 1983 



TABLE 2 NUMBER OF PAIRS OF BATTING GLOVES TO BE SELECTED AND 
PERMISSIBLE NUMBER OF DEFECTIVE PAIRS 

( Clauses A-2.1 and A-3.1 ) 

Number of Pairs of Number of Pairs of Batting Number of Permissible 

Batting Gloves in Gloves to be Selected Defective Pairs 

the Lot in the Sample 

(1) (2) (3) 

Up to 25 3 

26 to 50 5 

51 „ 100 8 

101 ,,150 13 

151 „ 300 20 1 

301 „ 500 32 2 

501 and above 50 3 

A-3. NUMBER OF TESTS AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

A-3.1 Each pair of batting gloves selected in accordance with A-2.1 and Table 2, shall be 
inspected for all the requirements of materials, manufacture and dimensions. A pair shall be considered 
as defective if it fails to satisfy any one or more of the requirements of the specification. The lot shall 
be declared as conforming to the requirements of this specification if the number of defective pairs in 
the sample does not exceed the corresponding permissible number of defective pairs given in col 3 of 
Table 2. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard was first published in 1966. The present revision has been taken up to incorporate 
certain modifications brought to the notice of the Sectional Committee while implementing the Indian 
Standard. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



