**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



^^Eti^^tt^n f im^NS ^g^T^^i ra^g^^uiKS a raaa^ 



IS 1116 (1994) 
10: Glassware] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



Glass globes for hurricane lanterns [CHD 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^^PTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 1116 : 1994 __ 
REAFFIRMED 

( Tf WT ^fterw ) 

Indian Standard 

GLASS GLOBES FOR HURRICANE LANTERNS — 

SPECIFICATION 

( First Revision ) 



UDC 666-1757 : 621 -32675 



© BIS 1994 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

February 1994 Price Group 3 



Glassware Sectional Committee, CHD 010 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the 
draft finalized by the Glassware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 

This Indian Standard was first published in 1957, at the instance of the Tariff Commission and 
Development Wing, Ministry of Commerce and based on G/LAMP-25A 'Specification for 
hurricane lanterns, storm and weather proof, issued by Ministry of Works, Housing and Supply, 
Government of India and IND/GS/343 'Lanterns, hurricane, globes— clear, ruby and green' r 
issued by Ministry of Defence, Government of India. 

Semiautomatic machines are being used now in the manufacture of glass globes for hurricane 
lanterns. To cover the present trade practice and to align this standard with the defence 
requirements, this revision was taken up. The thickness of glass and weight have been reduced, 
and maximum absorption of light has been increased. 

The composition of the Committee and the Subcommittee responsible for the formulation of this 
standard is given in Annex E. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded 
off in accordance with IS 2:1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The 
number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JANUARY 2006 

TO 

IS 1116:1994 GLASS GLOBES FOR HURRICANE 

LANTERNS —SPECIFICATION 

( First Revision ) 

( Page 1, clause 2 ) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

2 REFERENCE 

The standard listed below contain provisions which through reference in this 
text, constitute provisions of this standard At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below : 

IS No. Title 

1382 1 98 1 Glossary of terms relating to glass and glassware (first revision )' 

( Page 2, clause 6.2.3 ) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

'6.2.3 BIS Certification Mark 

Each glass globe may also be marked with the Standard Mark. 

6.2.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of Bureau of 
Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
The details of conditions under which the licence for the use of Standard Mark 
may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau 
of Indian Standards.' 



( CHD 10 ) 

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



IS 1116 : 1994 



Indian Standard 



GLASS GLOBES FOR HURRICANE LANTERNS — 

SPECIFICATION 



( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 



This standard covers the requirements and 
methods of sampling and test for glass globes 
for hurricane lanterns. 

2 REFERENCE 

The following Indian Standard is a necessary 
adjunct to this standard: 

IS No. Title 

1382 : 1981 Glossary of terms relating to 

glass industry (first revision ) 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 1382 : 1981 and the following shall 
apply. 

3.1 Body Diameter 

Maximum diameter of the body. 

3.2 Total Height 

Overall height of the glass globes for lanterns. 

3.3 Neck Collar Height 

The height of the flat portion of the neck. 

4 TYPES 

The globes shall be of two types, namely, Type 1 
for glass globes of spherical shape and Type 2 for 
glass globes of conical shape. 

5 REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 Dimensions and Mass 

5.1.1 The shape and dimensions of the two types 
of globes shall be as given in Fig. 1 and 2 
respectively. A bead may be permitted at the 
top of the globe provided that the total height 
of the globe and top neck collar height are 
maintained. 

5.1.2 Nominal mass of the two types and the 
tolerance on mass shall be as follows: 

Type Nominal Weight ( g ) Tolerance ( g ) 

1 85 ±14 

2 150 ± 25 

5.2 Resistance to Thermal Shock 

5.2.1 The globes shall pass thermal shock test 
given in Annex A. 



5.2.2 The globs shall also pass the chilling test 
given in Annex B. 

5.3 Transmittance 

5.3.1 The globes shall be transparent and show 
no apparent colour. They shall have a trans- 
mittance of 92 percent, Min of visible light 
when tested in accordance with Annex C. 

5.3.2 In case coloured globes are required, 
their transmittance shall be as agreed to between 
the purchaser and the manufactures. 

5.4 Manufacture 

5.4.1 The globe shall be symmetrical on their 
long axis. The top and the base shall be 
reasonably round, with a planity of not more 
than 0*4 mm. The body shall be of uniform 
thickness. 

5.5 Workmanship and Finish 
5.5.1 Bubbles 

a) Open bubbles or bubbles which can be 
burst with finger nail on any part of the 
globe is not acceptable. 




1.2 TO 2.0- 

AIl dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Glass Globe, Type 1 



IS 1116 : 1994 



1.8 TO 3.5 




140+3 



mm 



102±1 



AH dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 2 Glass Globe, Type 2 

b) Closed bubbles of the following sizes may 
be allowed: 

Bubble Size Max No. Allowed 

( Diameter ) 
mm 

Less than 0*5 5 per cm 2 of surface 

0*5 to 1 4 per cm 2 of surface 

More than 1 to 2 2 per cm 2 of surface 

The bubbles may be checked with unaided eye/ 
magnifying glass. 

5.5.2 Cords and Striae 

Glass globes shall be free from such cords and 
striae which obscure transmission of light. 

5.5.3 Stones 

Glass globes shall be free from metallic particles 
or stones not fully covered by glass. A 
maximum of two stones fully covered with glass 
may be allowed in a globe. 



5.5.4 Adhered Glass 

A piece of glass or small foreign particle welded 
to the globe surface which cannot be removed 
without causing a chip or crack, the maximum 
acceptable size shall be 075 mm and maximum 
number of such defects shall not exceed three. 

5.5.5 Defects in Blowing 

Glass globes shall be as free as possible from 
deformities shape and such other defects as 
mould mark, scratches and depressions. 



5.5.6 Finishing 

The globes shall have a smooth finish and 
be free from cracks. 



shall 



5.5.7 Annealing 

Glass globes shall be reasonably free from 
strains. The strain may be checked by a 
polariscope. 

6 PACKING AND MARKING 

6.1 Packing 

Glass globes shall be packed as agreed to 
between the purchaser and the supplier in such a 
way that there is no damage to the globes. 

6.2 Marking 

6.2.1 Each globe shall be legibly and indelibly 
marked with an indication of source of 
manufacture. 

6.2.2 A label showing: 

a) Batch number, 

b) Lot number, 

c) Date of manufacture, and 

d) Type of globe. 

6.2.3 The use of the Standard Mark is governed 
by the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made 
thereunder. The details of conditions under 
which the licence for the use of Standard Mark 
may be granted to manufacturers or producers 
may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 

7 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY 



The sampling and judging 
conformity shall be done in 
Annex D. 



the criteria for 
accordance with 



IS 1116: 1994 



ANNEX A 
(Clause 5 2.1 ) 

THERMAL SHOCK TEST 



A-l PROCEDURE 



The globes shall be heated in an oven to 120°C 
for atleast 20 minutes. They shall then be 



rapidly removed and immediately sprayed on 
the side with a finely divided spray of water at 
room temperature. The globes shall not 
develop cracks. 



ANNEX B 
( Clause 5.2.2 ) 

CHILLING TEST 



B-l PROCEDURE 



The globes shall be well cleaned and kept 
immersed for 5 minutes in boiling distilled water 
in a closed vessel having a small steam vent. 
They shall be kept suspended in water so that 



they do not come in contact with the walls of 
the container. They shall then be removed and 
immediately dipped in cold water having a 
temperature of 0°C to 1°C. On completion of 
the test, the globes shall not show any sign of 
crack, breakage, fading in colour or other damage. 



ANNEX C 
( Clause 5.3.1 ) 

LIGHT TRANSMISSION TEST 



C-l PROCEDURE 

Two sub-standard lamps of approximately the 
same luminous intensity shall be mounted on the 
standard photometer bench which is used for 
determining the hoiizontal luminous intensity of 
lanterns. One of the two sub-standard lamps 
shall be completely covered with the glass globe 
and its luminous intensity measured against the 



other sub-standard lamp. The transmission of 
the second lamp, expressed as percentage of 
original luminous intensity, shall be taken as the 
light transmission of glass globe. 

C-l.l This test shall be carried out before and 
after the thermal shock test ( see Annex A ). 
There shall not be any variation in the two 
readings for absorption of light. 



ANNEX D 
( Clause 7 ) 

METHODS OF SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 



D-l METHODS OF SAMPLING 

D-l.l For the purpose of sampling, all packages 
containing glass globes belonging to one batch 
of manufacture shall be grouped together to 
constitute a lot. 

D-1.2 Depending on the lot size ( see col 1 of 
Table 1 ) a number of packages shall be selected 
randomly from the lot in accordance with col 2 
of Table 1 for drawing samples for test. An 
equal number of glass globes shall then be at 
random selected from each of the selected 
packages so as to make a total number of globes 
same as specified in the appropriate column of 
Table 1 ( see col 3 ). This total number of 
globes shall constitute a sample, 

D-2 CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

All the globes so selected in the sample shall be 
subjected to requirements given in clause 5. A 



globe failing to meet any one or more require- 
ments shall be termed as defective. The lot shall 
be considered conforming to the requirements of 
this standard if the number of defective globes 
is less than or equal to the corresponding accep- 
tance number given in Table 1, otherwise not. 

Table 1 Number of Samples for Tests 

( Clause D-1.2 ) 



Lot Size 

( No. of 

Packages ) 


Sample Size 
( No. of 
Packages ) 


No 

t — 


. of Globes and Acceptance 
Number 


No. of 
Globes 


> 
Acceptance 
Number 


(1) 


(2) 






O) 


(4) 


Up to 8 


2 






4 





9-15 


3 






6 





16-25 


5 






10 





26-50 


8 






16 


1 


51-100 


13 






26 


2 


101 and above 20 






40 


3 



IS 1116 : 1994 



ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Glassware Sectional Committee, CHD 010 



Chairman 

DR K. P. SRIVASrAVA 



Members 

Shri N. K. Aoarwal 

Shri P. K. Agarwal ( Alternate I ) 

Shri Sanjay Aoarwal ( Alternate II ) 
Shri P. K. Chatterjee 

Shri M. M. Raktavade ( Alternate ) 
Chief Chemist 

Dy Chief Chemist ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. M. Chopra 

Shri K. K. Man ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. P. Singh Dhakarey 

Shri Girish Trivedi ( Alternate ) 
Shri Om P. Dhamija 

Shri P. P. Saxena ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. N. Dwivedi 

Shri S. K. Das ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. S. Ghosh 

Shri D. Sengupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. B. Karandikar 

Shri V. K. Mahajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. C. Jain 
Shri A. A. Joshi 

Shri M. Krishnamurthy ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. P. Junnarkar 

Shri H. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Kalhan 

Shri G. Gosain ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Mathur 
Shri R. P. Mithal 

Shri R. P. Srivastava ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. C. Padamsee 
Shri N. V. Patel 

Shri N. S. Patel ( Alternate ) 
Shri A, K. Ray 

Shri R.N. Guha ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. R. Rao 
Shri L. V. Rao 

Shri Partho Datta ( Alternate ) 
Shri I. V. Rao 

Shri D. N. Dave ( Alternate ) 
ShriS. R. Sachdbv 

Shri B. Bose ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Sahai 

Shri R. P. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. T. P. Sinha 

Shri C. H. Subramanyam ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. K. Somany 

Shri J. N. Kundu ( Alternate ) 
Shri Umesh Sinha 

Shri M. J. Israni ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. K. Singh, 
Director ( Chem ) 



Representing 
Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute ( CSIR ), Calcutta 

Hindustan Safety Glass Works Ltd, Calcutta 

Victory Flask Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Ministry of Finance, Deptt of Revenues, Central Revenues 

Control Laboratory, New Delhi 
Ministry of Transport, Deptt of Railways, Research Designs & 

Standards Organization ( RDSO ), New Delhi 
Ministry of Defence, DGQA ( GS ), Kanpur 

Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 

Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute, Calcutta 

The Indo-Asahi Glass Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Ballarpur Industries Ltd, New Delhi 

Hindustan National Glass & Industries Ltd, Calcutta 
Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay 

Pieco Electronic & Electricals Limited, Bombay 

Mohan Crystal Glass Works, Ghaziabad 

United Breweries Ltd, Bangalore 
Hind Lamps Ltd, Shikohabad 

Eagle Flask Industries ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay 
Alembic Glass Industries Ltd, Vadodara 

Haryana Sheet Glass Ltd, Haryana 

Borosil Glass Works Ltd, Bombay 
Triveni Sheet Glass Works Ltd, Calcutta 

Maruti Udyog Ltd, Gurgaon 

Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi 

Hindustan Vacuum Glass Ltd, Faridabad 

Development Commissioner, New Delhi 

Hindustan National Glass & Industries Ltd, Calcutta 

The Mahalakshml Glass Works Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Secretary 

Shrimati Meenal Passi 
Assistant Director ( Chem), BIS 



( Continued on page 5 ) 



IS 1116 : 1994 



( Contiuued from page 4 ) 

Glassware for Illumination Purposes Subcommittee, CHD 010 : 05 



Convener 
Shri R. P. Srivastava 

Members 
Shri N. G. Basak 

Shri B. Bose ( Alternate) 
Shri A. K. Bharoava 

Shri A. K. Sachdeva ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. K. Ghosh 

Shri S. B. Bhattacharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. P. Gupta 

Shri R. K. Jaggi ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. G. Junnarkar 

Shri A. H. Mulchandani ( Alternate ) 
Shri Naresii Kumar 

Shri S. R. Sangal ( Alternate ) 
Shri Pradeep Kumar 

Shri Ravish Nioam ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. R. Kibe 

Shri Y. L. Natu ( Alternate ) 
Shri N.C. Pal 

Shri S. M. Kembhavi ( Alternate) 
Representative 
Representative 
Shri S. Sanmugam 

Shri P. Bhaskaran ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Rajesh 
Shri M. M. Sharma 

Dr J. C. Kapur ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. S. Sood 

Shri D. K. Shrivastava ( Alternate ) 



Representing 
Hind Lamps Ltd, Shikohabad 



Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi 

Hyderabad Lamps Ltd, Hyderabad 

Electric Lamp Manufacturers ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Surya Roshni Ltd, Kashipur 

Peico Electronics and Electricals Ltd, Bombay 

Research, Designs and Standards Organizations, Lucknow 

Lumax Industries Ltd, Faridabad 

Paisa Fund Glass Works, Thalegaon 

Kalpana Lamps & Components Ltd, Madras 

Hindustan Machine Tools, Hyderabad 

Sylvania Laxman India Ltd, Delhi 

Metal Lamp Caps ( India ) Ltd, Bangalore 

Mysore Lamps Ltd, Mysore 
Apar India Pvt Ltd, Madras 

Development Commissioner ( Small Scale Industries ), New Delhi 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
•certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has a copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such a review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Addition'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. CHD 010 ( 0157 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 331 01 31 



NEW DELHI 110002 I 331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola f 37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 1 37 86 26, 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 f 53 38 43, 53 16 40 



53 23 84 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

1 235 15 19, 235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) f 632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 430093 1 632 78 91, 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESIfWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Paragon Enterprises, Delhi. India 



