**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 7879-1 (1975) : Glossary of aeronautical and 
astronautical terms. Part 1: General [TED 14: Aircraft and 
Space Vehicles] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



.uw. L. < .^<. ( Second Reprint JUNE 1 999 ) <S : 7879 (Part I) - 1 975 

UDC 001-4 :0W18 (IneorporatingAmendmentNol) ( Reaffirmed 1995 ) 



tndlan Standard 

GLOSSARY OF AERONAUTICAL 
AND ASTRONAUTICAL TERMS 

PARTI GENERAL 



u 

o 



u 

o 

ui 

I 

E 
E 
o 
O 



CO 

c 
m 

& 



0. Foreword 

0.1 Provides ttindard definitions of technical terms peculiar to aeronautics, astronautics and related 
subjects. Terms in general use in other branches of engineering are also included where they have 
some special relevance to aeronautics or astronautics. 

0.2 This standard consists of a series of parts, each part covering terms specific to a particular feature, 
type of aircraft, equipment, service, etc. 

0.3 The general arrangement of the terms is alphabetical. However, in certain cases related terms have 
been given toglther under a heading or general definition, and these are printed in distinctive italic type. 

0.4 Each term has been assigned a 4«digit or 5-digit number. The first one (or two) digit, in the 
thousandth place, ^represents the part number. This part number with the following digit in the 
hundredth place represents the section. The last two digits represent the position of the definition 
within a section. Thus the term 3405 is the 5th definition of Section 34, which is in Part III. 

O.S Where two or more synonymous terms are In use, the term which is favoured is given first, with the 
intention that it should gradually displace the others. The alternative terms are given below the 
preferred terms in less prominent type. 

0.0 An Indian Standard Glossary of space terms covering definitions pertaining to rockets, missiles, 
etc, is also under preparation. 

0.7 Assistance has been derived from BS 185 'Aeronautical and astronautical terms' issued by the 
British Standards Institution, in the preparation of this series of Indian Standards. 



1. Scope — This part covers the standard definitions for general aeronautical terms. 

2. Terminology 

SECTION 11 —GENERAL 

No. Term Definition 

1 101 Aeronautics All activities relating to aerial locomotion ( see 1 109 ). 

1 102 Aerostation The operation of lighter- than-air aircraft ( see 1 109 ). 

1 103 Aircraft Dinghy An inflatable boat carried in an aircraft for use after alighting 

on water. 

1 104 Alrvirorthy Complying with the regulations prescribed by the competent 

authority certifying the fitness for flight of an aircraft. 

1 106 Altitude The vertical distance above mean sea- level ( see 1 1 1 8 ). 

1106 Density Altitude An atmospheric density expressed as the altitude which 

DENSITY HEIGHT corresponds to that density in the international standard 

atmosphere. 

1101!^ Pressure Altitude An atmospheric pressure expressed as the altitude which 

corresponds to that pressure in the international standard 
atmosphere. 

1 108 Altitude Chamber A chamber in which conditions of pressure, and sometimes 

temperature, at altitude can be simulated for test 
purposes. 



Aitoptsd 28 Novsmbsr^STS 



O December 1985, BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARQ 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS:7879(Partl)-l975 

No. Term 

1109 Aviation 

1110 Avionics 

1111 Buoyancy 

1112 Centre of Buoyancy 

1113 Reserve Buoyancy 

1114 Elovation 



1115 Flight Simuiator 



1116 Gas Dynamics 



1117 Ground. To 

1118 Hoight 

1119 Jsttison 

1 1 20 IMagnetofiuiddynamlcs 

MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS (MHD) 
MAGNETOGASDYNAMICS 

1 1 21 Msclianics of Fluids 



1122 Plasma 

1123 Sortie 

1124 AirbornoTime 



1125 Flight TImo 

BLOCK TIME 
CHOCK-TO-CHOCK TIME 
BUOY-TO-BUOY TIME 

1126 Flying TImo 



Doflnltion 

a) The operation of heavier-than-air aircraft ( see 1102 ). 

b) Synonym for ' aeronautics \ 

The application of electronics to aeronautics and astro- 
nautics. 

The vertical force on an aircraft, or other body, wholly or 
partly immersed in a fluid, equal to the weight of the 
fluid displaced. 

The centre of gravity of the fluid displaced by an aircraft, or 
other body, wholly or partially immersed in a fluid. 

Excess of the buoyancy of a seaplane, with its hull or floats 
completely immersed, over its weight. 

a) The altitude of a point on the Earth's surface. 

b) The angle between the observer's horizontal plane and 

the oblique line from the observer to a given point above 
him. ( Abbreviation for ' angle off elevation * ). 

Equipment in which certain flight conditions are simulated 
as far as possible, used for training aircrew to operate a 
given type of aircraft, or for investigating the flying 
characteristics of an aircraft. 

The science of the flow of gases, especially when compres- 
sibility and 'real gas' effects such as dissociation or 
noncontinuum behaviour are present. 

To prohibit an aircraft from flying. 

The vertical distance above a specified datum ( see 1 105 ). 

To throw overboard. 

The study of the flow of electrically conducting fluids ( for 
example, ionized gases ) in magnetic fields. 

The science of the behaviour of fluids under the action of 
forces. Fluids include liquids and gases, and simple 
fluids may be characterized by continuing deformation 
under the action of shear stresses. Fluid Statics is a 
branch of this science dealing with fluids in equilibrium. 
The term Fluid Dynamics is used for the branch dealing 
with the flow of fluids under the action of forces. 

Classically, Hydrostatics and Hydrodynamics are referred 
to water. However, they are now used for incompres- 
sible fluids, generally liquids. Aerodynamics clas- 
sically is referred to air, usually relative motion of air 
with a solid body. It is sometimes used to refer to 
compressible fluids, usually gases. 

An electrically conductive state of a gas in which it is com- 
prised of neutral particles, ionized particles and free 
electrons but, talcen as a whole, is eiectrically neutral. 

A flight by an aircraft for a specific purpose. 

The period beginning at the time when the aircraft leaves the 
Earth's surface and ending when tt again maices contact 
with the Earth's surface. 

The period beginning at the time when the aircraft starts to 
move under the control of the pilot and ending when it 
returns to rest at the end of the flight. 

The summation of the flight times. 



IS:7879(Partl)-l975 



No. Term 

1 1 27 Ground Running-Time 



The classification of the main 
In Appendix A. 



1201 Aeroplane 



1202 


Amphibian 


1203 


Boat Amphibian 


1204 


Landplane 


1205 


Seaplane 


1206 


Float Seaplane 


1207 


Flying Boat 

BOAT SEAPLANE 


1208 


Aircraft 


1209 


Heavi«r-than-Air Aircraft 

AERODYNE 


1210 


Liglit«r^han-Air Aircraft 

AEROSTAT 


1211 


Airslilp 


1212 


Non-rigid Airship 


1213 


Rigid Airship 


1214 


Semi-rigid Airship 


1215 


Balloon 


1216 


Captive Balloon 


1217 


Free Balloon 


1218 


Glidor 


1219 


Kite 



1220 Ornlthopter 



1221 Rotorcraft 



1222 Cyclogyro 

PADDLE-PLANE 

1 223 Gyroplane 



1224 Helicopter 



Definition 

The period of engine-running time while an aircraft is at rest 
and/or taxing 

SECTION 12 — AIRCRAFT 

types of aircraft defined in this standard is shown diagramatically 



A power-driven heavier-than-air aircraft with supporting 
surfaces which remain fixed under given conditions of 
flight. 

An aircraft capable of operating from either a land or a water 
surface. 

An amphibian of which the main body or hull is also the 
means of support on water. 

An aeroplane capable of operating from a land surface. 

An aeroplane capable of operating from a water surface. 

A seaplane provided with floats as its means of support on 
water. 

A seaplane of which the main body or hull is also the means 
of support on water. 

A vehicle designed to travel through the air outside the 
ground effect region. 

An aircraft which derives its lift chiefly from aerodynamio 
forces. 

An aircraft which is supported chiefly by its buoyancy in air. 

A power-driven lighter-than-air aircraft. 

An airship in which the internal pressure alone maintains the 
designed shape of the envelope. 

An airship having a rigid framework to maintain the designed 
shape of the envelope. 

An airship having a rigid longitudinal member to distribute 
the load and to assist in maintaining the designed shape 
of the envelope. 

A non -power- driven lighter-than-air aircraft. 

A balloon anchored or towed by a line. 

A balloon floating freely in the air. 

A non-power- driven heavier-than-air aircraft. 

A non-power-driven heavier-than-air aircraft without controls, 
anchored or towed by a line. 

A heavier-than-air aircraft supported in flight chiefly by the 
reaction of the air on wings to which a flapping motion 
is imparted. 

A heavier-than-air aircraft which derives lift from a rotor or 
rotors. 

A rotorcraft on which the rotor is similar in form to a paddle 
wheel, power-driven about a horizontal axis. 

A rotorcraft with non-power-driven rotor(s) rotating about 
axes which are vertical, or nearly so, when the aircraft 
is in horizontal flight. 

A rotorcraft deriving lift from power-driven rotor(s) rotating 
alx>ut axes which are vertical, or nearly so, when the air- 
craft is in horizontal flight. 



IS:7879(Partl)-l975 

APPENDIX A 
CLASSIFICATION OF MAIN TYPES OF AIRCRAFT 



r Non-power-driven f Free balloon 

Captive balloon 



AIRCRAFT 



Lighter-than-air aircraft ' 
(Aerostat) 



Heavier-than-air aircraft 
i^ (Aerodyne) 



Balloon 

Power-driven 
Airship 

Non-power-driver) 
Glider 

Kite 

Power-driven 
Aeroplane 



{ 



f Rigid airship 
Semi-rigid airship 
I Non-rigid airship 



Rotorcraft 



Ornithopter 



r Landplane 
Seaplane 



J Float seaplane 
I Flying boat 



Amphibian | Float amphibian 
(^ Boat amphibian 

r Cyclogyro 
Gyroplane 
Helicopter 



I 

1 



Printed at Simco Printlno Press. Delhi, inlfiia 



