**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 2969 (1974) : Method for Determination of Oil Content of 
Jute Yarn and Fabrics [TXD 5: Chemical Methods of Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



( Reaffirmed 1999 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 
DETERMINATION OF OU. CONTENT OF 
JUTE YARN AND FABRICS 



(First Revision) 



In R.r.rtiT SH^IhMBFK \9i2 



UDC 6T?a3»O6:677.0lU.2ii2 



"Si:*,:" ■-..:■. 7,-31 • 



iNDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK SHA\'AN, ^ BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DFXHI It 0002 



t8i2S69-l91l 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 
x)ETERMJNAtION OF OIL CONTENT OF 
iUl'E YARN AND FABRICS 

^ (First Revision) 

Qhcmical Methods of Test Sectional Ck)ramittee> TDC 5 

Ctmirman Ripr§s€nling 

Dm P. C Mbhta AhmadabAd Textile Induttry't Resemrcb AitocUtioo» 



Ahmedabad 



Mimhtrs 



Dm V. Q. AoMiBOTmi T. K. Synthetict Ltd, Kmnpur 

Dm AjiT SiMOH Mioiitry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Sbmi S. p. Kiupum ( AlumaU ) 
DmS, M. BrrmABn Cotton TechnologicAl Reiemrch Laboratory 

(ICAR ). Bombay 
Shmi B. V. Bhatt .Ahniedabad Manufacturing and Calico Printing 

Co Led, Ahmedabad 
Shei K. G. Shah ( Alttrnati ) 
Dm ( KbMAmi) M. D.BHAVtAm The Silk & Art Silk MilU* Research Attociation, 

Bombay 
Somi K. S. Bhujavo Office of the Textile Commiiiioner, Bombay 

Smmi S. K. Boflm National Test House, Calcutta 

Smmi B. B. CHAmmAvmsTi Superintendence Company of India ( Private ) Ltd, 

Calcutta 
Dm N. F. DxmAi Sandoa ( India ) Limited, Bombay 

DimaoTom of Havdlooic0 and Government of Tamil Nadu 
TmxTiLma 

S«mi K. RAMAMcrmTBT {AlUm^U) 
Sum M. D. Dixit The Bombay Textile Retcarcb Ai»ociation, Bombay 

Smmi M. H» Ooamt Silk Be Art Silk MilU* Anociation Limited, Bombay 

Dm C. J. Smam ( AlUmaU ) 
Dm A. S. DuTT Indian Jute Industries* Research Association, 

CalcutU 
Dm J Ai PmAXAtm Textiles Committee, Bombay 

Smmi K. B. KuLCAmm Textile Auxiliaries Manufacturers' Associmtioti, 

Bombay 
Smm4 S. M. Mitrmv Association of Merchants and Manufacturers of 

Textile Stores and Machinery. India, Bombay 
SmmrP. 5. NAOXAmin Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Smmi M. G. BHamAOAVA {Alumatf) 

( C^^tinmid ea pagt 1 ) 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
Thb publicadoo is protected under the Mmm C^pyr^gkt Aa ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproductioo in whole or in part by any means except %rith written permission of 
the publiaher shall be deemed to be aa infringement of copyright under the Mid Act. 



I8t2%9-1974 

( C^faimui from pa^i \ ) 

Mtmbtrs lUpriMMiiMg 

Db K, I. NAmAsiMHAH Ofl5c« of th« TextiU Comr 

De B. M, Patxl I. C. I. ( Indim ) Privmte Ltd, Ca. 

Sami K. S. Srintvaiaw ( AlUrruiti) 
Skbi Gobdhanbhai H. Patbi. Shri Dineth Mills Ltd, Baroda 

Shbi R. S. Pbayao All India Handloom Boafd, Bombay 

Shbi R. Ramabbishnak Binny Limited, Madras 

Shbi N. S, Sabaiya The Bombay Textile Research Attociation, Bombay 

Shbi B. P. Sbboufta Directorate General of Supplies and Dispotals 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 

Shbi V. B. Hajbla ( AUematt ) 
Shbi Jam nadab K. Shah Raipur Manufacturing Co Ltd, Ahmedabad 

Shbi K, M. Shah The Millowners* Association, Bombay 

Shbi R. C. Shah Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Association, 

Ahmedabad 
Shbi N. S. Sidhtj Directorate of Industries, Government of Punjab 

Shbi A. SuBBAMAifiAN TTie Ahmedabad Millowncrs* Association, 

Ahmedabad 
Shbi S. Sundabam The Delhi Cloth k. General Milk Co Ltd, Delhi 

Shbi M. K. Vbnuoofal ( AUtmatt ) 
Shbi S. S. Tbivbdi Ahmedabad Textile Industry*! Research Association, 

Ahmedabad 
Shbi S. M. Chabbabobtt, EHrector General, ISI ( Ex-qfici§ MtmUr ) 



Director ( Tex ) 



Shbi D. R. Kohli 
Deputy Director ( Tex ), ISl 



Chemical Test Methods Subcommittee, TDC 5:14 

Shbi R. C. Smah Ahmedabad TextiU Industry's Research Association^ 

Ahmedabad 

Shbi R. S. Aqabwal Minbtry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shbi A. K. SutoH ( AlUnuUt ) 
Db V. G. AoNiHOTBi J* K* Synthetics Ltd, Kanpur 

Db (Kumabi) M. D. BsAvaAm The Silk %l Art Silk Mifu' Research Aseoctatioo, 

Bombay 
Shbi K. S. Bhttjaiio Office of the Textile Coknmissioner, Bombay 

Dm S. N. Gbosb Indian Juta Industries' Research Association, 

CalcutU 
Shbi K. P. Dab ( Alttmatt ) 

Shbi G. R. Kulkabbi Wool Research Association Bombay 

Sh»i N. S. Saraita The Bombay TextiU Research Association, Bombay 

Shbi Jam nadab K. Shah Raipur Manufacturing Co Lid, Ahmedabad 

ShbiK. M. Shah Mafatlal Fine Spg &: Wvg Co Ltd ( Unit No. 4 ), 

, Bombay 



IS 1 2969 -1974 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF OIL CONTENT OF 

JUTE YARN AND FABRICS 

(First Revision) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indi2ui 
Standards Institution on 4 October 1974, after the draft finalized by the 
Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Textile Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1964. It has now been revised 
to include the method for determining the oil content of jute yarn and 
fabrics on the basis of conditioned mass of the test specimens, which is 
widely used in countries importing jute products from India. 

0.3 During conversion of jute fibres into yam considerable amount of oil, 
Commonly known as batching oil, is used in the form of its emulsion in 
water. Some or all of the oil is present in the later stages of manufac- 
ture of jute goods. The finished jute goods usually contain 5 to 9 percent 
oil. In the case of special goods, the oil content may be up to I percent 
only, 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this 
standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, 
it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1,1 This standard prescribes two methods for determination of oil content 
of all types of jute yam and fabrici, namely conditioned-mass method 
and oven-dry method. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 A known amount of the sample is extracted with trichloroethylene 
or light petroleum in Soxhlet apparatus. The solvent is removed by 

*Rul€i for rounding ofT numerical values ( rtois^d). 



IS 1 2969 -1974 

distillation and the extract is weighed. The mass of the extract ii 
expressed as a percentage of the oven -dry mass of the extracted specimen 
or conditioned mass of the test specimen before extraction. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Lot — The Quantity of iute yarn or fabric purporting to be of one 
definite type and quality delivered to one buyer against one despatch 
note shall constitute a lot. 

3.2 Samples from the lot shall be so drawn as to be representative of the 
lot. Samples drawn in accordance with the procedure laid down in the 
specification for the material or as agreed to between the buyer and the 
seller shall be held to be representative of the lot. 

4. PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMENS 

4.1 From each bundle of yam or cut of fabric selected, draw a test 
specimen weighing 6 to 8 g. 

5. ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS FOR CONDITIONING AND 
TESTING 

5.1 Conditioned-Matt Method — The test shall be carried out in the 
standard atmosphere afier conditioning the test specimens as prescribed 
in IS: 6359-1971*. 

5.2 Oven-Dry Method — The test may be carried out in the prevailing 
atmosphere. 

6. APPARATUS 

6;i Soschlet Apparmtnt 

6.2 Drying Oven — capable of maintaining a temperature of 105 db 3°C. 

6*3 Weighing BaUnc« — capable of weighing to an accuracy of 1 mg, 

7. REAGENTS 

7.1 Qjwdity of Remgentt — Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals 
shall be employed in test and distilled wat«r {see IS : 1070-1960f ) shall 
be used where the use of water as a reagent is intended. 

NOTB — ' Pure chtm*cals' iball mean chcgsiicalilhAt ^o not coQUin impurities 
which affect the te«t remits. 



•Method for conditioning of textilet, 
fSpecificmtion for water, diitilled quality ( rtwistd ), 



ISi2969*1974 

7J The reagents to be used in the test shall be *s follows, 
7J2.1 Trichlorvethyleng 
1J.3, Light Petroleum — boiling range 40 to eO^'G. 

8^ PROCEDURE 

8.1 Conditioned-Mass Method 

8.1.1 Take a test specimen conditioned in the standard atmosphere 
( set 5.1 ), determine its mass ( Mc ) correct to I mg and place it in the 
thimble of the Soxhlet apparatus. Take about 100 ml of trichloroethy- 
lene or light petroleum in the extraction flask previously cleaned, dried 
and weighed correct to 1 mg. Extract the test specimen for 1 J to 2 hours 
with a minimum of 6 siphonings per hour. Disconnect the apparatus, 

8.1.2 Recover the excess of the solvent by heating the flask in a 
water-bath, maintained at 95 to 95°C if the solvent is trichloroethylene 
and 60 to 65°C if the solvent ii light petroleum, and simultaneously 
allowing a stream of air to pass through the flask by means of a tube 
terminating just below its neck. Remove all traces of moisture by 
heating the flask at 105 :t 3^C for \ hour Weigh the flask and 
determine the mass of the extract { Mt ) correct to I mg. 

8.U Repeat the test with the remaining test specimens. 

8.2 Oven-Dry Method 

8.2.1 Take a test specimen, weigh it to the nearest milligram and place 
it in the thimble of the Soxhlet apparatus. Take about 100 ml of 
trichloroethylene or light petroleum in the extraction flask previously 
cleaned, dried and weighed correct to 1 mg. Extract the test specimen 
for I J to 2 hours with a minimum of 6 siphonings per hour. Disconnect 
the apparatus. 

8.2.2 Withdraw the specimen from the apparatus, open it out and 
allow the excess solvent to evaporate. Dry the specimen for 4 hours at 
105 ^ S^'C in the drying oven. Transfer the dried specimen to a tared 
airtight container, cool and weigh. Determine the oven-dry mass of the 
specimen ( M4 ) correct to 1 mg. 

8.2.3 Proceed further as in 8.1.2. 

8J2.4 Repeat the test with the remaining test specimens. 

9. CALCULATIONS 

9.1 Calculate the oil content percent of each specimen to the nearest 01 
percent as follows: 

Condi tioned-mass basis: 

Oil content percent -■ * x 100 

5 



18 1 2969- 1974 

where 

Mm » mass in milligrmms of the extract ( 8,1.2 ), and 

Afc a» maws in milligrams of the conditioned specimen ( M.l ). 

Overfdry-mass basis: 

M 

Oil content percent -• , ,* - x 100 

where 

Mm « mass in milligrams of the extract ( 8.2^ ), and 

A/d -■ mass in milligrams of the oven-dry de-oiled specimen 
( 8.2-2 ). 

9.2 Calculate the average of all the values obtained as in 9.1 to the 
nearest 0*1 p>ercent* 

10. REPORT 

10.1 The report shall include the following information: 

a) Average oil content percent, 

b) Method followed, and 

c) Number of specimens tested. 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JANUARY 1999 

TO 

IS 2969 : 1974 METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF 

OIL CONTENl^ OF JUTE YARN AND FABRICS 

( First Revision ) 

FOREWORD 

(This amendment has been issued to accommodate the fisc of /i-bexanc as an 
extrsctins resizent.) 

(Page 3, clause 2,1 ) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

'2.1 A known amount of the sample is extracted with trichlorocthylene or light 
petroleum or n-hexane in Soxhlet appanitxw. The solvent is removed by 
distillation and the extract is weighed. The mass of the extract is expressed as a 
percentage of the oven dry mass of the extracted specimen or conditioned mass 
of te^t specimen before extraction/ 

( Page 5, clause 1.1,1) — Insert 123 as under 

'123 nhexane* 

(Page 5, clause SA A ) — Substitute the following for ibc existing: 

*8.l.l Take a test specimen, weigh it to the nearest milligram and place it in the 
thimble of the Soxhlet appaiatus. Take about 100 ml of trichioroethylene or light 
petroleum or n-hexane in the extraction flask previously cleaned, dried and 
weighed correct to 1 mg. Extract the test specimen for t^ to 2 houre with a 
minimum of 10 siphonings per hour. DisconiKCt the apparatus.' 

( Page 5, clause 8.1.2 ) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

*8.1.2 Recover the excess of the solvent by heating the flask in a water-bath, 
maintained at 90 to 95^C if the solvent is trkrhloroethylene, 60 to 65^C if the 
solvent is light petroleum and 70 to 75^C if the solvent is /t-hexanc, and 
simultaneously allowing a stream of air to pass through the flask by means of a 
tube terminating just below its neck. Remove all traces of moisture by beating 
the flask at 105 ± S^'C for 30 min. Weigh the flank and determine the mass of the 
extract (Afc) correct to 1 mg.* 



Amend No. 1 to IS 2969 ; 1974 

( Page 5, clause 8^.1 ) — Substitute the following for tbc existing: 

'S2A Take a test specimen, weigh it to the ncjiest milligram and place it in the 
thimble of the Soxhiet apparatus. Take about 150 ml of trichloroethylenc or light 
petroleum or /r-hexane in the extraction (lask previously cleaned, dried and 
weighed correct to 1 mg. Extract the test specimen for 1.5 to 2 hours with a 
minimum of 6 siphonings per hour. Disconnect the apparatus.* 



{ TX 05 ) 



Rtpn>gnphy Unit, BIS, New Delhi. IndU 



