IS '14527:1998 ( Reaffirmed 2006 ) ema4vm *m $3 ChlcichlRfl~ 3TfbGkf

Indian Standa.rd

EXPRESSIONOF PERFORMANCEOF PULSEGENERATORS

ICS

29.160.20

BUREAU
MANAK

OF INDIAN
BHAVAN, 9 BAHAI>UK

STANDARDS
SHAH %AI;/\R MARC;

NEW DE1 .Hl 1 10002 Murch 199X 7

Price Group

Electronic

Measuring

Instruments,

Systems and Accessories

Sectional Committee,

LTD 2 1

. FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Electronic Measuring Instruments, Systems and Accessories Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. The objective of this standard is to standardize the terminology for describing the functional performance, performance characteristics and criteria for evaluating the performance of generators. It also standardizes tests necessary to verify the performance of generators. This standard is largely based on IEC Pub 624 (1978) `Expression of the performance by the International Electrotechnical Commission. of pulse generators', the the

issued

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 14527 : 1998

EXPRESSION OF PERFORMANCE PULSE GENERATORS
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard applies to the specification of pulse generators and to accessories used with generators. 1.2 Generators with continuous or pulsed sinusoidal outputs, television pattern generators, complex function geqerators, and generators for insulation resistance testing specially excluded from the scope of this standard. 2 REFERENCES below Title Method for specifying the functional performance of electronic measuring equipment Pulse techniques and apparatus: Pulse terms and definitions Pulse measurement and analysis, General considerations are necessary

OF
the wordy

NOTE -Throughout the rewunder of this smdurd, `generator accessory' is included in `generator'.

3.3.2.1 Permanent (non-permanent) accessory

generator

A generator accessory which is permanently (occasionally) associated with a generator and which is (is not) essential to its operation. 3.3.2.2 Interchangeable generator accessory

The Indian Standards given adjuncts to this standard: IS No. 9176: 1979

A non-permanent generator accessory which has its own properties which are independent of any generator with which it may be associated. 3.3.2.3 Partially interchangeable accessory generator

14501 (Part 1) : 1998 (Part 2) : 1998

An interchangeable generator accessory which may be associated with a limited and specified set of generators or generator accessories. 3.3.2.4 Non-interchangeable generator accessoq

3 TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose of this standard, definitions shall apply. 3.1 Pulse Terms The pulse terms used throughout defined in IS 14501 (Part 1). 3.2 Pulse Measurement this standard are the following

A generator accessory which is associated with one particular generator. A non-interchangeable generator accessory and the generator with which it is associated have mutually interacting adjustments or characteristics. When such mutual interaction exists, this standard applies to the combination of the generator and the non-interchangeable generator accessory. 3.3.3 Modular Genercrtor A generator which is a combination generator accessories. 3.3.3.1 Generator main frame A partially interchangeable&enerator accessory which provides common services and/or facilities (for example, mechanical mounting, a.c. and/or d.c. power, analogue and/or digital signal paths, cooling, etc) for itself and for one or more associated generatol accessories. Typically, in the absence of other generator accessories, a generator main frame cannot function as a generator. 3.3.3.2 Gerlerurtor plug-irr
urtit

and Analysis

of two or more

Definitions of pulse measurement terms used and descriptions of pulse measurement techniques referred to in this standard are provided in IS 14501 (Part 2). 3.3 Pulse Generator 3.3.1 Pdse Genrrcrmr An apparatus which supplies electrical energy in pulse form at an accessible output.
NOTEThroughout this standard, the word `generator' iv used 111 pluce of `pulse generato, '

Terms

3.3.2 Gerrerntcrr.Accxwo,_y A device or apparatus which is or may be ;L part of generator, associated with ;I generator, or associatccl to modify or Ollc' or more

A partially Interchangeable generalor accessory which, typically: il) 111aybe associated with one OI mure specilieci generator main f~-rames,

IS 14527 : 1998 b) is adapted by plug and socket connections and its construction to use the services and/or facilities provided by the associated generator main frame, and performs specified generator functions. 3.4.6.2 Absolute error The error expressed algebraically, in the unit of the measured or supplied quantity. a) For measuring apparatus, the error is the indicated value of the measured quantity minus its true value, and b) For a supply apparatus, the error is the true value of the quantity supplied minus its rated, indicated or pre-set value.
NOTE-The true value of a quantity is the value that would be measured by a measuring process having no error.

c)

In the absence of a generator main frame, a generator plug-in unit cannot function as a generator. 3.4 Terms Generators Related to the Performance of

3.4.1 Per$ormance The degree to which the intended generator are accomplished. 3.4.2 Perjk-mance Characteristic functions of a

One of the quantities assigned to a generator in order to define by values, tolerances, ranges, etc, the performance of the generator.
NOTE The term `performance characteristic' include influence quantities (see Note under 3.4.3). does not

In practice, since this true value cannot be determined by measurement, a conventionally true value, approaching the true value as closely as necessary (having regard to the error to be determined), is used in place of the true value. This value may be traced to standards agreed upon by the manufacturer and the user, or to national standards. In both cases, the uncertainty of the conventionally true value shall be stated. 3.4.6.3 Relative error

3.4.3 Influence Quantity Any quantity, generally external to a generator, which may affect the performance of the generator.
NOTE Where a change of a performance characteristic affects another performance characteristic, it is referred to as an influencing characteristic (see 3.4.4 and 3.6.3).

The ratio of the absolute error to a stated value. 3.4.6.4 Percentage error

3.4.4 Influencing

Characteristic

A performance characteristic which, when altered in value or state, produces a change in the value or state of one or more other performance characteristics (influenced characteristics). 3.4.5 3.4.5.1 Terms Related to Values and Ranges Rated value

The relative error, expressed as a percentage, such as percent of full scale (the maximum value of the effective range), percent of the indicated or pre-set value or of the rated value. 3.4.1 Terms Related to Stahilit) 3.4.7.1 Stab,ility

The ability of the generator to maintain its indicated or supplied value during a specified time, other conditions remaining constant. 3.5 Terms Related to the Conditions Operation, Transport and Storage 3.5.1 Rated Range of Testing,

The value (or one of the values) of a quantity to be measured, observed, supplied or set, which the manufacturer has assigned to the apparatus. 3.4.5.2 Ra.ted range

of Use

The range of a quantity to be measured, observed, supphed or set, which the manufacturer has assigned tti the apparatus. 3.4.5.3 Eflective range

The range of values for an influence quantity within which the requirements `concerning operating error are satisfied. 3.52 Rated Operating Corrtlitinns

That part of the rated range where measurements can be made or quantities be supplied within the stated limits of error. 3.4.6 Trt-tus Related to Error

The whole of the effective ranges for performance characteristics. and rated ranges of use f'or-influence quantities, within which the perform:Incc 01` the fc`nerator is specified.

3.4.6.1 Fitluciol value A value to which reference is made in ordcrto specit'y the I-el;ttivc CI-I-OI-. I'w example. the upper limit of the effective range. or another clearly stated value.

IS 14527 : 1998 3.5.4 L+nit Conditions of Operation The whole of the ranges of values for influence quantities and performance characteristics (beyond the rated ranges of use and effective ranges respectively) within which a generator can function without resulting in damage or degradation of performance when it is afterwards operated under rated operating conditions.
NOTEThe limit conditions will, in general, include overload.

3.7.1.1

Warm up time

The time interval after switching on the generator under specified conditions, necessary for it to comply with all performance requirements. 3.7.1.2 Preliminary adjustment

3.5.5

Conditions of Storage and Transport temperature, humidity, etc, within which the or transported in an resulting in damage or when it is afterwards conditions.

The whole of the conditions of air pressure, vibration, shock, generator may be stored inoperative condition, without degradation of performance operated under rated operating 3.6 Limits of Error

A preliminary operation which, if required, precedes the operation of a generator and its associated generator accessories for measurement purposes, and in which specified adjustable parts are altered or set: a) in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions; b) without disassembly of the generator or its associated generator accessories; and c) without the use of any additional apparatus, other than the associated generator hccessories; in order to provide operation of the generator complies with all performance requirements. which

The maximum values of error assigned by the manufacturer to a measured or supplied quantity of a generator operating under specified conditions. 3.6.1 Operating Error under rated operating conditions.

3.7.2 Generator Operating Modes and Controls A generator may operate in any of the operating modes defined in this clause where, except as noted, all defined operating modes are mutually exclusive. 3.7.2.1 Normal mode (internal triggering mode)

The error determined 3.6.2 Intrinsic Error The error determined

under reference conditions.

The operating mode in which a generator produces one output pulse for each cycle of an internally generated signal. 3.7.2.2 Manual mode

3.6.3 Influence Error The error determined when one influence quantity assumes any value within its rated range of use (or an influencing characteristic assumes any value within its effective range) all others being at reference conditions. NOTEWhen overthe whole rated range ofuse a substantially
linear relationship exists between the influence error and the effect causing it, the relationship may be conveniently expressed in coefficient form.

The operating mode in which a generator produces one output pulse for each actuation of a manual control. 3.7.2.3 Triggered mode

The operating mode in which a generator produces one output pulse for each occurrence or cycle of an electrical signal which is provided by other apparatus. 3.7.2.4 Synchronized mode

3.6.4 Stability Error The error which occurs in the indicated value of a generator during a specified
conditions remaining constant.

or supplied time, other

The operating mode in which a generator produces one output pulse,for each cycle of an internally generated signal and in which the internal signal is synchronized with a signal which is provided by other apparatus. 3.7.2.5
Burst mode

3.6.5

Variation

The difference between the values of a parameter when one influence quantity assumes successively two specified values within its nominal range of use, the
others being at reference conditions.
NOTE - Tha `nomin:ll range of use' corresponds herl: to the `rntetl rnngc of ULC' appr:mng m this siandxd.

The operating mode in which a generator produces a pulse burst with predetermined characteristic for each cycle of an internally generated signal and in which, for the pulse burst duration, operation may he in normal mode, triggered mode. or synchronized mode. 3.7.2.6 Triggered burst mode

3.7 Technical

Terms

The operating mode in which a generator 1~ocluces a pulse burst with predetermined characterialics l'o~~each occurrence or cycle of an electrical sign;11 which is

IS 14527: 1998 provided by other apparatus and in which, for the pulse burst duration, operation may be in normal mode, triggered mode, or synchronized mode. 3.7.2.7 Gated mode 3.7.3.2 Line trigger

An electrical input signal, at the frequency of the line (mains) supply and normally derived internally, which may be operative in triggered mode. 3.7.3.3 Trigger input

The operating mode in which a generator produces a pulse burst for the duration of an electrical signal which is provided by other apparatus and in which, for the pulse burst duration, operation may be in normal mode, triggered mode, or synchronized mode. 3.7.2.8 Modulated mode

An electricril input signal from external apparatus which may be operative in triggered mode. 3.7.3.4 Synchronizing input apparatus

The operating mode in which generator operation is identical to normal mode, triggered mode, or synchronized mode except that, in addition, the magnitude of a specified performance characteristic of the constituent pulses of the output pulse train is a function of the value of an electrical signal which may be provided by other apparatus. 3.7.2.9 Square wave mode

An electrical input signal from external which is operative in synchronized mode. 3.7.3.5 Burst trigger input

An electrical input signal from external apparatus which is operative in triggered burst mode. 3.7.3.6 Gate input apparatus

An electrical input signal from external which is operative in gated mode. 3.7.3.7 Modulating input

An operating mode of a generator which may be operative concurrently with any mode which is defined in 3.7.2.1 and 3.7.2.3 to 3.7.2.8 above, and in which the output pulses have a duty factor of 0.5. 3.7.2.10 Double pulse mode

An electrical input signal from external which is operative in modulated mode. 3.7.3.8 Input terminal

apparatus

An operating mode of a generator which may be operative concurrently with any other mode which is defined in 3.7.2.1to 3.7.2.8 above, and in which the generator produces two output pulses for each cycle of an internally generated signal or each cycle or occurrence of an electrical signal from external apparatus. Typically, the two pulses thus produced have nominally identical characteristics, the second pulse being delayed in time relative to the first. 3.7.2.11 Operating mode control A control which provides means for establishing the operation of a generator in one or more of the operating modes defined in 3.7.2.1 to 3i7.2.10 above. 3.7.3 Input Signal Terms A generator, depending on the generator operating modes provided, may accept any of the input signals, and may have any of the input terminals or input signal controls defined in this clause.
NOTE-The input signal terms defined in this inouts which are usually located on the front panel &ogramming signals &V 5.1). which are' also usuclllyhave thetr inputs located on the rcnr panel clause apply to ofn generator. Input stgnr\ls. of a generator.

A multi-conductor electrical connection through which any of the electrical input signals defined in 3.7.3.3 to 3.7.3.7 or any other electrical input signal, may be inti-educed into a generator from other apparatus. 3.7.3.9 Input terminal nomenclature

The name of any generator input terminal is formed by appending the word `terminal' after the name of the electrical input signal which the terminal will accept (for example, trigger input; trigger input terminal). 3.7.3.10Input value (amplitude) control

A control which provides means for setting the internally effective value or amplitude of any of the electrical inputs to a generator. 3.7.3.11 Input polarity' (slope polarily) control

A control which provides means for setting the internally effective polarity (slope polarity) of any of the electrical inputs to a generator. 3.7.4 Input Circuit Terms The terms defined in this clause apply to all generator
input
defined

The distinction
drawn.

If aooronriute

between the two types of inputs cannot be cleerly or desirable, any inout mny be described

circuits

which

accept

the electt-ical

input

signals

in 3.7.3.2 k) 3.7.3.7.

3.7.3.1 Munuul trigger A trigger which is actuated by hand in manual mode.

The impedance, expressed as: a ) complex impedance at a specified frequency,

4

IS 14527 : 1998

b) equivalent
cl

resistance in parallel with an equivalent capacitance or inductance, or equivalent resistance in series with an equivalent capacitance or inductance which is present at an input tekninal. Input impedance nomenclature

electrical output which the terminal will deliver (for example, trigger output; trigger output terminal). 3.7.5.8 Output value (amplitude) control

3.1.4.2

A control which provides means for setting the valhe or amplitude of any of the electrical outputs from a generator. 3.7.59 Output state (polarity) control

The name of any generator input impedance is formed by appending the word `impedance' after the name of the electrical input signal (for bxample, trigger input; trigger input impedance). 3.7.4.3 Irqmt impedance control

A control which provides means for setting the state (polarity) of any of the electrical outputs from a generator. 3.7.6 Output Circuit Terms

A control which provides means for setting the value of an input impedance of a generator. 3.7.5 Ourput Signal Terms

The terms defined in this clause apply to all generator outputs which are defined in 3.7.5.1 to 3.7.5.5. 3.7.6.1 Output circuit

A generator, depending on the generator operating modex provided, may generate any of the output signals, and may have any of the output terminals or output signal controls defined in this clause.
NOTE - The output signal controls defined in this clause are, typically, manual controls which are located on the front panel of a generator, Programmable control of output signals (see 5.1) may also be drovided in a generator.

An electrical circuit which is capable of delivering electrical energy through an associated output terminal to an impedance or apparatus external to the generator. 3.7.6.2 Low impedance source

3.7.5.1

Generator output

The main or primary signal output(s) of a generator. 3.7.5.2 Positive (negative) generator output

An output circuit whose ideal equivalent circuit consists of an ideal voltage generator connected in series with an ideal resistance and which is designed to deliver electrical energy to an external resistive impedance which is large compared to the ideal series resistance. 3.7.6.3 Spec@ed impedance source

A generator output which provides positive (negative) output pulses. 3.7.5.3 Generator offset output output signal which, when by superposition with the

An auxiliary electrical provided, is combined generator output. 3.7.5.4 Trigger output

An output circuit whose ideal equivalent circuit consists of an ideal voltage (current) generator connected in series (parallel) with an ideal resistance (conductance) and which is designed to deliver electrical energy to an external resistive impedance (conductive admittance) which is substantially equal to the ideal series resistance (parallel conductance). 3.7.6.4 High impedance source

An auxiliary electrical output signal which occurs coherently and in a predetermined time relationship with generator output pulses. 3.7.5.5 End (beginnin,g)

of burst output

An auxiliary electrical output signal which occurs once for each generator output pulse burst and in a predetermined time relationship to the end (beginning) of each pulse kst. 3.7.5.6 Out@ terminal

An output circuit whose ideal equivalent circuit consists of an ideal current generator connected in parallel with an ideal conductance and which is designed to deliver electrical energy to an cxternnl conductive admittance which is large compared to the ideal parallel conductance. 3.7.6.5 Source voltage

A multi-conductor electtkal connection through which any of the outputs detined in 3.7.5.1 to 3.7.5.5 or any other signal output. may be taken from a
generator.

The value of the voltage of the equivalent WI& voltage generator- uf a low imped;lnce SOLIICCOI specified impedance source.

IS 14527: 1998 3.7.6.7 Source impedance The value of the equivalent complex series impedance of a low impedance source or specified impedance source. 3.7.6.8 Source admittance trigger output, and end (beginning) of burst output.

The name of the advance (delay) between any pair of the signals listed above, except those defined in 3.7.7.1 and 3.7.7.2, is formed by the sequence `name of first signal' to `name of second signal' advance (delay) (for

The value of the equivalent complex parallel admittance of a high impedance source or specified impedance source. 3.7.6.9 Source impedance (admittance) control

example, trigger input to trigger output delay). 3.7.8 Indicator Terms
3.7.8.1 Indicator a visually or

A control which provides means for setting the value of the source impedance (admittance) of a source. 3.7.6.10 Output impedance (admittance)

A device which is capable of producing aurally perceptible signal or indication. 3.7.8.2 Fault indicator

The impedance (admittance) presented by the output terminal when the internal circuit is a load for, rather than a source of, electrical energy.
NOTE In many impedance. cases, this is identical with the source

An indicator which is automatically actuated or energized when the operation of a generator is, unless
otherwise specified, not within the range of rated operating conditions. A fault indicator may be associated with a fault protection circuit (see 3.7.9.1). 3.7.8.3 Overload indicator

3.7.6.11 Rated values and ranges of load impedance (admittance) a) b) In the case of a low impedance source; the rated value of the minimum load impedance, In the case of a specified impedance source; the rated range of use of the load impedance (admittance), and In the case of a high impedance source; the
rated

A fault indicator which is automatically actuated or energized when the output voltage, current, or power,

as specified, of a generator exceeds its rated value. 3.7.8.4 Short-circuit indicator
A fault indicator which is automatically actuated or energized when the load impedance which is

c)

value of the minimum load admittance, will comply with all

connected to a generator output is less than the rated load impedance. 3.7.8.5 Open-circuit indicator
A fault indicator which is automatically actuated or energized when the load admittance which is connected to a generator output is less than the rated load admittance. 3.7.8.6 Duty factor limit indicate,

for which the generator performance requirements. 3.7.7 Input-Output Terms
3.7.7.1 Output delay

The pulse delay interval between a trigger input signal and its associated generator output pulse. 3.7.7.2 Triggror output advance (delay)

The pulse advance (delay) interval between a generator output pulse and its associated trigger output signal. 3.7.7.3 Other input-output
advcance (delctJ) terms

A fault indicator which is automatically actuated or energized when the duty factor of a generator output is greater than the maximum rated duty factor. 3.7.8.7
Output nwet-

An integral calibrated indicator which indicates value of a specified generator output. 3.7.9 Fmlt
Protection Tc~rms

the

Signal advance and/or delay may exist between pair of the following signals:
--

any

manual trigger, line trigger, U-ipger input, synchronizing burst trigger gate input. modulating generatw
positive

input, input, input,

output, (negative) generntor output.

IS 14527 : 1998 protection circuit has operated and after the conditions which caused the fault protection circuit to operate have been corrected in order to restore a generator to normal operation. 3.7.9.3 Overload protection circuit A faultiprotection circuit which operates automatically when ibe power output of a generator output exceeds its rated value. 3.7.9.4 Short-cbcuitprotection
circuit -

A fault protection circuit which operates automatically when the load impedance which is connected to a generator output is less than the rated load impedance. 3.7.9.5 Open-circuit protection circuit A fault protection circuit which operates automatically when the load admittance which is connected to a generator output is less than the rated load admittance. 3.7.9.6 Duty factor limit protection circuit A fault protection circuit Which operates automatically when the duty factor of a generator output is greater than the rated duty factor. 4 CATEGORIES OF PERFORMANCE CHARACTERISTICS 4.0 This clause lists categories of performance characteristics, on the basis of units of measurement. The lists provided in the following clause are not exhaustive; they are representative.
NOTE - Throughout the remainder of this standard, except where otherwise specified, 011clauses are written in terms of categoriesof performance charncteristics

manual trigger, line trigger, trigger input, synchronizing input, burst trigger input, gate input, modulating input, generator output, positive (negative) generator output, trigger output, end (beginning) of burst output, and jitter of any of the above.

4.2.2 Duration Category

4.1 Frequency Category Quantities of which the unit of measurement is the hertz, for example: pulse repetition frequency, pulse burst repetition frequency, modulating input frequency, synchronizing input frequency, trigger input frequency, and -- burst trigger input frequency. 4.2 Temporal Category Quantities of which the unit of measurement is the second, minute, hour, etc. 4.2.1 Interval Category
Tenq-mral quantities

Temporal quantities for which time is measured as the duration'between two specified instants, for example: trigger input pulse duration, trigger input first transition duration, synchronizing input pulse duration, synchronizing input first transition duration, burst trigger input pulse duration, burst trigger input first transition duration, gate input pulse duration, gate input first transition duration, output pulse duration, output pulse first transition duration, output pulse last transition duration, positive (negative) output pulse duration, positive (negative) output pulse first transition duration, positive (negative) output pulse last transition duration, trigger output pulse duration, trigger output first transition duration, end (beginning) of burst output pulse duration, end (beginning) of burst output pulse first transition, duration, and jitter of any of the above 4.3 Voltage (Current) Category Quantities of which the unit of measurement is the volt (ampere), for example: t&gger input pulse amplitude, synchronizing input pulse amplitude, burst trigger input pulse amplitude, gate input pulse amplitude, modulating input signal value, output pulse amplitude, output pulse offset, positive (negative) output pulse amplitude, positive (negative) output pulse offset, .trigger output pulse amplitude, end (beginning) of burst output pulse amplitude, fluctuation of any of the above _-- pulse waveform distt )i1ion :bnd pulse waveform featup,, distortion. 7

difference

between

for which time is measured as the two specified instants, for

exnmple: output delay, trigger output

--

advance (delay), advance and/or delay between any pair of the following:

IS 14527 : 1998 4.4 Power Category Quantities of which or the volt-ampere, input supply input supply output pulse 4.5 Impedance the unit of measurement for example: power, volt-amperes, and power. Category is the watt which may be provided in a generator. Throughout the remainder of this standard, except where otherwise specified, all clauses are written in terms of types of control provided for quantities. 5.1 Control in General 5.1.1 Provision of Control Any quantity of a generator may have associated: a) manual control means [ for example, knob(s), switch(es), lever(s), push-button(s), etc, or combinations thereof 1; and/or b) programme control means ( for example, digital signal inputs or analogue signal inputs, or combinations thereof ), with which the value, amplitude, occurrence, or state of quantity which is to be supplied or set may be established. 5.1.2 Quantity Manual Control Nomenclature When manual control of a quantity is provided, the name of the control is formed by appending the word `control' after the name of the quantity (for example, pulse duration; pulse duration control). When more than one manual control is provided, such controls are distinguished by the use of additional descriptive words (for example, `coarse', `fint', `range', `vernier', etc.)
NOTE - The inclusion of the appended `control'on panel or other markings on a generator is optional. the front

(Admittance)

4.6 State Category Quantities which are described by the assignment two or more descriptions of states. 4.6.1 Polarity Category State quantities of which the states are positive (+) and negative (-), for example: trigger input pulse polarity, trigger input slope polarity, synchronizing input pulse polarity, burst trigger input pulse polarity, modulating input signal polarity, trigger output pulse polarity, end (beginning) of burst output pulse polarity, generator output pulse polarity, and generator output offset polarity. 4.6.2 Assigned State Category State quantities of which the states are `on' and `off' or two or more other specified states, for example: operating mode, that is: normal mode, manual mode, triggered mode, synchronized mode, burst mode, triggered burst mode, gated mode, modulated mode, and square wave mode; double pulse mode. 4.7 Dimensionless Category of

5.1.3 Quantity Programme

Control Nomenclature

When programme control of a quantity is provided, the name of the programme input is formed by appending the words `programme control' after the name of the quantity (for example, pulse duration; pulse duration programme control). When more than one programme control input is provided, such inputs are distinguished by the assignment of designations to connector pins or terminals.
NOTE - The inclusion of the appended words `programme control' in the marking on a generator is optional.

5.2 Specific Types of Control This clause describes the types of control of quantities which may be provided by manual and/or programme means. In principle, any of these types of control may be associated with any quantity in any of the categories of quantities defined in 4. 5.2.1 Fixed Quantity A quantity for which no control is provided. 5.2.1.1 Calibrated fixed quantity

Quantities which are expressed as a ratio or as a percentage, for example: symmetry, duty factor, `voltage standing wave ratio, reflection coefficient, percent pulse waveform distortion, and percent pulse waveform feature distortion. 5 TYPES OF CONTROL CHARACTERISTICS OF PERFORMANCE

A fixed quantity whose value is specified. 5.2.1.2 Uncalibrated fixed quantity

5.0 This clause describes the types of control, 01 absence ol` control, of any performance characteristic 8

A fixed quantity whose value is partially specified, th:\t is, for which limits of error are not stated.

IS 14527 : 1998 5.2.2 Switched Quantity A quantity whose control/provides two or more distinct values, amplitudes, or states. 5.221 Calibrated switched quantity distinct values or

b) the maximum, minimum, or nominal values of cl
certain performance characteristics; and the states provided for certain performance characteristics,

A switched quantity whose amplitudes are specified. 5.222 Uncalibrated

wherein the statement applicable to a particular quantity is determined by the specific type of control which is provided for that quantity. 6.2 Required
Standard)

switched quantity

Statements

(Described in this

A switched quantity whose distinct values or amplitudes are partially specified, that is, for which limits of error are not stated. 5.223 Switched quantity with assigned stares

A switched quantity whose distinct states are assigned (for example, on, off, positive, negative, etc). 5.23 Adjustable Quantity

Statements of the limits of operating error or statements of vaIues shall be made in accordance with clauses listed in Table 1, co1 3 and 4, for all performance characteristics of a generator. Statements on influence quantities shall be made in accordance with 6.8 6.3 0ptio1U StaDdard) Statements (Described b this

A quantity whose control provides a monotonic continuum of values as a function of actuation of the control in one direction or sense over its complete range. 5.23.1 Calibrated adjustable quantity

An adjustable quantity whose control has a multiplicity of nominally resettable positions wherein each nominally resettable position is associated with a specified value. 5.2.3.2 Uncalibrated adjustable quantity

Statements of the (a) limits of intrinsic error, (b) limits of influence error, (c) limits of stability error and (d) variation of any or all quantities of a generator whose specification complies with this standard if made, shall be in accordance with clauses listed in Table 1, co1 5, 6.7 and 8, respectively. 6.4 Optional Statements Standard) (Not lhscribed in this

Statements of limits of error or statements of values mutually agreed upon by the manufacturer and the user but not described in this standard may be made. 6.5 Specifkation of Characteristic Quantities

An adjustable quantity whose control provides partially specified values, that is, for which limits of error are not stated. 5.2.3.3 Conditionally calibrated adjustable quantity

An adjustable quantity or a calibrated adjustable quantity whose control has one or more distinct resettable positions wherein each distinct resettable position is associated with a specified value. 5.3 Multiple-Controlled Quantity

All statements of limits of error or values required by 6.5.1 to 6.5.8 below, which may apply to any quantity listed in the categories of performance characteristics shall be in the unit of measurement which is specified for the particular quantity. Statements on influence quantities shall be made in accordance with 6.8. 6.5.1 Specification The manufacturer the quantity. 6.5.2 Specification Quantity of a Calibrated Fixed Quantity shall specify the limits of error of qf an Uncalibrated Fixed or

A quantity for which two or more controls are provided wherein any or all of the controls may be any of the controls defined in 5.2 above. 5.4 Dual-Controlled Quantity

A quantity for which both manual control means and programme control means are provided wherein any or all of the controls may be any of the controls defined in 5.2 and 5.3, above. 6 STATEMENT OF PERFORMANCE

The manufacturer shall specify the minimum maximum and/or nominal value of the quantity. 6.5.3 Specification

of a Calibrated Switched Quarltity

The manufacturer shall specify the limits of error of the quantity for each switched position. 6.5.4 Spec(fication Quantity of ml Uncalibrated Switched or for

6.1 Values and Limits of Error The quality and nature of the functional performance of a generator is defined by statements of: a) the limits of error of the values of certain performance characteristics,

The manufacturer shall specify the minimum maximum and/or nominal value of the quantity each switched position.

Table 1 Types of Control Related to Statements of Performance (Clauses 6.2 and 6.3)
Type of Control Defined in 1 Calibrated fixed Uncalibrated fixed Calibrated switched Uncalibrated switched Assigned switched Calibrated adjustable Uncalibrated adjustable Conditionally calibrated Multiple-controlled Dual-controlled 2eneral test conditions 2 5.2.2.1 5.2.1.2 5.2.2.1 5.2.2.2 5.2.2.3 5.2.3.1 5.2.3.2 5.2.3.3 5.3 5.4 I 8 Value (See Note 1) 3 6.5.2 6.5.4. 6.5.5 6.5.7 6.5.8 6.6 6.7 7 Operating Error (See Note 1) 4 6.51 6.5.3 6.5.6 6.5.8 6.6 6.7 7 8.1 and 8.2 Type of Error Intrinsic Error (See Note 2) 5 Influence Error (See Note 2) 6 6.5.1 6.5.3 6.5.6 6.5.8 6.6 6.7 7 8.3 Stability Error (See Notes 2 and 3) 7 65.1 6.5.3 6.5.6 6.5.8 6.6 6.7 7 8.4 Variation (See Note 2) 8 6.51 6.5.3 6.5.6 65.8 6.6 6.7 7 8.5

4 .. ;f

tl z 3

s

i$eafic test conditions
NOTES

1 Required for ah performance characteristics. See specified clauses for method of statement. 2 Optional for all performance characteristics. Specified references apply to those performance characteristics for which limits of intrinsic error, influence error, or stability error limits or variation are specified. 3 When the stability error is not included in the operating error, separate statements of the limits of stability error am required.

IS 14527 : 1998 6.5.5 Specification Assigned States of a Switched Quanrq with differ in the two cases. when the two types of control differ, the quantity shall be specified twice, firstly for manual control and secondly for programme control. 6.8 Form of the Specification of Influence Error The limits of influence error of a specified quantity of a generator shall be specified by the manufacturer in

The manufacturer shall provide a numerical and/or word description of the range or state of the quantity for each switched position. 6.5.6 Specification Quantity of a Calibrated Adjustable

accordance with 6.8.1 or'6.8.2, below. 6.8.1 Specification
of Limits of Influence Error

The manufacturer shall specify the limits of error of the quantity which are applicable within the entire effective range of the quantity. 6.5.7 Specification Quantity of an Uncalibrated Adjustable

The limits of influence error over the effective range of quantity may be specified.
NOTE - This form of specification is convenient when no substantially linear relationship exists between the influence error and the influence quantity of influencing characteristic causing the error.

The manufacturer shall specify the minimum and maximum values of the rated range of the quantity. 6.5.8 Specificaticun Adjustable Quantity of a Conditionally Calibrated

6.8.2 Specification

in Coeficient

Form

The manufacturer shall specify the limits of error of the quantity at each of the distinct resettable positions provided and shall specify the minimum and maximum values of the rated range of the quantity. 6.6 Specification Quantities of Multiple-Controlled

The influence error over the effective range of a quantity may be specified in coefficient form including the appropriate sign, so that a correction formula can be applied.
NOTE - This form of specification is appropriate when a substantially linear relationship exists between the influence error and the influence quantity or influencing characteristic causing the error. Although, this form of specification does not specify limits of influence error, typically, the influence error is significantly less than the intrinsic elTor, and the absence of limits of influence elTor is not important.

The manufacturer shall specify the limits of error or values, as applicable, of the quantity in all combinations of all types of controls which are associated with the multiple-controlled quantity where for each control the applicable 6.5.3 to 6.5.8 shall apply. 6.7 Specification of Dual-Controlled Quantities

6.8.3 Usage Groups
The reference values or ranges,the rated ranges of use and the limit ranges ofoperation, storage and transport, for all influence quantities shall be selected from only one of the usage Groups 1, II or 111in 6 of IS 9 176. These usage groups are: Usage Group 1: For indoor use and under conditions which are normally found in laboratories and factories and where generators tiill be handled carefully. Usage Group II: For use in environments having protection from full extremes or environment and under conditions of handling between those of Groups I and III. Usage Group III: For outdoor use and in areas where the generator may be subjected to rough handling. Any exceptions to the values given in 7 shall be explicitly and clearly stated by the manuf:lcturcr with
an indication The fencrator that they may foi are cxccptions. to one group conditions of rated and but to this

Any quantity of a generator may have both manual control means and programme control :neans. When both means of control are provided, the manufacturer shall specify the following. 6.7.1 Control Section

The means or techniques by which the mnuual control means (programme control means) aIe activated to permit control of the quantity while the programme control means (manual control means) aredeacti\,ated. 6.7.2 Provision of Override The means or techniques by which and the conditions under which the manual control means (programme control means) may or will override the progl-amme control means (manual control means).

correspond environrrientnl mains

When ,both manu;d control IIKWIS and pragranune control mc-ans are associated with a quantity, the type of control provided (as defined in 5.2 and 5.3) may II

iranges another,

of' use for group

supply conditions,

shall be clearly

stated

by the manufactureI-.

IS 14527 : 1998 7 GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR TESTING agreed between the interested parties. This standard does not specify which category of test is applicable to the various performance characteristics. The applicable categories should be specified by agreement between maimfacturer and user. All tests stated are type tests unless agreed otherwise by the manufacturer and the user. The three categories of tests Type tests, which are made on a single generator of each design or on a small number of generators of the same design. b) Batch tests, which are made only on a fraction of a production or delivery batch. c) Routine tests, which are made on all generators of a production or delivery batch. 8 SPECIFIC CONDITIONS FOR TESTING 8.1 Test Conditions Applicable to Operating Error The limits of operating error of a quantity of a generator specified by the manufacturer shall be valid under rated operating conditions. 8.2 Test Conditions Applicable to Intrinsic Error The limits of intrinsic error of a quantity of a generator shall be valid under the reference conditions specified by the manufacturer. The specified reference conditions should, preferably, be in accordance with IS 9176 : 1979. 8.3 Test Conditions Applicable to Influence Error Any preliminary adjustments specified by the manufacturer shall be carried out before beginning the measurements. 7.4 Connected Load 8.3.1 Influence Characteristic Error Due to an Influencing

7.1 Test Equipment 7.1.1 In general, measurements for verification shall be carried out with instruments which will not appreciably (or only calculably) affect the values to be measured. In principle, the errors in measurements made with these instruments should be negligible in comparison with the errors to be determined. 7.1.2 When the error negligible, the following of the instrument rule shall apply. is not

If a generator is claimed to have a limit of error of fe percent for a given performance characteristic and the manufacturer uses for its checking an apparatus resulting in an error of measurement of ti percent, the error being checked shall remain between the limits ye-n) percent. Likewise, if a user checks the same generator using another apparatus resulting in an error of measurement of ti percent, he is not entitled to reject the generator if its apparent error exceeds the limits of fe percent, but remains within the limits of +(e+m) percent. 7.2 Period for Achievement of Stable Operation

The supply voltage shall be applied for a period equal to the warm up time as specified by the manufacturer or, in the absence of such information, for a period of 1 h. 7.3 Performance of Preliminary Adjustments

The rated ranges of load impedance (admittance) shall be connected to a generator through out all tests except for specified tests which require other load impedances (admittances). 7.5 Output Value

Throughout the determination of the influence error of a specified quantity caused by changes in the value of a specified influencing characteristic: a) the value of the specified influencing characteristic shall be changed within its effective range, all influence quantities shall be maintained at any constant value within the reference conditions, and unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer, all other influencing characteristics shall be maintained at any constant value within the reference conditions.

b)

,

The voltage (current) output of a generator output shall be set at the maximum rated output value throughout all tests except for specified tests which require other values. 7.6 Control of Influence Quantities Throughout all tests all influence quantities shall remain within the limits specified for the applicable usage group (see 68.3). 7.7 Testing The tests shall be divided into three categories and the sampling rates for type tests and batch tests shall be 12

c)

.

8.3.2 lnjluence Error Due to an Injluence Quantity Throughout the determination of the influence error of a specified quantity caused by changes in the value of a specified influence quantity the values of ail other influence quantities and influencing characteristics shall be maintained within reference conditions.

IS 14527 : 1998 8.3.3 Influence Error Due to Temperature Measurements for the determination of influence error shall be performed after a time interval following the change in temperature in order that thermal equilibrium may be established. This elapsed time interval: a) may be specified by the manufacturer, and b) shall not be greater than I h. 8.3.3.1 Limits of injluence error due to temperature 8.3.4 Influence Error Due to Supply Voltage Measurements for the determination of the limits of influence error shall be performed when the mains supply voltage is abruptly changed from its rated value to: a) 110% of its rated value, and b) 90% of its rated value. In each case, changes in the value of the quantity relative to its value before the change in the value of the mains supply voltage shall be specified as follows: a) the maximum positive and negative changes during the first minute, and. b) the change after a time interval of 15 min. 8.4 Test Conditions Applicable to Variation

The limits of influence error for the rated range of use shall be specified in accordance with 6.8.1.
NOTE - Typically, and unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer, measurement at intervals of 10" C throughout the rated range of use are adequatk for the determination of the limits of influence error.

8.3.3.2 Coefficient temperature

of

influence

error due to

The coefficient qf influence error for the rated range of use shall be specified #asthe change per 1�C and in accordance with 6.8.2.
NOTE - Typically, and unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer, two measurements at temperatures differing by 10�C within the rated range of use are adequate for the determination of the coefficient of influence error.

The limits of variation of a specified quantity shall be determined as the change in value of the quantity when the specified intluence quantity is changed from its reference value (or the limit of its reference range) to any specified value within its rated range of use. Throughout thedetermination of the limits of variation all other influence quantities and influencing characteristics shall be maintained within reference conditions.

13

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of lndiarl Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. , Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the, prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude `the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of' Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. LTD 21 ( 1429 ).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 Telephones : 323 0 I 3 1,323 33 75, 323 94 02 Regional Central Offices : Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17 323 38 41 8s 61 20

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 1 IO 002

1

Eastern

: l/l4 C. LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700 054 : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022

337 X4 99,337 { 3378626,33791

Northern

1 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113

60 38 43 60 20 25

235 02 16,235 04 42 1 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 8327591.8327892

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, MUMBAI 400 093

Marol,

Andheri

(East)

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Prinkct at Printograph, New Delhi, Ph : 5726847

