(Reaffirmed 2001)

IS : 9877 - 1981

Indian

Standard

CODE- OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE OF GRAIN COMBINE
Harvesting, Threshing and Transport Equipment Sectional Committee, AFDC 51
Chaitmm DR S.~R. VERMA Members DR L. N. SHUKLA(Alternate to Dr S. R. Verma ) Nationai Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR), Kamal SHRI V. P. ANEJA DR S. P. AOARWALA ( Altcrnaic ) Department of Agriculture, Government of Punjab, SHRI S. S. BAINS Chandigarh National -Agricultural Co-operative Marketing SHRI BHUPENDRA Federation of India Ltd, Delhi SHRI CHANDRAMOHA~ Punjab Tractors Limited, Ropar SHRI G. S. RIHAL ( Alternate ) SHRI c. B. CHUGH Indian Investment Centre, Ney Delhi DIRECTOR Trac;;tosaining Centre ( Mimstry of Agriculture ), SENIORTEST ENGINEER ( Alternate ) Mahindra Owen Limited, Punt SHRI A. K. GARC SHRI G. C. SINGHAL( Alternate ) Department of Agriculture, Government of Uttar SHFU R. C. GOEL Pradesh, Lucknow SHRI C. S. SHARMA( Alternate ) SHRI R. K. GUPTA State Farms Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI M. L. GARG ( Alternate ) SHRI INDERJIT SINGH Union Forgings, Ludhiana SHRI PARAMJIT~SINGH ( Alternate ) SHRI H. S. KUMARA~WAMY Dunlop India Limited, Calcutta SHRI S. K. MISRA Tractor Training & Testing Station (Ministry of Agriculture ), Budni SHRIJ. PRASAD( Alternate ) PROP A. C. PANDYA Central Institute ofAgricultural Engineering (ICAR), Bhopal DR R. S. DEVNANI( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 @ZJ Copyright 1982 INDIAN This publication STANDARDS INSTITUTION of 1957 ) and is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV Representing Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9877 - 1981 ( Continued frompage 1 )
Members SHRI P. Ik PANGOTR+
DR J. S. PANWAR

Rcfiresefiting
Ministry of Agriculture ( Department of Agriculture and Go-operation ) Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR), New Delhi Jyoti Limited, Vadodara Haryana Agro-Industries Chandigarh Corporation Ltd,

SHRI fL K. KAUL ( Altcmate) DR K. M. PATEL SHRIK. K. PATEL (Alteraatc )
SHRI E. C. PETER

Vicon Limited, Bangalore Escorts Limited, Faridabad SHRI RIPDAMANSINGH SHRI N. L. K. MALHOTRA ( Alternate ) Hindsons Private Ltd, Patiala &RI R. K. SABHARWAL Govind Ballabh Pant University of Agriculture & DR K. N. SINOH Technology, Pantnagar PROP BHAGWANSINGH( Alternate ) U. P. State Agro-Industrial Corporation Ltd, SHRIR. S. YADAVA Lucknow Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojZo Member) Smu T. PURNANANDAM, Director ( Agri & Food )

SHRI M. M. KOWLX( Alternate) SHRIM. R. AHLADA RAO

Secretav
SHRI R. N. SHARMA Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI

2

IS : 9877 - 1981

Indian

Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE OF GRAIN COMBINE
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian
Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 27 July 1981, after the draft finalized by the Harvesting, Threshing and Transport Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council.

0.2 Combine ( combine-harvester-thresher ) is a complex machine and involves heavy initial investment. It is, therefore, imperative that it is utilized for reasonably long working hours for several years and the cost of operation is minimized. Though basic design of combine and the quality of the material used for its different components are important, proper installation, operation and preventive maintenance of the combine is equally important in achieving these objectives. This code provides guidelines for these. The terminology with regard to combine and its components is covered under 3 of IS : 8122 ( Part I ) - 1976". 0.3 In the preparation of this standard, assistance Tractor Training Centre ( Ministry of Agriculture has been received ), Hissar. from

1. SCOPE 1.1 This
preventive code prescribes the guidelines for installation, operation maintenance of grain combine ( combine-harvester-thresher and ).

2. I~NSTALLATION/SETTING OPERATION

OF GRAIN

COMBINE

FOR

2.0 Before starting the combine, general inspection of the unit and of the prime mover should be carried out. Special attention should be paid for the points given under 2.1 to 2.15.
*Test code for combine harvester thresher: Part I Terminology.

3

IS : 9877 - 1981 2.1 If the header
or any sub-assembly has been removed during portation or storage, mount the unit on combine as per instructions tioned in operator's manual of the machine. 2.2 All fasteners should be checked and tightened, be properly ifrequired. greased or oiled as per transmen-

2.3 All the lubrication points should manufacturer's recommendation.

2.4 Ensure that all the sub-assemblies of machine matter, such as chaff, straw, stone and dust. 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 2.10 a) b) c) d) e) f) Check for proper tensioning

are free from all foreign

of drive belts and chains. or rotating parts. parts.

Check for free movement Check for the correct Check

of all moving

direction

or rotation pressure

of the moving in tyres.

for recommended

inflation

Check that all safety guards/shields Check and replenish

are properly

secured to the machine.

the following, crank-case,

if necessary:

Oil level in the engine

Oil level in the gear box, Oil level in the hydraulic Fuel level in the~fuel tank, Water Oilin level in the radiator, wet-type air cleaner. working as specified and system reservoir ( if available ),

2.11 Check_all the systems of prime mover for proper in the operator's manual.

2.12 In case of tractor-operated combine, use the tractor of recommended power, and ensure that power take-off ( PTO ) speed conforms to the recommendations of the combine manufacturer. Make drive connection to machine as per the instruction contained in operator's manual of the combine. 2.13 A self-propelled combine should be equipped with fire extinguisher where as in case of tractor-operated combines, the tractor should be fitted with spark arrester. 2.14 The stone trap should be checked. emptied and trap put to effective position Stones, again. if present, should be

4

IS : 9877 - 1981 2.15 Depending
on crop and field condition, necessary adjustments in all the systems (cutting, conveying, threshing, separating, cleaning and collecting, etc) of the combine shall be made in accordance with the operator's manual. Attachments, such as lodged crop lifter, crop dividers, if required, should be fitted. 3. OPERATION

OF COMBINE
shall be operated by a skilled and trained operator. which may

3.1 The

combine

3.2 Ensure that check bunds and ridges of abnormal height, hinder the smooth working in the field, have been flattened.

3.3 If required, ensure that recommended width of swath from head lands and side lands have been cut for first run of the machine/tractor. 3.4 Prior to starting the engine and engaging the personnel by blowing the horn. 3.5 Before starting change the engine, the working mechanism, warn

check the following: position;

4 b) cl 4

gear

lever is in neutral

main power drive ( in case of PTO-operated machine ) and drive lever ( in case of self-propelled machine ) are disengaged; In the case of tractor-operated combines, never start without being seated well in the tractor seat; and the tractor

Before moving the tractor-operated combines, ensure that there are no obstructions to the wheels ( like animals or persons sitting near the wheels ).

starting and warming-up of engine, keeping the gear change lever in neutral position, engage main power drive and other drive levers ~of different sub-assemblies of machine and check for smooth operation of all the systems under no-load condition. 3.7 In case of self-propelled combine, brake pedals should be coupled while driving on roads. However, during field operations while negotiating sharp bends these may be decoupled. In case of tractor-operated combines, the tractor brakes should be locked together. 3.8 Follow the pattern of operation as suggested in operator's instruction manual ( see also Fig. 1 and 2 for PTO-operated and self-propelled combine respectively ).

3.6 After

5

IS : 9877 - 1981

IA

10

!C

FIG. 1 PATTERN OF OPERATION FOR PTO OPERATED COMBINES INDICATING WORKING PASSAGEAROUND FIELD CORNERS

ZA, 2B,2C;E" 2F 1 -

Working Passage~Acound Field Corners Harvesting Square Field After Covering the Corners Harvesting Rectangular Elongated Field After Covering the Corners Harvesting Large Sized Field ( Dividing into Smaller Parts )

FIG. 2

PATTERN OF OPERATION FOR SELF-PROPELLED COMBINE 6

IS : 9877 - 1981
3.9 In first few runs, depending upon the field and crop conditions, make selection or correction for travel speed; and speed of reel, threshing cylinder, rack/straw walker, blower; cylinder-concave clearance; air quantity; sieve opening; etc.
NOTE - Once position of throttle lever is set in order to get desired speeds of various systems of combine, it should not be disturbed during operation. Any change in forward speed during operation should-be done by change of gear shift lever or variator.

3.10 The adjustments which cannot be done from operator's seat, if possible, should be ~carried after disengaging the main drive and other drive levers ( preferably after stopping the prime mover ). 3.11 The lever for the drive except while unloading. 3.12 The straw. radiator shall to unloading augers should be disengaged

be cleaned

periodically

to avoid

its choking

by

3.13 In case a combine is to be used as stationary thresher, disconnect the drive to the cutter bar and reel. Remove the reel, if possible. No person, other than employed for the operation of machine, be allowed near the machine. Persons working on the machine should be briefed about the safety aspect. Straw should be removed simultaneously. 3.14 Persons working on the combines should be strictly smoke and/or consume any other intoxicant. 3.15 Do not touch moving parts of the machine. the instructed not to

3.16 In case of a failure during work, stop the machine, disengage mechanism involved and only then proceed with the repair.

3.17 Hands should not be taken off the steering wheel during the ride; do not allow any unauthorized personnel to stay on the platform, nor in the direct vicinity of the machine. 3.18 -Never overload the bagging bags soon after filling. 4. PREVENTIVE platform of the combine. Remove the

MAINTENANCE
and servicing schedules as given in operator's

4.1 Make sure that lubrication
manual are followed. 4.2 Always use correct and minor repair.

tool and correct

methodology

for any adjustment

7

IS : 9877 - 1981 4.3 Clean procedure
the machine thoroughly -after each day's work according mentioned in the operator's manual. to the

4.4 The combine shall be checked including clutches, brakes, steering and readjusted, if required. 4.5 Take care while refilling

for proper working of different systems system and hydraulic systems every day

the fuel tank, not

to spill fuel by overfilling.

4.6 For any welding job required td be done on the machine, chaff and any other inflammable material should be removed. Battery terminals and alternator should be disconnected before welding. While welding close to the bearing in the machine, earthing should be done properly. 4.7 Do not allow for any job to be performed underneath the header. Proper jacking of the header is essential to prevent any accident. 4.8 Insulation of electric cables shall not show any damage nor be aged beyond safety. Cables running near the movable parts of the combine shall be fastened and protected against rubbing and other damages. 4.9 Entrust 4.10 Always tives. specialized repairs only to authorized sold through personnel. representa-

use genuine

spares

manufacturer's

4.11 Tractors discharging excess of carbon through silencer may cause fire hazards during harvesting. Get the tractor serviced before using it for combine operation. 4.12 The periodical with the instructions 5. DIAGNOSIS maintenance of engine of the manufacturer. should be done in accordance

OF COMMON
faults,

FAULTS
their causes

AND THEIR
and remedies

REMEDIES
are given in

5.1 Some
Appendix

of the common A for guidance.

6. OFF-SEASON

STORAGE
thoroughly.

6.1 Clean the inner and outer side of the machine

6.2 Remove the sieves and clean them properly and apply a coat of used engine oil or suitable rust preventive. The same should be done for chains of tailing and grain elevators, and for those of feeding conveyor. 8

IS : 9877 - -1981 6.3 On parts which may get rusted or wherever paint has come of because of moving parts, a coat of rust preventive or paint or used engine oil should be provided. 6.4 Clean up the concave, the shaker shoe floor, the stone separator, well as the grain and tailing augers. 6.5 Take belts and chains off, clean them and store. 6.6 Slacken 6.7 Repair the over-load clutches and lubricate their working surfaces. as

or replace worn out and damaged parts.

6.8 Lubricate the fingers of the platform auger bar with oil. Other lubricating points should be properly greased or oiled. 6.9 Store the machine under a shed to protect from dust, rain and sun. 6.10 Jack up the combine to take the weight off the wheel tyres. 6.11 Servicing of the engine ( in case of self-propelled machine ) for storage should be done in accordance with the operator's manual of the engine. 6.12 Hydraulic be topped up. cylinder shall not carry any load and the system should

6.13 Apply a film of grease to the fuel tank surface on both the sides. 6.14 Charge the storage batteries and re-charge them regularly. ( self-propelled machine ) to capacity

6.15 Inspection windows should be checked and it should be ensured that they are properly closed. 6.16 The lever for drive to unloading augers should be disengaged except while unloading.

9

IS : 9877 - 1981

APPENDIX A (mzuse 5.1 )
COMMON
TROUBLE (1) Crop left uncut or partially cut i)

TROUBLE,

REASONS
REASON (2)

AND

THEIR

REMEDIES
REMEDY (3)

Knife sections or ledger plates worn or damaged Clearances between the knife sections and the ledger plates not correct ktt~ bars worn or

Replace or repair knife sections or ledger plates Correct the clearances

ii)

iii) iv)

Re-grind the knife sections, sharpen or replace them Check and correct it

Slanting angle of the knife bar not correct Registration of knife is not correct

v)

Make adjustment rect the same

to cor-

Clogging of cut crop platform auger

on

i) ii)

Reel set too high Crop conveyor is too low Reel extended ward excessively speed

Lower it to correct position Correct the speed Take it back position to correct

iii)

for-

Harvested crop around reel

winding

i) ii)

Too

high reel set

speed in-

Lower the speed Correct tines the setting of reel

Reel tines correctly

Crop plants bend in front of moving combine

i)

Reel speed is too low, that is, reel index is not proper Reel position correct is not

Adju;tr;lr;

rotary speed of

ii)

Adjust the position reel

of the

10

IS :9877- 1981
Tstoua~e (1) Harvested crop winding around platform auger i) ii) iii) Crop mid REhson (2) excessively too huhigh RRmEDY (3) Harvest the crop at proper moisture Set it correctly Set the reel properly

Auger set or too low

Incorrect reel setting in relation to platform auger Unripe crop Concave setting not parallel in relation to threshing cylinder Too large concave cylinder clearance Too low speed threshing cylinder of

Grain left unthreshcd

i) ii)

Wait till the crop ripened condition Set the concave

is in

properly

iii) iv)

Reduce the clearance proper threshing

for

Correct the speed of threshing cylinder to recommended number Check and ensure proper adjustment of feeding conveyor Increase the speed. to rc commended revolutions Increase to the recommended shaker shaft speed Reduce the travel speed or increase the cutting height Set the concave properly Change by new one Set crop dividers and reel properly for regular supply of crop

v)

Crop supply non-uniform through feeding conveyor Too low threshing cylinder speed Too low shaker shaft speed Crop humid

Straw wrapping around threshing cylinder

i) ii)

iii)

iv)

Incorrect ting

concave set-

v)
vi)

Worn out threshing cylinder beater Irregular crop supply by header unit in too large batches

11

IS : 9877 - 1981
TP~OUBLE (1) Grain breakage REltsolr REMEDY. (3) not Set the concave the concave properly slots

(2) i)
ii) iii) Concave parallel setting

Concave clogged Excessive iuantity of grain mixed with ears su plied to threshing. cy{nder by tailing elevator Too high threshing cylinder speed Incorrect setting and functioning of threshing unit Incorrect setting functioning of cleaning unit Front of machine too high and the is

Clear

Set the shaker to correct position

iv)

Lower

the .cylinder

speed

Grain losses underneath the straw walkers

i)

Set the cylinder-concave properly to ensure proand parallelism per clearance Set the cleaning perly the unit pro-

ii)

iii) iv) ~Grain losses through shaker sieves i)

Lower front

machine

in

cylinder Threshing speed too high Concave - cylinder clearance not adjusted resulting properly into rain breakage and bowing P aivay of the grains Concave clogged Sieve clogged Chaffer shield adjusted too below Chaffer wrongly extension adjusted

Decrease the threshing cylinder speed Set the correct clearance

ii) iii) iv) v) vi) vii)

Clean the concave Clean the sieve Adjust the chaffer shield to proper position Adjust chaffer correctly extension

The air flow on the sieves is too strong The travel speed and capacity are on the higher side

Reduce the air flow Reduce the travel speed and swath coverage ( Continued )

IS :9877 -1981
TROUSLE REAson
&.MEDY

(3)

Grain losses
cleaning

unit

caused

by

i) ii) iii)

Too strong air fiow Too speed high blower

Reduce the air flow Reduce the blower speed

Upper sieves open too narrowly or clogged Lower sieves open too narrowly or clogged Humid crop rotating low Too speed of shaker shoe shaft Sieves overloaded with threshed material

Clear the upper sieves and provide proper opening Clear the lower sieves and provide proper opening Wait for drying before harvest Check for drive and correct it Increase of crop tension

iv) v) vi)

vii)

the height of cut

Sieve-overloaded

i) ii)

Too

weak

air

blast

Adjust the blower opening Avoid slippage of belt

Drive belt of threshing cylinder slipping Sieve clogged or too narrowly open Blower belt slips Shaker drive belt slips

iii)

Clear the sieves and proper opening be provided Avoid slippage of belt Avoid slippage drive belt of shaker

iv) v)

vi)

Too low main drive speed ( engine/PTO speed ) cylinder Threshing speed not correct

Correct the speed to required number

vii)

Correct it to desired number

13

IS : 9877- 1981
TROUBLE

REASON (2) circutailing

REMEDY (3) Clear the sieve and provide proper gap Increase opening and clear it of sieve

(1)

Too . high return laz;a;orthrough

i)
ii)

Lower sieve cIogged 01` open too narrowly Upper sieve open too narrowly or clogged partially Incorrectly justments set air ad-

iii) iv) Grain not cleaned properly i) ii) iii) iv) v) vi) vii)

Adjust the air requirement Wait for drying of the crop before harvesting

Crop is humid Too weak air blast

Correct the air speed and adjust it Decrease the opening

Lower sieve too widely Upper sieve too widely

opened opened

Decrease the opening Set it properly Reduce the speed to desired number Increase the clearance required number to

The chaffer extension not set properly Too high speed threshing cylinder of

Too less concavecylinder clearance Machine not ently loaded suffici-

Cover full width for harvesting

14

