**************** 


-k  t^^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  12136  (1987) :  Classification  of  printing  machines  [MED 
25:  Printing  Machinery] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y>K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


UDC  68f62V00i-3  IS  :  12136  •  1987 


(  Reaffirmed  2003 ) 

Indian  Standard 
CLASSIFICATION  OF  PRINTING  MACHINES 


1.  Scope  —  This  standard  evolves  a  rational  method  in  classification  of  various  types  of  printing 
machines. 

2.  Methodology  —  The  classification  is  based  on  the  basic  principles  of  transfer  of  inked  image 
from  the  fcrnie  to  the  substrate. 

ZA  The  following  are  the  basic  principles. 

2.1.1  Relief -printing  —  The  printing  surface  Is  raised  at  a  uniform  level  in  reversed  image  at  a 
height  of  2'33  mm  to  transfer  the  ink  directly  to  the  substrate  under  uniform  pressure.  This  process 
is  known  as  letterpress  printing. 

2-1.2  Planograpfiic  printing  —The  printing  and  non-printing  surfaces  are  in  the  same  height  or 
level  and  the  inked  image  are  transferred  on  the  substrate.  The  principle  of  this  process  is  based 
on  ink-water  repulsion.  The  im.ages  are  transferred  to  blanket  from  the  plate  and  printed  on  the 
substrate.    This  printing  process  Is  known  as  offset  or  lithographic  printing. 

2.1.3  Intaglio  printing  —  The  printing  surface  Is  recessed  from  the  non-image  area  and  the  Ink 
fills  up  on  the  recessed  portion  and  is  wiped  clean  by  a  doctor  blade.  The  paper  sucks  the  ink  to 
give  impression  directly.  This  process  is  known  as  intaglio  or  gravure  printing. 

2.1.4  S/7A  screen pr/n<//7flf —The  Image  area  is  made  into  a  stencil  by  opaquing  on  non-Image 
areas  of  a  piece  of  silk  cloth  stitched  on  aframa.  The  ink  filled  on  the  frame  is  transferred  through 
the  screen  and  passes-on  to  the  substrate  hold  next  to  the  screen  on  the  other  side.  This  process 
is  known  as  silk  screen  printing. 

3.  Printing  Machines  Based  on  Letterpress 

3.1  Classifications  Based  on  Construction  and  Mect)anism 

3.1.1  Platen  printing  machine 

a)  Hand-fed  platen,  and 

b)  Auto  platen. 

3.1.2  Fiat  bed  cylinder 

a)  Stop  cylinder, 

b)  Single  revolution  cylinder, 

c)  Oscillating  cylinder,  and 

d)  Two-revolution  cylinder. 

3.2  Classifications  Based  on  Paper  Used 

3.2.1  Sheetfed  letterpress  machine 

a)  Flat  bed  cylinder,  and 

b)  Rotary  letterpress. 

3.2.2  Web-fed  letterpress  machine  —  Rotary  letterpress. 

3.3  Classifications  Based  on  Number  of  Colours 
3.3.1  Single  colour 

a)  Flat  bed  cylinder,  and 

b)  Rotary  web. 


Adopted  18  August  1987 


©January  1988,  BIS 


Gr  2 


BUREAU    OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 
MANAK    BHAVAN,    9    BAHADUR    SHAH     ZAFAR    MARG 
NEW   DELHI    110002 


ISH2136.19B7 

3.3.2  Multi-colour 

a)  Flat  bed  cylinder,  and 

b)  Rotary.web. 

3.3.3  Multi-reel 

a)  Multi-unit, 

b)  Rotary  web,  and 

c)  Rotary  satelite. 

3.4  Classifications  Based  on  End-Product 

3.4.1  Fixed  size  cut-off  (  reel  to  sheet )  —  Rotary  web. 

3.4.2  Variable  size  cut-off —Rotary  web. 

3.4.3  Reel-to-reel  —  Rotary  web. 
3-4.4  Reel-to-fold  —  Rotary  web: 

a)  Broad  sheet, 

b)  Tabloid, 

c)  Quarter  fold,  and 

d)  Double  parallel. 

4.  Flexographic  Printing  Machine — The  principle  of  printing  is  more  or  less  same  as  of 
letterpress  printing.  The  image  carrying  printing  plates  are  made  of  soft  or  resilient  material 
and  a  water-based  Ink  is  directly  applied  to  the  plate  and  the  Image  Is  transferred  to  the  paper 
directly. 

5.  Planographic  Printing  Machine 

5.1  Classifications  Based  on  Construction  and  Mechanism 

5.1.1  Lithographic  printing  machine  —  Direct  litho. 

5.1.2  Flat  bed  cylinder  offset 

5.1.3  Rotary  cylinder  offset 

a)  Conventional  three  or  four  cylinders,  and 

b)  Satelite. 

5.2  Classifications  Based  on  Number  of  Colours 
5-2.1  Single  colour 

a)  Flat  bed  cylinder,  and 

b)  Conventional  rotary  (  three  cylinders  in  one  unit ). 
5.2.2  Multi-colour 

a)  Rotary, 

b)  Flat  bed  cylinder  ( two  colours  in  one  unit  with  five  cylinders  ), 

c)  Rotary  offset  In  line  construction  ( three  or  four  cylinders  in  one  unit ),  and 

d)  Rotary  satelite  construction  (three  or  four  colours  In  one  unit  with  single  impression 
cylinder ). 

5.3  Classifications  Based  on  Paper  Feeding 

5.3.1  Sheetfed 

a)  Flat  bed  cylinder  offset,  and 

b)  Rotary  offset. 

5.3.2  Web  fed 

a)  Unit  system  consisting  of  three  cylinders,  and 

b)  Perfecting  by  four  cylinders  blanket  to  blanket. 


IS  :  12136- 1987 


5.4  Classifications  Based  on  Configuration  of  Printing  Press 

5.4.1  Web  printing  mactiine  —  Three-  or  four-cylinders  printing  machine. 
5.4-2  'ty'  or  'N'  printing  unit  —  Four-cylinders. 

5.4.3  T'  printing  unit  —  Six-cylinders. 

5.4.4  Satelite  printing  unit  —  Seven-cylinders. 

5.4.5  Sateiite  printing  unit  —  Nine-cylinders. 

6.  Other  Type  of  Printing  Machines 

a)  Thermographic  printing  machine  —  Letterpress, 

b)  Laser  printing  machine, 

c)  Collo-type  printing  machine,  and 

d)  Hollograghic  printing  machine. 


EXPLANATORY     N  OTE 

This  standard  makes  an  attempt  to  lay  down  the  broad  classification  of  printing  machinery. 
While  preparing  the  standard,  assistance  has  been  derived  from  Italian  National  Standard,  UM 
6435-1969 'Classification  of  printing  machines'. 


Printed  at  New  India  Printing  Press,  Khurja,  India 


