**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11640-1 (1986): Retractor, General Surgery, Part 1: 
Schonborn's Pattern [MHD 1: Surgical Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC615-472'2 



IS : 11640 (Parti ) -1986 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 




SPECIFICATION FOR 
RETRACTOR, GENERAL SURGERY 

PART 1 SCHONBaRN'S PATTERN 



1. Scope — Prescribes dimensional and other requirements of Schonborn's pattern retractor used in 
general surgery. 



2. Shape and Dimensions — As shown in Fig. 1 
r 5*6+0.5 



16+1 




P«8 



1.8t0.2 




9±1-i 



U±T 




5.5*0*5 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 1 RETRACTORS, SCHONBORN'S PATTERN 

3. Material — Stainless steel conforming to designation 20Cr13 or SOCrlS of 18:6603-1972 
'Specification for stainless steel bars and flats'. 

4. Workmanship 

4.1 The retractor shall be free from burrs, pits, cracks and other surface defects. 

4.2 The edges of the blade shall be properly rounded and the retractor shall be free from sharp edges. 

5. Surface Condition — All surfaces shall be free from pores, crevices and grinding marks. The 
retractor shall be supplied free from residual scale, acid, grease and grinding and polishing materials. 
Compliance with these requirements shall be checked by inspection using normal vision (corrected, 
if necessary). 

5.1 Surface Finish — The surface finish shall be one of or a combination of the following: 

a) Mirror polished; 

b) Reflection-reducing, for example, satin finish, matt black finish; and 

c) An applied surface coating, for example, for insulation purposes. 

(Mote —The satin finish should be effected by an appropriate procedure, such as grinding, brushing, electropolishing 
and in addition, satin finishing (glass beading or satin brushing). The finish should be uniform and smooth and it 
should reduce glare. Instrument of mirror finish should be adequately ground to remove all surface imperfections and 
polished to remove grinding marks, resulting in a mirror finish. The mirror finish should be effected by an appropriate 
procedure, such as polishing, brushing ejectropolishing and mirror buffing. 

5.2 Passivation and Final Treatment — The retractor shall be treated by a suitable passivation process. 

Note' — Examples of methods of passivation axe by electropolishing or by treating with 10 (v/v) nitric acid 
solution for not (ess than 30 min at a temperature of not less than 1 0°C and not exceeding 60°C. The retractor should 
then be rinsed in water and dried in hot air. 



Adopted 20 January 1986 



© December 1986, ISI 



Gr 1 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 11640 ( Parti ) -1986 

6. Keat Treatment and Hardness — The retractor shall be heat treated to give a hardness of 380 
to 430 HM when tested in accordance with IS : 1501-1968 'Method for Vickers hardness test for steel 
[first revision)\ 

7. Tests 

7.1 Fiexfbillty Test — Uo\6 the retractor in a suitable vice at the middle portion so that the working 
end protrudes outside the vice in the downward direction. Apply a force of 250 N at the retracting 
end and hold it for 5 minutes. After the test there shall be no damage to the retractor or take a 
permanent set. 

7.2 Corrosion Resistance Test — Test the retractor in accordance with IS : 7531-1975 'Method for 
boiling and autoclaving test for corrosion resistance of stainless steel surgical instruments'. It shall 
show no sign of corrosion after the test. 

8. Marking — The retractor shall be legibly and indelibly marked with the manufacturer's name, 
initials or recognized trade-mark and the words 'Stainless SteeT. The marking shall preferably be done 
by electrical etching and not by stamping. 

8.1 iSf Certification iVIar/dng — Details available with the Indian Standards Institution. 

9. Packing — As agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 

10. Sampling — Sampling procedure and acceptance criteria for the forceps shall be as agreed to 
between the purchaser and the supplier. However a recommended scheme for the same is given in 
Appendix A- 



APPENDIX A 

{Ciause 10) 

SAMPLING PLAN AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 



A-1. Lot 



A-1.1 In a consignment, all the retractors of the same pattern and dimensions shall be grouped 
together to constitute a lot, not exceeding 50 items. Each lot shall be tested for the requirements of 
this specification. 

A-2. Scale of Sampling and Criteria for Conformity 

A-2.1 Eight retractors shall be selected at random from each lot by using random number tables 
(15:4305-1868 Methods for random sampling). Such retractor in the sample shall be individually 
tested for the requirements of shape and dimensions, material, workmanship, finish and marking. Any 
retractor failing to meet one or more of the above requirements shall be termed as defective. No defective 
retractors in the sample shall be permitted if the lot is to be accepted under this clause. 

A-2. 2 The iot which has been found satisfactory according to A-2.1 shall be tested for hardness, 
flexibility and corrosion resistance test. For this purpose, one retractor shall be sampled at random 
and tested for the above requirements. If need be, more retractors may be drawn for conducting the 
relevant tests. 

A-2.2,1 No failure shall occur if the lot is to be declared acceptable under this clause. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

Considerable assistance has been derived from DIN 13464-1982 Medical instrument; retractor, 
Schonborn type, issued by Deutsches Institut fiir Normung (West Germany). 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



