WAT WAH IS 16334 : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2018) 


Ta wat woei — 
aaraa — antes fagia 


Power System Communications — 
Interoperability — Guidelines 


ICS 33.200 


@ BIS 2015 


dia AM sd 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF “ad, 9 FIG WAL Bri, ae feeeit-110002 
Vie” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2015 Price Group 7 


Power System Control and Associated Communications Sectional Committee, LITD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Power 
System Control and Associated Communications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical 
Division Council. 


Indian power sector is growing at an enormous pace. Various grid expansion and interconnection projects are 
on-going to strengthen the existing transmission infrastructure to build a national grid. The need for interconnecting 
power networks is in turn driving the need for interconnection of information networks. It is imperative that the 
power systems today utilize the capabilities that modern information and communication technologies provide. 
Interoperability among various communicating entities of the power system is crucial for achieving the benefits 
of a seamless integrated information network. 


Electricity or power sector in India is dealing with a number of complex and large issues including demand- 
supply imbalance, quality of power, financial viability and growth impediments. There is a lot of ground work to 
be done to address these issues and it would perhaps take at least next ten years or even more to address them. 
However, there is one area where a lot of progress can be made very rapidly — Standards and Protocols. India can, 
and must, leverage global best standards for power sector and apply them in Indian market and context. 


Interoperability is an important area within standards and protocols and it is addressed in this document. IEEE 
defines interoperability as the ability of two or more systems or components to exchange information and to use 
the information that has been exchanged. This definition is about two decades old, long before smart grid term 
was coined. A slightly recent definition may be appropriate. The measure of ease of integration between two 
systems or software components to achieve a functional goal. A highly interoperable integration is one that can 
be easily achieved by the individual who requires the result. 


IS 16334 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


INTEROPERABILITY IN POWER SYSTEM 
COMMUNICATIONS — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard provides guidelines for achieving 
interoperability for utilities and applications. The goal 
is to develop interoperability standards for power sector 
in India as per the following guidelines which cover 
the following: 


a) The traditional value-chain (generation, 
transmission and distribution). 


b) The newer elements of value-chain (trading, 
risk-management, renewable generation, ABT 
(Availability Based Tariff), home/office area 
networks, system operations (load dispatch 
centers)). 

c) IT (Information Technology), 
Communication Technology (CT) and 
Automation or Operational Technologies (AT/ 
OT) and standards based integration between 
these components/layers. 

d) All the layers in the system starting from 
physical power system infrastructure, the 
communication network, the system software 
and application software. 


e) Harmonization among standards related to 
different aspects of the power system. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards listed in Annex A. 


3 ABBREVIATIONS 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
abbreviations shall apply: 


Description Abbreviations 
Availability Based Tariff ABT 
Automated Metering Infrastructure AMI 
Common Information Model CIM 
Distribution Automation DA 
Distributed Energy Resource DER 
Demand Response DR 
Distribution Transformer DT 


Description Abbreviations 
Energy Management System EMS 
Enterprise Resource Planning ERP 
Home Automation Network HAN 
Head End System HES 
Meter Data Management System MDMS 
Neighbourhood Area Network NAN 
Phasor Data Concentrator PDC 
Phasor Measurement Unit PMU 
Regional Transmission Operator RTO 
Remote Telemetry Unit RTU 
Unified Modelling Language UML 
Wide Area Network WAN 


4 OVERVIEW OF APPLICABLE STANDARDS 


4.1 Areas of Interoperability 


The objective of achieving interoperability across the 
power sector domain is a vast subject and requires 
standards in different areas. The smart grid requires 
different components of the power grid to communicate 
to each other across distinct interfaces. Interoperability 
is sought to be achieved at the interfaces of each pair 
of communicating entities. To prioritize the activities 
it is decided to create a selection of areas that requires 
interoperable standards at their interfaces. Following 
is the selection of areas that requires interoperable 
communication standards. An illustration is provided 
in Fig. 1. 


a) Intra substation communication — 
Communication happening within the 
boundary of a substation. Includes station bus 
and process bus communications. 


b) Inter substation communication — Sending 
protection, samples, phasor measurements, 
and process control information between 
substations in real-time 

c) Field equipment communication — It 
represents communications that take place 
originating from/ destined to devices outside 
control centres like a data concentrator 
gathering primary equipment monitoring data. 

d) Substation — Central System Communication 
— It includes monitoring and control of 
substations, pole-top devices, generation 
plants or distributed energy resources. 
Exchange of critical and non-critical 
information to be considered. 


IS 16334 : 2015 


e) Inter central system communication — It 


includes exchanging fault information for 
contingency analysis and emergency 
operations between Control centres/Data 
centres. Exchanging metering information 
from territorial boundaries to initialize state 
estimation or load distribution applications is 
another example. Communication may take 
place between levels of control centres within 
a utility, or between RTOs. 


Central system — DER communication — This 
includes communication between utility 
control centers and Energy Service Providers 
(ESPs) and Energy Market Participants like 
real-time pricing negotiations, aggregated 
customer metering and settlements. May 
provide data later used for market operations. 
Communication requirements for control 
centres to pass metering data to energy market 
participants also are considered. This 


g) 


h) 


j) 


Enterprise App 


© 


2 


Central System 


Central System 


2 


environment also encompasses the 
communications between distributed energy 
resources and the organizations that must 
monitor and operate them. 


Central system — Enterprise system 
communication — The gathering weather 
data, communicating with regulators, auditors 
and vendors. May include passing historical 
data, specifications, network topologies, 
configuration files, debug traces. Enterprise 
applications like Billing systems, ERPs are 
also considered here. 


Central system — consumer communication 
— This environment encompasses the 
communications between central system and 
devices in the consumer premises. 


Intra consumer premises communication — 
This includes communication within the 
consumer premises between the smart meter, 
in home display, smart appliances, etc. 


DER/Market 


Substation 


Dev 


Substation 


Field 


Dev 


Equipment 
(DT, 
Sectionalizer, 
FPI, 
RMU...etc.) 


Dev 


Consumer Premises 


Dev 


Dev 


Fic. 1 AREAS OF INTEROPERABILITY AND THEIR INTERFACES 


2 


4.2 Guidelines for Selection of Standards 


The major principles for the selection of existing 
standards for the above mentioned areas are the 
following considering that the standard: 


a) is well-established and widely acknowledged, 

b) is an established National Standard, where 
available. In the absence of a suitable National 
Standard, a stable industry-level standard 
developed by an open consensus process. 


c) has or is expected to have, significant 
implementations, adoption, and use. 


d) is supported by established standard body or 
users group to ensure that it is regularly 
revised and improved to meet changing 
requirements and that there is strategy for 
continued relevance. 


e) is developed and adopted internationally, 
wherever practical. 


f) isintegrated and harmonized, or there is a plan 
to integrate and harmonize it with 
complementing standards across the utility 
enterprise through the use of an industry 
architecture that documents key points of 
interoperability and interfaces. 


g) is openly available under fair, reasonable, and 
non-discriminatory terms. 


h) is associated conformance tests or a strategy 
for achieving them. 


j) has accommodated legacy implementations. 


k) allows for additional functionality and 
innovation through: 


1) Symmetry — It facilitates bi-directional 
flows of energy and information. 

2) Transparency — It supports a transparent 
and auditable chain of transactions. 


3) Composition — It facilitates building of 
complex interfaces from simpler ones. 

4) Extensibility — It enables adding new 
functions or modifying existing ones. 


5) Loose coupling — It helps to create a 
flexible platform that can support valid 
bilateral and multilateral transactions 
without elaborate pre-arrangement. 


6) Layered systems — It separates functions, 
with each layer providing services to the 
above and receiving services from the 
layer below. 

7) Shallow integration — It does not require 
detailed mutual information to interact 
with other managed or configured 
components. 


IS 16334 : 2015 


4.3 List of Applicable Standards 


List of applicable standards mapped to distinct 
application domains is given below. 


4.3.1 Domain Areas 


a) 


b) 


d) 


Advanced metering infrastructure — It 
consists of the communications hardware and 
software and associated system and data 
management software that creates a two-way 
network between advanced meters and utility 
business systems, enabling collection and 
distribution of information to customers and 
other parties, such as the competitive retail 
supplier or the utility itself. AMI provides 
customers real-time (or near real-time) pricing 
of electricity, and it can help utilities achieve 
necessary load reductions. 


Distribution grid management — It focuses 
on maximizing performance of feeders, 
transformers, and other components of 
networked distribution systems and 
integrating with transmission systems and 
customer operations. As smart grid 
capabilities, such as AMI and demand 
response, are developed, and as large numbers 
of distributed energy resources and plug-in 
electric vehicles (PEVs) are deployed, the 
automation of distribution systems becomes 
increasingly more important to the efficient 
and reliable operation of the overall power 
system. The anticipated benefits of 
distribution grid management include 
increased reliability, reductions in peak loads, 
and improved capabilities for managing 
distributed sources of renewable energy. 


Network communications — The smart grid 
domains and sub domains shall use a variety 
of public and private communication 
networks, both wired and wireless. Given this 
variety of networking environments, the 
identification of performance metrics and core 
operational requirements of different 
applications, actors and domains in addition 
to the development, implementation, and 
maintenance of appropriate security and 
access controls is critical to the smart grid. 


Wide-area situational awareness — It refers 
to monitoring and display of power-system 
components and performance across 
interconnections and over large geographic 
areas in near real time. The goals of situational 
awareness are to understand and ultimately 
optimize the management of power-network 
components, behaviour, and performance, as 
well as to anticipate, prevent, or respond to 


IS 16334 : 2015 


e) 


problems before disruptions can arise. 


Demand response, DER and consumer energy 
efficiency — It is mechanisms and incentives 
for utilities, business, industrial, and 
residential customers to cut energy use during 
times of peak demand or when power 
reliability is at risk. Demand response is 
necessary for optimizing the balance of power 
supply and demand. 

Cyber security — It encompasses measures 
to ensure the confidentiality, integrity and 
availability of the electronic information 
communication systems and the control 
systems necessary for the management, 
operation, and protection of the Smart Grid’s 
energy, information technology, and 
telecommunications infrastructures. 


g) Electric transportation — It refers primarily 
to enabling large-scale integration of plug-in 
electric vehicles (PEVs). 


4.3.2 Standards Mapped Against Domain and Area of 
Interoperability 


This section provides a mapping of the relevant 
standards across two axes, one the application domain 
being addressed and the other the appropriate area of 
Interoperability. Various cross-sections of these 
mappings show multiple candidates for standards that 
may be applied. Some effort has been spent in ranking 
these candidates according to suitability but the 
rankings shown are subject to change, pending a 
detailed scrutiny of the standards which is beyond the 
scope of this guidelines document. For the time being, 
the ranking is indicated by a horizontal sequence of 
the standards with the left most entries considered most 
suitable. 


4.3.2.1 Domain — AMI 


Area of Interoperability 
(Interface Number) 


Intra substation (1) 


Inter substation (2) 
Field equipment (3) 


Substation — Central System 
(4) 


Inter Central System (5) 


Central System — DER (6) 


Central System — Enterprise 


Standards for AMI 


Substat on M tering — to Substation gateway/HES 


IEC 62056 1815959 


Pole top DCU, DT Mounted DCU - Upstream 


IS15959 


Pole top DCU, DT Mounted DCU - Downstream 
Zigbee SEP IEEE P1901.1 
v1.0/v2.0 G3 PLC Prime PLC 
ec sl Saar 


Substation gateway - upstream 


TEC 62056 / 
IS 15959 


Boundary metering data exchange 


TEC 62056 


oH 

W 

eG 
N 
O 
Nn 
lon 
— 
— 
ies 
O 


ies! 
Q 
on 
So 
OO 
2 
S 
m 


© 
X 


— pd 
nw 
za 
oD 
AS 
Da 

rox 

— 


Energy market communications 


HES — to — MDMS/Billing/ERP, etc 


IEC/TR 62325 


System (7) 


Central System — Consumer 


(8) 


Intra Consumer Premise (9) 


Area-Independent Standards 


— 
m m 
OO 
ON ON 
— 
VO NO 
aD 
O Oo 
— 


TEC 62056 


TEC 62056 / 
G3 PLC / 


Prime PLC 


mc 62351 | = | = | 


Generic IEC 62056 
Webservices 


HES — Meter/Smart home gateway 


IS 15959 MERE AA 


HAN communications 
IEC 62056 / 
RS232 / Home 
LAN 


TEEE P1901.1 


Security 


Electricity meter specific standards 


SG-AMI 1-2009 |IS 13779 IS 14697 


IS 16334 : 2015 


4.3.2.2 Domain — Distribution Grid Management 


Area of Interoperability Standards for Distribution Grid Management 
(Interface Number) 


Intra substation (1) Substation process bus 


TEC G1890°9°2 lS EE NE EE 


Substation station bus 


IEC 61850 IEC 60870-5-103 IEEE 1379-2000 


Disturbance data — Oscillography files 


TEEE C37.111 - 
1999 


Inter substati (2) Synchro zed (Special) protecti schemes 
/ TEC-60870-5- 
103 
Field equipment (3) Field DA — Sectionalizer/Totalizer monitoring and control 


[BC-60870-5-104 | Modbus / DNP3 


Fault passage indication / Fault location / FLISR 


TEC-60870-5-104 | Modbus / DNP3 


Renewable generation 


1BC.61400-25 [ee 


Substation — central svstem Substation gateway — upstream to control center 
D | TEC 60870-5-104 | 1EC-61850-90-2 | DNP3 | | 
Inter central system (5) Data exchange for scheduling, execution and settlements 
PS Rd N O O 
(ICCP/TASE.2) 
Central system — DER (6) Energy market communications 


kon TE 
IEC 61970 
Central system — enterprise 
61970 
ERA ER ee EN 


Central system — consumer 

(8) eS ee ee es ET IT EET 

Intra consumer premise (9) | ~ | =- Ù sl = | 

Area-Independent standards 
| mees | ld = | 


4.3.2.3 Domain — Network communications 


Area of Interoperability Standards for Communication Networks 
(Interface Number) 


Intra substation (1) | Substation processbus o process | Substation processbus o 


RS-485/232/422 | | = | 
TCP\IP on Ethernet | RS-485/232/422 | = — | — | 


Inter substation (2) 
SIn | oa20,30.40 | onOpieFbe |  — | 

PSTN on 2G, 3G, 4G on Optic Fibre 
Field equipment (3) 


TCP\IP-RS232 on | TCP\IP-RS232 on | IEEE P1901.1/ | TCP\IP—RS232 
PSTN 2G, 3G, 4G G3 PLC on Optic Fibre 


IS 16334 : 2015 


Area of Interoperability Standards for Communication Networks 
(Interface Number) 


Substation — Central 

is PSTN | 2636.46." | on Opie Fme | O O | 
PSTN 2G, 3G, 4G on Optic Fibre 

Inter central system (5) 


TCP\IP — RS232 on 
Optic fibre 


Central system — DER (6) Market operations / DER integration 
ibn hiér id ME NEE 
PSTN 2G, 3G, 4G 
Central system — Enterprise Intra control center / Data center 
oma El ed e NA N WEE 
LAN 
Central system — Consumer 
PSTN 2G, 3G, 4G 
— Zigbee SubGHz [Prime PLC/G3PLC] IEEE PIDOLI ] — | 
Intra consumer premise (9) HAN communications 
PLC IEC 61334 / IEC | Ethernet LAN 
12139 
Area-independent standards 


IBCTS6I08S | | sl CT 


Network management 


SNMP v3 DMTF, CIM, WBEM, ANSI INCITS 438-2008, 
netconf, STD62, CMIP/CMIS 


Carrier layers 
EE Sos | | sd so 


4.3.3.4 Domain — Wide area situational awareness 


Area of Interoperability Standards for Wide Area Situational Awareness 
(Interface Number) 


Intra substation (1) Substation Station bus PMU to Station PDC 


| IEEE C37.118.2_ | EC 61850-90-5 | | =~ | 

Inter substation (2) Ee ae eee EE eee 
Field equipment (3) PMU to PDC 

| FEE C37.118.2_ | Œc 61850-90-5 | — | =~ | 

Substation — central system 

@) | IEEE C37.118.2_ | ŒC 61850-90-5 | — | ~= | 

Inter central system G) 

| TIEFE C37.118.2_| EC 61850-9005 | | = | 

Central system-DER(6) | ~ lÙ =- Ù = Ù = ë 

Central system — enterprise 

system (7) | TIEFE C37-1182 | TEC 61850-90-5 | | 


Central system — consumer 
(8) 


Intra consumer premise (9)|  — | = Ù sl = ë 
Area-independent standards PMU measurement standards 
IEEE C37.118.1 | IEEE1344 | = | = |] 


6 


IS 16334 : 2015 


4.3.3.5 Domain — Demand response, DER and consumer energy efficiency 


Area of Interoperability 
(Interface Number) 


Intra substation (1) 


Inter substation (2) 
Field equipment (3) 


Substation — Central system 


(4) 


Inter central system (5) 
Central system — DER (6) 


Central system — enterprise 
system (7) 


Intra consumer premise (9) 
Area-independent standards 


Central system — consumer (8) 


Standards for Demand Response and Consumer Energy Efficiency 


Substation RTU feeder based demand monitoring 
IEC 60870-5- IEC 61850 Modbus 


104/101 


DT mounted demand monitoring/metering 


Substation RTU feeder based demand monitoring 


IEC 60870-5- TEC 61850-90-2 Modbus 


104/101 


DER integration to meet demand peak 


IEC-60870-5-104]  — | 


DR aggregation and load management 


IEC 60870-5- 
104/101 


DNP3 


TEC 61968 / IEC 
61970 


Security 


DER and microgrid 


TEC 60904 


IEC 62351 


IEC/TS 62257 


4.3.3.6 Domain — Cyber Security 


Area of Interoperability 
(Interface Number) 


Intra substation (1) 

Inter substation (2) 

Field equipment (3) 
Substation — central system 
(4) 

Inter central system (5) 
Central system — DER (6) 


Central system — enterprise 
system (7) 


Central system — consumer 
(8) 

Intra consumer premise (9) 
Area-Independent standards 


Standards for Cyber Security 


Security 


TEC 62351 


NISTIR 7628 ISO 27000 ISA SP99 


IS 16334 : 2015 


4.3.3.7 Domain — Electric Transportation 


Area of Interoperability (Interface 
Number) 


Intra substation (1) 
Inter substation (2) 
Field equipment (3) 


Inter central system (5) 
Central system — DER (6) 


Area-independent standards 


Standards for Electric Transportation 


Data concentrators / Aggregators communications 
TEC 62056 IEC 60870-5-104 |DNP3 


(4) 
Central system — RO o 
system (7) 


Central system — consumer 
(8) TEC eos a E 
Intra consumer premise (9) 


Security 


Te EE or a Ee 


NOTE — The list given above are based on literature survey. The domain areas and the existing standards/family identified are based 


on the study carried out but cannot be considered as exhaustive 


5 LEVELS OF INTEROPERABILITY 


Interoperability occurs in various levels or layers. These 
layers span the details of the technology involved to 
link systems together, to the understanding of the 
information exchanged, to the business processes and 
organizational objectives that are represented in 
business, economic, and regulatory policy. Three broad 
levels were identified by the working group namely, 
Communication Technology (CT), Information 
Technology (IT) and Operation Technology (OT). The 
scope of these levels are as described below. 


5.1 Communication Technology (CT) 


This level of interoperability address the technical 
aspects of communication between the two systems. 
This covers defining the specifications of basic physical 
medium of connection, the network addressing and 
identification mechanism and the protocols for 
communication. 


5.2 Information Technology (IT) 


Even though the basic connectivity protocols are 
satisfied and a certain amount of information is 
communicated between two systems, the information 
may not be useful until it is semantically understood 
on a common basis. This can be achieved by 
conforming the information being communicated to a 
standard information model at a higher level of 
interoperability. As this level the semantics of the 
content that is communicated is standardised. 


5.3 Operation Technology (OT) 


At this level, the business context for communication 
between any two systems needs to be standardized. 
This defines the high level functions or services that 
are to be carried out to achieve certain organisational 
objectives. OT answers why information is to 
be exchanged, IT answers what information is to be 
exchanged, CT answers how information is to 
exchanged as shown in Fig. 2. 


5.4 Interoperability and Modularity 


The functional requirements are constantly changing 
in a competitive and expanding power sector in a 
dynamic regulatory environment. The approach of 
ensuring layers of interoperability (as described above) 
would facilitate the utilities to replace individual 
components of the system without the need for 
replacing the entire solution from end to end. For 
example, ensuring interoperability at each layer, would 
facilitate replacement of communication technology 
(CT) without any changes in IT and OT layers, or 
conversely, the OT or IT systems can be replaced 
individually without the need for changing the CT. The 
cost implications of not having interoperability are thus 
enormous. 


6 Context Setting Framework for Information 
Network of Indian Power Sector 


In this standard, a model is presented which depicts 
the logical information network of Indian power sector. 


IS 16334 : 2015 


Levels of Interoperability 


Operation 
System Technology 
A 
O— Information 


Technology 


Communication 
Technology 


Resource 
Identification 
Scalability 


Cross Cutting Issues 


Fic. 2 LEVELS OF INTEROPERABILITY AND CROSS CUTTING ISSUES 


The logical information network is essentially a graph 
with nodes as information sources and sinks, which 
are interconnected with information branches. 
Information travels from source nodes to destination 
nodes over the information links across devices 
belonging to different systems, organizations, people, 
information representation formats and communication 
protocols. For example, National Load Despatch 
Centre (NLDC) and Regional Load Despatch Centre 
(RLDC) are two nodes in the network which share 
information over a communication link. The details of 
the underlying physical network are not covered in the 
model. The objective of mapping this information 
network is to identify all the participants and the types 
of information that is being exchanged between these 
participants. It is attempted to make this network model 
as comprehensive as possible covering all aspects of 
power system scheduling, operation, control and 
commercial settlement practices being followed in 
current Indian scenario. 


6.1 Participants of the Information Network 


Figure 3 presents the nodes participating the 
information network. The nodes can be categorized as 
belonging to different kinds of utilities as described 
below. 


6.1.1 Generation Utilities 


The generation utilities in India range from regional 
level to local level. At regional level there are central 
owned ISGS plants namely NTPC, NHPC and NPC 
plants. There are private gencos at regional level 
represented as ultra mega power plants (UMPPs) and 
independent power producers (IPPS). The gencos at 
the regional level inject their generation in the regional 
power pool through the central transmission utilities. 
Correspondingly at stage level there are state owned 
gencos, IPPS, MPPs and CPPs who inject their 
generation into the state power pools VIA the state 
transmission utilities. At local level all the sources of 
distributed generation, renewable energy sources are 


listed. 


Every generator has an associated generator substation 
where the generated power is stepped up and evacuated 
to the grid. The real-time operational information on 
all these generators is measured and available at these 
generator substations VIA its remote terminal units 
(RTUs). This the substation RTUs form important 
source nodes in the information network. The RTUs 
report to the control centres at the corresponding level 
as shown in Fig. 3. 


6.1.2 Transmission Utilities 


The transmission utilities in India are also hierarchical. 
Power Grid Corporation of India limited (PGCIL) is 
the central transmission utility (CTU) at the regional 
and national level, while there are independent state 
transmission utilities (STUs) for each state. These 
CTUs and STUs form sources and sinks of information. 
The information on availability, maintenance and 
scheduling of the entire transmission infrastructure is 
exchanged frequently between the transmission utility 
with its respective system operator. Similarly, the real 
time operational data on the entire transmission grid 
at all levels is obtained from substation RTUs 
(SS-RTUs). Additionally, phasor measurement units 
(PMUs) and phasor data concentrators (PDCs) are also 
being installed at various locations in India, which form 
a separate path of real-time phasor information 
reaching the control centres. The commercial 
settlements in India are carried out on the basis of data 
retrieved weekly from the special energy meters 
(SEMs) installed at the interfaces of the constituent 
power networks. All these information nodes which 
come under the transmission utilities are depicted in 
Fig. 3. 


6.1.3 System Operators 


Under the unified load dispatch and communications 
(ULDC) scheme [9], the entire power system is 
operated by a hierarchy of control centres with well 
defined roles and responsibilities assigned to each level 


IS 16334 : 2015 


of system operation. Control centres form the major 
part of system operation, participating heavily in the 
information network. 


6.1.4 Market Operators 


The role of market operators is gradually increasing. 
Bilateral power traders and power exchanges are 
involved in carrying out the operations of the power 
markets. These markets participate in the information 
network as shown in Fig. 3. Salient features of Indian 
power market can be summarised as - Energy only, 
Physical delivery, Voluntary participation, Double 
sided bidding, Uniform pricing, Day-ahead exchange, 
Hourly bids, Congestion management by market 
splitting, Multiple exchanges — Competition amongst 
exchanges. 


6.1.5 Distributing Utilities 


Following the restructuring of Indian state electricity 
boards many public as well as private distribution 
utilities have emerged in India. Distribution utilities 
(discoms) at the fore front of advancing the role of 
information technology in their operations are already 
reaping the benefits of lower losses, faster outage 
response, higher reliability and customer satisfaction. 
Thus discoms also need a well connected interoperable 
network to achieve remote operation capability and 
automated billing via deploying AMI and AMR. 


6.2 Information Networks 


Having identified the nodes in the information network, 
we move on to connect the nodes and form data flow 
diagrams. All the data exchanges have been broadly 
classified into four kinds based in the content being 
exchanged as defined in following sections. 


6.2.1 Scheduling Data Flow 


The data that is exchanged prior to the event of transfer 
of electrical energy comprising amount of power to be 
generated, transmitted and consumed by all the 
participants of the power network is defined as 
Scheduling data. The schedule is typically fixed ahead 
of the day of actual event, referred as (D-1) or before. 
In India the schedule is ultimately derived out of 
superposition of various contracts such as , Long Term 
Open Access (LTOA), Short Term Open Access 
(STOA), availability based tariff mechanism, power 
purchase agreements (PPAs), bilateral transactions, 
power exchange transactions, etc. The nodal agency, 
at each of the levels (regional, state and local) is 
responsible for preparation of the schedule. The 
scheduling data flow network is shown in Fig. 4. 


6.2.2 Operational Data Flow 


The data that is exchanged simultaneously during the 
event of transfer of electrical energy comprising 


lnformation Ecosystem of Indian Power Sector 
Participating Nodes in the Information Network 


Generation Transmission System Market Distribution 
Utilities Utilities Operators Operators Utilities 
@ ISGS @ ctu @ NLDC @ Px 
® IPP @ BLT 
Regional = 
Level @ UMPP H @ PMU @ STOA 
@ SS-RTU @ @ SS-RTU @ RLDG @ABT Settlements 
@ SEM @ ABT Scheduler 
@ State Genco @ ISM = 
IPP @ STU @ SLDC 
State > Š @ BT 8 em 
Level | |e op @MPP 7  @ PMU @ ALDC ah Boss 
@ssRru @ @SSRTU @ABT Settiements @ Discom 
@ SEM @ ABT Scheduler 
@ D-SCADA @ Sensor 
@ DG ROS 
Local if @ MGC e 
Level @ RES vy @ RT © AMI 
® kes © AMR 
@ SS-RTU 
@ HAS @ SS-RTU 
Acronym Soup; ISGS - Inter Stale Generating Station, UMPP - Ulira Mega Power Plants. SS-RTU - substation remote terminal uni, IPP - Independent 


Power Producer, MPP — Marchan! Power Producer, CPP - Captive Power Producer, DG — Distributed generation, RES - Renewable anergy sources, CTU 
Central Trangmission Unit, PMU — Prhasor measurement unit, SEM Special Energy Metar for intra and interstate Availability based tarif(AAT), NLDC — National 
load despatch center, RLOC - Regional LOC, SLOC State LOC, ALDC Area LOC, D-SCADA — Distribution supervisory contro! and data aquisition system, 
MGC — Micro grid controller, IAS - Intlustru automation system, HAS — Home automation system, PX — Power Exchange, BLT — Bilateral trader, STOA— Short 
term open access, [SM — Intra state markets. RT ~ Retail trader, ROS — Remote operated switch. AMI = Automated metering Infrastructure, AMR - Auimated 


meter reader 


Fic. 3 PARTICIPATING NODES IN INFORMATION NETWORK 


10 


amount of power actually generated, transmitted and 
consumed by all the participants of the power network 
is defined as operational data. The operationally data 
is typically measured by instruments in substations and 
transmitted by remote terminal unit (RTU) during the 


IS 16334 : 2015 


event, and thus is referred as real-time data. The 
direction of operational is bottom-up flowing to higher 
levels of hierarchy, while being collected, aggregated 
and summarised at each level. The operational data 
flow network is shown in Fig. 5. 


Information Ecosystem of Indian Power Sector 
Scheduling data flow 


Generation 


Transmission 


System Market Distribution 
Utilities Utilities Operators Operators Utilities 
© ISGS © cTU @ NLDC @ Px 
Regional dade HD @ BLT 
Level @ STOA 
@ SS-RTU ® @ SS-RTU e lt @ABT Settlements 
sl hy ABT Scheduler 
9 
4—0 ISM 
SLDC 10 = 
State tiro st lY 
Level AÙ © @ SS-RTU 
@ CPP 11 
@SS-RTU o © SS-RTU l 2 @ABT Settlements @ Discom 
@ SEM @ ABT Scheduler 
Fr D-SCADA @ Sensor 
@ ET EI 
Local ERES A ki @ RO 
Level e 5 IAS oo, RT = Eg 
© SS-RTU 
ans @ SS-RTU 
Fic. 4 SCHEDULING DATA FLOW 
Information Ecosystem of Indian Power Sector 
Operational data flow 
Generation Transmission System Market Distribution 
Utilities Utilities Operators Operators Utilities 
@ IsGS @ cTU @ NLDC @ PX 
Regional des = 16 © BLT 
Level ae di p aa @ STOA 
@ SS-RTU @ SS-RTU a @ RLDC @ABT Settlements 
@ SEM @ ABT Scheduler 
@ State Genco -A 13 @ ISM 2 
IPP @ SLDC 
State = 10 ti @ BLT B 12 
Level @ MPP 2 Aboet4+——_$— IS 8 SERTU 
© CPP ; 
@SS-RT 7 @ABT Settlements @ Discom 
@ SEM @ ABT Scheduler 
DSCADAS—————— —B @ Sensor 
@ DG 
Local = 
Level @RES | 
@ SS-RTU ° 


Fic. 5 OPERATIONAL DATA FLOW 


11 


IS 16334 : 2015 


Information Ecosystem of Indian Power Sector 
Commercial data flow 


Generation Transmission System Market Distribution 
Utilities Utilities Operators Operators Utilities 
@ ISGS © CTY 43 @ NLDC dra 
@ IPP +2 14 
Regional @ UMPP f Ed @ BLT 
Level D Š EE RE @ STOA 
Ai EE ES wed 
@ SS-RTU EET eu, *— ABT Settlements 
@ SEM | @ ABT Scheduler 
® State Genco 10 © ISM 
@ IPP @ STU $ soo? as N 
State 
Level @ MPP = 3 0 é oe a © @ SS-RTU 
@ CPP D 7 — 
@SSRTU @ O@SSRTY @ABT Settlements @ Discom 
11 
EM 75 @ ABT Scheduler 
6 @ D-SCADA Sensor 
@ DG MA —— 
Local anes @MGC sah ROS 
73) 
Level 2 @ IAS @ RT 171 © AMI 
@ SS-RTU @ AMR 
GHAS @ SS-RTU 


Fic. 6 COMMERCIAL SETTLEMENTS DATA FLOW 


6.2.3 Control Data Flow 


The data that is exchanged as control commands from 
control centres is defined as control data. The network 
of control data flow is exactly same as that of 
operational data flow except that the direction of data 
flow is reversed. However, it is important to note that 
the same physical network is typically not used for 
exchange of control data. Following the decisions made 
in the control centres the control commands are 
despatched on phone communication by the operators 
with the agency who is responsible for carrying out 
the commands. Thus there is a human intervention in 
delivery of control operations of the system, which is 
a hurdle in implementation of closed loop automated 
control. At distribution system level there are some 
utilities equipped with capabilities of remote operation 
of the switches and circuit breakers. 


6.2.4 Commercial Data Flow 


The data that is exchanged after the event of transfer 
of electrical energy so as to calculate and disseminate 
the information on commercial settlements to all the 


12 


participants of the power network is defined as 
commercial data. The commercial settlement is usually 
carried out after the day of actual event, referred as 
(D + 1) or later. The commercial data flow network is 
shown in Fig. 6. 


6.3 Observations 


It is seen that at the organisation level, the roles and 
responsibilities are well defined among various kinds 
of Indian utilities. This creates a hierarchical network 
of utilities involved in operating the power network 
by communicating over the information network. 
Every link in the communication is backed up with a 
specific business context as to why such a 
communication is needed. Following the restructuring 
of the power sector and under the active contributions 
from the regulatory agencies at all levels, the public 
and private utilities are evolving in a dynamic 
environment. Based on the data flow network in the 
Figs. 4, 5 and 6, it can be generalized that the 
information flow is typically assuming a radial tree 
like structure. 


IS 16334 : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN/INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS 


IS No./International 
Standard 

13779 : 1999 
14697 : 1999 
15959 : 2011 


IEC 61968 series 


IEC 61970 series 
IEC/TS 62351 series 


IEC 61334 series 
IEC 62056 series 
SG-AMI 1-2009 


Zigbee Smart Energy 
Profile v1.0 


EN 13757 

IEC 61850 series 
IEEE C37.111-1999 
IEEE 1379-2000 


Modbus 


IEC/TR 62325 series 
IEC/TS 61085 series 
TEC 61400-25 
Network Management 


Standards — including 
Internet based standards 


IEEE P1901 


ISO/IEC 12139 : 2009 


IEEE 802 Family 


3GPP Family of Standards 
— Including 2G, 3G and 


4G 
C37.118.1 
C37.118. 2 


TEC 61850-90-5 : 2012 


IEEE 1344 
IEC 60904 series 
IEC/TS 62257 series 


ISA SP99 


Title 


AC static watthour meters class 1 and class 2 

AC static transformer operated watt hour and var-hour meters 

Data exchange for electricity meter reading, tariff and load control — Companion 
specification 

Application integration at electric utilities — System interfaces for distribution 
management 

Energy management system application program interface (EMS-API) 

Power systems management and associated information exchange — Data and 
communications security 

Distribution automation using distribution line carrier systems 

Electricity metering — Data exchange for meter reading, tariff and load control 
NEMA Smart Grid Standards Publication SG-AMI 1-2009 — Requirements for Smart 
Meter Upgradeability 

ZigBee Smart Energy is a wireless communication standard for interoperable products 
that monitor, control, inform and automate various processes including the delivery 
and use of energy and water 

Mbus: Communication systems for meters and remote reading of meters 
Communication networks and systems in substations 

Common Format for Transient Data Exchange (COMTRADE) for Power Systems 
Recommended Practice for Data Communications Between Remote Terminal Units 
and Intelligent Electronic Devices in a Substation 

A generic protocol used to exchange field information from the device to control 
centre 

Framework for energy market communications 

General considerations for telecommunication services for electric power systems 
Communications for monitoring and control of wind power plants. 

Protocols used for management of network components and devices attached to the 
network. DMTE CIM, WBEM, ANSI INCITS 438-2008, SNMP v3, netconf, STD 
62, and OSI-based standards including CMIP/CMIS 

Standard for Broadband over Power Line networks (Broadband communications over 
Powerline medium access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) protocols.) 
Telecommunications and information exchange between systems — Powerline 
communication (PLC) — High speed PLC medium access control (MAC) and physical 
layer (PHY) 

This includes standards developed by the IEEE 802 Local Area and Metropolitan 
Area Network 

2G, 3G, and AG cellular network protocols for packet delivery. 2G - CSD, HSCSD, 
GPRS, EDGE, EDGE Evolution 3G - UMTS/FOMA, W-CDMA EUTRAN, HSPA, 
HSPA+ 4G — LTE Advanced 

Synchrophasor Measurements for Power Systems 

Synchrophasor Data Transfer for Power Systems 

Communication networks and systems for power utility automation — Part 90-5: Use 
of IEC 61850 to transmit synchrophasor information according to IEEE C37.118 
IEEE Standard for Synchrophasors for Power Systems (Replaced by IEEE C37.118) 
Photovoltaic devices 

Recommendations for small renewable energy and hybrid systems for rural 
electrification 

Manufacturing and Control Systems Security 


13 


IS 16334 : 2015 


IS No./International Title 

Standard 

ISO/IEC 27000 Information technology — Security techniques — Information security management 
systems — Overview and vocabulary 

NERC CIP Critical Infrastructure Protection standards 

IEC 60309 series Plugs, socket-outlets and couplers for industrial purposes 

IEC 61851 series Electric vehicle conductive charging system 

IEC 61980 series Electric vehicle inductive charging systems 

NISTIR 7628 Guidelines for Cyber Security 

ISO/IEC 13335 series Information technology — Security techniques — Management of information and 
communications technology security 

SAE J1772 Electrical connector between Plug-in Electric Vehicles (PEVs) and Electric Vehicle 


Supply Equipment (EVSE). 


14 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 10 (3299). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


