IS 13161 ( Part 1 ) : 1991
( Reaffirmed 2002 )

~efm~-~~~ti~tiWT Yrn 1 wf%wfh~ mm*

Indian Standard
SHIPBUILDING NOISE LEVELS ONBOARD SHIP-S

PART 1 GLOSSARY OF TERMS

UDC

629'12 : 534'61 : 001'4

@ BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

-November1991

Price Group 1

Shipbuilding Sectional Committee, TED 17

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Shipbuilding Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. This Indian Standard is one in the series of Indian Standards being published for noise levels onboard ships. The other parts in this series are: Part Part Part Part Part 2 Measurement 3 Maximum noise levels 4 Noise exposure limits 5 Requirement for protection 6 Guidelines for controlling noise exposure

The purpose of this standard is to limit noise levels and to reduce exposure to noise in order to: a) provide for safe working conditions by giving consideration to the need for speech communication and for hearing audible alarms, and to an environment where clear-headed decisions can be made in control stations, navigation and radio spaces and manned machinery spaces; b) protect the seafarer from excessive noise levek which may give rise-to a noisecinduced hearing loss; and C) provide the seafarer with an acceptable degree of comfort in rest, recreation and other space and also provide conditions for recuperation from the effects of exposure to high noise levels. In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from Publication No. 814 82'05E `Noise levels onboard ships', issued by International Maritime Organization ( IMO ).

I!3 l3l61-( Part I ) : 1991

Indian Standard
SHIPBUILDING
PART 1 SCOPE

1

NOISE LEVELS ONBOARD SHIPS
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 3.6 Ear Protector A device worn to reduce the level of noise heard by the wearer. 3.7 Effective Sound Level Lef x H A notional continuous sound level which is calculated from the various A-weighted sound levels and duration at these levels with an XdB exchange rate. The exchange rate is the number of dB decrease in noise level which would allow doubling of exposure time. Lef ( 3 ) ( H ) is equal to Leq H. In instances of fluctuating noise and intermittent exposures 5dB is often used for X. `H' represents the time period concerned expressed in hours. 3.8 Equivalent Continuous Souud Level Les H A notional level which would in the course of a given time period ( H ) cause the same A-weighted sound energy to be received as that due to the actual sound over the period._ _`H' represents the time period concerned expressed in hours. T pa(t) )" & Leq = 10 loglo -+ pa" s
0

This standard gives the definitions of terms used in connection with noise levels onboard ships. 2 REFERENCES IS 4755 : 1987 `Reference zero for the calibration of pure tone air conduction audiometers (jrst revision )' is a necessary adjunct to this standard. 3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, definitions shall apply. 3.1 Accommodation Spaces Cabins, offices ( for carrying out ship's business ), hospitals, mess rooms, recreation rooms ( such as lounges, smoke rooms, cinemas, libraries and hobbies and games rooms ), open recreation areas to be used by seafarers, galleys, serveries, pantries, changing rooms, bath-rooms and similar spaces. 3.2 Auxiliary Machinery Machinery other than main propelling machinery that is in service when the ship is in normal service, for example, auxiliary diesel engines, turbogenerators, hydraulic motors and pumps, compressors, ventilation fans, gear pumps. 3.3 A-weighted Sound Pressure Level or Noise Level The quantity measured by a sound level meter in which the frequency response is weighted according to the A-weighting curve. 3.4 Continuously Manned Spaces Spaces in which continuous or prolonged presence of seafarers is necessary for normal operational periods. 3.5 Duty Stations Those spaces in which the main navigating equipment, the ship's radio or the emergency source of power are located or where the fire recording or fire control equipment is centralized and also those spaces used for galleys, main pantries, stores ( except isolated pantries and lockers ), workshops other than those forming part of the machinery spaces and similar such spaces. the following

where
T pa(t) po = measurement

time, A-weighted instantaneous sound = pressure, and = 20 x 10-8 Pascal ( the reference level ).

3.9 Fluctuating Noise Noise which is varying in level rising and falling. For the purpose of this standard it may be taken to mean fluctuations in excess of the steady noise as defined in 3.25 and excludes impulse noise as defined in 3.11. 3.10 Hearing Loss Hearing loss is evaluated in relation to a reference auditory threshold defined conventionally in IS 4755 : 1987. The hearing loss corresponds to the difference between the auditory threshold of the subject being examined and the reference auditory threshold, taking an average loss of 25 dB calculated at frequencies 500, 1 000 and 2 000 Hz. 1

IS 13161 ( Part 1 ) : 1991 3.11 Impulse Noise Noise of less than one second's duration which occurs as an isolated event, or as one of a series of events with a repetition rate of less than 15 times per second. 3.12 Integrating Sound Level Meter A sound level meter designed or adapted to measure the level of the mean squared time averaged A-weighted sound pressure. 3.13 Machinery Spaces All spaces containing propulsion machinery, boilers, pumps, oil fuel units, stem and internal combustion engines, generatorsand major electrical refrigerating, machinery, oil filling stations, stabilizing, ventilation and air-conditioning machinery and similar spaces, trunks to such spaces and engineer's workshop. 3.14 Navigating Bridge Wings Those parts of the ship's navigating bridge extending towards the ship's sides. 3.15 Noise For the purpose of this standard all sound which can result in hearing impairment, or which can be harmful to health or be otherwise dangerous. 3.16 Noise Induced Hearing Loss A hearing loss, originating in the nerve cells with in the cochlea, attributable to the effects of sound. 3.17 Noise Level A-weighted sound pressure level ( see 3.3 ). 3.18 Normal Service Shaft Speed The shaft speed specified for the ship's acceptance on initial delivery or after being modified, as applicable. 3.19 Occasional Exposures Those exposures typically occurring once per week, or less frequently. where
p = rms value of measured

3.20 Passenger Any person on board other than the master and members of the crew or other persons employed or engaged in any capacity onboard a ship on the business of the ship. 3.21 Port Condition The condition in which all machinery required for propulsion is stopped. 3.22 Potentially Hazardous Noise Levels Those levels at the above which persons exposed to them without protection are at risk of sustaining a noise induced hearing loss. 3.23 Sound Energy that is transmitted by pressure waves in air or other materials and is the objective cause of the sensation of hearing. 3.24 Sound Pressure Level A measure of sound level, L, on a logarithmic scale given by: L = 20 log,,, f po
P

solely

1

dB

sound pressure between 20 Hz and 20 kHz, and

PO = 20 x 10Ns Pascal ( the reference level 1.

3.25 Steady Noise A sound where the level fluctuates through a total range of less than 5dB ( A ) as measured on the `slow' response of a sound level meter in one minute. 3.26 Voyages of Short Duration Voyages where the ship is not generally underway for periods long ~enough for seafarers to require sleep, or long off-duty periods, during the voyages.

2

Standard

Mark

Standards Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations

by the provisions of the Bureau oj Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and Standard marked products are also continuously checked by operated by the producer. Details of conditions under BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. The use of the Standard Mark is governed

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Director Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the or grade designations. Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, ~when necessary and amendments, if any, dare issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in may be possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard sent to RIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. TED 17 ( 889 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters
:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches

Offices :
: -Manak Bhavan,

NEW DELHI CALCUTTA

9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 110002

311 01 31 331 13 75 37 86 62 53 38 43 235 02 16 6 32 92 95

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

700054 160036 600113

: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS : Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri BOMBAY 400093

( East )

: AHMADABAD,

BANGALORE, BHOPAL, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR,

-Printed

at Printwell

Printers,

Aligarh,

India

