**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10260-2 (1982) : Terms, definitions and classification of 
plain bearings. Part 11: Friction and wear [PGD 13: 
Bearing] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 21822 5 0316:0014 IS : 10260 ( Part II)- 1982 




Indian Standard < Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

TERMS, DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATION 
OF PLAIN BEAPxING 

PART II FRICTION AND WEAR 



1. 5cope —^ Covers the most commonly used terms, with their definitions and classification, applied 
to friction and wear of plain bearings. 

1.1 For some of the terms and word-combinations their short forms are given which are recommen- 
ded for use when they are unambiguous. Self-explanatory terms are given without definitions. 

2. General Terms 

2.1 External Friction — Phenomenon of resistance to relative motion between two bodies, originating 
at their surface contact area and directed tangenlially to them. 

2.2 Internal Friction — Phenomenon of resistance to relative motion of the parts of one and the same 
body. 

2.3 Wear Process— Process of a loss of substance from a solid body surface due to friction and/or 
build-up of its permanent deformation, displayed as a gradual change of body dimensions and/cr 
shape. 

2.4 Wear— Result of a wear process expressed in specified units. 
Note — Wear may be expressed in the units of length, voluirre, mass, etc. 

3. Types and Characteristics of External Friction 

3.1 Types and characteristics of external friction in plain bearing shall be as follows: 

3.1.1 According to the presence of relative motion: 

a) Static friction, and 

b) Dynamic friction. 

3.1.2 According to the character of relative motion: 

a) Sliding friction, 

b) Rolling friction, and 

c) Combined rolling and sliding friction. 

3.1 .3 According to the presence of lubricant: 

a) Unlubricated friction, and 

b) Lubricated friction. 

3.2 Static Friction — Friction between two bodies during microdisplacement before macrodisplace- 
ment. 

3.3 Dynamic Friction— Friction between two bodies in relative motion. 

3.4 Sliding Friction — Dynamic friction in which the tangential velocities of the contacting bodies 
at the contact area differ in magnitude and/or direction. 

3.5 Rolling Friction — Dynamic friction in which the tangential velocities of the contacting bodies 
are identical both in magnitude and direction at least at one point of the contact area. 

3.6 Combined Rolling and Sliding Friction — Dynamic friction between two contacting bodies when 
rollina and sliding friction take place simultaneously at the contact area. 

3.7 Unlubricated Friction— Friction between two bodies when no lubricant is intentionally applied 
on the rubbing surface. 

3.8 Lubricated Friction — Fr\cX\on between two bodies with a lubricant applied on the rubbing 
surface. 



Adopted 21 June 1982 



January 1983, ISI 



Gr 2 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 10260 (Part il ) - 1982 

3.9 Friction Force — Resisting force tangential to the common boundary between two bodies when, 
under the action of an external force, one body moves relative to the surface of the other. 

3.10 Maximurr) Static Friction Force — Static friction force, exceeding of which initiates macro- 
displacement. 

3.11 Coefficient of Friction — Ratio of the friction force between two bodies to the normal force 
pressing these bodies together. 

3.12 Sliding Velocity— Difference between tangential velocities of the bodies at the point of their 
contact during sliding. 

3.13 Siiding Surface — Body surface subjected to friction. 

4. Types and Characteristics of Wear Process 

4.1 Type and characteristics of wear process in plain bearing shall be as follows: 

i) l\/lecfianical wear: 

a) Mechanical wear, 

b) Abrasive wear, 

c) Hydroabrasive (gasabrasive) wear, 

d) Fluid erosion, 

e) Fatigue wear, 

f ) Cavitation wear, 

g) Fretting wear, and 
h) Adhesive wear. 

ii) i\/lechanO'Chemicai wear: 

a) Mechano-chemical wear, 

b) Fretting corrosion, and 

c) Oxidative wear. 

iii) Wear under the action of electric current: 
a) Electroerosive wear. 

4.2 Mechanical Wear— Process of wear due to mechanical actions. 

4.3 Abrasive Wear — Process of mecharvical wear of a material, caused by cutting or scratching 
actions of hard bodies or hard particles. 

4.4 Hydroabrasive ( gasabrasive ) Wear — Process of wear due to the action of hard bodies or hard 
particles carried in a flowing fluid or gas. 

4.5 Fluid Erosion — Process of wear due to the action of streaming liquid or gas. 

4.6 Fatigue Wear— Process of mechanical wear caused by fatigue destruction during repeated 
deformations of microvolumes of the rubbing surface material. 

Note —Fatigue wear may occur both during sliding and rolling. 

4.7 Cavitation Wear — Process of mechanical wear when a solid body moves relative to a liquid in 
which vapour bubbles collapse close to the surface thus causing local high impact pressure or high 
temperature. 

4.8 Fretting Wear — Process of mechanical wear of the contacting bodies having oscillatory relative 
motion of small amplitude. 

4.9 Adhesive Wear — Process of wear due to adhesion, extraction of material out of the body surface, 
its transfer from one rubbing surface to another one and the effect of thus formed irregularities on the 
adjacent surface. 

4.1^ Mechano-Chemical Wear — Process of wear due to mechanical action accompaniedijy chemical 
and/or electrochemical interaction of the material with the environment. 

4.11 Oxidative Wear— Process of mechano-chemical wear in which chemical reaction of the material 
with oxygen or oxidizing media predominates. 

4.12 Fretting Corrosion — Process of mechano-chemical wear of the contacting bodies having 
oscillatory relative motion of small amplitude. 



IS: 10260 (Part II)- 1982 

4.13 Electroerosive Wear — Process of wear of the surface due to the action of discharges caused by 
electric current. 

4.14 Wear Rate — Ratio of wear extent to the time interval during which it has developed. 

Note — Wear rats is distinguished as "morrientary" (at a definite moment) and as "mean" wear rate (during a 
definite interval of time ). 

4.15 Wear Intensity — Ratio of Vvear extant to the specified distance on vvhich wear develops or to 
the volume of the work done. 

Note 1 — The choice of units to express the volume of work is determined for each particular case. 

Note 2 — Wear intensity is distinguished as "momentary" or as "mean". 

5. Phenomena and Processes in Friction and Wear 

5.1 Stick-slip Motion — Phenomenon of alternation of relative sliding and relative state of rest or an 
alternative increase and decrease of relative sliding velocity developing spontaneously during dynamic 
friction. 

Nots — An example of stick=slip motion is the motion caused by auto-osctl!ations developing at decrease of coefficient 
of friction with Increase of sliding velocity. 

5.2 Adhesion in Friction (Adhesion ) — Phenomenon of local attraction of two rubbing solid bodies 
due to the action of molecular forces. 

5.3 Transfer of Material — Phenomenon developing during friction when the material of one body 
adheres to aaother body and, on being detached from the first, remains on the surface of the second 
body. 

5.4 Seizure — Process of formation and developing of damages on rubbing surfaces due to adhesion 
and transfer of material. 

Note — Seizure may result in stopping of relative motion. 

B,B Scoring — Damage of the rubbing surface in the form of severe scratches in the direction of 
sliding. 

5.6 Scratching — FormaXion of fine scratches on the surface in the direction of sliding due to 
Irregularities on the harder sliding surface or due to hard particles. 

5.7 Spalling — Separation of particles of material from a surface in the form of flakes due to fatigue 
wear. 

5.8 Pitting =-PrGCBss of cavity form.ation on the rubbing surface due to detachment of particles of 
material during fatigue wear. 

b.B Hunning-in — Process of changing the rubbing surface geometry as well as physical and 
mechanical properties of material surface layers during the initial period of friction usually displayed 
ijnrjor constant outside conditions like decrease of friction force, temperature and wear intensity. 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard was earlier covered in IS : 4757-1968 'Dimensions for wrapped bushes and 
thrust washers ' and IS : 4774-1 968 ' Thin-walled bearings and thrust half-washers '. On the basis of 
the current international practices, the concerned committee felt the necessity to bring out a separate 
standard on plain bearing terminology to make it in line with ISO/DIS 4378/1 ' Plain bearing-vocabu- 
lary: Part I Construction ', ISO/DIS 4378/2 ' Plain bearing-vocabulary: Part 2 Friction and vvear ', and 
ISO/DIS 4378/3 ' Plain bearing-vocabulary: Part 3 Lubrication \ issued by International Organisation 
for Standardization. The standard consists of the following parts: 

IS : 10260 ( Part l)-1982 Terms, definitions and classifications of plain bearing: Part 1 
Construction. 

IS : 10260 ( Part 11 )-1982 Terms, definitions and classification plain bearing; Part II 
Friction and wear. 

IS : 10260 (Part lll)-1982 Terms, definitions and classifications of plein bearing; Part III 
Lubrication. 

These standards have been prepared for the guidance of the manufacturers and consumers to 
assist them for the correct interpretation of the terminology related to the plain bearings. 



Printed at Delhi Printers, Delhi, India 



