1S/1S0 14024:1999
( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard

ENVIRONMENTAL LABELS AND DECLARATIONS-- TYPE I ENVIRONMENTAL LABELLII'W -- PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES

ICS

13.020

061S 2003

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

December 2003

Price Group 6

Environmental

Management

Sectional Committee, CHD 34

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 14024:1999 `Environmental labels and declarations -- Type I Environmental Iabelling -- Principles and procedures' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Environmental Management Sectional Committee and approval of the Chemical Division Council. The text of ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International be read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should

b)

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker.

CROSS REFERENCES In this adopted standard reference appears to the following International Standard for which Indian Standard also exists. The corresponding Indian Standard which is to be substituted in its place is given below along with its degree of equivalence for the edition indicated: International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence Identical

ISO 14020:1998 Environmental labels and declarations --General principles

lS/lSO 14020:1998 Environmental labels and declarations -- General principles

1S/1S0 14024:1999

Introduction There are a number of approaches to environmental Iabelling. This International Standard relates to Type I
environmental Iabelling programmed which award their environmental label to products which meet a set of predetermined requirements. The label thus identifies products which are determined to be environmentally preferable within a particular product category. Type I environmental Iabelling programmed are voluntary, can be operated by public or private agencies and can be national, regional or international in nature.

1S/1S0 14024:

1999

Indian

Standard

ENVIRONMENTAL LABELS AND DECLARATIONS -- TYPE I ENVIRONMENTAL LABELLING -- PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
1 Scope
This International Standard establishes the principles and procedures for developing Type I environmental Iabelling programmed, including the selection of product categories, product environmental criteria and product function characteristics; and for assessing and demonstrating compliance. This International Standard also establishes the certification procedures for awarding the label.

2 Normative

reference

The following normative document contains prowsions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this International Standard. For dated references, subsequent amendments to, or revisions of, any of these publications do not apply. However, parties to agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the normative document indicated below. For undated references, the latest edition of the normative document referred to applies. Members of ISO and IEC maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. ISO 14020:1998, Environmental labels and declarations -- General principles.

3 Terms

and definitions
Standard, the foliowing terms and definitions apply,

For the purposes of this International

3.1 Type I environmental Iabelling programme voluntary, multiple-criteria-based third party programme that awards a Iicence which authorizes environmental labels on products indicating overall environmental preferability of a product within product category based on life cycle considerations 3.2 product any goods or service 3.3 product category group of products which have equivalent function 3.4 product environmental criteria environmental requirements that the product shall meet in order to be awarded an environmental 3.5 product function characteristic attribute or characteristic in the performance

the use of a particular

label

and use of a product

1

1S/1S0

14024:

1999

3.6 ecolabeliing body third party body, and its agents, which conducts a Type I environmental 3.7 third party person or body that is recognized as being independent [lSO/lEC NOTE Guide 2:1 996]

Iabelling programme

of the parties involved, as concerns the issue in question

"Parties involved" are usually supplier ("first party") and purchaser ("second party") interests.

3.8 interested party any party affected by a Type I environmental 3.9 licensee party authorized

Iabelling programme

by an ecolabelling body to use a Type I environmental

label

3.10 environmental aspect element of an organization's NOTE impact.

activities, products or services which can interact with the environment

A significant environmental aspect is an environmental aspect which has, or can have, a significant environmental

[ISO 14001:1996] 3.11 environmental impact any change to the environment, activities, products or services [ISO 14001:1996] 3.12 certification procedure by which a third party gives written assurance requirements [lSO/lEC Guide 2:1996]

whether adverse or beneficial,

wholly or partially resulting from an organization's

that a product, process or service conforms

to specified

3.13 Iicence (for Type I environmental Iabelling) document, issued under the rules of a certification system, by which an ecolabelling body grants to a person or body the right to use Type 1 environmental labels for its products or sewices in accordance with the rules of the environmental Iabelling programme 3.14 fitness for purpose ability of a product, process or service to serve a defined purpose under specific conditions [lSO/lEC Guide 2:1996]

4 Objective

of Type 1environmental

Iabelling

The overall goal of environmental labels and declarations is, through communication of verifiable and accurate information, that is not misleading, on environmental aspects of products and services, to encourage the demand for and supply of those products and services that cause less stress on the environment, thereby stimulating the potential for market-driven continuous environmental improvement.

2

1S/1S0 14024:1999

The objective of Type I environmental Iabelling programmed is to contribute to a reduction in the environmental iinpacts associated with products, through the identification of products that meet a specific Type I programmers criteria for overall environmental preferability. The objective of this International environmental Iabelling programmed Standard is to secure transparency and credibility in implementing Type I and to harmonize the principles and procedures applicable to the programmed.

5 Principles
5.1 Voluntary nature

of the programme
including those developed or operated by government-sponsored

Type I environmental Iabelling programmed, agencies, shall be voluntary in nature.

5.2 Relationship

with ISO 14020

in addition to the requirements of this International Standard, the principles set out in ISO 14020 shall apply. Where this International Standard provides for more specific requirements than ISO 14020, such specific requirements shall apply. 5.3 Relationship with legislation label shall be the

A precondition for the granting and maintenance of a Iicence to use a Type i environmental compliance by the applicant with environmental and other relevant legislation.

5.4 Life cycle consideration
The objective of reducing environmental impacts and not merely transferring impacts across media or stages of the product life cycle is best served by considering the whole product life cycle when setting product environmental criteria. Life cycle stages to be taken into account when developing the product environmental criteria should include: extraction of resources, manufacturing, distribution, use and disposal relating to relevant cross-media environmental indicators. Any departure from this comprehensive approach or selective use of restricted environmental issues shall be justified.

5.5 Selectivity
Product environmental criteria shall be established to differentiate environmentally preferable products from others in the product category, based on a measurable difference in environmental impact. Product environmental criteria should differentiate between products only when these differences are significant. Testing and verification methodologies used to evaluate products have different levels of precision and accuracy. This should be considered when determining the significance of this difference. Once product environmental criteria are established criteria shall be eligible to use the label. according to the above paragraph, all products which meet the

5.6 Product environmental
5.6.1 Life cycle considerations

criteria

The product environmental 5.6.2 Basis of criteria

criteria shall be based on indicators arising from life cycle considerations

(see 6.4).

The product environmental

environmental criteria should be set at attainable impacts, measurement capability and accuracy.

levels

and

give

consideration

to

relative

3

1S/1S0

14024:

1999

5.7

Product function characteristics

In developing the criteria, the fitness for purpose of the product and levels of performance shall be taken into account. International, regional or national standards for the product should be considered for use in the programme, according to the hierarchy for use of standards set out in ISO 14020. NOTE In the context of environmental Iabelling, fitness for purpose implies that a product satisfies health, safety and consume! performance needs.

5.8 Validity of programme
5.8.1 Period of validity

requirements

The product environmental predefine period. 5.8.2 Review period

criteria and product function requirements

for each product category

shall be set for a

The product environmental criteria and product function requirements shall be reviewed within a predefine period, taking account of factors such as new technologies, new products, new environmental information and market changes. Review of the product environmental criteria and product functional requirements need not necessarily lead to changes in them.

5.9 Consultation
A process of formal open participation among interested parties shall be established at the outset for the purpose of selecting and reviewing product categories, product environmental criteria and product function characteristics. 5.10 Compliance and verification

All the elements in the product environmental criteria and product function characteristics of the environmental Iabelling programme shall be verifiable by the ecolabelling body. The methods for assessing compliance should make use of, in order of preference: -- ISO and IEC standards: other internationally recognized standards;

-- --

regional and national standards; other repeatable and reproducible methods which follow accepted lSO/lEC 17025 for information on good laboratory practice); principles of good laboratory practice (see

.-- manufacturer's 5.11

evidence.

Transparency

A Type I environmental Iabelling programme should be able to demonstrate transparency through all stages of its development and operation. Transparency implies that Information shall be available to interested parties for inspection and comment where appropriate. Adequate time shall be allowed for comments to be submitted. This information should include:

--

selection

of product categories; of product environmental criteria;

---- selection and development
-- --

product function characteristics; testing and verification certification methods;

and award procedures;

1S/1S0 14024:1999

review period; -- period of vaiidity; nonconfidential evidence on which the awarding of the label is based; development (e.g. fees, government financial support etc.);

funding sources for the programme compliance Transparency 5.12 verification

should not conflict with the requirements trade aspects

of 5.17.

International

r'rocedures and requirements for environmental Iabelling programmed shall not be prepared, adopted `with a view to, or with the effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to international trade. The applicable and Interpretations of the World Trade Organization (WTO) should be taken into account. 5.13 Accessibility

or applied provisions

Application to, and participation in, environmental Iabellmg programmed shall be open to all potential applicants. All applicants who fulfil the product environmental criteria for a given product category and the other programme reqwrements shall be entitled to be granted a Iicence and authorized to use the label. 5.14 Scientific basis of product environmental criteria principles. The criteria

The development and selection of criteria shall be based on sound scientific and engineering should be derived from data that support the claim of environmental preferability.

5.15 Avoidance

of conflict

of interest shall

"Type 1Environmental Iabelling programmed shall ensure that they are free from undue influence. Programmed be able to demonstrate that sources of funding do not create a conflict of interest. NOTE Attention is drawn to the provisions of lSO/lEC Guide 65.

5.16 Costs and fees
Fees may include application, testing or administration fees. [n principle, the costs and fees for the granting and maintaining of a label should be based on all programme costs and should be kept as low as possible to maximize accessibility. Any fees should be applied equitably to all applicants and licensees. 5.17 Confidentiality of all information which is identified as confidential shall be maintained,

The confidentiality 5.18 Mutual

recognition

Mutual recognition, based on confidence, should be encouraged. There may be mutual recognition of tests, inspections, conformity assessment, administrative procedures and, where appropriate, product environmental criteria. To ensure full transparency, shall be made available. NOTE information on existing mutual recognition agreements with other eco-labelling bodies

For further guidance see Chapter 8 of reference [6]

5

1S/1S0

14024:1999

6 Procedures 6.1 General
Type I enwronmental Iabelling involves an iterative process which includes:

--
--

consultation the selection development,

with interested parties; of product categories; review and modification of product environmental of product function characteristics; of certification and elements of the programme. criteria;

-- -- --

the identification the establishment

procedures and other administrative

6.2 Consultation

with interested parties

The ecolabelling body shall implement a formal consultation mechanism that facilitates full participation of interested parties. Such a mechanism could include the use of selected groups of interested parties' representatives, e.g. consultation board, advisory committee or public hearing. Consultation is an on-going process that occurs in the selection of the product category, and in the establishment of product environmental criteria and product function characteristics. Interested parties shall be given adequate time and access to details and sources of information used. The consultation process shall also ensure that interested parties who comment on the programme receive proper consideration of and response to their comments. Reasonable efforts should be made to achieve a consensus throughout the process.

6.3
6.3.1

Selection

of product categories
a feasibility study

Conducting

In this phase of the process, a study should be conducted on potential product categories and the nature of the market. The purpose of the study is to consider the feasibility of establishing the product categories. The study should include: initial selection of possible product categories;

--
--

consultation

with interested parties;

market survey (e.g. nature, size, demand); suppliers in the market place (e.g. small and medium-sized impacts of products; improvement; of use enterprises, foreign and domestic producers);

.

environmental

--

potential and need for environmental
definition

of scope of product categories, taking into account equivalence

--

fitness for use, including product function characteristics; availability of data; legislation and agreements.

--
6.3.2

current national and international Proposal for product category

Once a feasibility study has been completed, the ecolabelling body will be in a position to ascertain which product categories are most likely to obtain marketplace acceptance. A product category proposal should be prepared for

6

1S/1S0

14024:1999

the interested parties which summarizes the components of the feasibility study, its findings, and the considerations leading to the proposal of product categories for the programme. 6.4 6.4.1

Selection and development

of product environmental
criteria

criteria

Selection of product environmental

The framework and procedures which this International Standard sets forth are intended to provide uniformity while allowing decisions on the final criteria to be the result of the consultation process between the ecolabelling body and interested parties. The criteria shall be selected in accordance with the requirements set out in 5.2 to 5.17. The matrix in Table 1 is an example of applying this approach and is included to assist ecolabelling bodies to initiate selection of product environmental criteria. The matrix links the stages of the product life cycle with the major environmental input and output indicators. The emission indicators are grouped by media and are usually more than one per medium. The study of the life cycle stages (which may be performed as a further part of the feasibility study given in 6.3.1) could lead to the conclusion that environmental impacts in some stages are insignificant and do not warrant further consideration. Regardless, the study shall show that the selection of product environmental criteria will not lead to the transfer of impacts from one stage of the life cycle to another or from one medium to another without a net gain of environmental benefit.

Table 1 -- Typical product environmental criteria selection matrix Environmental inputloutput indicators
Stage of the life cycle Resource extraction Production Distribution Use Disposal Energy Renewable/ Nonrenewable Resources Renewable Nonrenewable Water Emission to Ak Soil Other

6.4.2 6.4.2.1

Development General

of product environmental

criteria

The process for establishing issues, available technology, Product environmental -- .

the criteria should take into account relevant local, regional, and global environmental and economic aspects. in terms of

criteria should be expressed

impacts on the environment

and natural resources; or environmental aspects, such as emissions to the environment.

whenever that is not practicable,

Criteria that directly or indirectly require or exclude the use of particular processes or production methods without justification shall be avoided. Any exclusions of certain substances should be based on scientific methology meeting Principle 3 of ISO 14020. Methods such as risk assessment may provide useful information in this respect. Some major considerations in this phase of the Iabelling programme are set out in 6.4.2.2 to 6.4.2.5.

1S/1S0

14024:1999

6.4.2.2

Identification

of the areas most relevant for reduction of environmental

impact

The ecolabelling body shall identify the product life cycle stages where there is differentiation of environmental impacts among the products within the category. The ranges and variability of the data obtained for specific products shall be analysed to ensure that the selected product environmental criteria are adequate and reflect the differences among products. 6.4.2.3 Use of qualitative and quantitative indices requirements.

The ecolabelling body may consider it proper to apply weighting factors to the selected environmental The reasons for each weighting factor shall be clearly explained and justified. 6.4.2.4 Determination of numerical values for each relevant criterion

The ecolabelling body shall determine the criteria that most accurately reflect the selected environmental aspects. Once the criteria have been determined, the ecolabelling body shall assign numerical values to them. These values could take the form of minimum values, threshold levels not to be exceeded, a scale-point system or other relevant and appropriate approaches. 6.4.2.5 Determination of test methods, procedures and availability of test laboratories

Testing and verification requirements should be considered in parallel with the preparation of requirements for a given product category. The organizational, technical and economic feasibility of such testing and verification requirements should be carefully considered. The ecolabelling body should provide a reference to the test methods that are required for any given criterion or characteristic, and should examine the availability of competent laboratories capable of performing the tests. The test methods should be selected according to the guidance given in 5,10. 6.5

Selection of product function characteristics

In the selection of the product function characteristics, due consideration shall be given to product function. This should be addressed in terms of product performance, rather than design or descriptive characteristics. When establishing product function characteristics, consideration should be given to:

-- --
-- -- 6.6

identification selection verification identifying

of the product function characteristics; elements that characterize function;

of key performance

that the key performance

elements are applicable to all products in the category; (see 5.7).

the necessary levels of performance

Reporting and publication

Once the product categories, product environmental criteria and product function characteristics have been established, they shall be published. The selected report format shall be accompanied by information which demonstrates that: -- the establishment and requirements of the category, criteria and characteristics set out in this International Standard; conforms with the scope, principles, practices,

--

the criteria are objective and justifiable; methods to verify the product environmental criteria and product function characteristics to participate in the process are available;

-- --

interested parties were given the opportunity consideration.

and their views were taken into

8

1S/1S0 14024:1999

The ecolabelling body should purchasers and the public.

also provide

information

on request

that explains

the meaning

of the label to

6.7 Implementation

of modifications

to the product environmental

criteria

In cases where the label has already been awarded to products, there are a number of factors which should be considered when establishing the date on which revisions to the criteria will come into force. These factors include, but are not limited to:

-- --

the urgency of complying with the revised product environmental

criteria; involved in retooling the manufacturing

the extent of the change, the length of time, and the level of complexity process to comply with the revised criteria; avoidance process; of unintentional commercial advantage

--

given to a particular

manufacturer,

particular

design

or

-- --

the need to involve the licensee's material suppliers; action that needs to be taken with respect to existing products which are still in the chain of supply to the end consumeL time for appropriate consultation complexity of administering legislative requirements. with licensees; bodfi with the label awarded under the old criteria

--
-- --

the changes for the ecolabelling

7 Certification 7.1 General

and compliance

Clause 7 sets out general requirements NOTE

for certification and compliance.

In addition, reference to lSO/lEC Guide 65 is recommended.

7.2 Basic concepts
7.2.1 General

The prerequisites for awarding the label are normally divided into the elements set out in 7.2.2 and 7.2.3 7.2.2 General rules

General rules guide the overall operation of the programme. These general rules control the general conditions for the awarding of the Iicence and the use of the label. The general rules should address, but may not be limited to, the following issues: -- -- -- -- -- -- publicity by licensees; conditions which could lead to the suspension, procedures for implementing cancellation or withdrawal of a Iicence;

corrective action in case of non-conformity;

procedures for resolution of disputes; procedures for testing and verification; fee structure;

9

1S/1S0

14024:

1999

--

guidance

for the use of logotype.

It is essential that all prerequisites for the awarding of the Iicence and the use of the label are included in the general rules, the product environmental criteria and product function characteristics, since only these requirements can be used as the basis for awarding or withholding the Iicence to use the label. 7.2.3 Product environmental criteria and product function characteristics for each product category

Product environmental criteria and product function characteristics set out the technical requirement+ elements of the Type I environmental Iabelling programme for each product category. 7.3 Licensing body shall award a Iicence to use

The ecolabelling body is responsible for licensing of applicants. The ecolabelling the label only when it is satisfied that, among other contractual obligations:

--

the applicant is in compliance with the general rules of the programme; the product is in compliance with the product applicable to its product category. environmental criteria and product function characteristics

The issuing of a Iicence does not oblige the licensee to use the label. The ecolabelling body shall maintain a publicly available list of products which have been awarded the label.

7.4
7.4.1

Procedures

for assessing and demonstrating

compliance

Basic principle

The methodology for assessing whether a product complies with the product environmental criteria and product function characteristics, and of verifying on-going compliance, shall be documented and have sufficient rigour to maintain confidence in the programme. There may be many factors influencing the choice of compliance one programme to another. 7.4.2 Supervision and control procedures, and the methodologies may vary from

The ecolabelling body shall review the programme requirements and, in accordance with the General rules (see 7.2.2), determine the appropriate form of verification for each. Once the requirements have been reviewed, a plan of supervision and control shall be prepared. 7.4.3 Supporting documentation to comply with environmental and other

The ecolabelling body shall require the applicant to make a commitment relevant legislation.

The ecolabelling body shall obtain documentary evidence of the applicant's requirements. All data shall be of known and verifiable quality. The ecolabelling body shall prepare and make available, on request, documentation

conformity

with the programme

including, at a minimum:

-- -- -- -- --

product categories; product environmental criteria;

product function characteristics; period of validity of criteria; testing and verification methods;

10

1S/1S0

14024:1999

certification

and award procedures;

periodic review criteria; nonconfidential evidence on which the awarding of the label is based; (e.g. fees, government financial support, etc.);

--

funding sources for the programme development compliance verification. of conformity

,

7.4.4

Declarations

If the programme allows for the use of the applicant's declaration of conformity with certain programme the declaration of conformity should follow the guidelines set out in lSO/lEC Guide 22. 7.5 Compliance monitoring

requirements,

After the Iicence has been awarded to an applicant, the licensee shall inform the ecolabelling that might affect its continued compliance with the requirements.

body of any change

The ecolabeliing body shall ensure that any change in the product or its manufacturing process likely to affect compliance is considered and shall require the licensee to initiate corrective action if compliance is not maintained. It is the responsibility 7.6 of the licensee to ensure that compliance with the programme requirements is maintained.

Protection of the label
is legally protected in order to

The ecolabelling body shall ensure that its label (i.e. the certification mark/logotype) prevent unauthorized use and to maintain public confidence in the programme.

The ecolabelling body shall have a clear and explicit policy regarding the proper use of the label. Any deviation from this policy shall result in appropriate corrective action and possible withdrawal of the Iicence.

11

1S/1S0

14024:

1999

Bibliography

[1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6]

ISO 14001:1996,

Environmental

management

systems -- Specification

with guidance for use.

ISOIIEC 17025, General requirements

for the competence

of calibration and testing /laboratories. and re/ated activities.

lSO/lEC Guide 2:1996, Genera/ terms and their definitions concerning standardization lSO/!EC Guide 22:1997, General criteria for supp/ier's declaration of conformity.

lSO/!EC Guide 65:1996, General requirements for bodies operating product certification systems. Certification and related activities: Assessment and verification of conformity to standards specifications. International Organization for Standardization, Geneva, 1992, ISBN 92-67-10176-5. and technical

12

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of hdian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that chal ,ges are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. CHD 34 (1 148).
Amendments

Issued

Since Publication Text Affected

Amend

No.

Date of Issue

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 23230131, 23233375, 23239402 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme Vll M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 603843 { 609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519, 22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

