NAT HA IS 11632 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Aa cht qr: Tagan ehr Chet AT 


( Teel JAGO ) 


Code of Practice of Rehabilitation 
of Tubewells 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 65.060.35; 73.100 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sri” 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay feet — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 4 


Diamond Core and Waterwell Drilling Sectional Committee, MED 21 


FOREVVORD 


This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) vvas adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Diamond Core and Waterwell Drilling Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 


This code of practice vvas first published in 1986. The standard has been revised to incorporate the latest 
development in rehabilitation of tubevvells. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance vvith IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised y. 


IS 11632 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF PRACTICE OF REHABILITATION 
OF TUBEWELLS 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down the guidelines for rehabilitation 
of sick tubewells. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard following definition 
shall apply. 


Tubewell Rehabilitation — Restoring a well to its 
most efficient condition by various treatments. 


It is important to monitor changes in the operating 
characteristics of the well, because the well can 
deteriorate to the point where rehabilitation is difficult, 
if not impossible. Generally, if the specific capacity 
of a well declines by 25 percent, it is time to initiate 
rehabilitation procedures. The necessity for well 
rehabilitation depends on the effectiveness of the well 
maintenance programme and how faithfully it has 
been followed. So many variables are involved that 
a single maintenance programme cannot be devised 
suiting every hydrogeologic condition and every type 
of well. Effective maintenance programme begins 
with well construction record, and operating record 
over the period since installation. The entire work of 
rehabilitation must be done in constant consultation 
with the owner of the well. 


3 CAUSES OF DETERIORATING 
PERFORMANCE 


WELL 


Six major problems which occurs over time and lead to 
deterioration of well performance are as follows: 


a) Reduction in well yield; 
b) Plugging of the formation around the well screen; 
c) Onset of sand pumping; 


d) Structural collapse or rupture of the well casing or 
screen; 
e) Condition of the pump; and 
f) Corrosion and incrustation of the screen/ pipe 
assembly. 
It is, thus, ofimmense importance to establish the cause 
of deteriorating condition ofthe well before undertaking 
rehabilitation plan. Also, it may be that more than one 
problem occur at the same time. 


4 DATA COLLECTION 


Prior to field investigation collect all possible 
information regarding the well from the owner. This 
data may include: 


a) Date of construction of the tubewell; 

b) Method of drilling; 

c) Lithological log/geophysical log; 

d) Sieve analysis of aquifers screened, if done; 

e) Sieve analysis of filter pack ifused and the volume 
packed; 

f) Well assembly chart with pipe material and 
diameter, screen material and diameter, shape 
and size of screen opening, smallest width of slot 
opening, etc.; 

g) Centring guides diameter and location on casing 
pipes, 

h) Seals and packers, if provided; 

j) Methods of development with periods; 


k) Chemical treatment given at the time of 


construction/development; 


m) Pumping test results at the end of development. 
These may include pre pumping water level; rate 
of discharge with corresponding draw down after 
about one hour pumping for three to four different 
discharge rates; 


n 


— 


Sand content and colour of the discharged vvater 
at the beginning of the pumping test and later at 
various discharge rates; 


— 


Final operating pump lowered in the well along 
with its rated yield, head, diameter, column pipes, 
position of the pump in the well, rated electrical 
consumption etc.; 


p 


Historical and dravv 


dovvn, 


= 


operational discharge 


q 


r) Historical record of non-pumping water level; 

s) Record of sand content in discharged water with 
time during operational pumping; 

t) Results of the initial and present analysis of the 
well water; 


u) Well sounding at the end of the pumping test 
before acceptance by the owner; and 


IS 11632 : 2020 


vv) Any other record maintained during period of 
operation till the present condition reached. This 
may include periodic water level record, discharge 
rate, water quality, sand content, position of pump 
in the well, electrical consumption, periodic 
maintenance etc. 


5 FIELD INVESTIGATION 


The field investigation must start from the discussions 
with the owner, operator of the pump and concerned 
staff regarding the kind of trouble they are facing. 
Further investigation should be based on the problem 
faced/informed. The following field investigations and 
data collection shall be under taken for arriving at the 
cause of trouble in the well: 


a) Collect hydrogeological data and water level 
trends etc., from available source, if any; 


b) Operate the pump and collect information for 
about an hour or till the discharge can be obtained 
whichever is earlier, on pre pumping water level, 
discharge rate, change in discharge with time, 
fluctuation in discharge if any, colour of the 
water discharged, sand content if any, the units of 
electricity consumed, any abnormal sound of the 
pump during operation, depth to pumping water 
level if facility available, etc.; 

c 


— 


Collect a vvater sample and get it analyzed 
chemically and bacteriologically. Also record the 
smell and temperature of the discharged vvater. 
Then get the pump removed and make record of 
depth to vvater level and clear depth of the vvell 
structure, 


d 


— 


If borehole camera is available, videography of 
the vvell structure shall be undertaken for locating 
any evidence of depth wise damage to the casing 
or screen, incrustation, organic growth or any 
deposit on the casing or screen. Note of any 
floating material such as algae, iron bacteria or 
similar organism shall be made; and 


e 


— 


Examine the condition of the column pipes of 
pump, drive shaft, bearing, spiders, and pump 
bovvl for excessive accumulation of ferric or 
ferrous oxide. Such deposits must be got examined 
on urgent basis for possible organism involved. 
The pump parts shall also be examined for any 
pitting, graphitization, cavitation and vvear and 
tear of impellers. The flanges and glen packings 
of column pipes shall also be examined for any 
damage. 


6 ANALYSIS OF THE DATA COLLECTED 


Based on the discussions and the data collected possible 
cause of vvell trouble/problem shall be ascertained. 
A eritical examination of the borehole videography 
is likely to pin point the basic cause of vvell trouble. 


Some mafor observed problems and their causes are 
as under: 


6.1 Reduction in Well Yield 


The very first step shall be to compare current specific 
capacity of the well with the original or any past 
value. If the value is nearly same as original then the 
well structure needs no action and the pump shall be 
checked for its malfunction. If specific capacity 1s 
significantly lower, then the reduction in well yield 
could be due to the following: 

a) Lowering of Water Level of the Aquifer in the 
Area — In this case nothing shall be done except 
lowering a higher capacity pump to deeper level to 
obtain the desired yield. 

Infilling in the Well, Blocking Part or Full 
Screen — This could be due to many reasons and 
may require specific treatment. 


b 


— 


Cc 


wm 


Plugging of Formation or Filter Pack Outside 
the Well Screen — It is difficult to diagnose this 
situation, however, if no other reason is obvious, 
the reduction in specific capacity could be due to 
this reason. 


6.1.1 Malfunctioning of Pump or its Components 
Malfunctioning of the pump could be due to following: 


a) Improper adjustment of the impeller due to wear 
or other causes; 


b) Ahole in the column pipe and or; and 


c) Erosion or corrosion of the impeller or bowls. In 
some cases hole in the column pipe or loose glen 
packings is also seen. 


6.2 Onset of Sand Pumping 


Onset of sand pumping may be due to poor designing 
or incomplete development of the well. Localized 
corrosion of well screen or in some cases incrustation 
on part of a screen may be the cause of sand pumping. 
This can be verified from the borehole photography. 
This situation results in higher entrance velocity 
through the screen causing fines from the aquifer to 
move towards the screen and finally in the well yield, 
these ultimately clog the formation, gravel and screen 
opening. Corrosion and incrustation are major causes 
of well failure after onset of sand pumping. 


6.3 Structural Collapse or Rupture of the Casing or 
Screen 


The camera videography of the well structure is most 
appropriate for locating casing/screen rupture. But 
other methods, such as, lowering of a dolly of one 
nominal smaller casing/screen can precisely locate the 
collapse position. The dolly shall not pass the collapse 
part of pipe casing. Whenever a rapture takes place 
the inside pipe assembly is filled with filter media 


used surrounding the vvell casings. This can be noticed 
during pumping also vvhen the sand discharged vvith 
vvater 1s coarser than screen opening. Once the rupture 
or collapse position is ascertained the rehabilitation 
process can be planned. This normally does not happen 
but may occur in some wells. 


6.4 Corrosion and Encrustation of the Pipes and 
Screens 


These problems are most difficult to ascertain especially 
encrustation. The corrosion of screens can be identified 
vvith increased sand pumpage and encrustation vvith 
reduced yield. But the best result could be obtained 
from the videography of the vvell structure. 


7 METHODS 
REHABILITATION 


OF TREATMENT/ 


Once the cause of problem is identified the treatment 
shall be initiated. 


7.1 Infilling in the Well 


Infilling in the well blocking part or full screen 
shall be removed by bailing or compressed air. The 
operation shall be carried out slowly not damaging 
the screens. However, 1f the well does not get clear 
of infilling, look for any damage to the well structure. 
The borehole photography shall then be studied to 
locate the type of damage and place of damage. At 
the end, the well shall be redeveloped by appropriate 
method (compressed air or over pumping) to make 
it give sand free discharge. After the development 
procedure the well shall be tested for obtaining 
specific capacity. Also the clear depth of the well shall 
be again determined. 


7.2 Physical Plugging of Formation or the Screen 
a) Mechanical Methods 


1) Wire brushing or other means of mechanical 
scrapping shall be applied to remove 
encrustation. The loosened material then shall 
be removed by bailing or air lifting. 


2) High velocity jetting shall be done against 
screens to break and remove the plugging of 
screens if it is due to slit and clay particles. 


3) Polyphosphates and surfactants — 
Sodium polyphosphates are crystalline 
and glassy. Crystalline polyphosphates 


are sodium acid pyrophosphate (SAPP), 
tetra sodium pyrophosphate (TSPP) and 
sodium tri polyphosphate (STP) along 
with chelating compounds have the power 
to treat clay plugging problems. Sodium 
hexametaphosphate (SHMP) is a glassy 
phosphate that is commercially available and 
shall be used for treating vvells. The suggested 


IS 11632 : 2020 


mixture of chemicals for 1 000 liters of water 
in the well is : 


The sodium hexametaphosphate 16 kg 
Sodium carbonate 4 kg 
Sodium hypochlorite 5.25 percent 11 
VVetting agent — Pluronic F-68 1 kg 


Estimate the water in the well and the gravel 
pack and also the chemical required. 


Mix all the chemicals in 500 lt of warm water 
in a black or plastic tank. Then dilute 1t with 
cooler water. Pour the prepared solution into 
the well with a 38/50 mm diameter plastic or 
iron tremie pipe placed such that its bottom is 
1.5 m above the bottom of the well. The pipe 
is then raised by about 3 m and procedure is 
repeated until the volume of water in well is 
replaced by the solution. At the end pour in 
water in the well that is equal to about half of 
the water in casing pipe. 


Agitation of the water and the chemical shall 
then be done at an interval of about 1 h for 
about 6 h to achieve the desired results. This 
agitation can be done by compressed air 
method or pump. However, it must be ensured 
that the chemical is not discharge out in first 
few hours of agitation. The discharged water 
and chemical shall be guided back into the 
well after removal of sediments. After 6 h the 
well shall be pumped to waste to remove all 
chemicals from the well. 


7.3 Sand Pumping 


Redevelop the well with established well development 
method. High velocity jetting is very effective in 
many cases. However, if the established cause of 
sand pumping is incrustation, acid treatment is most 
appropriate. If the cause of sand pumping is enlarged 
slot opening or rupture in the well structure, following 
procedure should be adopted. 


7.3.1 The sand pumping may be due to a broken screen 
or casing or faulty packer. The location and location 
of the break should be determined and verified by 
photographic survey. In some cases the break will be 
associated with displacement of the axis and possibly 
deformation of the casing and screen. In such a case 
run a hydraulic or mechanical casing swage into the 
well to round out and if possible realign the casing or 
screen. In such cases telescope 3 m or more of liner 
with neoprene rubber seals sized to both the smaller 
and larger casing into the smaller casing. Another 
treatment is to swage a liner into the smaller casing 
with the upper end extending about 1 m above the 
reducer or original packer and the seal the two with 
cement grout. 


IS 11632 : 2020 


7.3.2 If problem is due localized enlargement of screen 
slots or a hole in the casing, a liner should be swaged in 
place opposite the corroded section. 


7.3.3 If sand pumping is due to settlement and bridging 
of filter pack, it is recommended to vigorously 
redevelop the well by injecting large quantity of water 
into the pack from surface. 


7.3.4 Malfunctioning of the pump should be rectified 
by removing the pump from the well and get it repaired 
or replaced. All column pipes should be thoroughly 
examined and glen packings replaced. 


7.4 Acid Treatment 


If all other possibilities are eliminated, the problem of 
reduced yield is incrustation of the screen or pack or 
both. Scrap the screens with steel disc or steel brush 
on a drill stem and collect the scrapings. Examine 
the scrapings to determine the nature and chemical 
composition of the incrustation. It may be primarily of 
calcium, magnesium and iron carbonates or iron hydro 
oxide. In such a case the acid treatment to rehabilitate 
the tubewell may be possible. The acid treatment shall 
be applied with a team of experts. 


7.4.1 The choice of the acid has to be one of the 
followings: 


a) Muriatic or hydrochloric acid (HCl) 27.92 percent; 
b) Sulfuric acid (H,SO,); or 
c) Sulfamic acid [amino sulfamic (H,NSO,H)]. 


Along with acid the chelating agents should be 
chosen from the following: 


1) Citric acid [(COOH)CH, C(OH) (COOH) CH, 
COOHİ: 


2) Phosphoric acid (H,PO,), 

3) Tartaric acid [HOOC (CHOH), COOH]; 
4) Rochelle salt (KNaC,H,O,); or 

5) Glycolic acid HOCH, COOH. 


Usual amount of chelating agent to be 
used is as under: 


w 


— 


i) 1 kg of agent to 15 kg of sulfamic powder; 
ii) 1 kg of agent to 5 1 of 15 percent HCl; or 
iii) 2 kg of agent to 5 1 of H,SO, 


7.4.2 Limitations for acid treatment are as follovvs: 


a) It is not recommended to use sulfuric acid as 
the reaction of the sulfuric acid vvith calcium 
carbonate forms calcium sulfate vvhich is relatively 
insolvable and difficult to remove from the well; 

b) Inhibited sulfuric acid is aggressive to most 
metals, particularly copper alloys; and 

c) Muriatic or hydrochloric acid even in inhibited 
form should not be used on wells having type 304 
or 308 stainless steel screens as it causes stress 


corrosion cracking of these alloys. This could, 
however, be safely used on wells with 316 or 321 
stainless steel screens. 


7.4.3 Procedure for Application 


7.4.3.1 Muriatic acid 


a) Muriatic or hydrochloric acid 27.92 percent — 
Full strength acid is to be used. The volume of 
the water in the well below top most screen is 
estimated and 2-2.5 times as much acid as water 
is placed in the well through a plastic or black iron 
pipe; 

b) 1 kg of diethylthiourea or a similar inhibitor 
should to be put in the vvell per 15 000 1 of the 
acid used along vvith the chelating agent as given 
above, 


c) The acid should be left in the vvell for 4 to 6 h, 


d) The vvell then is surged vvith surge block for 15 to 
20 min at about 1 h interval, and 


e) The solution in the vvell is then pumped or bailed 
from the vvell to vvaste. 


7.4.3.2 Sulfamic acid 


a) Estimate the volume of vvater in the vvell belovv 
the top of screen, 


b) For every 500 1 of vvater mix 150 kg of sulfamic 
acid, 10 kg of citric acid, 8 kg of diethylthiourea, 
1.6 kg of pluronic F 68 or L 62 and 70 kg of 
sodium chloride; 


Dissolve the chemicals in water at the surface and 
keep them at surface in water the total of which 
adds up to equivalent of water in the casing and 
careen; 


c 


wm 


d 


wm 


The slurry is pumped or poured into the well 
through a black iron or plastic pipe which initially 
extends to the bottom of the well. The pipe is then 
raised 2 to 3 m stage as sufficient solution is added 
to displace an equivalent volume of water in the 
well; 

The solution is left in the well from 12 to 24 h 
during vvhich time it is surged for 15-20 min at 
hourly interval; 

f) Test the solution in the well and when the pH 
value drops between 6 and 7 the acid should be 
considered exhausted; 


e 


— 


— 


Pump out the solution to vvaste from the vvell and 
observe its performance. If marked improvement 
is observed develop the vvell and sterilize and put 
back to use, 


8 


h) If the vvell has only marginally improve another 
dose of acid treatment can be given, and 


j) When acidizing a well keep a tank of sodium 
bicarbonate handy for any accidental spillover of 
the acid on men and material, 


7.4.3.3 Chlorine treatment 


Where blockage of screen is caused by slime forming 
organism, chlorine gas may be an effective treatment. 
40 to 60 kg pressure gas eylinder should usually be 
used. The gas eylinder should be connected through 
a plastic or black iron pipe which extends to nearly 
bottom of the well. Open the cylinder slowly such 
that discharge of the cylinder should not exceed 
16 kg per 24 h. After the cylinder is exhausted 
neutralize the chlorine in well by adding sodium 
hydroxide or calcium hydroxide prior to pumping 
to waste. Similar results can be obtained by adding 
hypochlorite solution. Sufficient hypochlorite to 
produce 1 000 ppm chlorine in well water should 
be poured or pumped into the well. Surge the well for 


IS 11632 : 2020 


30 min and leave the solution for 6 h. After this the 
well should be pumped to waste. 


7.5 Explosives for Hard Rock Wells 


4 kg shots of 50-60 percent dynamite should be used 
at 1.5 m interval within the open hole against hard 
rock only and not against shales. Also avoid shooting 
within 15 m distance to casing pipe. After shooting 
starting from bottom the well should be bailed clean 
and developed. 
NOTE — Storage and use of explosives including dynamite 
for civilian purposes are regulated under provisions of 
Explosives Act, 1884 and Explosive Rules, 2008 and as 
amended with an exception where the provisions of Mines 
Act are applicable. 


IS 11632 : 2020 


ANNEXA 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Diamond Core and Water Well Drilling Sectional Committee, MED 21 


Organization 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 
In Personal Capacity, Chandigarh 


AMKO Mining And Drilling Equipment Pvt Ltd, 
Mumbai 


AQSEPTENCE Group (India) Pvt Ltd (Formaly 
Known As Johnson Screens India Pvt Ltd) 

Atlas Copco (1) Ltd. Pune 

Atomic Minerals Directorate For Exploration And 
Research, Hyderabad 

Central Ground Water Board, Faridabad 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Drilbits International Private Limited, Nashik 

Drillmax Rigs Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

DTE of Mines And Geology, Udaipur 


Indian Pump Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 


Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad 

Kores (India) Ltd, Mumbai 

Mecon Limited, Jharkhand 

Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd, Nagpur 


Mining Associates Pvt Ltd, Asansol 

Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Engineering, 
Rae Bareli 

RITES Ltd, Gurgaon 

Rockdrill (India), Jodhpur 


Sandvik Smith Asia Ltd, A.P. 


The Singareni Collieries Co Ltd, Kothagudem 


Representative(s) 


SHRI AJAY AGARWAL (Chairman) 
SHRI ANUP KUMAR JOHRI (Alternate) 


SHRI M. CHANDRA JINDAL 


Suri M. G. KUVAWALA 
Sarı H. M. KUVAVALA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH ARORA 
Suri ANIL C. SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI SHUDHANSHU NIGAM 
Suri S. Datta MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. B. ANAND 
Suri P. S. CHATTOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK K. DUBE 
SHRI SIVASHANKAR (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 

DIRECTOR (Alternate) 
SHRI Y. V. RAMANA MURTHY 

SHRI TUSHAR PAUL (Alternate) 
SHRI R. K. BILANI 

Suri R. B. Desai (Alternate) 
Suri N. K. PARIHAR 

Suri N. K. Jonwat (Alternate) 
SHRI YOGESH Mistry 

SHRI UTKARSH A CHHAYA (Alternate) 
Suri A. K. PATHAK 
SHRI SANDEEP DHOLI 
Suri B. K. SINHA 
Suri S. M. JosHI 

Suri J. G. JANGLA (Alternate) 
Suri RAM BABU BANSAL 

Suri ANJAY BANSAL (Alternate) 
Pror C. K. JAIN 


SHRI S. KUNAL 
Suri P. C. DewL1 (Alternate) 


SHRI KAMALKISHOR GUPTA 
SHRI RAVINDRA Ku. GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI RANGAYYA NAIDU 
Suri N. BHASKARA Reppy (Alternate) 


Suri V. RAMA Rao 
SHRI SUBHASH CHANDRA (Alternate) 


IS 11632 : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 
Water & Power Consultancy Services (India) Ltd, SHRI ANUPAM MISHRA 
Gurgaon Suri J. K. Rar (Alternate) 
BIS Directorate General SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (MED) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Ms KHusHBU .İYOTSNA KINDO 


Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 21 (13046). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, TV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


