**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 9080-2-4 (1981) : Safety requirements in electro-heat 
installations, Part 2: Particular requirements for 
resistance heating equipment, Section 4: Protection in 
installations used for drying varnishes and other similar 
products [ETD 17: Industrial Electroheating Equipment] 



a^v j i imzzmn^a r^ amses 



2sa> \\ i i^sttZfr^ss: 



^^XVVV^k 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




?TR T^> ^TT <sMHI | ^ft ?&fft ^UU fff ^TT *FRTT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakarn 



.^^_ 



• 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



"RE-AFFIRME& 1996** 

IS j 9080 { Part II Sec 4 } - 1981 
. . . j-. i ■ ( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 
IN ELECTRO-NEAT INSTALLATIONS 

PART II PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS FOR 
RESISTANCE HEATING EQUIPMENT 

Section 4 Protection in Installations used for Drying 
Varnishes and other Similar Products 



UDC 62I'363'3/'4 : 667' 63 3 ■ 26 (H 7 : 614025 




© Copyright 1981 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAft MARG 

IV MA DK1.H1 HlHAtf 



JM Gr 2 Aprd l9£n 



IS : 9080 ( Part H/Sec 4 ) ■ 1981 

Indian Standard 

SAFETY REQUIREMENTS IN 
ELECTRO-HEAT INSTALLATIONS 

PART II PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS FOR 
RESISTANCE HEATING EQUIPMENT 

Section 4 Protection in Installations used for Drying 
Varnishes and other Similar Products 

Industrial Electro-heating Equipment Sectional Committee, 

ETDC 61 

Chairman Representing 

Shbi S. K. Maztxmder Tata Iron and Steel Go Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Members 

Shbi A. K. Biswas ( Alternate to 
Shri S. K. Mazumder ) 
Shbi S. N. Agabwal Steel Furnace Association of India, New Delhi 

Shbi S. K, Bhattaoharji M. N. Dastur & Company ( P ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri T. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. M. Chandwani Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri P. S. Sharma ( Alternate ) 

Shbi Kaushal Goel Engineering Projects ( India ) Ltd f New Delhi 

Shbi M. M. Prasad ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Jain Graphite India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri J. K. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. L. Keswani Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri D. D. Rajden ( Alternate ) 
Shbi O. N. Krishnan Metallurgical & Engineering Consultants (India) 

Ltd, Ranchi 
Shri J. C. Madan Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri A. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. T. Makhijani Westerwork Projects Ltd, Bombay 

Shri L. C. Chandi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S, K. Mtjkherjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri Sujit Das ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. K. Mtjkhopadhya Bharat Machine Building Plant, Heavy Engineering 

Corporation, Ranchi 
Shri M. K. Naib Directorate General of Ordnance Factories 

( Ministry of Defence ), Calcutta 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1981 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 9080 ( Part II/Sec 4 ) - 1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri P. A, Patel Indian Furnace Company Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. Purandhar ( Alternate ) 
Db Ravindra Rbddy Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Secunderabad 

Shbi M. Shankralingam Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shbi R. V. Narayanan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Y. P. Vatsa The General Electric Go of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. M. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Saohdev, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Elec tech ) 

Secretary 

Km G. M. Joseph 
Assistant Director ( Elec tech ), ISI 



IS: 9080 ( Part II/Sec 4 ) - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 
IN ELECTRO-HEAT INSTALLATIONS 

PART II PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS FOR 
RESISTANCE HEATING EQUIPMENT 

Section 4 Protection in Installations used for Drying 
Varnishes and other Similar Products 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part II/Sec 4 ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 12 January 1981, after the draft finalized by 
the Industrial Electroheating Equipment Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

0.2 This standard forms Section 4 of Part II covering the requirements 
for protection in installations used for drying varnishes and other similar 
products. The other parts of the series are as follows: 

General requirements 

Particular requirements for resistance heating equipment 

Protection in direct resistance heating installations 

Protection in indirect resistance heating installations 

Protection in potassium and sodium nitrate and nitrite 
bath furnaces 

Particular requirements for mains and medium frequency 
induction furnace installations. 

Particular requirements for arc furnace installations. 

0.3 In preparing this standard considerable assistance has been derived 
from IEC Publication 519-2 ( 1975 ) ' Safety in electro-heat installation: 
Part II Particular requirements for resistance heating equipment ' issued 
by International Electrotechnical Commission. 



Part I 


Part II 


Sec 1 


Sec 2 


Sec 3 


Part III 


Part IV 



IS : 9080 ( Part H/Sec 4 ) - 1981 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same asihat of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part II/Sec 4 ) applies to all drying installations 
particularly to ovens, where they are used for drying or baking varnishes 
or other substances, the solvents or diluents of which may form, in contact 
with air, explosive mixtures. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall 
apply. 

2.1 Drying Ovens with Natural Ventilation — Installation in which 
the ventilation is ensured only by the ascending movement of hot air. 

2.2 Drying Ovens with Forced Ventilation — Installations in which 
ventilation is ensured by an air circulating fan, by a fan mounted in the 
air exit duct, or by a fan mounted in the fresh air intake duct. 

2.3 Drying Enclosure — Space in a drying oven where the material to 
be dried is placed. 

2.4 Vapour Space — All the space in the oven which can be filled with 
evaporated solvents. 

3. CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION DETAILS 

3.1 Nameplates and Wiring Diagram — In addition to the plate 
indicating the power, the oven shall be provided with a second plate 
giving the wiring diagram ( internal connections ) of heating elements. 
This additional plate can be eliminated if the number of the relevant 
wiring diagram is already given on the nameplate and if this diagram is 
fixed not far from the furnace. 

3.2 Overheating and Temperature Control — The possibility of 
local overheating shall be avoided in the oven construction. The oven 
shall be provided with a temperature controller or at least with an 
automatic temperature limiting system and also with a temperature 
indicator. 



•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 

4 



IS : 9080 ( Part H/Sec 4 ) - 1981 

3.3 Internal Heating Elements 

3.3.1 The heating elements shall be so made as to avoid any sparking 
and if possible shall be metal-clad. 

3.3.2 The tubes protecting heating elements shall be gas-tight and 
made of material resistant to oxidation at the working temperature; 
their walls shall be at least 0'5 mm thick. 

3.3.3 If screwed infrared emitters are applied, care shall be taken that 
the fittings cannot become unscrewed. 

3.4 Internal Connections 

3.4.1 The assembly of conducting elements placed inside the enclosure 
shall be made by welding or hard soldering. 

3.4.2 This does not apply to infrared emitters with screwed fittings. 

3.5 Ventilation Devices 

3.5.1 In order to maintain the concentration of solvent or diluent 
vapours well below the explosive limit, the vapour space of the oven 
shall be equipped with a ventilation system ( natural or forced ). 

3.5.2 Throttle valves placed in air ducts in the ventilation system shall 
not close completely so that satisfactory ventilation is ensured at all 
times. 

3.6 Explosion Panel — All closed drying ovens, that is ovens whose 
apertures or doors are closed during operation, shall be provided with 
an explosion panel of suitable dimensions and weight, and of a machani- 
cal strength ensuring that, in the case of an explosion, the liberated 
internal pressure is directed to an area not dangerous to personnel. 

4. OPERATION 

4.1 For operation and installation of ovens and installations for drying 
varnishes and similar substances, it is necessary to comply with the 
requirements of the relevant Indian Standard. 

4.2 In the case of ovens with forced ventilation, heating shall not be 
started before the beginning of the fresh air intake or the air circulation 
system. Provision should be made to ensure that, when the fresh air 
intake ceases, all heating elements are switched off. 

4.3 Furthermore, equipment shall be provided with danger indicators, at 
least one of which should be outside the immediate proximity of the 
dangerous zone. 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

INDUSTRIAL ELECTRO-HEATING EQUIPMENT 

IS: 

1885 (Part Li/Sec 1 ) -1979 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part LI Industrial electro- 
heating, Section 1 General terms 

1885 ( Part Li/Sec 2 )-1979 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part LI Industrial electro- 
heating, Section 2 Resistance heating 

8992-1978 Test methods for induction furnaces with submerged channels 

9021-1978 General test conditions for industrial electro -heating equipment 

9029-1978 Methods of tests for batch furnaces with metallic heating resistors 

9050-1979 Nominal dimensions of cylindrical machined graphite electrodes with 
threaded sockets and connecting pins for use in electric arc furnaces 

9080 ( Parti )-1979 Safety requirements in electro-heat installations: Part I General 
requirements 

9080 ( Part Il/Sec 1 )-1979 Safety requirements in electro-heat installations: Part II 
Particular requirements for resistance heating equipment, Section 1 Protec- 
tion in direct resistance heating installations 

9080 ( Part III )-1979 Safety requirements in electro-heat installations: Part III Parti- 
cular requirements for mains and medium frequency induction furnace 
installations 



