**•*•••••*•**••• 



A ♦ ^ 



^ 



TTH^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 11124 (1984) : Method for atomic absorption 
spectrophotometric determination of arsenic [CHD 1: 
Inorganic Chemicals] 




^■^^^r 



^^s^iHf 









Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakarri 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen' 




'^^^^rr 






BLANK PAGE 




/Ol 



<si£L»iL, 






PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



I& I 11124 - 1334 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR ATOMIC 

ABSORPTION SPECTRO PHOTO METRIC 

DETERMINATION OF ARSENIC 



UDC 543 422 : 546 ly 




® Qtpffifu 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAJt BHAVAN, 9 bAHAUUR SHAH ZAfAR MARQ 

NEW DELHI M^Xm 

Qt 2 McFi-h 1985 



IS : 11124 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR ATOMIC 

ABSORPTION SPECTROPHOTOMETRIC 

DETERMINATION OF ARSENIC 

Chemical Standards Sectional Committee, CDC 1 

Chairman Representing 

Dr 13. N. Mattoo Maharashtra State Forensic Science Laboratory, 

Bombay 

Members 

Dk S. K. Meghal ( Alternate to 
Dr B. N. Mattoo ) 
Shbi K. D. Amre National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shei S. B. Naistal ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. A. AsHTAPUTRE Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shki p. K. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. M. Banerjee National I'est House, Calcutta 

Shri P. K. Pain ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Chadha Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 

Smt. Debi Mukherjee ( Alternate I ) 

Shri P. K. Dhingra i. Alternate H ) 
Dr M. S. Chadha Ehabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Ghi:e;f Chemist Central Revenues Control Laboratory, New Delhi 

Deputy Chiei" Chemist ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director ( Chemicals ) Department of Industries & Commerce, Madras 

Deputy Director ( MCL ) 
Madras ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Khishnamoorthy Railway Board 

Shri Bhtjpinder Singh ( Alternate ) 
Dk p. D. MaijHotra Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Dr J. K. NiGAM Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 

Shri N. S. Birdie ( Alternate ) 
Shet Om Prasad Century Rayon, Kalyan 

Dr p. K. Panoya Sarabhai M. Chemicals, Vadodara 

Dr M. Pradhasahadhi Regional Research Laboratory, Hyderabad 

Dr J. Madhusudan Rao { Alternate ) 
Dr D. C. Prashar National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 

Dr a. K. Sarkar ( Alternate ) 
Da G. Ramana Rao Indian Drugs & Pharmaceutical, Calcutta 

Shri Rooplal Shah ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. P, Sahakaoi Itlab Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. S. Honavab ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11124 - 1984 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

SsRi V. N. Sehgal Central Forensic Sciences ( India ) Ltd, New Delhi 

Shbi V. S, BiSARiA ( Alternate ) 
Db S. G. Shabma Central Indian Pharmacopoeia Laboratory, 

Ghaziabad 
Dr p. D. Sethi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi G. S. Shukla Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Nagpur 

Shbi T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Dr V, Srinivasan Glaxo Laboratories ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi P. Mansukhani ( Alternate ) 
Prof M. M. Taqui Khan Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research 

Institute, Bhavnagar 
Dr G. D. Bhat ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. K. Mathur, Director General ISI, ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Ghem ) 

Secretary 

Shbi M. Bakshi Gupta 
Assistant Director ( Chem ), ISI 



IS: 11124-1984 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR ATOMIC 

ABSORPTION SPECTROPHOTOMETRIC 

DETERMINATION OF ARSENIC 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 31 October 1984-, after the draft finalized by the Chemical 
Standards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 

0.2 The atomic absorption spectrophotometric method is dependent on 
the fact -that atoms in the ground state will absorb light of the 
same wavelength they emit when excited. When vapour containing 
arsenic ( AsHs ) is introduced in the flame, the intensity of the trans- 
mitted radiation will decrease in proportion to the amount of ground 
state atoms present in the flame, that is, the extent of concentration of 
arsenir. A hollow cathode lamp made of the element to be determined 
provides the source of radiation. Vapour generation kit is used to 
provide AsHs vapour which is passed into the flame and the 
resultant arsenic absorption is seen as a peak signal. A monochromator 
eliminates the unwanted radiations and a photosensitive device measures 
the intensity of light. The absorbance is taken as the measure of concen- 
tration of the analyzed element. 

0.3 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the atomic absorption spectrophotometric 
method for the determination of arsenic by hydride generation 
technique. 

* Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 11124 - 1984 

2. OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 

2.1 The sample is brought in solution form by dissolving in suitable 
acids. Arsenic is reduced by potassium iodide to trivalent state and 
volatile AsHsis generated by sodium borohydride. The vapour is passed 
into the flame and the resultant arsenic absorption is seen as a peak 
signal. 

3. QTUALITY OF REAGENTS 

3.1 Unless specified otherv^rise, pure chemicals and deionized water shall 
be used. 

Note — ' Pure chemicals ' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities 
which affect the results of analysis. 

4. INTERFERENCES 

4.1 One of the main sources of interferences in the determination of 
arsenic is the molecular absorption of flame gases at the extreme ultra- 
violet region of spectrum where the most sensitive lines of arsenic occur 
( 193"7 nm and 197'2 nm ). This non-atomic absorption can be estimated 
by means of continuum light source such as hydrogen lamp and the 
element absorption can be readily corrected. The standard addition 
technique takes care of most of the possible Interferences in combination 
with background corrections. The background corrections are provided 
in all modern instruments. 

5. APPARATUS 

5.1 Atomic Absorption Spectropbotometer — Generally with the 
following parameters, 

5.1.1 Lamp Current — 7 mA 

5.1.2 Support — Air 

5.1.3 Fuel — Acetylene 

5.1.4 Wavelength 

Wavelength Band Pass nm 

193-7 1-0 

197-2 1-0 

5.1.5 Working Range ~~ 0'005 to 0'03 mg/1. 

5.2 Vapour Generation Kit 

4 



IS : 11124 - 1984 

6. REAGENTS 

6.1 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid — See IS : 265-1976*. 

6.2 Concentrated Nitric Acid — See IS : 264-19761. 

6.3 Concentrated Sulphuric Acid — See IS : 266-1977^. 

6.4 Potassium Iodide — Solid. 

6.5 Sodium Borohydride — Pellets. 

6.6 Standard Arsenic Solution — Dissolve 1'320 3 g of AS2O3 in a 

minimum volume of 20 percent NaOH and neutralize with nitric acid. 
Dilute to one litre with distilled water. This solution contains 
1 000 fig/ml arsenic. 

6.6.1 Reduction of Arsenic from Pentavalent to Trivalent — Arsenic As (V) 
shall be reduced to As ( III ) by addition of 20 percent ( mjv ) potassium 
iodide solution. Dissolve 20 g of potassium iodide 100 ml of water and 
add 1 ml of this solution to each 20 ml aliquot of samples. Reduction 
will be completed in about one hour at room temperature. 

Alternatively, heat the sample at 50°G in a water bath for about 5 
to 6 minutes to complete the reduction. Cool to room temperature 
before analysis. 

Ensure that all standards and the analyte are in the correct valence 
state of As ( III ), otherwise the sample and standard will not match. 

6.6.2 Working Standards — Dilute 1 ml of stock standard arsenic solution 
{ see QS ) to one litre to give 1 ppm solution of arsenic. Make five 
standard dilutions by diluting 0'5, I'O, 1'5, 2'0 and 2'5 ml of the solution 
to 20 ml using reagent blank. 

7. PROCEDURE 

7.1 Remove the cap from pellet dispenser and load with sodium borohy- 
dride pellet. Place the dispenser cap. 

Raise the quartz tube and ignite the flame. Place the tube oh the 
flame. Set the inert gas (nitrogen) supply regulator to 1'4 kg/cm^ 
through the reaction vessel. 

7.2 Optimise the response of the instrument by the adjustment of burner 
height and flame adjustment. 



*Speci{ication for hydrochloric acid ( second revision ). 
tSpecification for nitric acid ( second revision ), 
^Specification for sulphuric acid ( second revision ). 



IS : 11124 - 1984 

Remove the stopper assembly from reaction vessel and add 20 ml 
reagent blank in the reaction vessel. Replace the stopper assembly and 
switch on the stirrer. After 30 seconds turn the disperser knob through 
180° to allow the pellet to drop. Turn the knob back and take the 
absorption reading. 

Similarly take reading vi^ith 5 working standards ( see 6.6.2 ) and 
plot the graph in concentration vs absorb ance. 

Take sample in a reaction vessel, proceed as above and take the 
absorbance. 

From the graph calculate the concentration of arsenic in ppm in 
the sample. 

8. CALCULATION 

«, A . .u C X 7 100 

8.1 Arsenic, percent by mass = — me"" ^ ~0^ 



where 



C OB concentration of arsenic in fig/ml in the final solution, 
V « volume in ml in the final solution, and 
M ~ mass in g of the sample in the final solution. 



