YNAT HAB IS 14177 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ada Te sie Tue & faa 
ORM gor — fesnfdsr 


( TET GRÜEITT) 


Painting System for Hydraulic 


Gates and Hoists — Guidelines 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.160, 25.220.10 


© BIS 2023 


UR AAG ORT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM Yan, 9 JET Mes WH ART, Ag feeci-110002 
A MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2023 Price Group 5 


Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee, WRD 12 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division 
Council. 


Gates, its embedded parts, hoists and supporting structures should be protected against corrosion due to climatic 
conditions, biochemical reaction and abrasion due to different forces acting on it, otherwise these equipments may 
deteriorate to an extent that the replacement of parts may become necessary and such replacements are very 
difficult. It was, therefore, necessary to frame guidelines for a suitable painting system to be adopted. 


In the formulation of this standard assistance has been derived from the following publications. 


ISO 8501-1 : 2007 Preparation of steel substrates before application of paints and related products, Visual 
assessment of surface cleanliness, Part 1: Rust grades and preparation grades of 
uncoated steel substrates and of steel substrates after overall removal of previous 


coatings 
BS 4232 : 1967 Specification for surface finish of blast-cleaned steel for painting. 
SIS 055900 : 1967 Rust grades for steel surfaces and preparation grades prior to protective coating. 


The standard was published in 1994. The first revision of this standard has been taken based on the experiences 
gained from the fields. The standard has given additional references for epoxy-based zinc priming coating, coal 
tar epoxy paint and use of chlorinated rubber for paints. The negative tolerance in different types of coating being 
used has been deleted. 


The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 “Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 14177 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


PAINTING SYSTEM FOR HYDRAULIC GATES AND 
HOISTS — GUIDELINES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down the methods of preparation 
of steel surfaces, painting operation and paint 
system applicable to hydraulic gates, hoists and their 
supporting structures. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 1477 Code of practice for painting of 
ferrous metals in buildings: 


(Part 1) : Pretreatment (first revision); 
1971 


(Part 2) : Painting (first revision) 


1971 

IS 2339 : Aluminum paint for general 

2013 purposes in dual container (first 
revision) 


IS 2932 : Enamel, synthetic, exterior (a) 
2013 undercoating (b) finishing (third 


revision) 


IS 5905 : Sprayed aluminum and zinc coatings 
1989 on iron & steel (first revision) 


IS 6586 : Recommended Practices for metal 
1989 spraying for protection of iron and 
steel (first revision). 


3 SELECTION OF PAINTING SYSTEM 


The following factors should be considered while 
adopting the type of painting system to be used: 


3.1 Location 


The painting system to be adopted depends on 
location of structure, component or equipment 
relating to water exposure that is whether it is 
submerged under water, partially submerged under 
water, above water, occasionally submerged under 


water, above water, occasionally submerged under 
water or is to be in contact with concrete surface. 


3.2 Climatic Conditions 
It plays arole in the selection of painting system. 
3.3 Water Quality 


The pH value and salinity of water should be 
considered while selecting the type of finish coat. 


3.4 Composition of Paint 


The chemical composition of the paint should be 
considered while selecting the type of paint. 


4 FACTORS AFFECTING PERFORMANCE 
OF PAINTING SYSTEM 


For adherence and durability of the paint system it 
is extremely important that a suitable surface 
preparation is carried out. The factor which 
influence the performance of painting system are: 


a) Presence of welded surface, spatter and 
sharp projects; 

b) Presence ofmill scale and rust; 

c) Presence of foreign material such as oil and 
grease; and 

d) Profile of the surface. 


5 TYPES OF SURFACE PREPARATION 
PRIOR TO APPLICATION OF PAINT 


5.1 Blast Cleaning 


Surfaces requiring blast cleaning should be 
sand/grit/shot blasted after fabrication with sand or 
coarse quartz or using iron grit grade G-C40 to white 
metal prior to painting. Heavy deposits of grease or 
oil may be removed by the solvent like clean 
mineral, spirits, xylol or white gasoline, etc. prior to 
sand blasting. Small quantities of grease or oil may 
be removed by the blasting process. However, when 
abrasive material contains sufficient oil or grease it 
should not be re-used as it becomes unsuitable for 
blast cleaning process. The average surface 
roughness after sand blasting should not exceed 40 
microns. Blast cleaning should be performed with 
sand/grit/shot as per requirements given in 
IS 1477 (Part 1). After blast cleaning, the surface 
should be cleared from loose dust and debris 
preferably by air blast with the help of blower. 


IS 14177 : 2023 


For the purpose of surface preparation, blast 
cleaning has been classified into four classes as 
given below: 


a) Class A 


This is the best quality of Blast cleaning. Whole 
surface of steel should be cleaned to bare metal 
without any residual in any form. 


b) ClassB 


Under this class at least 95 percent of surface of 
steel should be cleaned to bare metal except 
some tightly bonded residue in the form of 
millscale/rust only. The extent ofresidue should 
not be more than 10 percent of any single square 
having an area of 6.25 cm?. 


c) ClassC 


Under this class at least 80 percent of surface of 
steel should be cleaned to bare metal except 
some tightly bonded residue in the form of 
millscale/rust only. The extent ofresidue should 
not be more than 40 percent of any single square 
having an area of 6.25 cm?. 


d) ClassD 


Under this class at least 65 percent of surface of 
steel should be cleaned to bare metal except 
some tightly bonded residue in the form of 
millscale/rust only. The extent ofresidue should 
not be more than 60 percent of any single square 
having an area of 6.25 cm?. 


5.2 Hand and Power Tool Cleaning 


Surface should be prepared by hand and power tool 
cleaning such as scraping, wire, brushing, machine 
brushing and grinding. Prior to hand and power tool 
cleaning, any heavy layer of rust should be removed 
by chipping. Visible oil, grease, dirt and other 
foreign material should be cleaned using solvents by 
the use of clean mineral spirits, xylol or white 
gasoline. After hand and power tool cleaning, the 
surface should be cleaned of loose dust and debris. 
Before application of primer coat, an absorbent 
should preferably be applied to remove very fine 
dust. This type of surface preparation may be used 
only for small components of the hoist equipment 
where blast cleaning is not feasible. 


5.3 Sprayed Zinc/Aluminum Metal Coating 


Within four hours of blasting the complete external 
surface of the skin plates shall be sprayed using 
thermal spraying method with pure aluminum/zinc 
(see IS 5905 and IS 6586) to a thickness of not less 
than 100 microns. After metalizing, primer coating 
shall be done within four hours followed by epoxy 
painting. The hot metal coating by airless thermal 
spraying may be done within 1 hour ofblast cleaning 
preferably in dry environment. 


6 PAINTING 
6.1 Application of Paints 


Surface preparation leaves the material in vulnerable 
condition. It is therefore essential that immediately 
after surface preparation, the prepared surface ofthe 
steel metal shall be covered with a primer coat 
within six hours. A primer coat cannot be expected 
to last for an extensive period and therefore it should 
receive finish coats before it deteriorates. Primer 
coated articles in storage should be examined every 
2-3 weeks to determine whether additional painting 
in needed. The air temperature at the time of 
application shall not be below 10°C and relative 
humidity should not be above ninety percent. Paint 
material should be thoroughly mixed at the time of 
application. Each coat of primer and paint should be 
compatible with the previous and subsequent coats. 
Each coat should be free from runs, drops, pinholes, 
wave, laps, sags and unnecessary brush marks and 
should be allowed to dry and harden before the 
successive coat is applied. Newly cleaned or painted 
surface should be kept in a covered area and 
protected from moisture, condensation, 
contamination and freezing temperatures until the 
paint is thoroughly cured. Each coat should be 
thoroughly dried and cured before application of 
successive coasts. Care should be taken to prevent 
contamination of surfaces between any two coats of 
paint. 


All coats should be applied in such a manner so as 
to produce an even film of uniform thickness 
covering all corners and crevices completely. 
Coating should be done by skilled workers with 
experience in applying the specific coating material. 
Thinner should not be added to any paint. However, 
if used, solvents should be compatible with the paint 
materials being applied. 


Spray application should be performed with airless 
spray equipment. Spray guns should be suited to the 
type ofpaint being used and should be operated with 
orifices, nozzles and air pressure suited to the type 
of paint and its consistency. Paint pots should be 
equipped with means of controlling air or liquid 
pressure on the pot independent ofthe gun pressure. 
Air lines should be equipped with water traps for 
positive removal of condensed moisture. 


Brush application of priming coats should be 
avoided. If brush is to be applied, paint material 
should be applied with succeeding coats, each coat 
of uniform coverage, well brushed out, leaving no 
defects. All cleaning, surface preparation and 
coating application work should be done after the 
parts are completely fabricated and machine 
finished and checked in the shop. The parts should 
be disassembled to the extent necessary to enable 
cleaning and coating those surfaces, which are 
inaccessible while assembled. After finish coating 
and curing, parts should be reassembled as required 


for shipment. Coating on bolts or connections which 
will not be removed in erection should be touched 
up. If some surfaces are inaccessible for painting, 
the coating should be applied by sheep skin daubers. 
Roller application of coating system should be 
avoided. If it is essential use the coating material it 
should be uniform and in even coats without defects. 
The second coat should be applied at right angle to 
the first coat. 


6.2 Painting System 


The Painting system should preferable be carried out 
in the shop in order to ensure good quality control. 
Considering the facility like the sand/shot blasting 
available in the shop, the application of primer coat 
should invariable be carried out in the shop. The first 
finishing coat should preferable be carried out in the 
shop. If due to practical reasons the finishing coat is 
applied in the field, the finished coat should be 
applied within the time gap permitted by the paint 
manufacturer between the primer coat and finished 
coat. In some cases, final coat of finished paint may 
be carried out in the field if inter coat bond permits. 
During painting operations, all stainless steel, bronze 
nickel and other machined surface adjacent to metal 
work to be painted should be protected by covering 
with masking tape or other suitable means. Metal 
work which has been shop painted should be handled 
with care so as to preserve the shop coat in the best 
practicable conditions. Before proceeding with any 
painting operation, the base metal should be cleaned 
and all the areas ofthe shop paint which are defective 
or damaged should be repainted. Metal work adjacent 
to field weld, riveting or bolting where the shop paint 
coating has been damaged due to handling or due to 
heat should be cleaned thoroughly to expose the base 
metal and should be repainted. Paint applied to such 
areas should be of the same type as used during the 
original shop coat. During assembly/fabrication, the 
surface on which another member overlaps for 
welding should be cleaned and painted and then the 
secondary member should be placed on the primary 
member to avoid surface left unpainted. Heat resistant 
paint should be used. 


6.2.1 Gates and Appurtenances 
6.2.1.1 Surface preparation 


The blast cleaning of following class for surface 
preparation should be adopted. The classification of 
blast furnace has been given at 5.1. 


a) Gates and stop logs — as per class B or class 
A 


b) Lifting beams — as per class C or class B. 


c) Exposed embedded parts — as per class B 
or class A. 


IS 14177 : 2023 


6.2.1.2 Primer coat 


After surface preparation the following primer coats 
should be applied. 


a) Gates and stop logs 


Over the prepared surfaces one coat of 
inorganic zinc silicate (preferably airless 
spray) should be applied giving a dry film 
thickness of 70* primer (containing not less 
than 85% zinc on dry film) should be 
applied to give a total dry film thickness of 
70* > microns. 


b) Lifting beam/lifting tackles 


Over the prepared surfaces two coats of zinc 
phosphate primer should be applied giving a 
dry film thickness of 40** microns per coat. 


c) Exposed embedded parts 


Over the prepared surfaces one coat of 
inorganic zinc silicate primer (preferably air 
less spray) giving as dry film thickness of 
75 microns should be applied. 


6.2.1.3 Finishing coats 


Over the primer coats the following finished coats 
should be applied. 


a) Gates and stop logs 


Finishing coat should consist of two coats of 
solvent less coal tar epoxy paint. These 
should be applied at an interval of 24 h. Each 
coat should give a minimum dry film 
thickness of 150° microns. The 
total dry film thickness of all the coats 
including primer coating should not less 
than 350 microns. 


b) Lifting beam 


Finishing coat should consist of two coats of 
alkyed based micaceous iron oxide paint. 
Each coat of paint should be given a 
minimum dry thickness of 65* microns. 
The interval between the two coats should 
be 24 h. The total dry film thickness of all 
coats including primer coating should not be 
less than 200 microns. 


c) Exposed embedded parts 


Finishing coat consist of two coats of 
solvent less coal tar epoxy paint. These 
should be applied at an interval of about 24 
h. Each coat should give a dry film thickness 
of 150° microns. The total dry film 
thickness of all the coats including primer 
coating should not be less than 350 microns. 


IS 14177 : 2023 


6.2.2 Hoists and Supporting Structure 
6.2.2.1 Surface preparation 


Should be done as per the requirements of class B 
given in 5.1. 


6.2.2.2 In case the surface preparation is done 
manually by wire brush, mechanical tools, etc. then 
instead of sand blasting all ferrous surfaces exposed 
to atmosphere or water shall be given a coat of rust 
inhibitive phosphate wash by brush immediately 
following cleaning operation and surface shall be 
thoroughly wetted with rust inhibitive wash atthe rate 
of approximately 30 ml/m? and allowed to dry for 
24 hours. Rinsing after applications is generally not 
required but unreached residue if any shall be 
removed by wiping the inhibited surface with damp 
cloth, within one hour after rust inhibiting wash has 
dried thoroughly and after removing un reacted 
residue, the application of primer and painting as 
indicated in the following paragraph shall be carried 
out. 


6.2.2.3 Primer coat 
a) Structural component 


Two coats of zinc phosphate primer should 
be applied. Dry film thickness of 40* micron 
per coat should be given. 


b) Machinery 


Except machined surfaces, all surfaces of the 
machinery including gearing housing, 
shafting bearing pedestals, etc., should be 
given one coat of zinc phosphate primer paint 
to give a minimum dry film thickness of 50 
microns. Motors and other bought out items 
should also be painted if necessary. 


c) Hydraulic hoist 


All unmachined ferrous surfaces (hoist, 
cylinder, cylinder heads, hydraulic piping, 
pipe fittings, bonnet covers) exposed to water 
should be given one coat of inorganic zinc 
silicate (preferably airless spray) to give a dry 
film thickness of 70* micros and surfaces 
unexposed of water should be given two 
coats of zinc phosphate primer paint giving a 
dry film thickness of 40° microns/coat. Oil 
tank control cabinets, hoist beams and pipe 
support should be given one coat of zinc 
phosphate priming paint giving a minimum 
dry film thickness of 50"° microns. 


d) Unmachined surfaces 


All unmachined surfaces should be given one 
primer coat of chlorinated rubber based zinc 


phosphate primer to give a dry film thickness 
of 50* microns. 


6.2.2.4 Finishing coats 
a) Structural component 


The finish paint should consist of one coat of 
alkyed based micaceous iron oxide paint at dry 
film thickness of 65*° microns followed by two 
coats of synthetic enamel paint conforming to 
IS 2932 to give dry film thickness of 25* 
microns per coat or synthetic enamel paint. The 
interval between the coats should be 24 hours. 
The total dry film thickness of all the coats 
including primer coat should not be less than 
175 microns. 


b) Machinery 


The finish paint should consist of three coats of 
aluminum paint conforming to IS 2339 or 
synthetic enamel conforming to IS 2932 to give 
a dry film thickness of 25*° microns per coat. 


c) Hydraulic hoist 


All unmachined ferrous surfaces (hoist 
cylinder, cylinder heads, hydraulic piping, pipe 
fittings, bonnet cover) exposed to water should 
be given two coats of solvent less coal tar epoxy 
paint. Each coat should be given a dry film 
thickness of 150*° microns. Total dry film 
thickness of all the coats including primer coat 
should not be less than 350 microns. Surfaces 
unexposed to water should be given one coat of 
alkyd based micaceous iron oxide paint to be 
given dry film thickness of 65*° microns 
followed by two coats of synthetic enamel paint 
conforming to IS 2932 to give dry film 
thickness of 25*° microns/coat. The interval 
between coats should be 24 hours. The total dry 
film thickness should not be less than 175 
microns. Oil tank control cabinet, hoist beams, 
pipe supports and clamps, ladders etc, should be 
given three coats of aluminum paint conforming 
to IS 2339 or synthetic enamel paint 
conforming to IS : 2932 to give dry film 
thickness of 25*> microns per coat. The total dry 
film thickness of all the coats including primer 
coat should not be less than 125 microns. 


d) Un-machined surfaces 


The unfinished surfaces of the piston and the 
unfinished surfaces of cylinder heads should be 
cleaned and given three coats of vinyl 
resin/chlorinated rubber to give a dry film 
thicknessof  30** microns per coat, to obtain 
a minimum dry film thickness of 125 microns 
including primer coat. 


6.2.3 Machined Surfaces 


All machined surfaces of ferrous metal including 
screw threads which will be exposed during 
shipment or while awaiting installation should be 
cleaned by suitable solvent and given a heavy uniform 
coating of gasoline soluble removable rust preventive 
compound or equivalent. Machined surfaces should 
be protected with the adhesive tapes or other suitable 
means during the cleaning and painting operation of 
other components. 


6.2.4 Painting of Embedded Parts in Contact with 
Concrete 


All surfaces of embedded parts which are to come in 
contact with concrete should be cleaned to meet the 
requirements of class D (see 5.1) and should be given 
a coating of cement latex to prevent rusting. Exposed 
machined surfaces of ferrous metal which are to be in 
rolling and sliding contact should not be painted but 
should be coated with heavy gasoline soluble rust 
preventive compound. In all exposures where metal 
will be partially embedded in concrete, it is good 
practice to extend the protective coating on the non- 
embedded portion a short distance into the area later 
to be embedded, thus eliminating problem at the 
junction point. 


6.2.5 Surfaces not to be Painted 


The following surfaces are not supposed to be 
painted unless or otherwise specified. 


a) Machine finished or similar surface. 
However, such surfaces should be 
protected with a corrosion preventing 
compound; 

b) Surfaces which will be in contact with 
concrete; 


c) Stainless steel overlay surfaces; 
d) Surfaces in sliding or rolling contact; 


e) Galvanized surfaces, brass and bronze 
surfaces; 


f) Aluminum alloy surfaces; 


g) Bare electrical conductors and insulating 
materials; and 


IS 14177 : 2023 


h) Equipment name plates and instruction. 
6.2.6 Handling Painted Metal Work 


Metal work to be transported by rail or truck should 
be loaded so as to prevent shifting and scuffing or 
gauging of the coating. In loading and unloading and 
during installation reasonable care and suitable 
handling equipment should employed to keep 
abrasion damage at a minimum. 


7 INSPECTION AND TESTING 


Inspection and testing of paint should be carried out 
in accordance with the provisions laid down in 
IS 1477 (Part 2). 


8 MAINTENANCE OPERATION 


As a part of maintenance operation, all gates, 
embedded parts and hoists should be inspected at 
least at an interval of 2 years. If repainting is 
considered necessary, surface preparation should be 
carried out by appropriate hand and power tool 
cleaning. Visible oil, grease, dirt and other foreign 
material should be cleaned by using solvents by the 
use of clean mineral spirits, xylol or white gasoline. 
While attending to the maintenance painting. It is 
not ordinarily intended that total sound adherent old 
paint be removed unless it is excessively thick or 
flexible. However, specific instructions should be 
given on the extent of surface to be blast cleaned 
while repainting. 


In preparing a previously painted surface, it is 
necessary to remove all corrosion and all paint 
which shows evidence of corrosion, peeling, 
excessive thickness, brittleness, blistering, scaling 
or general disintegration. It is essential that the 
removal of the old paint be carried back around the 
edges of the spotted area until a completely intact 
and adhering paint film with no rust or blisters 
underneath is attained. Edges of tightly adherent 
paint remaining around the area to be recoated 
should be feathered, so that the repainted surface 
can have a smooth appearance. The remaining old 
paint should have sufficient adhesion so that it 
cannot be lifted as a layer by inserting a blade of 
putty knife under it. 


IS 14177 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee, WRD 12 


Organization 
NHPC Limited, Faridabad 
Bhakra Beas Management Board, Punjab 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 


Central Water & Power Research Station, Pune 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
Department of Water Resources, Govt of 


Odisha 
Himachal Pradesh Power Corporation Ltd, 


Distt Mandi 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee 
Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 
Jaypee Infra Ventures, Noida 
NHPC Limited, Faridabad 
NTPC Limited, New Delhi 
P.E.S. Engineers(P) Limited, Hyderabad 
Precision Infratech Limited, Ahmedabad 


R.M. Sinha & Co, Kolkata 


Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam Limited, Shimla 


Texmaco Limited, Kolkata 


Water Resources Department, Maharashtra 


Representative(s) 
SHRIM. K. SINGH, GENERAL MANAGER (MECH) (Chairperson) 


SHRI K. K. SINGH 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER, MECH. DIVISION (Alternate) 


SHRI HARISH KUMAR, SENIOR MANAGER (DESIGN) 
MOHD WALIULLAH, MANAGER (DESIGN) (Alternate) 


SHRIR. K. RUSTOGI 
SHRIM. K. KHANDELWAL (Alternate) 


SHRIR. S. KANKARA 
SHRI RAJKUMAR, SCB (Alternate) 
DR K.C. SAHU, SC C (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR, GATES (E & NE) 
DIRECTOR, GATES (NW & S.), (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBI PRASAD PATTNAIK , GM (MECH) 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRIR P SHARMA 
SHRI RAM KRISHNA KAUNDAL (Alternate) 


DRK. S. HARI PRASAD 
PROF R. P. SAINI (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (DESIGN) 


SHRI NAVEEN SINGHAL, SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (Alternate) 


SHRI SHARAD KUMAR, ASSISTANT ENGINEER (Alternate) 
SHRI V. K. GUPTA 


SHRI RAJESH KUMAR DGM (CIVIL) 
SHRI BABOO LAL TYAGI, DGM (CIVIL), (Alternate) 
SHRI PUNIT MASIWAL, DM (MECH.), (Alternate) 


SHRI NAVEEN CHANDRA PANT 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. V. S. S. RAJU 
DR V. SURYA ANANTAPANTULA (Alternate) 


SHRI NALIN VIBHAKAR 
SHRI DHEERAJ VANIA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIT KUMAR SINHA 
SHRI DEBJIT SINHA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANISH KUMAR SHARMA 


SHRI UDAYAN BANERJEE 
SHRI ALOK KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (GATES CIRCLE) 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (GATES CIRCLE) (Alternate) 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity, (P.O Box-82, Unit 8, 
Gopalbandhu Nagar, Pin - 751012 
Bhubaneswar) 

In Personal Capacity, (Nayadu Enclave , 


Plot No.384, New ENT Care Hospital 
Matrusri Nagar Colony Miyapur, 
Pin - 500049 Hyderabad) 


In Personal Capacity, (Top Floor, Plot No. 7, 


Phase 2 Himuda Colony Saproon, 
Pin — 173211 Solan) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 14177 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ABHAY PRASAD PATTANAIK 


SHRIN. KANNAIAH NAIDU 


PROF GOPAL CHAUHAN 


SHRI R. BHANU PRAKASH, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (WATER RESOURCES DEPARTMENT) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI DUSHYANT PRAJAPATI 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/ JOINT DIRECTOR 
(WATER RESOURCES DEPARTMENT), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.WRD 12 (18191) 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMREC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


