RAT AAF IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 
Indian Standard 


Waa A ara ch Tarr — ofa afar 
WMT 1 aaa & fae aaa Hare 
( TET FRAT ) 


Use of Glass in Buildings — 
Code of Practice 


Part 1 General Methodology for Selection 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 81.040.20 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SERTE TH APT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2019 Price Group 9 


Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, CED 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


Glazing is an important item in building construction, and glass, the primary glazing element has to be selected 
to cater to several requirements. Fixing of glass is a specialized operation, when properly done, shall avoid the 
hazards of broken glass. Growing trend in resorting to glazed windows/doors in buildings; and structural glazing 
on exterior of buildings and structures has considerably increased the importance of glazing and the need for 
proper workmanship. This standard was, therefore formulated to provide required guidance and provisions on the 
subject matter. 


This Indian Standard is published in four parts. The other parts in this series are: 
Part 2 Energy and light 
Part 3 Fire and loading 
Part 4 Safety related to human impact 


This standard (Part 1) was first published in 2016 to provide guidance in the selection of appropriate glazing for 
various types for building construction. 


Correct selection of materials to be used in glazing for buildings depends on many factors. Therefore, provisions 
in this standard should be used in conjunction with those in other parts. 


Use of organic coated films including safety films on glass (say annealed) shall not be construed as safety glass as 
per this standard, and hence users should exercise caution in choosing their options. 


This revision of the standard is aimed at bringing the provisions at par with the provisions of the SP 7 (Part 6/Sec 8): 
2016 ‘National Building Code of India 2016: Part 6 Structural Design, Section 8 Glass and Glazing’. 


In this revision, the following major changes have been made: 
a) Reference to sustainability aspects during the selection of glass has been introduced; 
b) Various possible laminated glass combinations have been included; 
c) Provisions related to selection of materials for glass fins have been included; 
d) Deflection limits for the frame and the centre of glass pane have been updated; and 
e) Definitions of various terms have been updated as per the prevailing engineering practice. 
With the publication of this standard (along with the other parts) it is proposed to withdraw the IS 3548 : 1988 


‘Code of practice for glazing in buildings (first revision)’, in view of the comprehensive provisions proposed 
herein. However, the contents of the same are included in this standard as an informative annex (see Annex B). 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


Indian Standard 


USE OF GLASS IN BUILDINGS — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 


PART 1 GENERAL METHODOLOGY FOR SELECTION 
( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 1) covers the selection and 
application of glass in buildings, different types of 
glass and their requirements, and associated glazing 
materials. 


1.2 This standard does not cover the following: 


a) Glazing systems including frameless glazing 
system, and 


b) Patent glazing. 


NOTE — The provisions of this standard pertain to selection 
of glass and associated materials. However, parties, as per 
their mutual agreement, may appropriately utilize the relevant 
provisions for installation of alternative sheeting materials 
used for similar purposes such as plastic glazing sheets/ 
polycarbonate sheets taking also into account requirements of 
safety issues as applicable with the specific material. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subjected to revision, and parties to agreement based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 APPLICATION 


While selecting the glass for application, the type of 
glass shall satisfy the following criteria: 


a) Glazing thickness calculation subjected to wind 
load is calculated in accordance to IS 16231 (Part 3) 
and shall satisfy the requirements for human 
impact safety as per IS 16231 (Part 4). 


Installation of glass to the building is done in 
accordance with the provisions available in 
this standard and in the absence of any specific 
provisions, shall be as per manufacturer’s 
guidance. 


b 


wm 


c) For a given application, the type and thickness 
of glass selected shall be in accordance with the 
requirements provided herein. 


d) Optical, solar, thermal performance of glazing 
(clear/tinted/coated reflective glass) shall be as per 
the requirements in IS 16231 (Part 2) or as per the 
provisions hereunder. 


4 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 14900, IS 2553 (Part 1) and the following shall 


apply. 


4.1 Annealed Glass (see 4.18) — Also known as 
‘normal’ glass, which has not been subjected to 
toughening, lamination and heat strengthening. It is the 
product obtained from the process of slow and steady 
cooling of hot glass in order to relieve internal stresses 
or thermal induced stresses. 


NOTE — This term is most commonly used for flat glass. 


4.2 As-cut Finished Sizes — Finished panes of flat 
glass cut from stock/standard sizes. They may be 
subjected to further processing, such as edge working 
drilling, face decoration, etc. 


4.3 Aspect Ratio — The ratio of a longer side of glass 
pane to its shorter side. 


4.4 Beads or Glazing Beads — A strip of wood, metal, 
UPVC, aluminium, metal alloys or other suitable 
material attached to the rebate to retain the glass in 
position in the frame. 


4.5 Block (Setting Block) — A small piece of wood, 
plastic, rubber or other suitable material used between 
the edges of the glass (generally the bottom edge only) 
to centralize the glass in the frame (frequently called a 
setting block). 


4.6 Clear Glass — A transparent glass with neutral/ 
near colourless appearance. 


4.7 Coating Faults — It is the fault on reflective silver 
layer which shall alter the appearance of the silvered 
glass. They consist of scratches, stains, colour spots 
and edge deteriorations. 


4.8 Coefficient of Linear Expansion — It is expressed 
as the strain (change in length per unit length) per unit 
variation of temperature of a material. 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


4.9 Distance Piece — A small piece of wood or other 
suitable material used to locate the glass between 
the bead and the back of the rebate to prevent lateral 
movement. 


4.10 Double Glazing — Glazing formed by an 
assembly of two glass panes separated by a spacer 
and the gap may be filled by air or inert gases and 
hermetically sealed along the periphery to improve 
thermal insulation. 


4.11 Faceted Glazing — It is a type of glazing in which 
flat panes of glass are installed vertically at an angle to 
each other to form a faceted surface. 


NOTE — While no frames are used normally, in special cases, 
frames may also be used to achieve/maintain the curve. 


4.12 Fenestration — All area (including frame) in the 
building envelope that let in light, including window, 
plastic panels, clerestories, skylight, glass doors that 
are more than one-half the floor height, and glass block 
walls. 


4.13 Float Glass — Flat, transparent, clear or tinted 
soda-lime silicate glass having parallel and polished 
surfaces obtained by casting and floatation on a metal 
bath. 


NOTE — Flat glass is a general term covering sheet glass, 
float glass and various forms of rolled and plate glass in 
which shape of the glass is flat and commonly used for 
windows, glass doors, transparent walls and other architectural 
applications. 


4.14 Frame — An element made of timber/metal/ 
aluminum or other durable material/combination 
of materials such as glass fins and structural sealant, 
supporting the full length of a glazed panel edge. 


4.15 Frameless Glazing — An unframed glazing 
which maintains the integrity through pointed support 
structures. 


4.16 Front Putty — The compound forming a 
triangular fillet between the surface of glass and the 
front edge of rebate. 


4.17 Fully Framed Glazing — The glazing whose 
panels have all its four edges framed. 


4.18 Glass — An inorganic, non-metallic material 
produced by the complete fusion of raw materials at 
high temperatures, into a homogenous liquid which is 
then cooled to a rigid condition without crystallizing. 
It is typically hard and brittle, and has a conchoidal 
fracture. It may be colourless or tinted and transparent 
to opaque. The term glass refers to monolithic glass 
unless specified otherwise. 


4.19 Glazing — Act of securing of glass or plastic 
glazing sheet material into a building in prepared 
openings in windows, door panels, partitions, curtain 
wall, etc. 


4.20 Heat Strengthened Glass — Glass within which 
a permanent surface compressive stress, has been 
induced by a controlled heating and cooling process in 
order to give it increased resistance to mechanical and 
thermal stress and prescribed fracture characteristics. 


4.21 Hermetic Seal — A complete seal (especially 
against the escape or entry of air which is impervious 
to outside interference or influence) done on insulating 
glass units. 


4.22 Infill Balustrades — The balustrades in which the 
supported glass resists an infill pressure and/or point 
load applied to the glass panel. 


4.23 Insulating Glass Unit (IGU) — An assembly 
consisting of at least two panes of glass, separated 
by one or more spaces, hermetically sealed along the 
periphery, mechanically stable and durable. 


4.24 Interlayer — Layer or material acting as an 
adhesive and separator between plies of glass and/or 
plastic glazing sheets. 

NOTE — It can be designed to give additional performance 


to the finished product, for example impact resistance, fire 
resistance, solar control and acoustic insulation. 


4.25 Laminated Safety Glass — It is a glass made of 
two or more pieces of glass which are held together by 
an interleaving layer or layers of plastic materials. 


4.26 Maximum Thickness — The thickness of a pane 
of glass at the maximum thickness tolerance. 


4.27 Minimum Thickness — The thickness of a pane 
of glass at the minimum thickness tolerance. 


4.28 Modulus of Elasticity (Young’s Modulus) — 
This modulus expresses the tensile force that would 
theoretically have to be applied to a glass sample to 
stretch it by an amount equal to its original length. It is 
expressed as a force per unit area (for glass, E = 0.7 x 
10° N/mm? = 70 GPa). 


4.29 Monolithic Glass — A single sheet of flat glass 
which could be either annealed, toughened or heat 
strengthened. 


4.30 Mullion — Vertical framing member separating 
and supporting two adjacent panes of glass or panels. 


4.31 Nominal Thickness — A numeric designation 
that indicates the approximate thickness of glass. 


4.32 Organic Coated Glass — A sheet of glass coated 
on one or both sides with an applied organic coating or 
sheeting. 


4.33 Pane — A single piece of glass or plastic glazing 
sheet material in a finished size ready for glazing. 


4.34 Patterned Glass — A rolled glass having a 
distinct pattern on one or both surfaces. 


4.35 Rebate — The part of a surround; the cross- 
section of which forms an angle into which the edge of 
the glass is received. 


4.36 Reflective Coated Glass — It is a glass 
with reflective coating which uses the principle of 
increasing the direct reflection to maximize solar 
energy attenuation. In comparison with clear glass, its 
absorption of solar energy is also increased. 

NOTE — In comparison with float glass surface, these 


reflecting coatings (due to their composition) exhibit lower 
level of emissivity which improves their U-value. 


4.37 Sheet Glass — Glass made in large sheet directly 
from furnace or by making a cylinder and then flattening 
it. 


NOTE — These transparent glass have a glossy, fire- 
finished, apparently plane and smooth surfaces, but having a 
characteristic waviness of surface. 


4.38 Skylight — A fenestration surface having a 
slope of less than 60° from the horizontal plane. Other 
fenestration, even if mounted on roof of a building is 
considered as either a vertical glazing or sloped glazing 
depending upon the angle of the glazing. 


4.39 Stock/Standard Sizes — The panes of flat glass 
such as coated, mirror, enameled glass, etc, supplied 
with as-cut edges which are intended for further 
processing. These are generally corresponded with 
manufacturer’s production size. 


4.40 Thermal Transmittance (U) — Thermal 
transmission through unit area of the given building 
unit divided by the temperature difference between the 
air or other fluid on either side of the building unit in 
steady state conditions. It is also called as U-value. Its 
unit is W/m?K. 


NOTES 


1 Thermal transmittance differs from thermal conductance in 
so far as temperatures are measured on the two surfaces of a 
building unit in the latter case and in the surrounding air (or 
other fluid) of the material on the two sides, in the former case. 
Thermal conductance is a characteristic of the building unit 
whereas thermal transmittance depends on conductance and 
surface coefficients of the building unit under the conditions 
of use. 


2 In the case of a glazing system, thermal transmission is taken 
through the central part of the glass, and thermal conductance 
of the frame needs to be considered to determine the overall 
thermal transmission through the glazing system. 


4.41 Through Component/Connection— The internal 
spacer or fixing that either penetrates through the door- 
set or openable window from one face to another or 
directly connects the faces of one to the other. 


4.42 Tinted Glass — A normal flat glass to which 
colourants (normally metal oxides) are added during 
manufacturing process to achieve tinting and solar 
radiation absorption properties. It is also referred to as 
body tinted glass. 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


4.43 Toughened (Tempered) Glass — A single piece 
of specially heat-treated glass, with a stress pattern 
such that the piece when fractured reduces to numerous 
granular fragments, with no large jagged edges. 


4.44 Transom — A horizontal cross bar connecting 
two vertical members in a glazing frame. 


4.45 Unframed Glazing — A glazing with one or 
more edges unframed. 


4.46 Vertical Fenestration — All fenestration other 
than skylights. Trombe wall assemblies, where glazing 
is installed within 300 mm ofa mass wall are considered 
walls and not fenestration. 


5 SELECTION 


5.1 Right from the initial project evaluation stage, a 
suitable methodology that incorporates the implications 
of use of glass materials and their influence on 
performance of the building shall have to be looked 
into. A typical flowchart outlining such a methodology 
is provided for the users of this standard (see Fig. 1). 


It is assumed that, 


a) the location of area to be glazed, preliminary 
size/shape have been decided as part of normal 
building design process; 

b) the designer has gained information on glass/and 
plastic glazing sheet materials used in similar 
circumstances; and 


c) the designer is cognizant of implications of any 
innovation in design. 


5.2 Design requirement including aesthetic, functional 
and safety considerations; and client specified 
requirements such as security and maintenance needs 
to be considered. 


5.3 Effect of design on cost such as initial cost of glazing 
(specification of glass/plastic sheeting material; glazing 
method; access for initial glazing; work schedule; 
protection during construction); effect of glass/plastic 
sheeting material on capital/running cost related to 
building heating/cooling, lighting and ventilation; and 
maintenance cost of glazed areas (access for cleaning 
and reglazing) should be considered. 


5.4 Selection of appropriate glass may be done 
considering the cost benefit analysis in respect of 
the benefit accrued against the alternatives available. 
Also, the comparative cost of glazing materials should 
be considered together with their life expectancy and 
probability of need for maintenance. In the context of 
selection of glass, the provisions given in SP 7 (Part 11) 
: 2016 ‘National Building Code of India 2016: Part 11 
Approach to Sustainability’ may also be considered in 
addition to the cost benefit analysis on the use of glass 
vis-a-vis use of other alternatives. To suitably modify 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


Identify the location of glazed areas, their shape, size, cost, etc 


Feedback consideration from past projects and other related information | 


| 


Detailed review of constraints 


Make preliminary selection of glazing system 


| 


Design requirements consideration 


[Such as natural lighting (glare, fading, privacy); thermal consideration 
(solar transmission, thermal insulation, heat absorption); wind loading; 
safety; security; fire; durability; maintenance; 

air/water leakage and acoustics] 


Arrive at a compatible requirement 


Confirm preliminary selection or perform required modifications 
before reviewing 


Finalize the design 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL SEQUENCE OF DESIGN EVALUATION FOR GLAZED AREAS 


Table 1 Typical Properties of Various Types of Glass 
( Clause 6.1 ) 


SI Properties Sheet Glass Float Glass Laminated Tempered or Heat Strengthened 
No. Glass Toughened Glass Glass 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Tensile strength 40 N/mm? 40 N/mm? 40 N/mm? 120 to 200 N/mm? 40 to 55 N/mm? 
ii) Thickness As per IS 2835 As per IS 14900 3.5—19 mm 2-19 mm As per IS 16982 
iii) Density (approximate) <— 2400-2 550 kg/m? SE 
iv) Modulus of elasticity | 70 GPa Sa 
v) Coefficient of linear 1) 9x 10°m/mK —. > 
expansion 

vi) | Compressive strength Yt 1 000 N/mm? a al 


NOTE — Conventionally, the following types of glass exist: 
a) Annealed (clear) glass. 
b) Extra clear glass. 
c) Body tinted glass. 
d) Coated glass (including Lacquered glass), namely: 
1) Online coated glass. 
2) Offline coated glass. 


e) Processed glass — Each of the glasses (a) to (e) can be subjected to further processing to produce the following types: 


1) Heat strengthened, 

2) Toughened or tempered, 

3) Double glazed unit, 

4) Laminated glass (Single laminated), 
5) Laminated double glass unit, 


6) Ceramic/screen printed fritted glass (patterned glass), and 


7) Fire safety glass. 


to indicate that the selection of appropriate glass may 
be made considering the cost benefit analysis in respect 
of the benefit accrued against the alternatives available. 


6 TYPES OF GLASS 


6.1 The soda lime silicate glass is classified based on 
the type of internal stress which determines the strength 
of the glazing towards breakage, design and installation 
procedure and based on application. Table 1 gives the 
typical properties of various types of glass. 


6.2 Normal (Annealed) Glass 


6.2.1 For requirements including tests on nominal 
thickness of annealed (flat) glass (see Table 1 of 
IS 2835). Flat transparent sheet glass shall conform to 
the following classes as specified in IS 2835 namely: 


a) A quality or Selected Quality (SQ), 

b) B quality or Ordinary Quality (OQ), and 

c) C quality or Greenhouse Quality (GQ). 
Transparent float glass shall be as per IS 14900. 


A transparent flat glass is designated as clear glass 
when it is not tinted and when its light transmittance 
after any necessary pre-treatments is greater than 
the value prescribed in Table 2 for the nominal 
thickness. 


NOTE — Group C class is not suited for architectural 
purposes. 


6.3 Laminated Glass 


6.3.1 Laminated glass is a glass configuration made 
of two or more pieces of glass bonded together by 
interlayer/interlayers. It is commonly used as a form of 
safety glass which cracks and breaks under sufficient 
impact, the broken glass fragments being still held 
together. When laminated glass is broken, fragments 
tend to adhere to the interlayer. For requirements of 
laminated safety glass, IS 2553 (Part 1) may be referred. 


6.3.2 Laminated glass does not shatter like ordinary 
glass. It absorbs impact, resists penetration, and 
remains intact even if broken, holding glass fragments 
in place and lowering the risk of injury. Laminated 
glass is capable to stop flying debris and limit or 
avoid splintering on opposite side of the impact. 
When exposed to heat from solar radiation resulting 
in unequal temperature in the pane, laminated glass 
breaks but stays in place longer. The risk of thermal 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


breakage is avoided only when heat strengthened/ 
tempered laminated glass is used. 


6.3.3 Laminated glass can be made from the following 
typical combinations: 


a) Glass which is float/sheet/patterned/polished 
wired/wired patterned glass, and may be having 
the following properties: 

1) Clear, tinted or coated; 

2) Transparent, translucent or opaque; 

3) Annealed, heat strengthened or toughened; 
and 

4) Surface treated (such as acid etched or by 
sandblast). 


Plastic glazing sheet material which can be 
polycarbonate or acrylic and may be having the 
following properties: 


b 


we 


1) Clear, tinted or coated; and 
2) Transparent or translucent. 


Cc 


wa 


Interlayers which differ based on material type 
and composition; mechanical characteristics; and 
optical characteristics, and may be having the 
following properties: 


1) Clear or coloured; 
2) Transparent, translucent or opaque; and 
3) Coated. 


NOTE — Until standards on plastic glazing sheet materials 
and interlayers are formulated, they will be subject to the 
specifications of manufacturers of laminated glazing materials. 


6.4 Toughened or Tempered Glass 


6.4.1 Toughened glass is a type of safety glass which is 
heat treated to a uniform temperature of approximately 
650°C and rapidly cooled to induce compressive stresses 
of 75.5 MPa (770 kg/cm’) to 143.4 MPa (1 462 kg/cm?) 
on the surfaces and edge compression of the order of 
66.7 MPa (680 kg/cm’). For requirements of toughened 
safety glass, IS 2553 (Part 1) may be referred. 


6.4.2 Toughened glass gains its added strength from the 
compressed surfaces. However, if a deep scratch or an 
impact penetrates the surface, the glass shall break into 
a number of small particles. Any attempt to cut, drill, 
grind or sand blast the glass after toughening may result 
in glass breakage. The heat treatment process does not 
change the light transmission and solar radiant heat 
properties of the glass. 


Table 2 Minimum Light Transmittance Value Designating a 
Transparent Glass as Clear Glass 


( Clause 6.2.1 ) 


Nominal Thickness, mm 2 3 


Minimum Value of Light Transmittance, percent 89 88 


4 5 6 8 10 12 15 19 25 
87 86 85 83 81 79 76 72 67 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


6.4.3 Toughened glass provides greater thermal 
strength. It increases resistance to both sudden 
temperature changes and temperature differentials 
up to 250°C compared with normal glass, which can 
withstand temperature differentials up to 40°C only. 
Thermally toughened glass is approximately four times 
stronger than annealed glass of the same thickness and 
configuration, and must comply with the requirements 
of IS 2553 (Part 1). Toughened glass is difficult to 
break and when broken, it shall break into many 
relatively small fragments, which are less likely to 
cause serious injury to people, as there are no jagged 
edges or sharp corners like in normal glass. On the 
contrary, the toughened glass is also susceptible to 
breakage when hit with a small tap at its edge using 
a hammer or a hard object. Toughened glass passing 
the requirements of IS 2553 (Part 1) only qualifies as 
safety glass. Toughened glass cannot be subjected 
to further processing, such as cutting, drilling, edge 
grinding after toughening and any alterations such as 
sandblasting or acid etching will weaken glass and can 
cause premature failure (see Notes). 


Float glass contains some level of imperfection. One 
type of imperfection is nickel sulphide (NiS) inclusions. 
Most NiS inclusions are stable and cause no problems. 
There is, however, the potential for NiS inclusions that 
may cause spontaneous breakage in fully tempered 
glass without any load or thermal stress being applied. 
Heat soak testing is a process that exposes critical 
NiS inclusions in fully tempered glass. The process 
involves placing the tempered glass inside a chamber 
and raising the temperature to approximately 290°C to 
accelerate nickel sulphide expansion. This causes glass 
containing nickel sulphide inclusions to break in the 
heat soak chamber, thus reducing the risk of potential 
field breakage. However, the heat soak process is not 
100 percent effective. 


NOTES 


1 The process of toughening is used to increase the strength of 
glass and to produce fracture characteristics that are desirable 
in many situations. However, the process of toughening can 
also lead to an increased risk of spontaneous glass fracture 
(associated with material impurities). Accordingly, the 
possibility of spontaneous fracture should be taken into 
account when toughened glass is used. 


2 Heat soaking may minimize the risk of nickel-sulphide 
induced spontaneous fracture in toughened glass. Glass 
manufacturers may be consulted for advice relating to 
anticipated nickel sulphide minimization. 


6.5 Heat Strengthened Glass 


Heat strengthened glass is a type of tempered glass 
which has been strengthened thermally by inducing 
a surface compression of about 44.3 to 64.5 MPa 
(422 to 658 kg/cm’) as compared to a range of 75.5 
to 143.4 MPa (770 to 1 462 kg/cm’) in case of fully 
tempered glass. Heat strengthened glass is valued for 
its mechanical strength, which is twice that of normal 
annealed glass though half of toughened glass. With 


the exception of strength and thermal resistance 
characteristics, heat strengthened glass retains the 
normal properties of annealed glass. Heat strengthened 
glass provides necessary resistance to thermal stress 
associated with high performance glazing materials 
such as tinted glass and reflective glass. It also provides 
necessary resistance to heat building up when used as 
spandrel glass. Heat strengthened glass with its flatter 
surface also results in the facade having less optical 
distortions. Heat-strengthened glass shall have a 
surface compression of 31 to 52 MPa. 


NOTES 


1 Heat strengthening associated with relatively less residual 
stresses < 52.0 MPa has lower risk of spontaneous glass 
fracture (associated with material impurities). 


2 Surface compression (including fragmentation) four point 
bending, flatness tests are typically carried out to determine the 
characteristics of heat strengthened glass. 


6.6 Reflective Glass 


A metallic coating is applied to one side of the glass in 
order to significantly increase the amount of reflection 
by the glass of both the visible and infrared (light and 
heat) range of the electromagnetic spectrum. This 
metallic coating can be applied to clear or body tinted 
glass, without adversely affecting the transparency of 
the glass. The reflective glass imparts an enhanced 
appearance to the exterior of buildings due to the 
coating of metal oxides on the glass, they are widely 
applied as an aesthetic and energy efficient product 
in buildings for its highly reflective surface and its 
wide palette of colours. It reduces heat gain and glare 
from the exterior and allows optimum visible light 
transmission to the interior. If designed/used properly 
reflective glass can aid in reducing the air-conditioning 
load of the buildings. 

NOTE — Highly reflective glass should be avoided, especially 

in internal environments. The reflections from these surfaces 


can be particularly confusing for persons with vision 
impairment. 


6.7 Insulating Glass Unit 


Insulating glass unit is a prefabricated unit of glass 
having an edge seal that not only binds the individual 
sheets of glass together to maintain the mechanical 
strength of the joint but also protects the cavity between 
the glasses from outside influences. The moisture in 
the cavity between the two glasses is controlled by 
desiccants filled in the perforated spacer. The spacer 
can be aluminum, composites, plastics, etc. The spacer 
ensures the precise distance between the glass panes. 
The cavity may be filled with inert gases (such as 
argon, krypton) for better thermal performance or it 
shall be ensured that air in between is dry. The low heat 
conductivity of the enclosed dry gas between the glass 
panes drastically reduces the thermal heat transmission 
through the glass to 2.8 W/m’K (12 mm spacer between 
two, 6 mm glass) as compared to 5.73 W/m’K for 
normal 6 mm glass. It also helps in reducing the direct 
solar energy specifically when the outer pane is a solar 


control glass. For sizes greater than 3 m?, the thickness 
of the spacer shall be chosen such that physical contact 
of glass panes (white spots) does not occur. 
NOTE — Moisture penetration test and inert gas level 
test; climate test are typically carried out to determine 
the characteristic; and structural integrity/performance 
respectively of IGUs. 


6.8 Wired Glass 


The general requirements including thickness, 
dimensional tolerance and tests for wired glass as 
specified in IS 5437 are valid. 


NOTE — The size of panes using wired glass shall be limited 
to 0.84 m’. Further, the use of wired glass shall be restricted in 
vertical applications only and not to be used in horizontal or 
inclined position. 


6.9 Glass Fins 


When glass fins are used as a decorative member, it can 
be either toughened (tempered) or laminated glass. 


When glass fins are used as a structural member, it shall 
be heat strengthened/ toughened and laminated. The 
depth and thickness may vary as per elevation and wind 
load requirements. Design should also accommodate 
movements. It is recommended to use finite element 
analysis to determine the appropriate glass fin sizes. 


NOTE — Annealed glass shall never be laminated and used as 
a fin as the same never provides the required safety. 


7 APPLICATIONS 


Glass can be designed/suited to use in building 
occupancies such as in residential, assembly and 
mercantile in elements such as façades, windows, 
doors, partitions, display units, shop fronts, greenhouses 
(where plants are grown), atrium. Different types of 
glass are selected based on requirements. For safety 
against accidental breakage due to impact and strength 
requirement (mechanical and thermal), toughened 
safety glass or laminated safety glass, as deemed fit shall 
be considered (see Note). For increased high security 
requirements, acoustic insulation, sloped glazing and 
skylights, laminated glass may be considered. 
NOTE — Broken annealed glass falling on people can cause 
grievous or even fatal injuries; hence it is recommended to 
use safety glass in locations other than defined in Case 1 of 
IS 16231 (Part 4) where the risk of people getting hurt by 
falling glass is high. 


8 ASSOCIATED GLAZING MATERIALS 


8.1 Structural Sealant 


The structural sealant could be of silicone type with 
requirements meeting the design criteria. Structural 
sealant shall be shelf-stable, natural-cured, elastomeric 
adhesive exhibiting the desired adhesion to building 
substrates. The structural sealant may require cleaning 
and/or priming to get good adhesion for structural 
glazing application. For laminated glass applications 
where glass edges are sealed with a sealant, 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


compatibility shall be ensured with the interlayer to 
avoid delamination. 


8.2 Gaskets 


Gasket is a mechanical seal that fills the space between 
two mating surfaces, to prevent leakage from or into the 
joined objects and will be able to deform while under 
compression and tightly fills the space it is designed 
for, including any slight irregularities. 


8.3 Preformed Tape 
Typical requirement of preformed butyl and foam tapes 
shall be as given in Table 3. 
Table 3 Typical Properties of Preformed Tapes 
( Clause 8.3 ) 


SI Properties Requirements 
No. 
() (2) (3) 


i) Low temperature flex No cracks at —-23°C 


ii) Weight loss 2 percent, Max 


iii) Vehicle migration 1 paper stained maximum and this 
stain can be no more than 3.2 mm 


from edge of sample maximum 


iv) Backing removal No transfer of tape compound to 


the paper 
41.4 kPa, Min 


Compression index, 122 N/cm’, 


v) Yield strength 


vi) |Compression/ 


Recovery Max 
vii) Water absorption Weight gain maximum after 
boiling, 40 kg/m’, Max 
viii) Flow test Loss of height, 60 percent, Max 


8.4 Setting Blocks, Location Blocks and Distance 
Pieces 


Setting blocks, location blocks, and distance pieces 
shall be designed in accordance with IS 16231 (Part 3) 
which are, 


a) resilient, load-bearing, non-absorbent and rot- 
proof materials; and 


b) compatible with all other materials that may come 
in contact with them. 


9 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF GLAZING 


9.1 Glazing and associated materials used for the proper 
installation shall satisfy the minimum dimensional and 
framing requirements in accordance with the procedures 
given in this standard. The dimensional and thickness 
tolerance of the glass used in exterior and interior is 
determined from the provisions given hereunder. 


9.2 Dimensional Requirement 


9.2.1 The dimensions for edge clearance, edge cover, 
and front and back clearance, as defined in Fig. 2, shall 
be not less than the values given in Table 4. 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


NOTE — For glazing systems where the framing member 10 FRAME REQUIREMENTS 


is aluminium or steel, and gaskets are used to capture the 

glazing, minimum glazing bite of 12.7 mm is recommended 10.1 When completely assembled and glazed, the 
for architectural glazing. secondary design action effects due to deflection of the 
frame member supporting the edge of the glass shall 


9.2.2 Front Putty Width be allowed for. 


The front putty width shall be not less than 10 mm for 


panels up to 1 m?, and not less than 12 mm for panels 10.2 Deflection Limits 


2 2 
bom ESN Dae and a tr: The frame deflection limits under serviceability loading 


9.2.3 Dimensions of Rebates and Grooves (Width and Shall satisfy the conditions for four sided frames as 


Depth) given in 7.6.2 (c) of IS 16231 (Part 3). 

p . NOTE — In framing members, where reinforcement/fixing 
Dimensions of rebates and grooves shall accommodate brackets are required to meet the deflection/stress criteria, 
the requirement of Table 4 and allow for the appropriate it may be of aluminium or steel. When steel is used, proper 
setting and location blocks as in Fig. 1 to Fig. 3 of dielectric galvanic separation shall be used. The material 
IS 16231 (Part 3). chosen for reinforcement shall be in close proximity in the 


galvanic series, to ensure dielectric separation. 


SCIAS Dimensional Ilerance 10.3 Panels Glazed into the Building Structure 


The tolerance for dimensions shall be as per the A panel glazed directly into a building structure by 
respective Indian Standards given in Annex A. means of appropriate beads or stops shall be considered 


Sight line 
Front À 
clearance 
Back 
clearance 
: Position of 
Tight glazing panel 
siže 
Glazing Sight size 
panel size g 
1 _ Sight line 
Edge Rebate depth 
clearance Edge cover 
Glazing channel rebate 
or groove width 


Rebate 
width 


Fic. 2 SIZES AND REBATES 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


Table 4 Minimum Dimensions for Glazing Material 
( Clause 9.2.1 ) 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


SI Nominal Thickness Front and Back Clearance Edge Edge Cover Rebate 
No. e Clearance Depth 
(A) (B) © 
(see Note 1) (see Note 2) (see Note 3) 
© Q) 6) (4) 6) © (1) (8) 
i) 3mm 2 — — 2 4 6 
(pane area up to 0.1 m°) 
ii) For pane area > 0.1 m? 2 — — 3 6 9 
iii) 3 — 2 1 3 6 9 
iv) 4 2 — — 2 6 8 
v) 4 — 2 1 3 6 9 
vi) 5 2 2 2 4 6 10 
vii) 6 2 2 2 4 6 10 
viii) 8 — 3 2 5 8 13 
ix) 10 — 3 2 5 8 13 
x) 12 — 3 2 6 9 15 
xi) 15 — 5 4 8 10 18 
xii) 19 — 5 4 10 12 22 
xiii) 25 — 5 4 10 15 15 
NOTES 


1 Type A applies to linseed oil and metal casement putties. 


2 Type B applies to non-setting glazing compounds, plastic glazing compounds, two-part rubberizing compounds, sealants and 


preformed strip materials. 


3 Type C applies to gaskets made from extruded materials such as butyl strip, PVC, neoprene and sanoprene held in position by 


pressure upon the glass. 


4 For non-standard glass thicknesses the nearest values of nominal thickness, shall be used. 


5 Timber and PVC frames may not require the specified front and back clearances provided the waterproofing performance 


requirements are met. 


6 The dimensions are the minimum necessary for structural integrity of glass only but do not apply to insulating glass units. 


to be framed, provided the assembly complies with the 
deflection requirements of 10.2. 


10.4 Mixed Framing 


Glass supported along the top and bottom edges by one 
means and along the vertical edges by another means 
shall be considered to be framed provided each frame 
member of the assembly complies with the deflection 
requirements of 10.2. 


11 GLASS DIMENSIONS 


11.1 The actual thickness for exterior and interior glass 
[other than DGU (Double Glazing Unit)] use shall be 
measured using screw caliper (for example as per 5.1 
of IS 2835). 


The actual thickness of glass, rounded to the nearest 
0.1 mm shall not vary from the nominal thickness 
by more than the tolerances specified in respective 
Indian Standard or the values provided in this standard 


(unless Indian Standard specifications are developed). 


The minimum thickness allowed in insulated glass 
unit (IGU) should be the sum of minimum thickness 
allowed of two panes as per IS 14900 plus thickness 
of air-gap. 

The minimum thickness allowed in laminated glass 
should be the sum of minimum thickness allowed of 
two panes as per IS 14900 plus thickness of interlayer 
(see Table 5). 


Table 5 Minimum Thickness for Laminated Glass 
( Clause 11.1 ) 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Thickness 6 8 10 12 16 20 24 


Tolerance 0.6 +0.6 +06 +0.6 1.2 1.2 1:2 


11.2 Length and width are defined with reference to the 
direction of draw of the flat glass ribbon (see Fig. 3). 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


© 


| 
E 


H - Length 
B - Width 


| - Direction of draw 


Fic. 3 REPRESENTATION OF LENGTH, WIDTH AND 
DIRECTION OF DRAW 


11.3 Jumbo Sizes 


Glass is available commonly in the following sizes 
of nominal length (H), 4 500 mm to 6 000 mm and 
nominal width (B), 3 660 mm or 3 210 mm. 


NOTE — The usual width is 3 660 mm or 3 210 mm. Other 
sizes may be mutually as agreed to between the manufacturer 
and the user based on their requirement. 


11.4 Stock Size 


Glass is available commonly in the following sizes 
nominal length (H), 2 250 mm or 2 440 mm and 
nominal width (B), 3 660 mm or 3 210 mm. 


NOTE — Maximum glass sizes available from manufacturer 
are one consideration, the processing equipment limitation, 
capabilities of contract fabricator to install unit, availability of 
specialized transport and handling equipment to deliver unit 
should be checked in addition. 


11.5 Split Sizes 


Glass is delivered in equal or unequal split sizes from 
the jumbo or stock size. 


11.6 Squareness 


The nominal dimensions for length (H), and width (B), 
be given, the pane shall not be larger than a prescribed 
rectangle resulting from the nominal dimensions 
increased by the permissible plus tolerance or smaller 
than a prescribed rectangle reduced by the permissible 
minus tolerance. 


The sides of the prescribed rectangles (see Fig. 4) 
shall be parallel to one another and these rectangles 
shall have a common centre. For stock/standard sizes 
the tolerances on nominal dimensions length (H), and 
width (B), are + 5 mm. 


11.7 As-Cut Finished Size 


The nominal dimension for width and length being 
given, the finished pane or as-cut finished size shall not 
be greater than the prescribed rectangle from the nominal 
dimension increased by the tolerance ‘f’ or smaller 
than the prescribed rectangle reduced by the tolerance 
‘t. The sides of the prescribed rectangles are parallel to 
one another and these shall have a common centre in 


10 


accordance to Fig. 5. The limits of the squareness are 
also mentioned. Tolerances are given in Table 6. 


H-5mm 
H+5mm 


Fic. 4 DETERMINATION OF LENGTH, WIDTH AND 
SQUARENESS FOR STOCK/STANDARD SIZES 


Fic. 5 TOLERANCE ON WipTH (B) AND LENGTH (H) 


Table 6 Tolerance on Width (B), and Length (H) 
( Clause 11.7) 


SI Nominal Tolerance ‘P 
No. Dimension 
(B or H) Nominal Glass Nominal Glass 
Thickness <8 mm Thickness > 8 mm 
mm 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) <2 000 42 43 
o mm mm 

ii) <3 000 43 +4 
o mm o mm 

iii) > 3000 +4 45 
_ mm 0 mm 


NOTE — While the above tolerances are generally 
applicable, with the advancements in manufacturing, the 
following suggested tolerance may be suitably decided 
between the concerned parties: 
a) For glass of thickness up to 8 mm, tolerance shall be 
1 mm per linear metre. 
b) For glass of thickness above 8 mm and up to 16 mm, 
tolerance shall be 1.5 mm per linear metre. 
c) For glass of thickness above 16 mm, tolerance shall 
be 2 mm per linear metre. 


d) However, upper limit of tolerance shall be: 


1) +2.0 mm (for glass thickness < 8 mm), 
2) + 3.0 mm (for glass thickness < 16 mm), and 
3) + 5.0 mm (for glass thickness > 16 mm). 


IS No. 
419 : 1967 
543 : 2018 
875 (Part 3) : 2015 


1642 : 2013 


1950 : 1962 
2553 (Part 1) : 1990 
2835 : 1987 
5437 : 1994 
11433 (Part 1) : 1985 


12118 (Part 1) : 1987 
14900 : 2018 

16231 

(Part 2) : 2018 

(Part 3) : 2018 

(Part 4) : 2018 

16982 : 2018 

SP 7 : 2016 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 
Putty for use on window frames — Specification ( first revision) 
Cottonseed oil — Specification (third revision) 


Code of Practice for design loads (other than earthquake) for buildings and 
structures: Part 3 Wind loads (third revision) 


Fire safety of buildings (general): Details of construction — Code of practice 
(second revision) 


Code of practice for sound insulation of non-industrial buildings 
Safety glass — Specification: Part 1 General purpose (third revision) 
Flat transparent sheet glass — Specification (third revision) 

Figured rolled and wired glass — Specification ( first revision) 


Specification for one part gun-grade polysulphide-based joints sealants: Part 1 
General requirements 


Two-part polysulphide based sealants — Specification: Part 1 General requirements 
Specification for transparent float glass ( first revision) 

Use of glass in building — Code of practice 

Energy and light (first revision) 

Fire and loading (first revision) 

Safety related to human impact ( first revision) 

Heat strengthened glass — Specification 

National Building Code of India 2016 


11 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


GLAZING IN BUILDINGS 


B-0 All new glass construction shall be as per the 
provisions of IS 16231 (other than this annex). This 
annex is retained in this standard only to enable 
maintenance and servicing of glass construction which 
were designed and installed as per IS 3548. 


B-1 TERMINOLOGY 
The following definitions shall apply for this annex. 


B-1.1 Anchor — A strip of metal bent to an ‘L’ shape. 
The longer leg has countersunk holes for screws to 
fix the anchor to the background, and the shorter leg 
supports the glass without protruding beyond the face. 


B-1.2 Back Clearance — See B-1.7 and Fig. 6. 


B-1.3 Back Putty — The portion of putty remaining 
between the glass and the depth of the rebate after the 
glass has been pushed into position (see Fig. 6). 


| 


GLAZING 
SIZE 


TIGHT SIZE 


| 


N 
CLEARANCE |WIDTH 


B-1.4 Bead or Glazing Bead — A strip of wood, metal 
or other suitable material attached to the rebate to retain 
the glass. 


B-1.5 Bedding Putty — The compound placed in the 
rebate of the opening into which the glass is bedded. 


B-1.6 Block — A small piece of wood, lead or other 
suitable material used between the edge of the glass 
(generally the bottom edge only) to centralize the glass 
in the frame (frequently called a setting block). 


B-1.7 Clearances — The edge clearance and back 
clearance are as shown in Fig. 6. 


B-1.8 Distance Piece — A small piece of wood, lead or 
other suitable material used to locate the glass between 
the bead and the back of the rebate, and prevent lateral 
movement. 


POSITION OF GLASS 


| 


SIGHT SIZE 


BAC 
CLEARANCE 


6A Glazing Rebate 


STRIPPED 
AT AN 
ANGLE 


fi ACK 
PUTTY 


BEDDING 
PUTTY 


6B Glazing with Compound 


6 C Glazing into Groove 


Fic. 6 TYPICAL ILLUSTRATIONS SHOWING GLAZING DETAILS 


12 


B-1.9 Expansion Tape — See B-1.18. 


B-1.10 Fixing Compound — A material used in fixing 
glass, applied by hand, knife or trowel, or as a pre- 
formed strip and capable of adhering to a wide variety 
of surfaces. 


B-1.11 Frame — See B-1.31. 


B-1.12 Front Putty — The compound forming a 
triangular fillet between the surface of the glass and the 
front edge of the rebate. 


B-1.13 Glazing — The securing of glass in prepared 
openings, such as windows, door panels, screens and 
partitions. 


B-1.13.1 Double Glazing — See 4.10. 


B-1.13.2 External Glazing — A glazing, either side of 
which is exposed outside the building (contrast with 
outside glazing). 


B-1.13.3 Louvered Glazing (Horizontal) — A glazing 
with strips of glasses placed angular and one above the 
other at a distance sloping outside. 


B-1.13.4 Louvered Glazing (Vertical) — A glazing 
with strips of glasses spaced vertically side by side at 
an angle. 


B-1.13.5 Multiple Glazing — A form of glazing 
based on the same principle as double glazing, but 
incorporating three or more panes of glass. 


B-1.14 Glazing Compound — A material used in 
glazing, applied by hand, gun, knife or trowel, to 
provide a bedding for the glass and weather-tight joint 
between glass and surround. 


B-1.15 Inside Glazing — An external glazing in which 
the glass is inserted from inside the building. 


B-1.16 Outside Glazing — An external glazing in 
which the glass is inserted from outside the building. 


B-1.16.1 Outside Face — Keeping of the rough surface 
of textured or other glass outside while fixing the 
glass. 


B-1.17 Internal Glazing — Glazing, neither side of 
which is exposed outside the building (contrast with 
inside glazing). 


B-1.18 Insulating Strip — A strip of resilient material 
used to insulate the edge of the glass against rigid 
contact with non-resilient material (sometimes called 
expansion tape) . 


B-1.19 Pane — A piece of glass cut to size and shape 
ready for glazing (often called a square). 


B-1.19.1 Louvered Pane — A strip glass cut to the size 
of louver with smoothened edges ready for fixing. 


13 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


B-1.20 Peg — A small metal component used in 
glazing to hold the glass in a metal frame (sometimes 
called spring). 


B-1.21 Pointing Compound — A plastic non-setting 
compound having a workable consistency so that it 
may be handled and filled into joints readily. 


B-1.22 Rebate — The part of a surround; the cross- 
section of which forms an angle into which the edge of 
the glass is received. 


B-1.23 Saddle Bar — A metal stiffening bar, across the 
face of the glass and secured to the surround, to which 
a leaded light is tied. 


B-1.24 Sash — See B-1.31. 


B-1.25 Sealer — A liquid compound of brushing 
consistency applied to a surface to prevent the absorption 
of soils from the glazing or fixing compounds, or to 
prevent attack by alkalis on these oils. 


B-1.26 Setting Block — See B-1.6. 
B-1.27 Sizes 
a) Daylight size : sight size 
b) Full size 
c) Glass size 


B-1.27.1 Sight Size (Daylight Size) — The actual size 
of the opening which admits light (see Fig. 6). 


: tight size 


: glazing size 


B-1.27.2 Tight Size (Full Size, Rebate Size) — The 
actual size of the rebate opening (see Fig. 6) (contrast 
with glazing size). 


B-1.27.3 Glazing Size (Glass Size) — The actual size of 
a piece of glass cut for glazing (see Fig. 6). 


B-1.28 Spring — A small headless nail or triangular 
piece of metal used, in addition to putty, for securing 
panes of glass in surrounds (see also B-1.20). 


B-1.29 Spring Clip — A small metal component used, 
in addition to putty, for securing panes of glass in metal 
frames. 


B-1.30 Square — See B-1.19. 


B-1.31 Surround — Any frame, sash, casement or 
other building component into which glass is glazed. 


B-2 NECESSARY INFORMATION 


B-2.1 The following necessary information for efficient 
planning and distribution of the work shall be furnished 
by the general building contractor: 


a) Type of glass to be used with details, such as 
colour, pattern and ornamentation; and 

b) Details of the techniques to be employed in the 
work and other materials to be used. 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


B-2.2 The following information shall be given to the 
supplier when glass is ordered: 

a) Type, quality thickness and substance of glass; 

b) In specifying sizes, the first dimension given 
should be the height. Mode of measurements 
taken, that is, tight size, glass pane, size, etc, shall 
be mentioned. In case of extra allowance required 
for coloured glass, tight size with allowance 
required shall be indicated; 

c) In specifying sizes of preparing templates for 
shaped glasses, the face side should be specified; 

d) In specifying sizes for bevelled plates, decorated 
plates, factory made double glazing units, leaded 
lights, copper lights or louver ventilators, both 
tight and sight sizes should be given; 


e) Inall cases where patterned glass, decorated glass, 
leaded lights or copper lights are required to align, 
this should be specified and a dimensional sketch 
provided, if necessary; 


f) In cases where wired glass is required to align one 
way between adjacent panes within the limits of 
manufacture, this should be specified; and 


g) When ordering bent glass, the following additional 
items should be provided: 


1) Bent one way only to curve or series of 
curves — A rigid template cut to the exact curve 
and marked to indicate whether it represents 
the concave (hollow) or convex (round) side 
of the glass; 


2) Bent one way of the pane only, the curve 
being arc of a circle — A drawing showing 
straight edge, girth and radius of curve may be 
acceptable to the vendor in place of a template, 
provided it is marked to indicate whether it 
represents the concave (hollow) or the convex 
(round) side of the glass; and 


3) Bent both ways of the pane, whether the curves 
are simple curves or not — A rigid body mould 
shaped to the exact contour of the pane and 
marked to indicate which side of the glass it 
represents. 


B-3 MATERIALS 


B-3.1 Glass used for glazing in buildings should 
conform to following Indian Standards: 


a) Sheet glass — See IS 2835; 

b) Safety glass — See IS 2553 (Part 1); and 

c) Wired and figured glass — See IS 5437. 
B-3.2 Glazing compound for glazing should conform 
to following Indian Standards: 

a) Putty : IS 419 


b) Polysulphide based :IS 11433 (Part 1), and 
IS 12118 (Part 1) sealants 


14 


NOTES 


1 Compounds for glazing in concrete, stone, brick or asbestos 
cement — These types of compound normally need to be 
sealed to prevent absorption of oil from the glazing compound, 
unless the compound has been specially formulated; resistance 
to alkali is generally important. A non-setting compound may 
be used, provided it is painted. 

2 Non-setting compounds — These are needed for use with 
colour and heat-absorbing glasses which shall become hot in 
sunshine and which are, therefore, liable to expand and contract 
much more than ordinary glass. The fact that non-setting 
compounds are easily finger marked makes it undesirable 
to use them without beads, except in relatively inaccessible 
situations. If, in order to prolong its life, or for other reasons, 
the compound is required to take paint, reference should be 
made to the manufacturer of the compound. 


B-4 DESIGN 


B-4.1 Selection of Thickness of Glass 


For vertical windows secured on four edges, the 
minimum thickness of glass shall be found as follows: 


a) The maximum wind load average over a 1 min 
period or preferably 3 s period should be 
ascertained (see Note). 


b) Allowance should be made for both inward 
and outward pressure and the maximum 
pressure as a result of combination of this fact 
shall be found; correction for relevant height 
of the building and also for shield effect of 
obstructions surrounding the buildings should 
be made in accordance with the principles laid 
down in IS 875 (Part 3). 


c) The glass factor for the particular use should 

be found by dividing the area of the glass pane 
expressed in m° by the perimeter in running 
metres. For rectangular area, for instance, this 
would be [ (a x b)/2(a + b) ], where a and b are the 
dimensions of the sides, in metre. The minimum 
thickness of glass corresponding to various wind 
loads shall be found from Fig. 7, knowing the 
design pressure and glass factor. 
NOTE — Wind load data collected over a long period shall be 
available from the Meteorological Department and from this 
the maximum wind velocity and pressure corresponding to 
specific duration may be found. Unless very severe conditions 
of exposure warrant special considerations for design, the 
wind pressure data recommended in IS 875 (Part 3) (which 
correspond to measurement taken over a period of about 5 min) 
may be used in normal circumstances. 


B-4.2 Durability 


Though, under ordinary condition, glass has excellent 
durability, all glasses are subject to deterioration 
by action of water and prolonged attack by alkaline 
solutions may damage glass. If glass is allowed to 
remain dirty for a long period, the dirt film will tend to 
hold water and in this way, a process of surface attack 
may begin. 


LENGTH OF SHORTER SIDE (mm) 
1000 


1500 2000 


2500 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


TEE 


2000 
LA 
3000 7 41750 
Pd 
5 
i / 1500 
Z 
4 
/ 1250 
104 ¢ 
/ 
ir 
a 1000 
#1 5 
4 
4 6 750 
ssT45 
4e73 
4 
35 500 
* 
342 
25 
2 
| 250 
PLATE SHEET WiND 
THICKNESS PRESSURE 
(mm) ( N/m?) 


“Weight of glass in kg/m? approximately equal to 2.6 times the thickness in millimetres. Nomogram for determining 
thickness of window panes for various wind pressures. (Modulus of rupture of sheet glass taken as 38 N/mm? and of plate 
glass as 19 N/mm? after making allowance for variability of strength). 


Fic. 7 NOMOGRAM FOR DETERMINING THICKNESS OF GLASS PLATE AND SHEET FOR WINDOW PANES 


B-4.3 Fire Resistance 


In regard to fire resistance requirements for glazing, 
reference may be made to IS 1642. 


B-4.4 Thermal Expansion and Contraction 


For heat absorbing glass and clear glass with painted 
surface especially where the colour is black and when 
ordinary glass is used under dark background, the 
following special protections are necessary to provide 
for thermal expansion and contraction, and temperature 
of the glass may be liable to large variations on exposure 
to sunshine: 


a) Where the longer dimension is less than 750 mm, 
a glazing allowance of not less than 3 mm shall 
be given. Where the longer dimensions exceeds 
750 mm, not less than 5 mm clearance all round 
shall be given; 

b) The minimum cover necessary for safe glazing, 

except where toughened glass is used, shall 

not exceed 10 mm as otherwise there is risk of 
cracking owing to the shielded edge remaining 
colder than the exposed area; and 


Glazing compound should be non-setting 
compound and all absorbent rebates and grooves 
should be treated with a sealer and not merely 
primed. 


15 


B-4.5 Light Transmission and Heat Insulation 


For improved heat and sound insulation, double or 
multiple glazing may be used. The heat insulation 
depends upon spacing and scarcely at all on the 
thickness of the glass used. For vertical glazing, the 
insulating value increases up to a spacing of about 
10 mm, beyond which there is little further change. 
However, the spacing of as little as 3 mm shall provide 
an insulating value of 50 percent of this maximum. 
For inclined or horizontal glazing, there may be some 
advantages in using spacing greater than 20 mm where 
this is practicable. However, while designing for heat 
insulation, it should be remembered that frame members 
of high thermal conductivity may provide direct paths 
for heat leakage between the inside and outside air 
and thus appreciably impair the insulating value of the 
installation as a whole. The values of different light 
transmittance and heat/light ratio is given in Table 7. 


B-4.6 Sound Insulation 


For sound insulation, reference may be made to 
IS 1950. For effective sound insulation, spacing of 
the order of 100 mm and above be adopted in case of 
double or multiple glazing. Thicker glass also provides 
insulation. Further improvements may be effected by 
lining the surrounds between the glasses with a sound 
absorbing material. 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


Table 7 Diffuse Light Transmittance and Heat Light Ratio of Glazing Materials 
( Clause B-4.5 ) 


SI No. Material Thickness Diffuse Light Heat/Light Ratio 
mann Transmittance 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Clear glass 3.0 0.85 0.86 
ii) Double glazing (clear glass) 3.0 each 0.72 0.740 
iii) Heat absorbing glass 3.2-3.5 0.62 0.24 
iv) Figured glass 3.2 0.78 0.83 
v) Wire-cast glass 6.0 0.67 0.71 


D Double glazing reduces heat/light ratio. Further, the heat insulation of double glazing also improves due to air gap 
casing reduction of the overall heat transmission coefficient. 


B-4.7 Rebates and Grooves 


These should be rigid and true. Rebates for normal 
glazing shall be at least 8 mm deep, for small panes 
rebate may be 6 mm deep. For large windows, such as 
shop windows, the frame rebates at the tops and sides 
should be at least 10 mm and at the bottom 12 mm. 
Rebates for double or multiple glazed sealed units shall 
be 16 mm deep generally, unless otherwise advised 
by the manufacturers of the particular units. Rebates 
for flat glass without beads should be wide enough to 
accommodate the back putty, the glass and the front 
putty stripped at an angle. A wider rebate is needed 
for bent glass than for flat glass. For glazing with 
beads, rebates should be wide enough to accommodate 
glass and beads and to allow a minimum clearance of 
1.5 mm at both the back and front of the glass. Rebate 
and grooves shall be clean and unobstructed before 
glazing. 


B-5 GLAZING 


B-5.1 Size for Glass 


The size of glass for glazing shall allow a clearance 
between the edge of glass and surround as specified 
below: 


a) For wood or metal surrounds : 2.5 mm; and 
b) For stone concrete or brick : 3.0 mm 


The clearance may be increased, provided the depth 
of the rebate or groove is sufficient to provide not less 
than 1.5 mm cover to the glass. 


B-5.2 Location of Glass in Frame 


The glass shall rest upon two blocks to locate the pane 
properly within the surround. In the case of small 
panes, use of blocks may not be necessary. When 
glazing in side-hung windows or doors, the glass shall 
be located by blocks so that it bears on the bottom 
of the surround at a point near the hinge, but is not 
brought into contact with the surround and does not 
suffer undue stress. 


16 


B-5.2.1 When glazing in horizontal centre-hung sashes, 
which may be turned through about 180°, additional 
blocks shall be placed between the top edge of the glass 
and the surround to prevent movement of the glass 
when the sash is inverted, Where the panes are more 
than 90 mm high, the glass shall be located at the two 
pivoting points by blocks of suitably resilient material, 
such as chloroprene. 


B-5.3 Preparation of Rebates and Grooves in Wood 


Rebates or grooves should be primed to prevent 
excessive absorption of oil from the putty. If a shellac 
varnish or gloss paint is used for this purpose, the wood 
may be completely sealed and setting of the putty 
unduly delayed. 


B-5.3.1 Absorbent hardwood frames that are not to 
be painted should either be primed with a medium 
composed of equal parts of exterior varnish and 
white spirit, and glazed with linseed oil putty or be 
completely sealed with a coat of untinned exterior 
quality varnish and glazed with metal casement putty 
(which will need to be painted), or with a non-setting 
compound. Where hardwoods such as teak which are 
completely non-absorbent are recommended metal 
casement putty should be used. If the wooden frame 
has been treated with a preservative, according to 
the instructions of the manufacturer of the glazing 
compound, preparation of rebates and grooves should 
be made. 


B-5.3.2 In the case of stone, concrete, brick or other 
similar materials, the rebates of grooves should be 
sealed with an alkali-resisting sealer and allowed to dry 
before glazing. The compound shall be metal-casement 


putty. 
B-5.4 Glazing with Compound 


This method is suitable for window and door panes 
where the combined height and width do not exceed 
the maximum shown in Fig. 6 for appropriate exposure 
grading. 


B-5.5 Glazing with Beads 


This method should be used for window and door 
panes where the combined height and width exceed 
the maximum shown in Fig. 6 for glazing in unpainted 
hardwood frames and framed shop fronts for double 
and multiple glazing units as defined in B-5.9 (d), and 
wherever a non-setting compound is used in a position 
where it is liable to be disturbed. 


B-5.6 Glazing with Compound into Rebates 


Sufficient compound should be applied to the rebate so 
that, when the glass has been pressed into the rebate, 
a bed of compound (known as back putty) not less 
than 1.5 mm thick will remain between the glass and 
the rebate; there should also be surplus of compound 
squeezed out above the rebate which should be stripped 
at an angle (see Fig. 6) not undercut, to prevent water 
accumulating. The glass should be secured by springs 
or spring clips spaced not more than 450 mm apart 
measured around the perimeter of the pane, and 
afterwards fronted with compound to form a triangular 
fillet stopping 1.5 mm short of the sight line so that the 
edge of the compound may be sealed against the glass 
by painting, without encroaching over the sight line. 


B-5.7 Glazing with Compound into Grooves 


The glass should be pressed into glazing compounds 
previously placed in the groove. The spaces between 
the glass and the sides of the groove should be filled 
with compound, which should then be stripped at an 
angle (see Fig. 6) not undercut. 


B-5.8 Glazing with Beads Along with Compound 


Sufficient compound should be applied to the rebate so 
that when the glass has been pressed into the rebate, a 
bed of compound (known as back putty) not less than 
1.5 mm thick will remain between the glass and the 
rebate. There should also be a surplus of compound 
squeezed out above the rebate which should be stripped 
at an angle not undercut, to prevent water accumulating. 
Beads should be bedded with compound against the 
glass and wood beads should also be bedded against 
the rebate. 


B-5.8.1 Care should be taken to ensure that no voids 
are left between the glass and the bead. For outside 
glazing, hollow beads are undesirable unless they can 
be completely filled. 


B-5.8.2 With non-setting compound and where there 
is a risk of glazing compound being dislodged by 
pressure, front and back-distance pieces (to maintain 
face clearances) should be used. Distance pieces should 
be completely embedded in the compound. 


B-5.8.3 Beads should be secured to wooden frames 
with either panel pins or screws and to, metal frames 


17 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


in the way provided for in the frame. In securing to 
wooden frames, an adequate number of fixing for 
the beads should be used so as to prevent flexing or 
movement of the beads. 


B-5.8.4 The external glazing should be as far as possible 
fixed from outside with beads as stated in B-5.8. 


B-5.8.5 Where it is not possible to fix the class from 
outside, especially in a multi-storeyed building, it may 
be fixed from inside with sealing compound as shown 
in Fig. 8. 


— SHUTTER 
TOP BEAD CLEARANCE 
SIDE BEAD 
INSIDE OUTSIDE 


Pa BEAD“ 


SEALING COMPOUND 
SECTION AA 


A OUTSIDE 


* Can be fixed prior to or after placing the glass pane as per 
site conditions. 


Fic. 8 INSIDE GLAZING 


B-5.8.6 Figured glasses are used to avoid direct 
sunrays and to get diffused light. This can be achieved 
advantageously by placing rough surface of the glass 
facing outside. As the surface of glass from inside is 
smooth, it will facilitate in pasting of colour plastic 
film on inside surface, whenever required. In that case, 
it will be difficult to clean the rough surface of glass 
which is outside but it can be cleaned by a water jet. 


B-5.9 Double and Multiple Glazing 


The problems connected with the application of double 
and multiple glazing are briefly as follows: 


a) Two separate window frames, each single 
glazed — These are preferable for sound 
insulation. To avoid problems of dirt and moisture 
in the air space, means of access to the cavity 
should be provided. 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


b) One window frame carrying two sashes coupled 
together, each separately glazed — The glazing 
may be in separate rebates, one inside-glazed 
and the other outside glazed, or in single, wide 
rebates with spacing beads. The former method 
has the advantage that either pane can be replaced 
without disturbing the other. However, carefully 
such glazing is done, it may be necessary to open 
the cavity at frequent intervals for the purpose of 
cleaning. 


c 


<~ 


One window frame of sash single-glazed provided 
with clip to permit the attachment of a second 
glass — This system involves no serious cleaning 
problems since the clipped on panes can be quickly 
detached. Their main use is on existing windows 
which cannot otherwise be modified. 

d) Double or multiple factory-made hermetically 
sealed units — Problems of cleaning of inner 
surfaces does not arise. Adequate rebate shall 
be provided in accordance with manufacturer ’s 
instruction. 


B-5.10 Double Glazing Other than Factory Made 
Sealed Units 


To minimize entry of warm moist air from the interior 
of the building or penetration of rain from outside 
into the cavity, the glazing should be done in a careful 
and thorough manner. Where opening sashes are 
provided, it is essential that they should fit closely. 
A small breathing hole or tube should be provided from 
the bottom of the cavity to the outside to ensure that 
such breathing vents are kept clear of paint or other 
obstructions, 


B-5.10.1 Where separate panes are glazed in one sash, 
it is preferable to use preformed strip of compound for 
the back putty in glazing the second pane, in order to 
provide full back putty with a neat finish. Usually it is 
better to glaze the outer pane first. 


B-5.11 Factory-made Double or Multiple Sealed 
Units 


When ordering factory-made double or multiple sealed 
units, the following points may be taken into account: 


a) Both tight size and sight size (not glazing size) 
should be specified; 


b) 


Sealed units should be checked in the opening for 
edge clearance consistent with the manufacturer ’s 
recommendations. It is essential to follow any 
recommendations given by the manufacturer 
concerning the correct edge to be glazed at 
the bottom. Units should be positioned in the 
compound approximately one quarter of the total 
length from each end. The width of the blocks 
should be not less than the thickness of the sealed 
units and their thickness should be such as to 
position the units centrally in the opening. This 


18 


thickness of glazing compound between the glass 
and the back of the rebate, and between the glass 
and the bead should be about | mm; 

Special techniques of glazing are required to 
protect the seal and reference should be made to 
the manufacturer of the glazing units; 


c 


wm 


d) A non-setting glazing compound having good 
adhesion to glass and frame should be used. All 
absorbent rebates and beads should be treated with 


a sealer (priming is not sufficient); 


e) Glazing with beads should always be used. Hollow 
beads are not recommended; and 


f) Where there is a risk of the glazing being dislodged 
by pressure, front and back distance pieces should 
be used to maintain face clearance. 


B-5.12 Louvered Glazing 


This type of fixed glass louvers are recommended 
for toilets, stores, etc, where permanent ventilation is 
required. 


B-5.12.1 Louvered Glazing (Horizontal) 


Glass strips with rounded edges are inserted from 
inside in the grooves placed one above the other. The 
grooves shall be angular preferably at 45° on the frame. 
The grooves shall overlap over each other by at, least 
20 mm as shown in Fig. 9. 


INSIDE OUTSIDE 


NOTE — The depth of groove may be thrice the thickness of 
glass and width of the groove may be 1 to 1.5 mm more than 
the maximum thickness of glass. 


Fic. 9 FIXED GLAZED LOUVERED WINDOW 


B-5.12.2 Louvered Glass (Vertical) 


Glass strips are placed angularly and vertically, and 
inserted as described in B-5.12.1. 


B-5.13 Maintenance 


B-5.13.1 Cleaning 


Glass should be cleaned regularly. Failure to do this shall 
result in considerable reduction of daylight indoors, and 
may also result in discolouration and deterioration of 
the surface. Warm water with soap or a mild domestic 
detergent, followed by a clean water rinse is generally 
adequate for routine cleaning. For transparent glasses, 
cloth or wash leather should be used; for glasses with a 
broken or textured surface, a stiff plastic or bristle brush 
will be found effective. Where the above methods fail to 
remove obstinate dirt from transparent glass, polishing 
with whiting in water or methylate spirits may be found 
to be successful. Corrosive cleaning liquids are also 
sometimes employed, but should be handled with great 
care and should be sluiced away with excess of clean 
water as soon as possible after use to avoid damage to 
glazing or fixing compounds, window frames or any 
other materials near to the glass. Organic solvents are 
also useful for special purposes, for example, petrol 
or benzene for removing tar, turpentine for paint that 
has not dried hard and paraffin for grease. The solvents 
should, however, be carefully cleaned off the glass 
afterwards and, in some instances, the fire risk may 
need to be guarded against during use. Plaster or mortar 
splashed on the glass may be removed with a thin razor 


19 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


blade preferably before the material has set hard. Dried 
paint may be removed similarly. In using the razor 
blade, excessive force should not be used. 


B-5.13.1.1 If a trial shows that none of the above 
methods is likely to be quickly successful, it may be 
more economical to replace the glass. 


B-5.13.1.2 Where the cleaning of embossed, sand 
blasted or decorated glasses has been neglected, 
ordinary window cleaning methods may not be 
expected to be successful and treatment by a specialist 
is required. 


B-5.13.2 Replacement 


If wired glass is broken and allowed to remain exposed 
to weather conditions, moisture will penetrate to the 
wire which will rust. This will result in failure of the 
wire, which may allow the glass to fall. It is, therefore, 
essential that any breakage be made waterproof at 
once with a material such as a bituminous paint and 
replacement undertaken with new glass as soon as is 
practical. 


B-5.13.3 Maintenance of Glazing 


Glazing compound shall be regularly painted except 
where special materials are used. The building 
maintenance shall ensure that the metal work 
surrounding the frame do not corrode resulting in 
closing of gaps between the frame and glass or warping 
of timber with consequent breakage of glass. 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX C 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, CED 13 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 2061, Engineers 
Apartments, Plot 11, Sector - 18A, Dwarka, 
New Delhi 110078) 


Ahluwalia Contracts (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), 
Bengaluru 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
Builders Association of India, New Delhi 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, 
New Delhi 


Central Insecticides Board, Faridabad 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Confederation of Construction Products and Services, 
New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-North East Institute of Science and Technology, 
Jorhat 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Forest Research Institute, Dehradun 


Housing & Urban Development Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 


Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Pest Control Association, New Delhi 

Indian Plywood Industries Research & Training Institute, 
Bengaluru 


Larsen & Toubro Limited, ECC Division, Chennai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, 
Integrated HQ of MoD, (Army), New Delhi 


20 


Representative(s) 


Suri D. S. SACHDEV (Chairman) 


SHRI SHOBHIT UPPAL 
SHRI PRADEEP Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri A. N. PRAKASH 
SHRI SATISH V. SALPEKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SRINIVAS 
Suri H. E. Iver (Alternate) 


SHRI SUROJIT SAMANTA 
SHRI RAM Avtar (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDI NATH JHA 


ADDITIONAL PPA cum SECRETARY (CIB & RC) 
Joint Director (ENTOMOLOGY) (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (CSQ) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (TAS) (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK GAHLOWT 
SHRI SHASHI Kant (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. NEGI 
Dr Asay CuHourasiA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DIRECTOR 
Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (SZ) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (P)-1 (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI RAJANIJI SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI RAVINDRA Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr KIsHAN Kumar V. S. 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI S. C. BHATIA 
Suri P. S. CHApHA (Alternate) 


VICE PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI AMITAVA SIL 
SHRI ANAND NANDANWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAN VENKATESWARAN 
SHRI V. SUKUMAR HEBBAR (Alternate) 


Jr DG (ARCHITECTURE) 


Organization 


NBCC (India) Limited, New Delhi 

NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 

Pest Control (India) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

Public Works Department, Govt of Gujarat, Gujarat 


Public Works Department, Govt of NCT of Delhi, 
New Delhi 


Research, Designs and Standards Organization, Ministry of 
Railways, Lucknow 

School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi 

The All India Glass Manufacturers’ Federation, New Delhi 

The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 

The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 

The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 

In personal capacity (Pratap Nursery Lane Near 


Gurudwara, Panditwari, Dehradun) 
BIS Directorate General 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


Representative(s) 


EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (ENGG) 
GENERAL MANAGER (ENGG) (Alternate) 


Suri R. L. Das 
Suri ANIL Kapoor (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR M. GHUGE 
Suri NITIN B. JActap (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER, DESIGN (R&D) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Director (Works) 
ADE (Works) (Alternate) 


PROF ANIL DEWAN 
Pror Jaya Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI SOURABH KANKAR 
SHRI RUPINDER SHELLY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY SETH 
Ms Mecna BEHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY GARG 
SHRI SHAMIT MANCHANDA (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. ADLAKHA 
SHRI DEVENDRA GILL (Alternate) 


Suri K. S. PRUTHI 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI S ARUN KUMAR 
ScIENTIST ‘D’ (CivıL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Panel for Use of Glass in Buildings, CED 13/P1 


Organization 
In Personal Capacity (Flat A2/16, Sri Agrasen Society, 
Sector 7, Dwarka, New Delhi 110075) 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Confederation of Construction Products and Services, 
New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
Glazing Society of India, Chennai 


Kuraray India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 
Saint-Gobain Glass India Ltd, Chennai 


21 


Representative(s) 


Suri R. N. DANDEKAR (Convener) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (CSQ) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (TAS) (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK GAHLOWT 
SHRI SHASHI Kant (Alternate) 


Dr ASHOK KUMAR 


SHRI GOHUL DEEPAK 
SHRI SUBIN CALVIN Geo (Alternate) 


SHRI MALVINDERSINGH ROOOPRAI 
SHRI ANIL KAPOOR 


Suri A. R. UNNIKRISHNAN 
Suri N. Murat (Alternate) 


IS 16231 (Part 1) : 2019 


Organization Representative(s) 


The All India Glass Manufacturers’ Federation Association, SHRI SOMASUNDARAM SENTHIL 


New Delhi SHRI Prem Dutt (Alternate) 
The Energy Resources Institute, New Delhi SHRI SANJAY SETH 
The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai SHRI VIJAY GARG 
SHRI ASHUTOSH AGARWAL (Alternate) 
The Institution of Engineers (India), New Delhi Suri P. K. ADLAKHA 


22 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 13 (12373). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


