NAT HIAF IS 17433 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


aa tores amit — eiA ferar acta 
(ania ) AY Bret A TAT SITen eren GT — 
ugama cht fater 


Textile Dyestuffs — Natural Dye from 
Terminalia arjuna ( Arjun ) Bark — 
Identification 


ICS 59.040 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH APT, 4$ Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2020 Price Group 5 


Textile Speciality Chemicals and Dyestuffs Sectional Committee, TXD 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by Textile Speciality 
Chemicals and Dyestuffs Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


The revival of natural dyes has been for two reasons: 
a) Due to the harmful effect of synthetic dyes, safer natural dyes are being preferred globally, and 


b) Ban on the use of azo dyes which release carcinogenic amines has also brought back natural dyes in 
limelight. Natural dyes are being used extensively for dyeing of cotton, linen, silk and wool substrates. 


Terminalia arjuna (Arjuna, Arjun in Hindi) bark has been variously used for medicinal purposes in improving 
cardio vascular health, and for tanning and dyeing purposes. It has been used for dyeing textiles in shades of 
brown since ancient times. 


In order to achieve optimum quality with minimum lot-to-lot shade variation, and little differences in colour when 
the same dyestuff is obtained from different manufacturers, it is essential to standardize this natural dyestuff. This 
will improve the cost benefit ratio and help the user adjust their dyeing or printing recipes appropriately. 


It is for the first time that the standard for natural dyestuff Terminalia arjuna (Arjun) bark dye has been written, 
it is mainly for the ease of buyers, seller and users of this natural dyestuff. Standardization and identification 
methods will bring all the major parameters under scan and match. The main intention of this specification is to 
identify the natural dyestuff 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex F. 


In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 17433 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


TEXTILE DYESTUFFS — NATURAL DYE 
FROM TERMINALIA ARJUNA (ARJUN) BARK — 
IDENTIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes test method and identification 
requirement of powdere/ aqueous extract of Terminalia 
arjuna (Arjun) bark dye, and of textiles coloured 
with this dye. The detection and identification of the 
natural colourant from Terminalia arjuna (Arjun) 
bark is conducted using Kit method given in Annex 
A, chromatographic techniques, that is Thin Layer 
Chromatography (TLC) and High Performance Liquid 
Chromatography (HPLC) as given in Annex B and C 
and by UV-Visible spectroscopic technique as given 
in Annex D. The method for extraction of the dye 
from textile dyed with Terminalia arjuna (Arjun) bark 
extract is given in Annex E. 


2 REFERENCE 


The following standard contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the standards indicated below. 


IS No. Title 


1070: 1992 Reagent grade water — Specification 
(third revision) 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions apply: 


3.1 Terminalia arjuna (Arjun) Dye — The botanical 
name of Arjun tree is Terminalia arjuna, it belongs to 
family Combretaceae. Terminalia arjuna bark is used 
variously as medicine for heart problems and high 
blood pressure, astringent, tannin source, and dye. It 
has been used for dyeing textiles in shades of brown 
since ancient times. 


3.2 Natural Colourants — Colourants from natural 
origin, particularly materials obtained from plant parts, 
namely - stem, root and leaves, extracted without any 
chemical reaction primarily used in textiles for dyeing 
or printing. 


4 PRINCIPLE 


Natural colorants are usually never a single compound, 
they are composed of several compounds many of which 
are structurally similar and therefore visual response to 
one or more common laboratory chemicals may give 
a preliminary indication about the presence of those 
specific type of compounds found in a particular natural 
dye. The individual character of different compounds 
present in a natural colorant will determine how they 
bind to the textile substrate, and the ratios bound to 
the substrate may be different from their ratios in the 
extract. These individual components can be analyzed 
out by spectroscopic and chromatographic techniques 
which can establish the authenticity of the natural 
colourant. Terminalia arjuna bark is rich in tannins and 
flavonoids which contribute to the chromatographic 
and spectroscopic characteristics of its extract. 


5 APPARATUS 

5.1 Analytical Balance, with resolution of 0.001 g. 
5.2 Spatula 

5.3 Ultrasonic Water Bath (Sonicator) 

5.4 Stoppered Conical Flask 

5.5 Measuring Cylinder 

5.6 Funnel 


5.7 Qualitative Grade Filter Paper — Particle 
retention 11 um. 


6 REAGENTS 


6.1 Terminalia arjuna Bark, dried and powdered to 
serve as reference. 


6.2 Methanol — Analytical grade. 
7 PROCEDURE 


7.1 Preparation of Terminalia arjuna (Arjun) Bark 
Dye Reference and Test Sample 


Powder made by pulverizing authentic Terminalia 
arjuna bark material is used to prepare the reference 


IS 17433 : 2020 


sample. The stock solution of the reference natural dye 
is prepared by steeping 0.5 g of dry bark powder in 
100 ml methanol in a stoppered conical flask. It is then 
agitated in a sonicator set at 45°C for about 20 min after 
which the solution is filtered using a filter paper, and 
then transferred to another stoppered glass vessel for 
further analysis. If not used on the same day, the stock 
solution can be stored in a refrigerator for about two 
weeks. Stock solution of the test sample is also prepared 
in the same way from dry, powdered plant material. If 
the test sample is a liquid concentrate or a spray dried 
extract, a shorter dissolution time and a smaller amount 
of sample (0.05 g) may be sufficient. If the test material 
is dyed textile, the method for the extraction of the 
natural dye from it is given in Annex E. 


7.2 Analysis 


The detection and identification of natural Terminalia 
arjuna (Arjun) dye from prepared dye samples is 
conducted using Kit method given in Annex A, by 
using chromatographic techniques viz., TLC and HPLC 
as given in Annex B and C as well as by UV-Visible 
spectroscopy as given in Annex D. 


7.3 Qualification and identification of Terminalia 
arjuna (Arjun) Natural Dye 


Comparison between analyses of test sample and 
reference Terminalia arjuna dye sample through 7.3 can 


identify whether the test sample is natural Terminalia 
arjuna dye. The specific tests to be conducted are given 
in Table 1. 


8 CALIBRATION OF THE ANALYTICAL 
EQUIPMENT 


The instruments/equipment being used (TLC, HPLC, 
UV-Visible spectrophotometer) should be calibrated 
using standard reference materials and procedures 
as recommended by the manufacturer to ensure their 
proper working before start of the analysis. 


9 VALIDATION OF THE METHOD 


The test methods employed should be validated using 
authentic reference dye sample for reliability. and 
repeatability 


10 REPORT 


The report shall include the following information: 
a) Reference to this standard, 
b) Tests conducted and test conditions, and 
c) Results on identification of the test sample. 


Table 1 Specific Tests Recommended for Identification of Terminalia arjuna Bark Dye 
( Clause 7.3 ) 


SI No. Test Type of Test Ref to Annex 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Kit test Preliminary test A 
ii) Chromatography tests 
a) Thin layer chromatography (TLC) Mandatory test 
b) High performance liguid test chromatography (HPLC) Additional (See Note) C 
iii) Spectroscopy tests 
a) UV-visible spectroscopy Confirmatory test D 


NOTE— HPLC may be performed wherever such instrumentation facilities are available. 


IS 17433 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clauses 1, 7.2 and Table 3 ) 
KIT TEST FOR IDENTIFICATION OF TERMINALIA ARJUNA (ARJUN) BARK DYE 


A-1 PRINCIPLE 


Each natural dye has its characteristic molecular 
composition which is the distinctive feature of that 
dyestuff. The Terminalia arjuna (Arjun) dye gives a 
characteristic reaction with sodium hydroxide solution 
which is used for its identification. 


A-2 APPARATUS 

A-2.1 Test Tubes 

A-2.2 Test Tube Holder 
A-2.3 pH Meter 

A-2.4 Pipette 

A-2.5 Measuring Cylinder 
A-3 REAGENTS 


A-3.1 Distilled Water 


A-3.2 Sodium Hydroxide, Analytical Grade 


A-3.3 Stock Solutions of Test and Reference 
Terminalia arjuna (Arjun) Dye 


A-4 PROCEDURE 


The stock solution of both the reference and test 
Terminalia arjuna (Arjun) dye 1s diluted 10 times with 
water and 10 ml of the diluted solution is taken in a test 
tube. This solution is then made alkaline (pH 10.6) by 
using 10 percent solution of sodium hydroxide (NaOH) 
and observed for any colour change. 


A-5 OBSERVATION 


A dark maroon colour develops in the solution of 
reference Terminalia arjuna dye. If a similar colour 
change is observed in test sample also, it is likely to be 
Terminalia arjuna dye. 


A-5 CONCLUSION 


The development of dark maroon color in test sample 
gives an indication that it is Terminalia arjuna dye 


ANNEX B 
( Clauses 1, 7.2 and Table 3 ) 


IDENTIFICATION OF TERMINALIA ARJUNA BARK NATURAL DYE BY 
THIN LAYER CHROMATOGRAPHY (TLC) 


B-1 PRINCIPLE 


TLC separates non-volatile constituent compounds in a 
mixture by virtue of differences in their affinity for the 
stationary solid phase which is spread as a thin layer 
on a sheet/plate and the selected mobile solvent phase 
which are then seen as different spots on the TLC plate. 
Positioning of a spot on the TLC plate denoted by its 
R, value (distance travelled by the constituent / distance 
travelled by the solvent) depends on its chemical nature 
and is its characteristic property. Therefore, due to 
similarity in constituent chemical components, test and 
reference Terminalia arjuna dye samples under similar 
TLC condition should result in spots of similar R „values 
and colour and thus a test sample can be identified as 
whether it is Terminalia arjuna bark natural dye. 


B-2 APPARATUS 


B-2.1 Analytical thickness silica gel G/ GF 254 coated 
TLC plates (may be cast in-house or procured from 
commercial suppliers) 


B-2.2 Capillary for spotting TLC plates 


B-2.3 TLC development chamber (of a dimension 
suitable to accommodate TLC plate) 


B-2.4 TLC spot visualization chamber containing 
crystals of iodine (of a dimension suitable to 
accommodate TLC plate) 


B-2.5 Optionally, a viewing chamber for TLC 
with 254 nm UV tubes which may also be fitted with 
daylight fluorescent tubes (CRI 95) and photographic 
camera for recording photographs 


B-3 REAGENTS 


B-3.1 Stock Solutions, of test and reference Terminalia 
arjuna bark natural dye prepared in 7.1. 


B-3.2 Methanol 
B-3.3 Ethyl Acetate 


IS 17433 : 2020 


B-3.4 n-Hexane 
NOTE — All reagents except B-3.1 should be of analytical 


reagent grade and all glassware should be cleaned and finally 
rinsed with reagent grade water and dried. 


B-4 PROCEDURE 


Both reference and the test sample extracts are spotted 
carefully, side-by-side, on the silica gel coated TLC 
plate. The spots are dried and the plate is placed in 
TLC development chamber, pre-equilibrated with 
the developing solvent consisting of 60 percent ethyl 
acetate and 40 percent n-hexane. After the solvent 
front has travelled to sufficient distance, the TLC plate 
is removed and the solvent is allowed to evaporate. 
Developed spots are visualized in daylight. The spots 
may optionally be visualized and photographed in 
the viewing chamber under daylight fluorescent tubes 
and if a silica gel GF254 plate is used, also under 
UV-254 nm light. The TLC plate is then placed in the 
iodine chamber and the spots are visualized in iodine. 
The constituents of the test sample present as spots on 
the TLC plate are compared with the reference dye 
sample. The colour and R, values of the spots in both 
the test and reference sample are noted. 


B-5 OBSERVATION 

Details of stock solution preparation and its dilution if 
any, 

Type of TLC plate used: Silica gel G/ GF 254; in-house/ 
commercial 


Solvent system used: 80 percent ethyl acetate and 20 
percent n-hexane 


R,and spot colour Comment 
in reference 
sample of 
Terminalia arjuna 


bark dye 


R,0.60 major and 
0.20 minor 


R,and spot colour 
in test sample 


An indicative thin layer chromatogram with both 
the tracks being natural Terminalia arjuna bark dye 
is presented in Fig. 1. However, the position and 
number of spots may vary due to differences in sample 
preparation and chromatographic conditions. 


A-6 CONCLUSION 


Colour of the spots and the R, values of the reference 
and test samples are similar/different. 


Fic. 1 THIN LAYER CHROMATOGRAM OF TERMINALIA ARJUNA BARK DYE 


IS 17433 : 2020 


ANNEX C 
( Clauses 1, 7.2 and Table 3 ) 


IDENTIFICATION OF TERMINALIA ARJUNA BARK DYE BY HIGH PERFORMANCE LIQUID 
CHROMATOGRAPHY (HPLC) 


C-1 PRINCIPLE 


HPLC is used to separate compounds in a mixture 
by virtue of differences in their affinity for the 
stationary phase which is packed in a column, and the 
mobile solvent phase that is pumped through it. The 
constituents, depending upon their chemical nature, 
are differently retarded during their passage through 
the column and are identified by comparing the time 
taken by a constituent compound in eluting from the 
column as detected by a detector (retention time) with 
that of a standard reference compound. Selection of a 
detector is important as in the closed system, the eluting 
compounds cannot be seen by the eye and can only be 
detected by their characteristic properties. UV detector 
is a common detector employed as many organic 
compounds absorb in UV region. Wavelength of the 
detector can be set to a value where absorption by the 
compounds of interest is high so as to achieve higher 
sensitivity. Various parameters of the HPLC assay are 
set in such a way that distinct peaks of the reference 
sample are observed in the chromatogram. 


C-2 APPARATUS 


C-2.1 HPLC System — with binary pump, UV/PDA 
detector and software 


C-2.2 C-18 Reverse Phase Column (RPC-C18) — 
150 x 4.6 mm; 5 micron. 


C-2.3 Guard Column, compatible with the analytical 
HPLC column . 


C-2.4 Micro-Syringe 


C-2.5 Membrane Filters (0.45 micron), for micro 
-syringe. 


C-2.6 All Glass Filtration Assembly, for micro 
filtering solvents. 


C- 2.7 Oil-Free Vacuum Pump 


C-2.8 Membrane Filters (0.45 micron), for solvent 
filtration. 


C-3 REAGENTS 
C-3.1 Methanol 
C-3.2 Deionized Water 


C-3.3 Reference Terminalia arjuna bark natural dye 
and test dye stock solutions prepared in 7.1 after 
appropriate dilution with methanol 


NOTE — All reagents except C-3.3 should be of HPLC grade 
and need to be filtered through 0.45 micron membrane filter 
before use. All glassware used should be cleaned and finally 
rinsed with reagent grade water and dried. 


C-4 PROCEDURE 


C-4.1 Chromatographic conditions 


a) Stationary Column C18, 150 x 4.6 mm; 5 


phase: micron, 

b) Eluent/ Deionised water (95:5), 
mobile phase 
: Methanol : 

c) Flow rate: 1.0 ml/min, 

d) Detection 254 nm (band width 16 nm), 
wavelength: and 

e) Run time: 15 min. 

C-4.2 Method 


C-4.2.1 HPLC system is started and the selected 
mobile phase is allowed to pass through the column till 
a stable baseline is obtained. Reference dye solution is 
then aspirated into the micro-syringe, a membrane pre- 
filter is fitted onto it and the solution is injected into the 
sample loop (10-20 micro litre capacity) in load position 
to fill it completely. The injection valve is then turned to 
inject position to introduce the sample onto the column. 
Asthe mobile phase is continuously passing through the 
column, the constituents of the injected dye extract get 
separated. These separated constituents exit the column 
and enter the UV/PDA Detector which detects them by 
recording the absorbance of the individual constituents 
as they pass through it. This absorbance is converted 
to a signal and a peak is seen on the signal intensity 
versus time plot continuously displayed on the monitor. 
When a UV absorbing component passes through the 
detector, a peak is seen on the plot. After completion 
of the run, a chromatogram along with a report of peak 
retention times, peak height and peak area for each 
peak is generated by the software. The test sample run 
is also completed in the similar manner. Identity of the 
test sample is established by comparing the retention 
times of the peaks in reference and test chromatograms. 
Peak height or its area provides additional quantitative 
information about the relative abundance of various 
constituents in test and reference samples. 


C-4.2.2 An indicative chromatogram containing the 
peaks obtained after HPLC assay of the Terminalia 
arjuna bark natural dye extract is shown in Fig. 2. Peak 


IS 17433 : 2020 


location/retention times and height may vary between C-6 CONCLUSION 
the indicative chromatogram and the injected samples 
due to differences of the dye sample and the extract 
preparation conditions. 


The retention time of the constituents of the reference 
and test sample are similar/different. The reference 
sample and test sample are therefore similar/different. 


C-5 OBSERVATION 


In Reference Terminalia. | In Test Sample Comment 
arjuna bark natural dye 


Retention time of  the|1.8min 
peaks observed in HPLC 
chromatogram 


3.0 min 


3.3 min 


Fic. 2 CHROMATOGRAM OF THE TERMINALIA ARJUNA BARK DYE 


IS 17433 : 2020 


ANNEX D 
( Clauses 1, 7.2 and Table 3 ) 


IDENTIFICATION OF TERMINALIA ARJUNA BARK DYE BY UV — VISIBLE 
SPECTROSCOPIC METHOD 


D-1 PRINCIPLE 


When sample molecules are exposed to light having 
an energy that matches a possible electronic transition 
within the molecule, some of the light energy will 
be absorbed as the electron is promoted to a higher 
energy orbital. An optical spectrometer records the 
wavelengths at which absorption occurs, together 
with the degree of absorption at each wavelength. The 
resulting spectrum is presented as a graph of absorbance 
(A) versus wavelength. 


Many molecules absorb ultraviolet and/or visible light. 
Fine particles will scatter light and contribute to the 
absorbance. It is therefore essential to remove fine 
particles when measuring absorbance of dye solutions. 
Absorbance (A) is directly proportional to the path 
length, b, and the concentration, c, of the absorbing 
species. Beer 5 law states that 


A =€bc 


Where, € is a constant of proportionality, called the 
absorptivity. 

Different dye compounds within the natural dyestuff 
absorb radiations of different specific wavelengths. 
The spectral curve will thus be a summation of their 
individual absorbances. An absorption spectrum of the 
natural dyestuff will thus show a characteristic curve 
with peaks corresponding to structural groups present 
within the constituent molecules. 


D-2 APPARATUS 


D-2.1 Ultra 
Spectrophotometer 


Violet Visible Scanning 


D-2.2 Quartz Sample Cuvettes — Matched pair of 
1.00 cm light path. 


D-3 REAGENTS 


D-3.1 Reference Terminalia arjuna Bark Dye Extract 


D-3.2 Methanol 


NOTE — All reagents should be of analytical reagent grade 
and all glassware should be cleaned and finally rinsed with 
reagent grade water and dried. 


D- 4 PROCEDURE 


D-4.1 The stock solution of the reference Terminalia 
arjuna bark dye prepared in 7.1 may be used to record 
the spectrum in the UV-visible region (200—700 nm). 
If the absorbance in the UV region is too high, this 
solution may be suitably diluted for recording the 
spectrum in the UV region (200—400 nm). The test 
sample solution is also prepared in the same manner as 
the reference sample. 


D-4.2 Both visible and UV spectra are recorded with pure 
methanol in reference holder of the spectrophotometer. 
Reference dye sample is first analysed. Test sample is 
analysed next and recorded spectra are compared for 
similarity of the spectral curve that is, peak positions 
and their intensity (absorbance value). The absorbance 
spectral curve of this dye extract has specific 
characteristics both in the UV and visible range. An 
indicative UV spectrum of the Terminalia arjuna leaf 
dye extract is presented in Fig. 3. 


D-5 OBSERVATION 


D-6 CONCLUSION 


The nature of the spectral curve of the test sample in 
the UV and visible range is similar/different to the 
reference sample. 


In reference Terminalia 
arjuna bark extracts 


In test extract 


Comments (Describing difference/ 
similarity in spectral curve) 


232 nm — 1.56A 
278 nm — 1.70A 
364 nm — 0.61A 
410 mm — 0.31A 


Peak position (nm) with 
absorbance 


IS 17433 : 2020 


278nm, 1.700 OD 


Absorbance 


364nm, 0.615 OD 


250 300 350 400 


500 550 600 650 700 


Wavelength(nm) 


Fic. 3 UV - VisiBLE SPECTRUM OF THE TERMINALIA ARJUNA BARK DYE 


ANNEX E 
( Clauses 1 and 7.1 ) 
EXTRACTION OF DYE FROM FABRIC/YARN DYED WITH TERMINALIA ARJUNA BARK DYE 


E-1 PRINCIPLE 


Extraction of dyed textile samples with a suitable 
solvent (methanol) is necessary to release the dyes 
from these samples. 


E-2 APPARATUS 


E-2.1 Soxhlet Extraction Assembly with Heating 
Bench 


E-2.2 Scissors 
E-2.3 Qualitative Filter Paper Sheet 


E-2.4 Rotary Vacuum Evaporator with Evaporating 
Flask 


E-2.5 Funnel 
E-2.6 Conical Flasks 


E-2.7 Measuring Cylinder 
E-3 REAGENTS 
E-3.1 Methanol (Analytical Reagent Grade) 


E-4 PROCEDURE 


About 50 g of dyed textile is cut into small pieces and 
packed ina filter paper. The packed filter paper column is 
put for soxhlet extraction with methanol as the solvent. 
The temperature is so adjusted to get about 8-10 cycles 
of the solvent per hour. Extraction is continued for 6-8 
h, till most of the colour is discharged. The coloured 
solvent is filtered and is concentrated under vacuum in 
a rotary evaporator to about 20 ml. This concentrated 
extract can then be used for chromatographic and 
spectroscopic analysis as per the methods described in 
7.3 after appropriate dilution, if required. 


IS 17433 : 2020 


ANNEX F 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Textile Speciality Chemicals and Dyestuffs Sectional Committee, TXD 07 


Organization 


Department for Jute and Fibre Technology, Institute 
of Jute Technology, University of Calcutta 


Ahmedabad Textile Industry’s Research Association, 
Ahmedabad 


Ama Herbals, Lucknow 
Atul Ltd (Colors Division), Atul 


Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, 
Mumbai 


Archroma India Pvt Limited, Mumbai 


BioDye India Pvt Ltd, Sawantwadi, Maharashtra 


Department for Jute and Fibre Technology, Institute 
of Jute Technology, University of Calcutta 


Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 


Indian Jute Industries Research Association, Kolkata 
Jaysynth Dye-Chem, Mumbai 
National Peroxide Limited, Mumbai 


Northern India Textile Research Association 
Ghaziabad 


Office of the Textile Commissioner Mumbai 
S GS India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Shree Pushkar Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd, Mumbai 
Surya Processors Pvt Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Textiles Committee, Mumbai 
The Arvind Mills Limited, Ahmedabad 
The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


The South India Textile Research Association, 
Coimbatore 


The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research 
Association, Mumbai 


U P Textile Technology Institute, Kanpur 


Representative(s) 


Pror A. K. SAMANTA (Chairman) 


SHRI C. R. PRAYAG 
Ms Bipasha Maiti (Alternate) 


SHRI Y. A. SHAH 


SHRI SAI GANESH 
SHRI ARINDAM CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Dr (SHRIMATI) SUJATA SAXENA 
Dn A. S. M. Raja (Alternate) 


Suri RAJESH RAMAMURTHY 
Suri AsHIM GHosH (Alternate) 


Dr Bosco HENRIQUES 
Dr D. Das 


Pror RAJ GANESH S. PALA 


Dr S. K. CHAKRABARTI 
Suri Sannir Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI S. C. SHARMA 
Suri P. M. RESHAMWALA (Alternate) 


Suni K. H. DESHPANDE 
Suri V. N. Josui (Alternate) 


Dn M. S. PARMAR 


SHRI Humayun K. 
Suri JAMIL AHMED (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV SARASWAT 
Suni AsHIsH Rawat (Alternate) 


Dn N. N. MAHAPATRA 
Suri G. GANGA REDDY 


SHRI KARTIKEYA DHANDA 
SHRIMATI SHILPI CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJARSHI GHOSH 
SHRI UMASANKAR MAHAPATRA (Alternate) 


Dn (Surimati) PADMA S. VANKAR 
Suri M. P. SATHIANARAYANAN (Alternate) 


DR PRAKASH VASUDEVAN 
SHRI S. SIVAKUMAR (Alternate) 


Dr (SuniMATI) MANISHA MATHUR 
Dn RACHNA SHUKLA (Alternate) 


Pnor (SHRIMATI) ABHA BHARGAVA 
Dr Arun Patra (Alternate) 


IS 17433 : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 


Universal Starch Chem Allied Limited Dhule Suni D. A. PATIL 


Wool Research Association, Thane SHRIMATI SMITA BAIT 


SHRI CHETAN MaHAJAN (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI A. K. Bera, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Suri A. K. BERA 
ScIENTIST ‘F’ AND Head (TXD), BIS 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 07 (14181). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


