**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 1448-62 (1974) : Methods of test for petroleum and its 
products, Part 62: Heat stability of greases [PCD 1: 
Methods of Measurement and Test for Petroleum, Petroleum 
Products and Lubricants] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^yj i imzzmn^a rafrg amsBs 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 1448 [ P : 62 ] - 1974 

< -i ■ Adopted: 18 November 1974 

7«</Z0/2 Standard (Reaffirmed 2003) 

METHODS OF TEST FOR 

PETROLEUM AND ITS PRODUCTS: 

HEAT STABILITY OF GREASES 

( First Revisio n) 

Third Reprint NOVEMBER 1993 

UDC 621-892: 543-876 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 The methods prescribed are intended to determine the heat stability 
ofHme base, soda base and soda and lime mixed base greases. Method A 
is suitable for lime base greases whereas Method B is suitable for soda base 
and soda and lime mixed base greases. 

2. OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 

2.1 In Method A, 10 g of the sample in a watch-glass is placed in an oven, 
maintained at 120 ± I°C or at any other specified temperature for at least 
one hour. After keeping it for 24 hours at room temperature, the sample 
is examined for signs of breakdown, change in consistency and separation 
of oil. In Method B, 30 g of the sample in a dish is placed in an oven 
maintained at 150 ± 1°C for 3 hours. After keeping for 24 hours the dish 
containing the grease is kept in an inverted position for 24 hburs. The 
difference in mass before and after inverting the dish is calculated as the 
percentage loss in mass of the sample initially taken for the test. 

3. METHOD A 

3.1 Procedure for Superior Quality Lime Base Greases — Weigh 
accurately about 10 g of the sample and make it into a disc of approxi- 
mately 35 mm diameter and 5 mm height in the centre of a watch-glass of 

©Copyright 1975 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
Gr l NEW DELHI II0002 January 1975 



IS:I448[P:62}-I974 { . 

90 to 100 mm diameter and 7 to 10 mm depth at centre. Place the watch- 
glass on a removable metal shelf in an air-oven maintained at 120 ± 1°C. 
To allow free air circulation, do not cover the metal shelf with asbestos 
sheet or any other thing. Maintain the oven at 120 ± 1°C for at least half 
an hour before introducing the sample. When several tests are being 
carried out simultaneously, keep the watch-glasses in the oven in such a 
way that they do not cover more than 40 percent of surface area of the 
removable shelf on which the sample is kept. Keep them in the oven for 
one hour from the time the oven temperature automatically rises to 120°C 
after the initial temperature drop during introduction of the watch-glasses 
(normally the time taken for the oven to attain 120°C temperature is about 
half an hour ). Remove the watch-glasses, allow them to stand for 24 hours 
at room temperature in a draught-free place and examine the sample for 
signs of breakdown, marked change in consistency or separation of the oil 
by the following procedures: 

a) Keeping the watch-glass in a slanting position ( 10 to 20° from the 
vertical) and watching for flow of oil, thinned grease, if any; and 

b) Gutting the sample with a glass rod. 

3.2 Procedure for Lime Base Greases — Proceed as under 3.1 with the 
modification that the oven shall be maintained at 95 ± 1°C for the test. 

3.3 Precision — The precision of the method has not been established. 

4. METHOD B 

4»1 Apparatus — a dish made of metal ( nickel or steel), 75 mm in 
diameter and 19 mm in depth, fitted with a closely-fitting lid in which a 
hole of 70 mm diameter has been cut, and a perforated zinc sheet of 
approximately 12 holes to a square centimetre soldered over the cut-out 
portion of the lid. 

4.2 Procedure — Place approximately 50 g of the sample in the tared 
metal dish and weigh with the lid. Place the dish without the lid in an 
oven at 150 ± 1°C. After heating for 3 hours at this temperature, take 
out the dish and allow it to stand undisturbed for 24 hours at room 
temperature. Place the lid on the dish and reweigh (mass A). Invert 
the dish along with lid, on a pad of filter paper and allow it to remain for 
24 hours. Wipe out any oil adhering to the exterior of the lid and dish 
and weigh ( mass B ). 

4.3 Calculation — Calculate the difference in mass A and mass B and 
express as percentage loss in mass of the material initially taken for the test. 

4.4 Precision — The precision of the method has not been established. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



