IS 13260:1993 (Reaffirmed 2004)

Indian Standard

METHOD OF GRADING FOR APPEARANCE OF COTTON YARN USING PHOTOGRAPHIC STANDARDS

UDC

677.072~33 : 677.011 : [ 620.168 ]

@ BIS 1993 /P

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

July 1993

Price Group 2

Physical

Methods

of Tests

Sectional

Committee,

TX 01

FOREWORD This Indian the Physical Council. Standard Methods was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by of Test Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division

The appearance of cotton yarn is one of the important qualities affecting its commercial value as it influences, to a great extent, the general appearance of fabric made out of it. The appearance grade of cotton yarn is evaluated by visual comparison of black-board wrappings of yarn with photographic standards, taking into account the various factors, such as the regularity, imperfections, freedom from foreign matter, neppiness and hairiness of the yarn. This standard has been variations in the procedure prepared with for evaluating a view to eliminating unnecessary the appearance grade of cotton yarn. and undesirable

Taking into consideration the views of producers, consumers and testing authorities, the Sectional Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard felt that it should be related to the manufacturing and testing practices followed in the country in this field. Assistance has been derived from the following publications: ASTM Designation : D 2255-87 for Testing and Materials. Grading cotton yarns -for appearance American Society

Pillay K. P. R., Shankaranarayanana Relationship of yarn appearance Second Technological Conference

A. and Kandasami N. The K. S., Balasubramanian to certain factors of yarn quality. Proceedings of the held at SITRA, Coimbatore, 16 and 17 December, 1960.

B. R. Grading of yarn Subramanian S., Mobedji J. D., ( Mrs ) Phalgumani G. R., Manjunatha Text Trade and Indus J, Annual Number, V 18, appearance - an objective approach. No. 1 I-12, p 9, 1980. Balsubramanian N, Gupoe V. V. and Iyengar also CTRL Technol. &II. B-88 ( 1964 ). Ukidve A. V., ( Smt ) Raje, Uster Evenness Parameter R. L. N. Indian Cotton Gr Rev., 18, 66 ( 1964 ); Appearance and

Between C. R., and Oka, P. G. Relationship of Yarn. J. Tex. Ass., 39, 3 ( 1978 ).

In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance rounding cl? numerical values ( revised )`.

if the final value, observed with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for

IS 13260 : 1993

Indian Standard METHOD OF GRADING FOR APPEARANCE OF COTTON YARN USING PHOTOGRAPHIC STANDARDS
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes a method of grading for appearance of single cotton yarn, carded or combed, with the use of BIS Photographic Cotton Yarn Appearance Standards. 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards adjuncts to this standard: IS No. 3920 : 1985 Methods for Title for sampling of cotton determinations of characteristics (first yarn appearance are necessary 3.5 Thick Place A yarn defect characterised by a diameter greater than that of the adjoining segments and extending for 6 mm. ( The uneveness is normally caused by a greater number of fibres per yarn cross section than usual. ) 3.6 Thin Place A yarn defect characterised by a segment that is substantially ( at least 25 percent ) smaller in diameter than the average diameter of the yarn. 4 SAMPLING 4.1 To test conformity ofa lot to a specification as regards appearance grade, samples shall be selected so as to be representative of the lot in accordance with the relevant material specification or in accordance with IS 3920 : 1985. 4.2 The number of packages to be taken at random from each selected bale ( or case) shall be such that a total number of five packages are drawn from the lot. As far as possible, equal number of packages shall be drawn from each bale. However, there may be a need for drawing additional packages. 4.3 One board shall be these five packages. 5 EQUIPMENT 5.1 Yarn Board Winder This is a manually operated or motor-driven machine used for winding yarn on the thermosetting resin bonded laminate black board by rotating the clamped board end over end. The equipment is also fitted with a traversing guide to advance the yarn across the board as it is wour.d. The machine shall be capable of spacing the yarn evenly at the rate of 8, 10, 13, 15 and 19 wraps pzr cm ( 20, 26, 32, 38 and 48 wraps pier inch ) on the board with a tolerance of *_ 10 percent. NOTE - It should be ensured that the wraps p:r cm
is within the limits of tolerance as the spaci.igs of the yarn on the black board have an important b:ari,.g on the assessment made. Tnis is due to th-, fact that more closely wounded yarn will have larg>r length ' alfor view on the board and conjeque:ltly more imperfections per unit area. Obviously th.: effect will be opposite if the spacings are wider on the board.

*sp 54

$gical revision ) BIS cotton standards

3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this definitions shall apply. 3.1 Package A general term for a bobbin, cop, pirn, cone, cheese, bundle, etc, of yarn indicating that yarn is in a form convenient for transport for further processing. 3.2 Appearance Grade standard, the following

prepared

from

each

of

The appearance of cotton yarn in the grey state evaluated by visual comparison of black-board ~wrappings of yarn with photographic standards and based on the assessment of regularity, freedom from imperfections, foreign matter, neppiness and lack of hairiness. 3.3 Fuzz Untangled fibre surface of yarn. 3.4 Neps A tightly tangled knot lik,- mass of unurganised fibres, that is, a small knot of entangled fibres. ( In the case of cotton it usually comprises dead or immature cotton hairs. ) *Under print. 1 ends that protude from the

IS 13260:1993 Table 1 Requirements for the Preparation and Assessment of Yarn Boards

( Clause 5.4 )
BIS Photcgrapllic Ctitton Yarn ApI:earance S(andards Series -__ISIS 1 uis 2 CIS 3 BIS 4 BIS 5 Count of Yarn Used for Board Preparation ~_-_-*-.____ _ ttx Ne 60 30 15 10 6 10 20 43 6) 100 Wraps per cm ( per inch )

r--___h tex 100 37 18 5 12 I.9

Count Range -------7

NC

to 37+ to l&5+
to 12 +

6-t to 16s 16$ to 329 32-t to 505 50+ to 7.58 75+ and above

8(20) I\,( 26) 13 (32) 15( 38) 19(48)

to 7.9+ aLd below

NOIE - For assessir.g the appearance grade of yarn sample whose count value falls within the range of 6.0 Ne to 16.4 NC ( 100 to 37 + tex ), boards prepared at 8 wraps per cm ( 20 wraps per ixh ) should be csunt values in the other ranges, boards ars to be assessed using BTS 1. For yarn samples havi.~g m:an prepared and assessed using the respective standards boards as given in Table 1. 5.2 A cabinet procided with arrangement for proper illumination, for mounting the blackboard wlappitigs alld the BIS Photographic Cotton Yarn Appearance Standards ( *SP 54 ) to evaluate -the appearance grade of yarn. 5.3 The black-board laminate black-boards with dull finish on both sides on which yarn can be of approximately wound to cover an area 140 mm x 250 mm.

6.3 Grade C Yarn Grade C yarn may have more neps, and larger ones as well as more fuzziness and a greater amount of foreign matter than Grade B yarn. The contrast between the thick and thin places and the normal diameter of the yarn may be greater than in Grade B yarn resulting in an overall rougher appearance. 6.4 Grade D Yarn Grade D yarn may have some slubs that are more than three times the average diameter of the yarn. Grade D yarn may have more neps, neps of a larger size, more thick and thin places, more fuzz and more foreign matter than Grade C yarn. When siubs or large neps are present, Grade D yarn may have fewer neps than Grade C yarn. Grade D yarn may have an overall rougher appearance than Grade C yarn. 6.5 Yarn Below Grade D Yarn below Grade overall and an Grade D yarn. 7 PROCEDURE 7.1 Set the winding device so as to obtain the required number of threads p:r cm on the black-board, depending upan the count range in which the yarn under test fails (see Table 1 ). Take on2 of the packages constituting the test sample and mount it on the winding device. Also mount the black-board on the device in' such a way that yarn wsund on it will lie along the le,lgth of the bDard covering an area of approximately 140 mm x 250 mm. In a similar manner prepare remaining black-board wrappings, taking for each black-board one package from the test sample. D may rougher have more appearance defects than

5.4 BlS Photographic Cotton Yarn Appearance Standards ( *SP 54 ) A set of BIS Photographic Cotton Yarn Appearance Standards consists of five series, of yarn counts ( see covering five ranges Table 1 ). Each series has four photographs representing grades, A, B, C and D. Grade A is the highest and others are progressively The range of counts covered by each lower. series is given in Table 1. 6 DESCRIPTION 6.1 Grade A Yarn Grade A yarn are over three varn and very should have uniformity and No fuzziness. may be present may have no large neps which times the normal diameter of the few small ones. Grade A yarn centimetre-to centimetre good good cover without excessive leaf nor other foreign matter in Grade A yarn. OF YARN GRADES

6.2 Grade B Yarn Grade B yarn may have no large neps, but may have a few small ones. Grade B yarn may have no more than three small pieces of foreign matter per baard or specimen providttd they do not fJrm slubs. Grade B yarn may be slightly more irregular and may have slightly more fuzz' than a Grade A yarn.
*Till SP 54 is printed ASTM designation D 2255 : 87 <Grading Cotton Yarn for Appearaxe' mly be used.

2

IS 13260 : 1993

one of the black-board wrappings in the cabinet and by comparison with ser-ies of the BlS Photographic Cotton Yarn Appearance Standards relevant to the count of varn under test, mounted in the same cabinet, evaluate the appearance grade of yarn on the blackboard as A, B, C or D. Assess both sides of each black-board wrapping and assign the grade of the poorer side only as the grade of the specimen. While assigning the grade of the black-boards it should be noted that slubs, thick places, neps and foreign matter are to be treated as worst defects. Yarns with slubs should not be assigned A or B grade. It is preferable to get the assessment of the appearance grade of each black-board wrapping by a minirnum of three observers.
7.2.2 In precisely standard between case the black-board wrapping does not conform to any of the above mentioned grades, namely, A, B, C, D but falls in two consecutive grades, denote the 7.2.1

7.2 Mount

remaining 20 percent do not fdll below the lower grade consider the lot as passing appearance specification. If one or specimens fall more than one grade below specified, reject the lot.

next yarn more that

8.2 For research a.ld experimental psrp3ses, convert the yarn appearance grade of all the five grades of each of the g,aders to their respective index appearance values using Table 2 and calculate the individual grader's average index. From the average index values of all the graders, calculate the average index value of the yarn sample, correct to an integer.
Table 2 Grade
A

Appearance Index 130 120 110

and above

B-tB

c+
C DiD Below D

100
90 80 IO 60

appearance the letter grades.
7.2.3

grade of the yarn by `f' designating the lower

mark after of the two

In cuse the Black-board wrapping appears poorer than Grade D, denote the appearance grade of the yarn as `CD' ( Below D ). 7.3 Following the procedure given in 7.2, evaluate the appearance grade of the remaining black-board wrappings. 7.4 If the observers differ grade, five more packages evaluated. 8 CALCULATION
8.1 In acceptance testing, if no specimen falls more than one grade below that specified, determine the percentage of specimens that are If equal to or better than the specified grade. 80 percent of the specimens graded are equal to or better than the specified grade, and

9 REPORT 9-l The test report. a) Count of package; b) Number examined; shall yarn of inclule as the following: on the

indicated

by more than may be drawn

one and

black-board

wrappings

c) Average Appearance Index and Appearance Grade of the yarn in the lot; d) Range of grades; and BIS Photographic used for grading

e) Series number of the Appearance Standards the sample.

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made~thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements ,of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously cheked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of "Indian Standards.

