Indian Standard epee ERA 


aaga Ba-sule ch USM, 
deno Ud Raga eq — fem 
fadt 


(Vel Yate) 


Handling, Storage and 
Transport of Slaughterhouse 
By-Products — Guidelines 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 67.120.99 


© BIS 2015 


ads AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WH, 9 gae WH Art, we feeei-110002 
mw MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2015 Price Group 2 


Slaughterhouse and Meat Industry Sectional Committee, FAD 18 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Slaughterhouse and Meat Industry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1978 as a great potential was envisaged for utilization of slaughterhouse 
by-products for valuable feed-stuff, fertilizer and pet foods, if the by-products are handled, stored and transported 
under appropriate conditions. This standard was intended to provide guidelines for handling, storage and transport 
of slaughterhouse by-products thereby saving sizeable quantities of this raw material for the slaughterhouse 
by-product industries. 


In present revision, following major modifications have been incorporated: 
a) Guidelines for transport vehicles used for condemned/rendering material has been incorporated. 
b) Risk based classification of slaughterhouse by-products into three categories incorporated. 
c) Guidelines for disposal of slaughterhouse by-products incorporated. 


d) This standard has been aligned with Food Safety and Standard Regulations, 2011. 


IS 8895 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


HANDLING, STORAGE AND TRANSPORT OF 
SLAUGHTERHOUSE BY-PRODUCTS — GUIDELINES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard provides guidelines for proper handling, 
storage and transport of by-products of slaughterhouses 
and meat processing factories. This standard does not 
include the guidelines for the processing of 
pharmaceutical products like insulin and pancreatin. 


2 REFERENCE 


The following standard contains provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
1982 : 2015 Code of practice for ante-mortem and 
post-mortem inspection of meat 
animals (second revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 1982 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Slaughterhouse/Meat Processing Plant/ 
Abattoir — A licensed place/building/ premises where 
food animals are slaughtered humanely in hygienic 
manner with proper ante-mortem and post-mortem 
inspection by veterinarian for human consumption. 


3.2 Slaughterhouse By-Products — The secondary 
products obtained during the manufacture of a principal 
commodity or anything other than meat derived from 
a food animal. 


3.3 Rendering — A process involving application of 
heat for separation of fat and protein residue. 


3.4 Incineration — A process for burning waste 
material at high temperature until it is reduced to ash. 


4 ANTE-MORTEM AND POST MORTEM 
INSPECTION 


The by-products shall be obtained from animals 
subjected to proper ante-mortem and post-mortem 
inspection as per IS 1982. 


5 CLASSIFICATION OF SLAUGHTERHOUSE 
BY-PRODUCTS 


Slaughterhouse by-products may fall into one of the 
following three categories: 


a) Category 1 — These materials carry highest 
risk, and consist principally of material that 
is considered a transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathies (TSEs) risk, such as 
specified risk material [those parts of an 
animal considered most likely to harbour a 
disease such as avian influenza, Bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), for 
example bovine spinal cord]. Pet animals, zoo 
and circus animals and experimental animals 
are also classified as Category | material due 
to the level of veterinary drugs and residues 
they are likely to contain and due to the fact 
that adequate diagnosis of the exact cause of 
death of exotic animals may be difficult to 
achieve. 

b) Category 2 — These materials are also high 
risk material and include fallen stock, manure 
and digestive content. Category 2 is also the 
default status of any slaughterhouse by- 
product not defined in either Category 1 or 
Category 3. 

c) Category 3 — These are low risk materials 
and include parts of animals that have been 
passed fit for human consumption in a 
slaughterhouse but which are not intended 
for consumption, either because they are not 
parts of animals that we normally eat (hides, 
hair, feathers, bones, etc) or for commercial 
reasons. 


6 HANDLING, STORAGE AND TRANSPORT 
OF FOOD SLAUGHTERHOUSE BY-PRODUCTS 


6.1 Transport Vehicle for Condemned Material/ 
Rendering Material 


6.1.1 The material is usually transported in customized, 
water-tight vehicles to prevent spillage of material on 
the highway and may be subjected to temporary storage 
at the rendering plant. 


6.1.2 Slaughterhouse by-products shall be transported 


IS 8895 : 2015 


in sealed new packaging or covered leak-proof 
containers or vehicles. Containers shall be dedicated 
to the use of specific categories of slaughterhouse by- 
products and where they shall be cleaned and 
disinfected after each use in order to prevent cross 
contamination. 


6.1.3 A vehicle used for the transport of condemned 
material may not be used for any other purpose. 
However, after cleaning and disinfection the vehicle 
may be used for the transport of inedible material. 


6.1.4 A vehicle may only be used for the transport of 
condemned material if, 


a) the load space is lockable, theft proof and 
sealable; 

b) the internal surface is leak proof and 
constructed of durable material; and 

c) floor is provided at its lowest point with a 
drain pipe capable of being securely closed 
by a screw valve. 


6.1.5 The load space of the vehicle used for transporting 
material to a sterilizing plant shall be cleaned and 
disinfected to the satisfaction of a inspector at the end 
of each delivery, at a place specially constructed for 
the purpose. 


6.1.6 During transportation, a commercial document 
or in certain circumstances, a veterinary certificate shall 
accompany the slaughterhouse by-products. 


6.1.7 The commercial document shall record the date 
on which the material is taken from the premises; a 
description of the material; the quantity of the material, 
in weight or volume; the place of origin of the material; 
the name and address of the transporter; the name and 
address of the receiver and its approval or registration 
number, if appropriate; and the approval or registration 
number of the plant of origin, if appropriate. 


6.1.8 Records and related commercial documents or 
veterinary certificates shall be retained for at least two 
years. 


6.2 General Requirements for Collection and 
Identification of Slaughterhouse By-Products 


6.2.1 Slaughterhouse by-products shall be collected, 
identified and disposed off without undue delay, in 
order to prevent risks arising to public and animal 
health. ‘Undue delay’ will depend on a case-by-case 
assessment depending on the type of slaughterhouse 
by-products involved. 


6.2.2 Slaughterhouse by-products shall be collected 
and identified by category. Mixtures of different 
categories of slaughterhouse by-products shall be 
treated as the higher or highest risk of the mixed 


materials, for example if Category 3 material is mixed 
with Category 2 material, all the material shall be 
disposed of as Category 2 material. 


6.2.3 Category 3 material shall be labelled ‘not for 
human consumption’. Category 2 material shall be 
labelled ‘not for human/animal consumption’. 
Category | material shall be labelled as ‘for disposal 
only’. Specific types of animal by-products such as 
collagen, blood products may require further labelling. 


6.3 Requirements for Preservation, handling and 
Transport of Glands 


6.3.1 Preservation 


6.3.1.1 The best method of preservation applicable to 
all glands is freezing, and the collection of glands 
should therefore only be attempted where it is possible 
to freeze them within 1h of collection, and to deliver 
them in a frozen condition to the pharmaceutical 
producer. A freezer does not have to be a large 
installation. It is sufficient, if it is the size of a domestic 
refrigerator, provided the necessary temperature may 
be achieved rapidly. 


6.3.1.2 Some glands may be preserved by chemical 
means, as, for instance, by immersing 1 kg of the gland 
in 1 litre of acetone. After 24 h, the glands shall be 
removed and placed in fresh acetone. Chemical 
methods of conserving glands should only be used 
after previous consultation with the manufacturers, 
when they will indicate whether and how they wish 
the glands to be chemically treated; 1 percent phenol 
or 2 percent formalin are sometimes recommended. 


6.3.1.3 The third method of preservation is by vacuum- 
drying. This method allows the gland to be dried at a 
temperature low enough not to destroy its value for 
pharmaceuticals. Even glands which have been 
vacuum-dried shall reach the manufacturer quickly, 
as the fat contained by the dried material may become 
rancid and influence the potency of the product. Only 
certain glands may be dried, and here again the 
manufacturers usually provide their own type of drying 
equipment. 


6.3.2 Collection 


6.3.2.1 Only glands from healthy animals should be 
collected. Glands should never be in direct contact with 
water because the active principals may be partially or 
totally leached out. The collection of small glands is 
best done into a glass or metal container surrounded 
by crushed ice and fitted into a larger container. 


6.3.2.2 Trimming of ligaments, blood vessels, meat, 
fat or any other foreign tissue shall be done with a pair 
of scissors and forceps as soon as the glands are 
removed from the body. Sometimes it is better to trim 
after glands have been chilled. 


6.3.2.3 Quick freezing is essential; it is not enough to 
put the glands in a cooler; they shall be deep-frozen at 
a temperature not lower than 0°C. For freezing the 
glands should be spread on trays, so that as far as 
possible one does not touch another. 


6.3.3 Handling 
6.3.3.1 Collection 


The greatest care should be taken that glands do not 
touch water nor get contaminated with faeces, gall or 
other impurities. The glands shall reach the 
manufacturer in a condition in which it left the freshly 
slaughtered animal. It should be of a bright pink or 
red colour. 


6.3.3.2 Trimming 


All foreign tissues, such as fat, veins, ligaments, etc, 
should be cut off immediately. 


6.3.3.3 Chilling 


If the gland is left at room temperature, the hormones 
will be destroyed within 2h to 3h by enzymes which 
are present in it. Only chilling and subsequent freezing 
can prevent this action. The glands should be collected 
into a vessel which is immersed in a larger container 
holding ice. In no circumstances should the gland itself 
be put direct on ice, since water leaches out the active 
principals from the gland. 


6.3.3.4 Freezing 


Glands are spread out individually on chilled metal 
trays, so that they do not touch one another. This is to 
prevent the formation of slabs or blocks of glands. 
Individual separate glands freeze faster throughout and 
therefore destructive activity is stopped more rapidly. 


6.3.3.5 Packing 


The glands should not be subjected to rough handling 
before they reach their destination and therefore heavy 
wooden boxes, barrels or strong fibre boxes should be 
used. The containers should first be lined with several 
layers of wax paper, as protection against thawing. 
Each container should be tightly filled to the top to 
give the minimum air space. A double box may be 
used, for instance, a corrugated fiber box inside a 
wooden one. 


6.3.3.6 Marking 


Every package shall be marked with the producer’s 
name, the type of product, and the gross and net weights 
clearly stenciled. 


6.3.4 General 


The packages shall be transported under refrigerated 
conditions from the moment they leave the freezer until 


IS 8895 : 2015 


they reach the manufacturer, apart from the short 
periods necessary for loading and unloading. 


6.4 Requirements for Preservation, Handling and 
Transport of Edible Organs Such as Liver, Heart, 
Spleen, Kidney, Lungs, Testicles, Stomach Intestine, 
Brain, Bones and Blood 


6.4.1 The edible offals collected from healthy animals 
passed after post mortem inspection, should be 
hygienically processed and preserved without any 
contamination, if necessary with any pre-treatment and 
stored at chiller (0-4°C) or freezer (-18°C) depending 
upon their usage. 


6.4.2 The organs should not be subjected to rough 
handling before they reach their destination. The 
greatest care should be taken that they do not have 
contact with water nor get contaminated with faeces, 
gall or other impurities. All foreign tissues, such as 
fat, etc, should be removed and spread out individually 
on chilled metal trays, so that they do not touch one 
another. The material may be transported in tightly 
packed boxes/containers to protect from thawing with 
minimum air space. Every package shall have the 
producer’s name, the type of product, and the gross 
and net weights clearly stenciled. 


6.4.3 The best method of preservation applicable to 
all edible organs is freezing; it should be done within 
lh of collection, and to deliver them in a frozen 
condition. 


6.5 Disposal and Use of Slaughterhouse By-Products 
6.5.1 Disposal of Category 1 Material 


As the highest risk material, this material shall be 
destroyed by incineration, or by rendering followed 
by incineration. These are the only options for 
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) 
suspects. Other Category | material is also permitted 
to be pressure-rendered and disposed of in an 
authorized landfill site. 


6.5.2 Disposal and Use of Category 2 Material 


6.5.2.1 The basic options of incineration and rendering 
followed by incineration are permitted, as with 
Category 1 material. All Category 2 material may also 
be rendered and disposed of in an authorized landfill 
site, or used as fuel for combustion. Category 2 material 
may also be used for the manufacture of derived 
products. 


6.5.2.2 Category 2 material may be rendered and 
then used for the production of organic fertilizers. It 
may also be rendered and used in an approved 
composting or anaerobic digestion plant. A very limited 
number of Category 2 materials (manure, digestive 


IS 8895 : 2015 


tract content) may be applied directly to land without 
processing provided there is no risk of transmitting a 
disease. 


6.5.3 Disposal and Use of Category 3 Material 


6.5.3.1 As low-risk material, there are a much wider 
range of options for use and disposal of Category 3 
material compared to higher risk material. Category 3 
material may like Category 1 and Category 2 material 
be incinerated, or rendered followed by incineration. 
Category 3 material may also be rendered followed by 
disposal in an authorized landfill (unlike higher 


category material this does not have to be pressure 
rendering) or used as fuel for combustion and for 
manufacture of derived products. 


6.5.3.2 Category 3 material may be rendered for the 
production of pet food and organic fertilizers. Rendered 
Category 3 material may also be used in the production 
of animal feeding stuffs, though transmissible 
spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) related 
restrictions on the feeding of processed animal protein 
severely restrict this. Category 3 material may be used 
directly in approved composting or anaerobic digestion 
plants. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 18 (2875). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


