INA WAP IS 4410 (Part 5) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Act are oars a Seifert 
EICHE 


WET 5 TEL 


( FAT FRAT ) 


Glossary of Terms Relating to 
River Valley Projects 


PART 5 Canals 
( Second Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 
© BIS 2023 
acer HAR aT 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WO, 9 TE ME AH AM, ay feet - 110002 
ee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2023 Price Group 7 


Canals and Cross Drainage Works Sectional Committee, WRD 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 5) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Canals and Cross Drainage Works Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division 
Council. 


The major concern with the stilling basin type dissipator is more of structural strength rather than its hydraulic 
efficiency. Experiences had shown many examples of stilling basins suffering serious damages due to uplift, 
vibration, cavitation, and abrasion, all having their origin in the internal structure of hydraulic jump. The other 
relevant factors like determination of thickness of concrete floor of stilling basin, divide walls etc. have been 
covered in other standards pertaining to the structural designs of spillways. 


A number of Indian Standards have been published covering various aspects of river valley projects. These 
standards include various technical terms and the precise definitions of these technical terms is required to avoid 
ambiguity in their interpretation. To achieve this objective, the Sectional Committee brought out Indian Standards 
on glossary of terms related to Canals and Cross Drainage Works which have been published in twenty-three 
parts. This part (Part 5) of IS 4410 contains definitions of terms relating to the canals, sections of canals and their 
lining. 

This standard was first issued in 1967. In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to 
international coordination among standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating 
it to the practices in the field in this country. Considerable assistance was also derived from ‘Multilingual technical 
dictionary on irrigation and drainage’ published by the International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage 
(ICID) and other sources. The first revision of this standard was published in 1982 to include certain additional 
terms in light of experiences gained over the period. 


This second revision of the standard has been brought out to bring the standard in the latest style and format of 
the Indian Standards. In the revision of this standard, assistance has been derived from the definitions based on 
the revision of ICID Multilingual technical dictionary on irrigation and drainage published in 2009. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test or analysis, should be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 
: 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4410 (Part 5) : 2023 


Indian Standard 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO RIVER VALLEY 
PROJECTS 
PART 5 CANALS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 5) contains definitions of terms 
relating to canal system, types of canals, design of 
canals, cross section of canals, longitudinal section 
of canals and canal lining. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS Title 

IS 196 : Atmospheric Conditions for 

1966 testing 

IS 1191 : Hydrometry — Vocabulary and 

2016 symbols (third revision) 

IS 2951 Recommendation for estimation 

(Part 1) : of flow of liquids in closed 

1965 conduits: Part 1 Head loss in 
straight pipes due to frictional 
resistance 

IS 6339 : Hydrometry — Sediment in 

2013 streams and canals — 


Determination of concentration, 
particle size distribution and 
relative density (first revision) 


3 CANAL SYSTEM 
3.1 Branch Canal 


A canal receiving its supply from the main canal 
and acting as feeder for distributaries. It is also 
called ‘Lateral’. 


3.2 Canal 


An artificial open channel carrying water including 
situations passing through tunnels enroute. 


3.3 Contour Canal 


A canal which is aligned nearly parallel to the 
contour of the area. 


3.4 Distributary 


A channel receiving its supply from main or the 


branch canal. It supplies water to minors and 
watercourses. It will be called a ‘Major 
Distributary’ when it supplies water to another 
distributary called a Minor Distributary. 


3.5 Escape 


A channel through which surplus or excess water 
may be removed from a canal, stream or reservoir. 


3.6 Field Channel 


The channel that conveys water from water courses 
to the cultivator’s fields. 


3.7 Main Canal 


The principal channel of a canal system off-taking 
from a river or a reservoir or a feeder and also 
called as ‘Main Line’. 


3.8 Ridge Canal or Watershed Canal 


A canal in level ground or in sloping ground 
following, more or less, the ridge that divides the 
terrain into two or more gently sloping planes, 
making irrigation and distribution of water possible 
on both sides of the canal. 


3.9 Tail Escape 


An escape at the end of a channel in the distribution 
system intended to convey the surplus or unused 
water to a natural drain, depression, or other 
suitable place. It is also called ‘waste channel’. 


3.10 Water Course 


A channel taking off water from a branch canal, 
distributary or a minor to a delineated block of 
land. It may be built at Government expenses or by 
the beneficiary agriculturists depending upon the 
local irrigation practice and the area irrigated. 


4 TYPES OF CANALS 
4.1 Bypass Channel 


A canal taking off from any source and returning 
back to the same source, further downstream after 
bypassing a canal power house. 


4.2 Diversion Channel 


A canal constructed to divert water from the main 
river. It is also known as link canal. 


IS 4410 (Part 5) : 2023 


4.3 Feeder Canal 


A canal meant primarily either to convey water 
from one source of supply or system to another, or 
within the same system (also called Link Canal) or 
to a hydro power plant. 


4.4 Hydel Channel 


A canal or a reach of a canal, which is meant 
primarily to convey water to a power house. Also 
referred as power channel. 


4.5 Inundation Canal 


A canal taking off from a river in flood without any 
permanent diversion or control structure across the 
river. 


4.6 Irrigation Canal 


A canal constructed primarily for conveying water 
from the source of supply to areas in which it can 
be used for irrigation. 


4.7 Multipurpose Canal 


A canal meant for two or more purposes such as 
irrigation, navigation, power generation, domestic 
and industrial water supply. 


4.8 Navigation Canal 


A canal which is primarily used for transportation 
by water. 


4.9 Non-perennial Canal 


A canal meant to irrigate during only part of the 
year or particular season of the year. It is also called 
seasonal canal. 


4.10 Perennial Canal 
A canal which carries water throughout the year. 
4.11 Permanent Canal 


A canal having a regular channel and masonry 
works for regulation and distribution, and with an 
assured source of supply. 


4.12 Side Canal 


A canal adjacent to the parent canal to irrigate 
areas where direct irrigation from the parent canal 
is not feasible. 


4.13 Tail Race Channel 


A canal carrying tail water from a power house, 
back into the river. 


5 TERMS RELATING TO DESIGN OF 
CANAL 


5.1 Afflux 


The upstream rise of water level above the normal 
surface of water in a canal or drainage channel, 
caused by an obstruction resulting in contraction of 
normal waterway. 


5.2 Apron 


A protective layer of stone or other material 
extending out from a structure on or in the bed of a 
channel or situated at some other location in the 
bed of a channel where it is desired to prevent 
erosion and/or hydrostatic uplift pressure. 


5.3 Bed Load 


The sediment in almost continuous contact with the 
bed, carried forward by rolling, sliding or hopping. 
Bed load can be subdivided into contact load and 
saltation load. 


5.4 Bed Load Equation 


The general relationship between bed load rate, 
flow condition and composition of the bed 
material. 


5.5 Bed Load Function 


The rates at which various discharges will 
transport the different grain sizes of the bed 
material in a given channel. 


5.6 Bed Slope 


The difference in elevation of the bed per unit 
horizontal distance measured along the channel. 


5.7 Canal Drop or Canal Fall 


A structure designed to secure lowering of the 
water surface in a channel in a short distance and 
safe destruction of the liberated surplus energy. It 
may be vertical or inclined; in the latter case, it is 
usually called a chute. 


5.8 Capacity Factor 


The ratio of the mean supply to the authorized full 
supply or capacity (see 6.21). 


5.9 Coefficient of Contraction 


Ratio between the decreased length, area of 
section, or volume and the original length, area of 
section, or volume. 


5.10 Coefficient of Discharge 


A coefficient by which the theoretical discharge of 

water through orifices, weirs or other hydraulic 
structures, must be multiplied to obtain the actual 
discharge. 


5.11 Coefficient of Roughness 


A factor, in the Chezy, Darcy Weisbach, Hazen- 
Williams, Kutter, Manning and ether formulae for 
computing the average velocity of flow of water in 
a conduit or channel which represents the effect of 
roughness of the confining material upon the 
energy losses in the flowing water. It is also called 
as coefficient of Rugosity or Rugosity Factor. This 
is a dimensional parameter. 


5.12 Coefficient of Velocity 


The ratio of the actual velocity to the theoretical 
velocity. 


5.13 Contact Load 


The sediment that is rolling or sliding along the bed 
of the stream in substantially continuous contact 
with the bed. 


5.14 Critical Depth 
The depth of flow at which critical flow occurs. 
5.15 Critical Flow 


a) The flow in which the specific energy 
head is minimum for a given discharge; 
under this condition the Froude number 
will be equal to unity and surface 
disturbances will not just travel upstream; 
and 


b) A condition of flow where the mean 
velocity is at one of the critical values, 
ordinarily at Belanger's critical velocity. 
Another important usage is in reference to 
Reynold's critical velocity at which the 
flow changes from stream line or non- 
turbulent to turbulent flow. 


5.15.1 Belanger's Critical Flow 


That flow in open channel at which the specific 
energy content of the liquid flowing is minimum. 


5.15.2 Reynold's Critical Flow 


Flow at that velocity which distinguishes turbulent 
motion from viscous motion. 


5.16 Critical Tractive Force 


Tractive force which starts general movement of 
the bed material. 


5.17 Critical Velocity 
5.17.1 Belanger's Critical Velocity 


The velocity in a channel at which the specific 
energy content of the liquid flowing is minimum. 


5.17.2 Upper Critical Velocity 

The velocity at which eddy formation is first noted. 
5.17.3 Lower Critical Velocity 

The velocity at which eddies in the flow die out. 
5.17.4 Reynold's Critical Velocity 


The velocity in a conduit or channel at which flow 
changes from laminar to turbulent. 


IS 4410 (Part 5) : 2023 


5.18 Crop Ratio 


The crop ratio is defined as the ratio between the 
anticipated crop areas to be irrigated to the total 
cropped area during a year. 


5.19 Culturable Commanded Area 


The gross area commanded less the area of 
unculturable land included in the gross area. 


5.20 Datum 


An arbitrary horizontal line from which heights 
and depths are reckoned, as in a longitudinal 
section of a canal or railroad. 


5.21 Delta 


A term equivalent to duty of water when the latter 
is expressed in water depth units and refers to 
irrigation projects under operation. It is stated with 
reference to the place at which it is measured to 
reckoned, that is, delta at farm, delta at outlet, head 
of watercourse, or lateral head, delta at distributary 
head, delta at head of main canal. 


5.22 Discharge 


The volume of water flowing through a cross 
section of a channel in a unit time. It is also called 
as rate of flow. 


5.23 Drowning Rate 


Ratio of tail-water elevation to headwater 
elevation, when both are higher than the crest of the 
structure, the elevations being measured with the 
crest as reference datum; distance upstream and 
downstream from the crest at which head-water 
and tail-water elevations are to be measured should 
be such that levels are not influenced by the 
structure. 


5.24 Duty or Duty of Water 


The relation between the area irrigated, or to be 
irrigated, and the quantity of water used, or 
required, to irrigate it for the purpose of maturing 
its crop. Duty stated with reference to a base period 
and the place of its reckoning or measurement. It is 
expressed in a number of ways as given below: 


a) Water depth units; 

b) Depth area units per unit area; 

c) Area per unit rate of flow or per unit volume 
of water; and 

d) Volume of water or rate of flow per unit 
area. 


IS 4410 (Part 5) : 2023 


5.25 End Sills 


A vertical, stepped, sloped or dentated wall 
constructed at the downstream of the stilling basin. 


5.26 Energy Gradient 


The difference in total energy head per unit 
horizontal distance measured in the direction of 
flow. 


5.27 Equilibrium 


An ideal condition towards which a channel is ever 
tending to develop. A channel is in equilibrium 
when the energy available due to the discharge and 
slope is just sufficient to carry the sediment charge 
without any tendency for the stream or channel to 
change its shape or slope; this entails every part of 
the cross-section being in equilibrium. In nature 
this is never fully attained. 


5.28 Equivalent Roughness 


It is the sand roughness which will yield the same 
limiting value of 'f' (Darcy Weisbach resistance 
coefficient) as that of the given channel (or pipe). 


5.29 Flow 


The movement of a volume of water. 


NOTE — This term should not be confused with 
‘Discharge’ or ‘Rate of Flow’. 


5.30 Fluming 


The purposeful reduction of waterway of a channel 
below the normal either by a flume or a flumed 
structure. 


5.31 Fluming Ratio 


The ratio of the clear waterway of the throat of a 
flume or flumed structure to the normal channel 
width [see IS 4410 (Part 15/Sec 3)]. 


5.32 Friction Head (or Loss) 


The head or energy lost at the result of the 
disturbances set up by the contact between a 
moving stream of water and its containing channel. 


5.33 Friction Slope 


The friction head lost per unit length of channel. 
For most conditions of flow the friction slope 
coincides with the energy gradient, but where a 
distinction is made between energy loss due to 
bends, expansions, impacts, etc., a distinction must 
also be made between the friction slope and the 
energy gradient. Friction slope is equal to the bed 
surface slope only for uniform flow in open 
channels. 


5.34 Free Flow 


A condition of flow through or over a structure 
where such flow is not affected by submergence of 
the existence of tail water. 


5.35 Free Surface 


The surface of a fluid in contact with the 
atmosphere. 


5.36 Froude Number 


The dimensionless number obtained by dividing 
the mean velocity by the propagation velocity of an 
infinitely small surface wave. 


5.37 General Movement of Bed Load 


The stage of movement when all sediment sizes of 
the bed material are in motion and the movement is 
strong enough to develop bed configuration. 


5.38 Graded Sediment 


A sediment having a uniform or equable 
distribution of particles from coarse to fine. 


5.39 Gross Area 


The total area within the extreme limits set for 
irrigation by a project system or canal. 


5.40 Ground Water Table 


Topmost surface of underground water layers 
excluding the capillary fringe (which is apparent as 
static water level where an open well or pit is dug). 


5.41 Isovels 

Lines joining points of equal velocity. 

5.42 Laminar Flow — see IS 2951 (Part 1). 
5.43 Mean Depth — see IS 1191. 

5.44 Mean Velocity — see IS 1191. 

5.45 Non eroding Velocity 


The velocity corresponding to a particular silt 
grade that will not cause any scour. 


5.46 Non silting Velocity 


The velocity corresponding to a particular silt 
grade that will not allow silt to deposit. 


5.47 Non uniform Flow 


Open channel flow is said to be non-uniform ifthe 
depth of flow is not the same at every section ofthe 
channel. 


5.48 Open Channel — see IS 1191. 


5.49 Permissible Velocity 


The highest velocity at which water may be carried 
within permissible scour in a channel. 


5.50 Point Velocity 


The mean velocity of water at a point in an open 
channel flow or in conduit flow. 


5.51 Reach 


A length of open channel between two defined 
cross sections. 


5.52 Regime Silt Charge 


The minimum transported load consistent with a 
fully active bed. 


5.53 Reynold's Number — see IS 2951 (Part 1). 
5.54 Rough Boundary 


A solid boundary to the fluid in which the surface 
irregularities project through the laminar layer and 
cause turbulence. 


5.55 Roughness Reynold's Number 


A dimensionless parameter employed in problems 
of unsteady open channel flow for ensuring that the 
same type of turbulent flow is obtained in the 
model as prevails in the prototype, usually 
expressed as: 


R 
Rk =k = 
where 
= Height of equivalent sand 
k roughness; 
= Kinematic viscosity; and 
A = Shear velocity 


5.56 Saltation 


Stream transportation of sediments by intermittent 
leaps or bounds. 


5.57 Saltation Layer 


The zone above the bed within which phenomenon 
of saltation occurs in flowing channel. 


5.58 Saltation Load 


The sediment bouncing and hopping along the bed 
of the channel or moved directly or indirectly by 
the impact of the bouncing particles. 


5.59 Saltation Load Discharge 


The amount of material moved in unit time due to 
saltation. 


IS 4410 (Part 5) : 2023 


5.60 Sedimentation 


The process of deposition and subsidence of 
suspended matter carried by water, or other liquids, 
by gravity. It is usually accomplished by reducing 
the velocity of the liquid below the point where it 
can transport the suspended material. 


5.61 Sediment Diameter 
The following definitions are applicable: 
a) Nominal Diameter — see IS 6339 


b) Fall Diameter — Diameter of a sphere 
of specific gravity 2.65 and having the 
same standard full velocity as that of the 
particle (in which case, the aspect of fall, 
namely, flaky, disc, needle like, etc, must 
be specified). The standard fall velocity is 
the terminal fall velocity in quiescent 
distilled water of infinite extent and at 
24 °C. 


c) Sedimentation Diameter — Diameter of 
the sphere of the same specific gravity and 
the same terminal settling velocity as the 
given particle in the same sedimentation 
fluid under the same condition. 


d) Sieve Diameter — The size of the (square 
shaped) sieve opening through which a 
given particle will just pass (defined 
generally only for particles larger than 
0:062 5 mm). 


NOTE — Sieve diameter is nearly equal to 0.9 times 
nominal diameter. 


5.62 Sediment Charge 


The ratio of the mean sediment discharge to the 
water discharge. It is ordinarily expressed in parts 
by weight of sediment per unit volume of water. 


5.63 Sedimentation Concentration 


The ratio of the weight of the sediment in a water 
sediment mixture to the total weight of the mixture 
expressed as a percentage. 


5.64 Sediment Discharge Intensity 


The weight of sediment transported per unit time 
per unit width. 


5.65 Sediment Grade 


The particle size or the weighted mean diameter of 
the particle sizes which constitute the sediment 
sample. The spread of the sizes and the uniformity 
coefficient are also relevant. 


IS 4410 (Part 5) : 2023 


5.66 Sediment Transport Function or Sediment 
Lift Function 


The relationship which gives the capacity of the 
stream to transport the various sediment sizes of 
the bed material at different flows. 


5.67 Sediment Sphericity (Shape Factor) 


The ratio of the surface area of a sphere having the 
same volume as that of the particle to the surface 
area of the particle. 


5.68 Side Slope 


The tangent of the angle which the side of the open 
channel makes with the horizontal. The tangent of 
the angle or the side slope may be expressed as the 
number of units vertically on/in number of 
horizontal units. 


5.69 Silt Factor 


A factor f in the Lacey's formula and is given by 
the following equation in regime channels: 


f =1.16Vmr 


where 
mr = Average particle size in mm. 


5.70 Sluice 


a) A conduit, fitted with a gate, for carrying 
water at high velocity. 

b) An opening in a structure through which 
anything flows, for example, water, ice or 
debris. 

c) To cause water to flow at high velocities 
for wastage, for purpose of excavation, 
ejecting debris, transporting ways, etc. 


5.71 Smooth Boundary 


A surface whose equivalent roughness is 
sufficiently submerged under the laminar sub layer 
(about one-fourth is the ratio adopted). 


5.72 Smooth Channel Flow 


A flow in an open channel where the surface 
behaves hydraulically smooth. 


5.73 Specific Bed Load Transport 


The weight of the transported quantity of bed - load 
per unit width of bed per second, weighed dry or 
under water. 


5.74 Specific Energy 


The sum of elevation of free surface above the bed 
and the velocity head at that section, expressed in 
units of length. 


5.75 Stable Channel 


Channel in which the bed and the sides remain 
sensibly stable over a substantial period of time in 
the control reach, and in which scour and 
deposition during the rising and falling floods is 
inappreciable. 


5.76 Standard Fall Velocity 


The average fall velocity that the particle would 
finally attain if falling alone in quiescent distilled 
water of infinite extent and at a temperature 
without boundary effect as specified in IS 196. It is 
also called as terminal velocity. 


5.77 Static Threshold Discharge 


The discharge in a channel, above which bed 
material moves. 


5.78 Static Threshold Discharge Intensity 


The critical discharge intensity per unit width of 
channel when sediment begins to move. 


5.79 Steady Flow 


A condition of flow with constant mean velocity at 
every point of flow. 


5.80 Sub-critical Flow 


The flow in which the Froude's number is less than 
unity. 
5.81 Super Critical Flow or Hyper-Critical Flow 


The flow in which the Froude's number is greater 
than unity. 


5.82 Suspended Load 


That part of the sediment load of a stream, which 
remains in suspension in the flowing water for 
considerable periods of time without contact with 
the stream bed. 


5.83 Surface Velocity — see IS 1191. 
5.84 Threshold Velocity 


The velocity required to move material of a given 
size. It is also called ‘Competent Velocity’ or 
‘Critical Velocity’. 


5.85 Time-Integration Sampling 


The process of sampling over a considerable period 
of time to eliminate the variation of the sediment 
concentration with time. 


5.86 Total Energy Head 


a) The sum of kinetic, potential and pressure 
energies and is given by: 


where 


P = Pressure at a point under reference; 

p = Density of the fluid; 

a = Energy correction factor; 

g = Acceleration due to gravity; 

U = Mean velocity at section; and 

Z Elevation of the point under reference 
above an assumed datum assumed at 
the same plane for longitudinal as well 
as cross-sectional comparisons. 


5.87 Total Energy Line 


The plot of the total (energy) head in the direction 
of flow. 


5.88 Force 


The force of running water exerted on the wetted 
perimeter of a channel bed in the tangential 
direction 


5.89 Turbulence 


This is a condition of flow in which various 
quantities, such as local velocity, pressure, etc, 
show a random variation with space and time so 
that statistically distinct average values can be 
obtained. 


5.90 Turbulent Flow — see IS 2951 (Part 1) 
5.91 Uniform Flow 


Open channel flow is said to be uniform if the 
depth of flow is the same at all sections of the 
channel. A uniform flow is necessarily steady. 


5.92 Unstable Channel 


An unlined earthen channel in which silting and/or 
scouring occurs. 


5.93 Unsteady Flow 


In unsteady flow, either the magnitude or the 
direction of the velocity or both together, will vary 
with time. 


DOWLA 


BOUNDARY 
TRENCH 


BERM 


CANAL LAND WIDTH 


IS 4410 (Part 5) : 2023 


5.94 Velocity Component 


Rate of movement past a point in a specified 
direction. The maximum magnitude of this defines 
the velocity. 


5.95 Velocity Head 


The energy per unit weight expressed as a head is 
obtained by dividing the square of the velocity by 
twice the acceleration due to gravity. 


5.96 Velocity of Retreat — see IS 1191. 
5.97 Water Logging 


Condition in an area representing the general rise 
of ground water table encroaching upon the root 
zone of crops normally grown in that area; 
generally referred to the occurrence of water table 
within 1.5 metre of the general ground level. 


5.98 Water Sediment Complex 


Mixture of water and sediment in channels. This is 
called two-phase flow. 


5.99 Wetted Perimeter 


The length of the wetted boundary of a channel at 
a specified section for single channel flows. 


6 TERMS RELATING TO CROSS-SECTION 
OF CANAL 


6.1 Area — Cross-sectional area of a channel. 
6.2 Bed Bars 


Permanent structures constructed at intervals along 
the centre line or edge of the canal bed to indicate 
the design level and/or bed width (see Fig. 1). 


6.3 Bed Width or Bottom Width 


The distance between the extreme points at the 
bottom of a cross section (see Fig. 1). 


BOUNDARY 
STONE 


SPOIL BANK 


SERVICE 


FIG. 1 A TYPICAL CROSS — SECTION OF A CANAL 


IS 4410 (Part 5) : 2023 


6.4 Balancing Depth 


Depth of a canal cross section such that the quantity 
of excavation is equal to the earthwork required for 
banks, generally applicable only to reaches. 


BENCHING 


6.5 Benching 


Ledges shaped like steps or terrace formed below 
beds of canals and under the seats of banks in high 
filling for proper-bonding of earthwork with the 
natural ground (see Fig. 2). 


SATURATION 
LINE 


COUNTER 
BERM 


FIG. 2 CANAL IN FILLING 


6.6 Berm or Inside Berm 


The level surface left between the upper edge of the 
canal side slope and the inner toe of bank (see 
Fig. 1). 


6.7 Borrow Pit 
A pit excavated for obtaining embankment material. 
6.8 Boundary Stones 


Stone marking boundary of land permanently 
acquired on either side of the canal (see Fig. 1). 


6.9 Boundary Trench or Boundary Drain 


A trench excavated near the outer extremity of land 
permanently acquired on either side of the canal (see 
Fig. 1). 


6.10 Canal in Filling 


A canal in which the bed level is at or above ground 
level (see Fig. 2). 


6.11 Canal in Cutting 


A canal in which the full supply level is at or below 
the natural ground level. 


6.12 Canal Land Width 


The width of land acquired for construction of a canal 
(see Fig. 1). 


6.13 Counter Berm 


An extra layer of earth (sloping, horizontal or broken 
horizontal steps) provided near the toe of outer slopes 
(toe away from the canal section) of banks to cover 
the line of saturation when it cuts the slope above the 
ground level (see Fig. 2). 


6.14 Core Wall 


A wall of concrete, masonry, sheet piling, puddle clay 
or some other impervious material, built inside a bank 
to reduce seepage and also to provide greater shear 
resistance. 


6.15 Cross-Section 
A vertical section of the canal at right angles to the 
centre line or mean directions of flow. 


6.16 Cross-Sectional Shape 


The geometric shape of conveyance conduit, for 
example, rectangular, trapezoidal, semicircular and 
circular. 


6.17 Cut-Off Wall 


A wall or diaphragm of concrete or steel, or a trench 
filled with impervious earth or grout curtain, 
extending into the foundation of a clam and either 
making a watertight connection with the dam or its 
impervious facing or extending into the body of the 
dam a considerable distance; its purpose is the 
prevention or reduction of passage of water under the 
dam and the foundation material or through the upper 
layers of the foundation material. 


6.18 Depth 


The vertical distance between the bed of a canal and 
the water surface line. 


6.19 Dowel (Dowla) 


A guard bank either on canal ride or on both edges 
primarily constructed to prevent cutting up of the 
slope due to rain and to keep the limits of the 
boundary road or inspection path and the inside slope 
of the bank discernible (see Fig. 1). 


6.20 Free Board 


The vertical distance between the full supply line ina 
channel and the top of the containing banks which is 
provided so that the water does not overtop the 
confining structure (see Fig. 1). 


6.21 Full Supply Level 


The level describing the water surface elevation under 
steady flow condition of maximum normal discharge 
(see Fig. 1). The discharge so carried is full supply 
discharge. 


6.22 Hydraulic Gradient 


The decrease in hydraulic head per unit distance in the 
soil in the direction of flow. 


6.23 Hydraulic Mean Depth or Mean Radius 


The value obtained by dividing the cross-sectional 
area of flowing water in a channel, by the wetted 
perimeter in the case of single flow sections. 


6.24 Inspection Road or Inspection Path 


Road either on the top of bank or on the berm or on 
the ground beyond the bank for inspection purpose 
(see Fig. 1). 


6.25 Non-inspection Bank 


Bank of a canal which does not provide for an 
inspection path. 


6.26 Sand Core 


Sand filled depth in a bank to prevent the burrowing 
animals making holes. 


6.27 Saturation Line 


Line across the banks on either side of a canal in 
filling or partly in filling and partly in cutting up to 
which the banks get saturated after the canal has been 
running for some time (see Fig. 2). It is also called 
‘Line of Saturation’, ‘Percolation Line’ or ‘Hydraulic 
Grade Line’. 


6.28 Scour Depth (d) 


It is the calculated depth of normal scour in a river or 
channel, below the water surface level in the river or 
channel. It has been conventionally expressed as: 


1/3 
= 
Geis 
E 


q = Discharge intensity per unit width; and 
f = Silt factor. 


6.29 Service Road 


where 


Road on or outside the canal bank. It may serve for 
inspection purposes and also could be opened to 
public on a controlled basis (see Fig. 1). 


IS 4410 (Part 5) : 2023 


6.30 Slip Failure 


Slipping on sliding of an embankment on the side of 
a canal or any water retaining earth structure either 
due to instability caused like by sudden drawdown of 
the channel or water surface or for any other reason. 


6.31 Spoil Bank 


A bank composed of waste earth which has been 
excavated (see Fig. 1). It is also called as Waste Bank. 


6.32 Surface Width 


The width of the cross-section at the water surface 
(see Fig. 1). 


7 TERMS RELATING TO LONGITUDINAL 
SECTION OF CANAL 


7.1 Alignment or Alinement 


The course in plan along which the centre line of a 
canal is located. 


7.2 Bed Levels 


Levels (designed or average of the cross section) of 
the bed of a canal at any point along the centre line. 


7.3 Capacity Statement 


In designing irrigation canals, a statement prepared 
for determining the discharge requirements of the 
canal reach by reach. It is also called as Draw-off 
Statement. 


7.4 Cut-Off Statement 


A statement showing cumulative discharges in a canal 
starting from the tail end, serially adding up the 
requirements of the distributaries including all 
admissible losses from the tail to head of the canal. 


7.5 Field Command 


The difference in water level, in a water course or 
lateral and the level of the highest point of piece of 
land irrigated. 


7.6 Head Reach 
The portion of a channel close to its off take. 
7.7 Longitudinal Section 


A vertical section of a canal along its alignment. It is 
also called ‘L-section’ or ‘profile map’. 


7.8 Longitudinal Water Surface Slope 


The inclination of the water surface expressed as 
change of elevation per unit of horizontal length of 
canal. 


7.9 Natural Surface Levels or Ground Levels 


Level of the natural ground surface with reference to 
a datum. 


IS 4410 (Part 5) : 2023 


7.10 Outlet Statement 


A statement showing the location capacity and the 
area irrigated by the outlets. 


7.11 Reduced Distance (RD) 


Distance of any point along the centre line of an 
irrigation canal measured from the point of its off take 
from a river, stream, reservoir or a parent canal. If the 
distance is in kilometers, it is sometimes also called 
as ‘Kilometrage’. 


7.12 Ridges 


The high line that divides the terrain into two or more 
gently sloping planes, making irrigation and 
distribution of water possible on both sides of the 
canal aligned more or less along it. 


7.13 Super elevation 


The difference in the bed levels between the two 
extreme points (inside and outside) of a canal on a 
curve. 


7.14 Tail — The end of a channel. 

7.15 Tail Reach — The last portion of a channel. 
8 TERMS RELATING TO CANAL LINING 
8.1 Backfill 


Earth or other material placed behind linings or 
structure. 


8.2 Bentonite Soil Lining 


It is a type of earthen lining, where the earth in the 
lining is stabilized by mixing with bentonite 
emulsion. 


8.3 Bitumen Cement Concrete Lining 


A type of lining in which concrete is a mixture of 
bitumen cement and aggregates graded from fillers 
and fine sand to coarse gravel. Usually the concrete is 
placed while hot and compacted immediately. It is 
also called asphaltic concrete lining or hot mix asphalt 
lining. 

8.4 Built-Up Lining 

A type of lining built- up in situ alternate layers of 


bitumen or asphalt and a supporting fabric, such as 
jute, cotton or fibre-glass. 


8.5 Buried Asphalt Membrane Lining (BAM) 


A type of lining constructed by spraying a special 
bitumen or asphalt mix over a smooth subgrade to 
form a uniform, flexible, watertight membrane, which 
is then covered with a protective layer of earth and/or 
gravel. 


8.6 Cement Concrete Lining 


A type of rigid, smooth lining made of a mixture of 
cement and graded sand and either gravel or crushed 


stone. The lining may or may not be reinforced. 
8.7 Cement Mortar Lining 


A type of rigid, smooth lining made of a mixture of 
cement: and sand. 


8.8 Compacted Earth Lining 


Compaction of natural sub grade soil below bed and 
sides of the canal with the object of utilizing the 
natural bond between soil particles to achieve a soil 
structure of greater strength. 


8.9 Contraction Joints 


Joints provided transversely and also longitudinally in 
canal lining and filled with elastic material to allow 
movement in the structure without developing cracks. 


8.10 Domali or Dwarf Wall 


Walls built at intervals beneath the lining on sides as 
well as under bed. 


8.11 Earthen Section 


Section of an irrigation channel having boundaries 
comprising of softer material of the lithosphere, such 
as silt and clay. 


8.12 Expansion Joint 


Joint provided both in the transverse and longitudinal 
directions on the canal lining wherever needed to 
countervail effects of climatic variations. 


8.13 Graded Filter 


Inverted filter made up of two or three layers of 
properly designed and graded sieved permeable 
material, placed at the back of the canal lining, to 
allow release of seepage pressure in the natural soil 
underneath, whenever the flow in the canal is 
decreased (or discontinued). 


8.14 Gunite 


Gunite is a proportional combination of sand and 
cement which is mixed and pneumatically conveyed 
in a dry state to a nozzle, where water is added 
immediately prior to expulsion. Generally employed 
to render impermeability. 


8.15 Hot Mix 


A term commonly applied to a dense graded mix of 
mineral aggregates, filler and bitumen; the mix must 
be laid whilst still hot. 


8.16 Lined Canal 


A canal whose sides and bottom have been lined or 
covered with some watertight material to 
substantially prevent leakage or erosion or to improve 
carrying capacity, or to minimize growth of 
vegetation within the waterway. 


8.17 Lined Section 
Section of an irrigation channel protected with lining. 
8.18 Lip Cutting 


It is the extra width provided at the inner face of the 

bank under compaction to allow for any lapses in 
compaction due to inability of sheep foot rollers to 
cover the edge of the bank. 


8.19 Lining 


A protective covering overall, or over a portion, of the 
perimeter of a channel to prevent seepage losses, to 
withstand pressure or to resist erosion. 


8.20 Made-Up Ground 


The ground made from soil deposited and 
consolidated for the purpose of filling a depression or 
raising the level as required. 


8.21 Masonry Lining 


A type of canal lining involving the use of bricks, 
tiles, concrete blocks and stones. According to the 
construction used, they are respectively called 'Brick 
Lining', ‘Tile Lining’, ‘Block Lining’ and ‘Stone 
Lining’. 

8.22 Polythene Lining 


The canal lining in which the polythene sheets from 
the basic impermeable layer, although it may have 
protective cones of earth or masonry. 


8.23 Pressure Relief Valve 


A valve provided in a canal lining which opens into 
the canal to relieve excess hydrostatic pressure behind 
the lining. The pressure-relief valve shall be such that 
it will operate at a differential pressure Jess than that 
which may be damaging to the lining with a factor of 
safety of two. 


8.24 Puddle 


A compact mass of soil, clay or their mixture, which 
has been compacted through the addition of water and 
rolling and tamping and made more or less 
impervious. 


8.25 Sandwich Brick Tile Lining 


Lining consisting of a layer of plaster on the sub grade 
and two layers of tiles with an impervious layer of 
cement mortar sandwiched in between. 


8.26 Seepage 


Flow of subsoil water through pores or fissures in the 
natural ground or rock under gravitational effects. 


8.27 Sedimentation Lining 


Lining of canals with bentonite or some chemicals 
which penetrate the canal bed material and seal it. 


IS 4410 (Part 5) : 2023 


8.28 Seal Coat 


A treatment of bitumen or outback applied to a 
surface to render it impervious or less pervious. 


8.29 Sealing Compound 


Sealing material placed at the construction or 
expansion joints of the canal lining, to prevent entry 
or exit of water through the joint. 


8.30 Shotcrete 


Pneumatically applied cement mortar consisting of an 
intimate mixture of cement, sand and water, shot into 
place by means of compressed air. 


8.31 Sleeper Beam 


Plain concrete beams placed under the construction or 
expansion joints in between the panels of cast in situ 
lining. 

8.32 Slip Form 


A steel plate curved up at the leading edge of the slip- 
form machine, extending across the bottom and up the 
slopes of the canal to assist in forming the finished 
surface of the lining. 


8.33 Slip Form Lining 


A concrete lining in which the cementing material is 
either bitumen or Portland cement which has been 
laid by means of a slip form. 


8.34 Shotcrete Lining — Lining of shotcrete. 
8.35 Soil Cement Linin 


Lining consisting of a mixture of cement and soil, that 
is, the soil replacing the sand and gravel used in 
concrete. 


8.36 Standard Soil-Cement 


Soil-cement which is mixed at optimum moisture for 
maximum compaction as determined by the proctor 
method. 


8.37 Subgrade 


The surface specially prepared on which lining shall 
be laid. 


8.38 Sudden Drawdown 
Very quick fall in the water level in the canal. 
8.39 Toe Wall 


A small plain concrete or masonry wall placed at the 
toe of the slope of concrete or tile linings or graded 
filters to prevent sliding of the lining or the filters and 
also to house the pressure release valves. 


8.40 Under Drainage 


Arrangements for proper drainage and release of 
seepage pressure from behind the canal linings. 


IS 4410 (Part 5) : 2023 


ANNEXA 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITON 


Canals and Cross Drainage Works Sectional Committee, WRD 13 


Organisation 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Bhakra Beas Management Board, Punjab 


Brahmaputra Board, Guwahati 


Central Board of Irrigation & Power, 
New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 


Central Water & Power Research Station, 
Pune 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Department of Water Resources, Govt of 
Punjab, India 

Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Irrigation Department Govt of Kerala 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


Irrigation& Water Resources Department, Govt of 


Haryana 


Irrigation & Water Resources Department, 
Govt of Uttar Pradesh 


Water Resources Department, Govt of Bihar 


Water Resources Department, Govt of 
Maharashtra 


Water Resources Department Govt of Rajasthan 


Narmada and Water Resources, Water Supply 


and Kalpasar Dept, Govt of Gujarat 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation 
Limited, Faridabad 


Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd, Gujarat 


Representative(s) 


SHRIS. K. SIBAL, (Chairperson) 
CHIEF ENGINEER DESIGN (N&W) 


DIRECTOR DESIGNS 
SENIOR DESIGNENGR-1 (Alternate) 


SHRI GAYA PRASAD SINGH 
SHRI SHYAMAL KR.DEKA (Alternate) 


DRG. P. PATEL 
MR. SUNIL SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRIN. V. MAHURE 
SHRI SHAHID NOOR (Alternate) 


DR NEENA ISAAC 
SHRI SURESH KUMAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI ARUN KUMAR (Alternate II) 


SHRI MANOJ KUMAR MEENA 
DIRECTOR (Alternate) 


SHRI H. S. MENDIRATTA 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER RC CDO (Alternate) 


DR B. R. CHAHAR 


PROF MANOJ KUMAR JAIN 
PROF S. K. SINGAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ALEX VARGHESE 
SHRI MANJU BALAKRISHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA 
SHRI NAVEEN SINGHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP TANEJA 
SHRI PARDEEP YADAV (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH KUMAR GUPTA 


SHRI UPENDRA NATH KUNWAR (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 


SHRI RAJENDRA PAWAR 
SHRI M. M. PARATE (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (ID & R) 
DIRECTOR (CANAL SID & R) (Alternate) 


SHRI A. M. BARVE 
SHRI B H CHAUHDHARY (Alternate I) 
SHRIP. V. VYAS (Alternate II) 


SHRI SHRISH DUBEY 
SHRI PRASHANT JAISWAL (Alternate I) 
SHRI DEEPAK VERMA (Alternate II) 


DIRECTOR (CANALS) 
CHIEF ENGINEER (DESIGN) (Alternate) 


Organisation 


Water Resources Department, Govt of 
Andhra Pradesh 


Water Resources Organisation Public Works 
Department (PWD), Govt of Tamil Nadu 


Wapcos Limited, Gurgaon 


Water Resources Department, Raipur 


Water Resources Department, Madhya 
Pradesh, Bhopal 


In Personal Capacity, (242, Siddartha Enclave, 
New Delhi — 110014) 


In Personal Capacity, (204, Raj Mahal 
Apartments, Devi Marg, Bani Park, 
Jaipur — 302016) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 4410 (Part 5) : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI A. SURI BABU 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (CANAL) 
(Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENG DESIGN WRD 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER CANALS (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAMBHU AZAD 
SHRI A. K GEHLOT (Alternate) 


SHRI R. K. NAGARIA 
SHRIU.R. RATHOR (Alternate) 
SHRI V. K. WASHIK 
SHRI BHAGWATI PRASAD GUPTA (Alternate) 


PROF S. K. MAZUMDER 


SHRI YOGESH CHANDRA AGRAWAL 


SHRI R. BHANU PRAKASH, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (WATER RESOURCES DEPARTMENT) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI DUSHYANT PRAJAPATI 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(WATER RESOURCES DEPARTMENT), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:WRD 13 (18009). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


