NAT HA IS 17430 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


aa Toren Ua — ar ia 
(ASA) RAT Heil T AT 
uhii YA — agers cht ferte 


Textile Dyestuffs — Natural Dye 
from Red Flowers of Canna indica 
(Indian Shot, Sarvajjaya ) — 
Identification 


ICS 59.040 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, 4 freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2020 Price Group 5 


Textile Speciality Chemicals and Dyestuffs Sectional Committee, TXD 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft was finalized by Textile 
Specialty Chemicals and Dyestuffs Sectional Committee and had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


The revival of natural dyes has happened for two reasons: 
a) Due to the harmful effect of synthetic dyes, safer natural dyes are being preferred globally, and 


b) The ban on the use of azo dyes which release carcinogenic amines has also brought back natural dyes 
into the limelight. Natural dyes are being used extensively for the dyeing of cotton, linen, silk and wool 
substrates. 


Canna indica (Indian shot, Sarvajjaya in Hindi) is a perennial garden plant cultivated in gardens for its ornamental 
flowers and edible starchy rhizome. The false petals of the flowers are red, yellow or spotted (red on yellow or vice 
versa). The red flowered variety produces red dye which has recently been used for dyeing textiles. 


In order to achieve optimum quality with minimum lot-to-lot shade variation, and little differences in colour when 
the same dyestuff is obtained from different manufacturers, it is essential to standardize this natural dyestuff. This 
will improve the cost benefit ratio and help the user adjust their dyeing or printing recipes appropriately. 


It is for the first time that the standard for the natural dyestuff Canna indica (red) flower dye has been written, for 
the benefit of buyers, sellers and users of this natural dyestuff. Standardization and identification methods will 
bring all the major parameters under scan and match. The main intention of this specification is to identify the 
natural dyestuff. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 17430 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


TEXTILE DYESTUFFS — NATURAL DYE 
FROM RED FLOWERS OF CANNA INDICA 
( INDIAN SHOT, SARVAJJAYA ) — IDENTIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes test methods and identification 
requirements of powder / aqueous extract of 
Canna indica (Sarvajjaya) red flower dye, and of 
textiles coloured with this dye. The detection and 
identification of the natural colourant from red flowers of 
Canna indica is conducted using chromatographic 
techniques ¡.e., Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC) 
and High Performance Liquid Chromatography 
(HPLC) as given in Annex A and B and by UV-Visible 
spectroscopic technique as given in Annex C. The 
method for extraction of the dye from fabric dyed with 
Canna indica red flower extracts is given in Annex D. 


2 REFERENCE 


The following standard contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent edition of the standard indicated below. 


IS No. Title 


1070: 1992 Reagent grade water — Specification 
(third revision) 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions apply: 


3.1 Canna indica Red Flower Dye — Canna indica 
is the botanical name of the perennial plant Indian shot 
or Sarvajjaya (Hindi) widely grown for its attractive 
ornamental flowers. It belongs to family Cannaceae. 
Canna indica sps. can be used for the treatment of 
industrial waste waters through constructed wetlands. 
Canna indica produces red dye from the red variety of 
its flowers, which has been recently used for dyeing 
textiles. 


3.2 Natural Colourant — Colourants from natural 
origin, particularly materials obtained from plant parts, 
namely - stem, root and leaves, extracted without any 
chemical reaction primarily used in textiles for dyeing 
or printing. 


4 PRINCIPLE 


4.1 Natural dyestuffs are usually never a single 
compound; they are composed of several compounds 
many of which are structurally similar. Their individual 
character will determine how they bind to the substrate, 
and the ratios bound to the substrate may be different 
from their ratios in the extract. These individual 
components can be analyzed by spectroscopic and 
chromatographic techniques which can determine the 
authenticity of the natural colourant. 


4.2 The colouration in the red false petals of Canna 
indica is due to anthocyanins. The following 
anthocyanins have been identified: 3-O-(6-O-acetyl- 
p-D-glucopyranoside)-5-O-p-D glucopyranoside; 
malvidin  3,5-O-p-D-diglucopyranoside; cyanidin- 
3-O-(6”-O-a-rhamnopyranosyl-B-glucopyranoside; 
cyanidin-3-O-(6"-O-a-rhamnopyranosyl)-f- 
galactopyranoside; cyanidin-3-O-B-glucopyranoside; 
cyanidin-O-p-galactopyranoside. Saponins, sterols, 
phenolic compounds, tannins and the water insoluble 
carotenoids have been extracted from the flowers. All 
these compounds will contribute to the chromatographic 
and spectroscopic characteristics of its extract. 


5 APPARATUS 


5.1 Analytical Balance, with resolution of 0.001 g 
5.2 Spatula 

5.3 Ultrasonic Water Bath (Sonicator) 

5.4 Stoppered Conical Flask 

5.5 Measuring Cylinder 

5.6 Funnel 


5.7 Qualitative Grade Filter Paper, Particle retention 
11 um. 


6 REAGENTS 


6.1 Canna indica Red Flowers, dried and powdered to 
serve as reference. 


6.2 Methanol — Analytical grade. 


IS 17430 : 2020 


7 PROCEDURE 


7.1 Preparation of Canna indica Red Flower Dye 
Reference and Test Samples 


Dried and powdered red mature flowers from 
Canna indica plants should be used to prepare the 
reference sample. The reference stock solution of the 
natural dye is prepared by steeping 0.5 g of dry flower 
powder in 100 ml methanol in a stoppered conical 
flask. It is then agitated in a sonicator set at 45°C for 
about 20 min, after which the solution is filtered using 
a filter paper, and then transferred to another stoppered 
glass vessel for further analysis. If not used on the same 
day, the stock solution can be stored in a refrigerator 
for about two weeks. Stock solution of the test sample 
is also prepared in the same way from dry, powdered 
plant material. If the test sample is a liquid concentrate 
or a spray dried extract, a shorter dissolution time 
and a smaller amount of sample (0.05 g) may be 
sufficient. If the test material is dyed textile, the method 
for the extraction of the natural dye from it is given 
in Annex D. 


7.2 Analysis 


The detection and identification of Canna indica red 
flower natural dye from prepared dye samples is carried 
out by using chromatographic techniques namely, TLC 
and HPLC as given in Annex A and B. These are also 
analyzed by UV-Visible spectrophotometry as given in 
Annex C. 


7.3 Qualification and Identification of Canna indica 
Red Flower Natural Dye 


Comparison between analyses of test sample and 
reference Canna indica red flower natural dye sample 
through 7.3 can identify whether the test sample is 
Canna indica red flower natural dye. The specific tests 
to be conducted are given in Table 1. 


Table 1 Specific Tests Recommended for 
Identification of Canna indica Red 
Flower Natural Dye 


( Clause 7.3 ) 


SI Test Type of Test Ref to 
No. Annex 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 


i) Chromatography tests: 


a) Thin layer Mandatory test A 


chromatography (TLC) 
b) High performance Additional test B 
liguid chromatography (See Note) 
(HPLC) 
ii) Spectroscopy tests: 
a) UV-visible Confirmatory € 
spectroscopy test 


NOTE — HPLC may be performed wherever such instrumentation 
facilities are available. 


8 CALIBRATION OF THE ANALYTICAL 
EQUIPMENT 


The instruments/equipment being used (TLC, HPLC, 
UV-Visible spectrophotometer) should be calibrated 
using standard reference materials and procedures 
as recommended by the manufacturer to ensure their 
proper working before start of the analysis. 


9 VALIDATION OF THE METHOD 


The test methods employed should be validated using 
authentic reference dye sample for reliability. and 
repeatability 


10 REPORT 


The report shall include the following information: 
a) Reference to this standard, 
b) Tests conducted and test conditions, and 
c) Results on identification of the test sample. 


IS 17430 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clauses 1, 7.2 and Table 3 ) 


IDENTIFICATION OF CANNA INDICA RED FLOWER NATURAL DYE 
BY THIN LAYER CHROMATOGRAPHY (TLC) 


A-1 PRINCIPLE 


TLC separates non-volatile constituent compounds in a 
mixture by virtue of differences in their affinity for the 
stationary solid phase which is spread as a thin layer 
on a sheet/plate and the selected mobile solvent phase 
which are then seen as different spots on the TLC plate. 
Positioning of a spot on the TLC plate denoted by its R, 
value (distance travelled by the constituent / distance 
travelled by the solvent) depends on its chemical nature 
and is its characteristic property. Therefore, due to 
similarity in constituent chemical components, test and 
reference Canna indica red flower natural dye samples 
under similar TLC condition should result in spots of 
similar R, values and colour and thus a test sample can 
be identified as whether it is Canna indica red flower 
natural dye. 


A-2 APPARATUS 


A-2.1 Analytical thickness Silica gel G/ GF 254 coated 
TLC plates (may be cast in-house or procured from 
commercial suppliers). 


A-2.2 Capillary for spotting TLC plates. 


A-2.3 TLC development chamber (of a dimension 
suitable to accommodate TLC plate). 


A-2.4 TLC spot visualization chamber containing 
crystals of iodine (of a dimension suitable to 
accommodate TLC plate). 


A-2.5 Optionally, viewing chamber for TLC with 254 
nm UV tubes which may also be fitted with daylight 
fluorescent tubes (CRI 95) and photographic camera 
for recording photographs. 


A-3 REAGENTS 


A-3.1 Stock Solutions, of test and reference Canna 
indica red flower natural dye prepared in 7.1 


A-3.2 Methanol 
A-3.3 Ethyl Acetate 


A-3.4 n-Hexane 


NOTE — All reagents except item A-3.1 should be of 
analytical reagent grade and all glassware should be cleaned 
and finally rinsed with reagent grade water and dried. 


A-4 PROCEDURE 


Both reference and the test sample extracts are spotted 
carefully, side-by-side, on the silica gel coated TLC 
plate. The spots are dried and the plate is placed in 
TLC development chamber, pre-equilibrated with 
the developing solvent consisting of 60 percent ethyl 
acetate and 40 percent n-hexane. After the solvent 
front has travelled to sufficient distance, the TLC plate 
is removed and the solvent is allowed to evaporate. 
Developed spots are visualized in daylight. The spots 
may optionally be visualized and photographed in the 
viewing chamber under daylight fluorescent tubes and 
if a silica gel GF254 plate is used, also under UV-254 
nm light. The TLC plate is then placed in the iodine 
chamber and the spots are visualized in iodine. The 
constituents of the test sample present as spots on the 
TLC plate are compared with the reference dye sample. 
The colour and R, values of the spots in both the test 
and reference sample are noted. 


A-5 OBSERVATION 

Details of stock solution preparation and its dilution if 
any: 

Type of TLC plate used: Silica gel G/ GF 254: in-house/ 
commercial 


Solvent system used: 60 percent ethyl acetate and 40 
percent n-hexane 


R,of reference sample | R Comment 
of Canna indica red 


flower dye extract 


R, 0.90, 0.80, 0.60, 
0.40 and 0.20 


An indicative thin layer chromatogram with both the 
tracks being natural Canna Indica red flower dye 
extract is presented in Fig. 1. However, the position and 
number of spots may vary due to differences in sample 
preparation and chromatographic conditions. 


, and spot 
colour of test 
sample extract 


A-6 CONCLUSION 


Colour of the spots and the R, values of the reference 
and test samples are similar/different. 


IS 17430 : 2020 


| 
0 


Fic. 1 Thin LAYER CHROMATOGRAM OF CANNA INDICA RED FLOWER DYE EXTRACT 


o = — hp» — 


ANNEX B 
( Clauses 1, 7.2 and Table 3 ) 


IDENTIFICATION OF CANNA INDICA RED FLOWER DYE BY HIGH 
PERFORMANCE LIQUID CHROMATOGRAPHY (HPLC) 


B-1 PRINCIPLE 


HPLC is used to separate compounds in a mixture 
by virtue of differences in their affinity for the 
stationary phase which is packed in a column, and the 
mobile solvent phase that is pumped through it. The 
constituents, depending upon their chemical nature, 
are differently retarded during their passage through 
the column and are identified by comparing the time 
taken by a constituent compound in eluting from the 
column, as detected by a detector (retention time), with 
that of a standard reference compound. Selection of a 
detector is important as in the closed system, the eluting 
compounds cannot be seen by the eye and can only be 
detected by their characteristic properties. UV detector 
is a common detector employed as many organic 
compounds absorb in the UV region. Wavelength of the 
detector can be set to a value where absorption by the 
compounds of interest is high so as to achieve higher 
sensitivity. Various parameters of the HPLC assay are 
set in such a way that distinct peaks of the reference 
sample are observed in the chromatogram. 


B-2 APPARATUS 


B-2.1 HPLC System, with binary pump, UV/PDA 
detector and software. 


B-2.2 C-18 Reverse Phase Column (RPC-C18) — 
150 x 4.6 mm; 5 micron. 


B-2.3 Guard Column, compatible with the analytical 
HPLC column. 


B-2.4 Micro-Syringe 


B-2.5 Membrane Filters (0.45 micron), for micro 
-syringe. 


B-2.6 All Glass Filtration Assembly, for micro 
filtering solvents. 


B- 2.7 Oil-Free Vacuum Pump 


B-2.8 Membrane Filters (0.45 micron), for solvent 
filtration. 


B-3 REAGENTS 


B-3.1 Methanol 
B-3.2 Deionized Water 


B-3.3 Reference Canna indica red flower natural dye 
and test dye stock solutions prepared in 7.1. 
NOTE — All reagents except B-3.3 should be of HPLC grade 
and need to be filtered through 0.45 micron membrane filter 
before use. All glassware used should be cleaned and finally 
rinsed with reagent grade water and dried. 


B-4 PROCEDURE 


B-4.1 Chromatographic conditions 


a) Stationary Column C18, 150 x 4.6 mm; 5 


phase : micron, 

b) Eluent/ Deionised water (80:20), 
mobile phase: 
Methanol: 

c) Flow rate: 1.0 ml/min, 

d) Detection 254 nm (band width 16 nm), 
wavelength: and 

e) Run time: 15 min. 


B-4.2 Method 


B-4.2.1 HPLC system is started and the selected mobile 
phase is allowed to pass through the column till a stable 
baseline is obtained. Reference dye solution, after 
appropriate dilution, is then aspirated into the micro- 
syringe, a membrane pre-filter is fitted onto it and the 
solution is injected into the sample loop (10-20 micro 
litre capacity) in load position to fill it completely. 
The injection valve is then turned to inject position to 
introduce the sample onto the column. As the mobile 
phase is continuously passing through the column, the 
constituents of the injected dye extract get separated. 
These separated constituents exit the column and enter 
the UV/PDA Detector which detects them by recording 


IS 17430 : 2020 


the absorbance of the individual constituents as they 
pass through it. This absorbance is converted to a signal 
and peaks are seen on the signal intensity versus time 
plot which is continuously displayed on the monitor. 
When a UV-absorbing component passes through the 
detector a peak is seen on the plot. After completion 
of the run, a chromatogram along with a report of peak 
retention times, peak height and peak area for each 
peak is generated by the software. The test sample run 
is also completed in the similar manner. Identity of the 
test sample is established by comparing the retention 
times of the peaks in reference and test chromatograms. 
Peak height or its area provides additional quantitative 
information about the relative abundance of various 
constituents in test and reference samples. 


B-4.2.2 An indicative chromatogram containing the 
peaks obtained after HPLC assay of the Canna indica 
red flower natural dye extract is shown in Fig. 2. Peak 
location/retention times and height may vary between 
the indicative chromatogram and the injected samples 
due to differences of the dye sample and the extract 
preparation conditions. 


B-5 OBSERVATION 


B-6 CONCLUSION 


The retention time of the constituents of the reference 
and test sample are similar/different. The reference 
sample and test sample are therefore similar/different. 


In reference sample of Canna indica | In test sample | Comment 
red flower natural dye extract extract 
Retention time of the peaks observed in | Two main peaks at 2.2 and 2.6 min. 
HPLC chromatogram 
0.014- 
4 2998 (Max Plot) 
| 
1 | N 
0.0124 |og 
a | "| 
J im 
0.010- Tn | ^ 
] NAT | 
4 | | | 
0.0087] | || | 
| E | | 
2 | | | 
< 4 | | | 
0.006- | | | | 
J | | | 
| | || ‘i 
0.004- N | i 
| Te | \ 
] | | \ 
| | ^ 
0.0025 | \ 
] | 
] ^ T XE m es 
dec eee 
0.00 2 m 4.00 6. bo 8 bo 10.00 12.00 14.00 16.00 18.00 i 20.00 


Fic. 2 HIGH PERFORMANCE LIQUID CHROMATOGRAM OF CANNA INDICA RED FLOWER DYE EXTRACT 


IS 17430 : 2020 


ANNEX C 
( Clauses 1, 7.2 and Table 3 ) 


IDENTIFICATION OF CANNA INDICA RED FLOWER DYE 
BY UV-VISIBLE SPECTROSCOPIC METHOD 


C-1 PRINCIPLE 


When sample molecules are exposed to light having 
an energy that matches a possible electronic transition 
within the molecule, some light energy is absorbed as 
the electron is promoted to a higher energy orbital. 
An optical spectrometer records the wavelengths at 
which absorption occurs, together with the quantum of 
absorption at each wavelength. The resulting spectrum 
is presented as a graph of absorbance (A) versus 
wavelength. 


Many molecules absorb ultraviolet and/or visible light. 
Fine particles will scatter light and contribute to the 
absorbance. It is therefore essential to remove fine 
particles when measuring absorbance of dye solutions. 
Absorbance (A) is directly proportional to the path 
length, b, and the concentration, c, of the absorbing 
species. Beer 5 law states that: 


A =€bc 


Where, € is a constant of proportionality, called the 
absorptivity. 

Different dye compounds within the natural dyestuff 
absorb radiations of different specific wavelengths. 
The spectral curve will thus be a summation of their 
individual absorbances. An absorption spectrum of the 
natural dyestuff will thus show a characteristic curve 
with peaks corresponding to structural groups present 
within the constituent molecules. 


C-2 APPARATUS 


C-2.1 Ultra 
Spectrophotometer 


Violet Visible Scanning 


C-2.2 Quartz Sample Cuvettes — Matched pair of 
1.00 cm light path. 


C-3 REAGENTS 


C-3.1 Reference Canna indica Red Flower Natural 
Dye Extract 


C-3.2 Methanol 


NOTE — All reagents should be of analytical reagent grade 
and all glassware should be cleaned and finally rinsed with 
reagent grade water and dried. 


C- 4 PROCEDURE 


C-4.1 The stock solution of the reference Canna indica 
red flower dye prepared in 7.1 may be used to record the 
spectrum in the UV-visible region (200 - 700 nm). If the 
absorbance in the UV region is too high, this solution 
may be suitably diluted for recording the spectrum in 
the UV region (200-400 nm). The test sample solution 
is also prepared in the same manner as the reference 
sample. 


C-4.2 Spectra are recorded with pure methanol in 
reference holder of the spectrophotometer. Reference 
dye sample is first analysed. Test sample is analysed 
next and recorded spectra are compared for similarity 
of the spectral curve that is, peak positions and their 
intensity (absorbance value). The absorbance spectral 
curve of this dye extract has specific characteristics 
both in the UV and visible range and an indicative 
spectrum of the Canna indica red flower natural dye 
extract in UV-visible region is presented in Fig 3. 


C-5 OBSERVATION 


C-6 CONCLUSION 


The nature of the spectral curve of the test sample in 
the UV and visible range is similar/different to the 
reference sample. 


In reference Canna indica red 
flower dye extract 


In test 
extract 


sample | Comments (Describing difference/ 


similarity in spectral curve) 


Peak position | 360 nm — 0.688A 
(nm) with 
absorbance 463 nm - 0.456 A 


IS 17430 : 2020 


Absorbance 


360nm, 0.688 OD 


463nm, 0.456 OD 


250 300 350 400 450 


500 550 600 650 700 750 


Wavelength(nm) 


Fic. 3 Uv-VisiBLE SPECTRUM OF CANNA INDICA RED FLOWER DYE EXTRACT 


ANNEX D 
( Clauses 1 and 7.1 ) 


EXTRACTION OF DYE FROM FABRIC/YARN DYED WITH CANNA INDICA 
RED FLOWER NATURAL DYE 


D-1 PRINCIPLE 


Extraction of dyed textile samples with a suitable 
solvent (methanol) is necessary to release the dyes 
from these samples. 


D-2 APPARATUS 


D-2.1 Soxhlet Extraction Assembly with Heating 
Bench 


D-2.2 Scissors 
D-2.3 Qualitative Filter Paper Sheet 


D-2.4 Rotary Vacuum Evaporator with Evaporating 
Flask 


D-2.5 Funnel 
D-2.6 Conical Flasks 


D-2.7 Measuring Cylinder 
D-3 REAGENTS 
D-3.1 Methanol (Analytical Reagent Grade) 


D-4 PROCEDURE 


About 50 g of dyed textile is cut into small pieces and 
packed in a filter paper. The packed filter paper column is 
put for soxhlet extraction with methanol as the solvent. 
The temperature is so adjusted to get about 8-10 cycles 
of the solvent per hour. Extraction is continued for 6-8 
h, till most of the colour is discharged. The coloured 
solvent is filtered and is concentrated under vacuum in 
a rotary evaporator to about 20 ml. This concentrated 
extract can then be used for chromatographic and 
spectroscopic analysis as per the methods described in 
7.3 after appropriate dilution, if required. 


IS 17430 : 2020 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Textile Speciality Chemicals and Dyestuffs Sectional Committee, TXD 07 


Organization 


Department for Jute and Fibre Technology, Institute 
of Jute Technology, University of Calcutta 


Ahmedabad Textile Industry’s Research Association, 
Ahmedabad 


Ama Herbals, Lucknow 
Atul Ltd (Colors Division), Atul 


Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, 
Mumbai 


Archroma India Pvt Limited, Mumbai 


BioDye India Pvt Ltd, Sawantwadi, Maharashtra 


Department for Jute and Fibre Technology, Institute 
of Jute Technology, University of Calcutta 


Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 


Indian Jute Industries Research Association, Kolkata 
Jaysynth Dye-Chem, Mumbai 
National Peroxide Limited, Mumbai 


Northern India Textile Research Association 
Ghaziabad 


Office of the Textile Commissioner Mumbai 
S GS India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Shree Pushkar Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd, Mumbai 
Surya Processors Pvt Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Textiles Committee, Mumbai 
The Arvind Mills Limited, Ahmedabad 
The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


The South India Textile Research Association, 
Coimbatore 


The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research 
Association, Mumbai 


U P Textile Technology Institute, Kanpur 


Representative(s) 


ProF A. K. SAMANTA (Chairman) 


SHRI C. R. PRAYAG 
Ms Bipasha Maiti (Alternate) 


SHRI Y. A. SHAH 


SHRI SAI GANESH 


SHRI ARINDAM CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


DR (SHRIMATI) SUJATA SAXENA 
Dr A. S. M. Raja (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH RAMAMURTHY 
Suri AsHIM GHOSH (Alternate) 


Dr Bosco HENRIQUES 
Dr D. Das 


Pror RAJ GANESH S. PALA 


Dr S. K. CHAKRABARTI 
Suri SanDIP Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI S. C. SHARMA 
Suri P. M. RESHAMWALA (Alternate) 


Suri K. H. DESHPANDE 
Suri V. N. JosHı (Alternate) 


DRM. S. PARMAR 


Suri Humayun K. 
Suri JAMIL AHMED (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV SARASWAT 
Suri AsHIsH Rawat (Alternate) 


Dn N. N. MAHAPATRA 
Suri G. GANGA REDDY 


SHRI KARTIKEYA DHANDA 
SHRIMATI SHILPI CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJARSHI GHOSH 


SHRI UMASANKAR MAHAPATRA (Alternate) 


Dr (SHRIMATI) PADMA S. VANKAR 


Suri M. P. SATHIANARAYANAN (Alternate) 


Dr PRAKASH VASUDEVAN 
SHRI S. SIVAKUMAR (Alternate) 


Dr (SHRIMATI) MANISHA MATHUR 
Dr RACHNA SHUKLA (Alternate) 


PROF (SHRIMATI) ABHA BHARGAVA 
Dr Arun Patra (Alternate) 


IS 17430 : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 
Universal Starch Chem Allied Limited Dhule SHRI D. A. PATIL 
Wool Research Association, Thane SHRIMATI SMITA BAIT 
SHRI CHETAN MAHAJAN (Alternate) 
BIS Directorate General SHRI A. K. Bera, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Suri A. K. BERA 
ScIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 07 (14178). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


