**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  3025-10  (1984) :  Methods  of  sampling  and  test  (physical 
and  chemical)  for  water  and  wastewater,  Part  10:  Turbidity 
[CHD  32:  Environmental  Protection  and  Waste  Management] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


■K^y  / 1  juaaaws^fea  rs^^TTF^ 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  :  3025  (  Part  10)  -  1984 

UDC  628*1 /*3 :  543*316  (  Third  Reprint  SEPTEMBER  1998  )  ,  Reaffirmed  2qo2  ) 


Indian  Standard 

METHODS  OF  SAMPLING  AND  TEST  (  PHYSICAL  AND 
CHEMICAL  )   FOR  WATER  AND  WASTE  WATER 

PART  10  TURBIDITY 

(First  Revision) 


1.  Scope —  Prescribes  nephelometric  method  for  the  measurement  of  turbidity  of  water.  This  method 
is  applicable  to  all  types  of  water. 

2.  Principle  —  It  is  based  on  comparision  of  the  intensity  of  light  scattered  by  the  sample  under 
defined  conditions  with  the  intensity  of  Sight  scattered  by  a  standard  reference  suspension  under  the 
same  conditions. 

The  higher  the  intensity  of  scattered  light,  the  higher  the  turbidity.  Formazin  polymer  is  generally 
used  as  turbidity  standard  because  it  is  more  reproducible  than  other  types  of  standards  used 
previously.  The  turbidity  of  a  particular  concentration  of  Formazin  suspension  is  defined  as  40  Jackson 
turbidity  units.  The  same  suspension  of  Formazin  has  a  turbidity  of  approximately  40  units  when 
measured  on  Jackson  candle  turbidimeter.  Thus  turbidity  units  based  on  the  Formazin  preparation 
cioseiy  approximate  those  derived  from  Jackson  candie  turbidimeter  but  may  not  always  be  indentical 
to  them. 

3.  Interferences  —  Coloured  solutes  cause  low  turbidity  values. 

4.  Apparatus 

4.1  Sample  Tubes  —  The  sample  tubes  should  be  of  clear  and  colourless  glass. 

4.2  Turbidimeter —  The  turbidimeter  shall  consist  of  a  nephelorneter  with  a  light  source  for  illuminat- 
ing the  sample  and  one  or  more  photo  electric  detectors  with  a  readout  device  to  indicate  the  intensity 
of  light  scattered  at  right  angles  to  the  path  of  the  incident  light.  The  turbidimeter  should  be  so 
designed  that  little  stray  light  reaches  the  detector  in  the  absence  of  turbidity  and  should  be  free  from 
significant  drift  after  a  short  warm-up  period. 

5.  Reagents 

5.1  Turbidity-Free  Water — Pass  distilled  water  through  membrane  filter  having  a  pore  size  not 
greater  than  0*45  pm,  if  such  filtered  water  shows  a  lower  turbidity  than  the  distilled  water.  Discard  the 
first  200  ml  collected.  Otherwise  use  distilled  water. 

5.2  Hexamethylene  Tetramine  Solution  —  Dissolve  10*0  g  hexamethylene  tetramine  in  demineralised 
water  and  dilute  to  100  mi. 

5. 3  Hydrazine  Sulphate  Solution—  Dissolve  1*000  g  hydrazine  sulphate  (NH^f-hSCL)  in  deminera- 
lised water  and  dilute  to  100  ml. 

5.4  Turbidity  Standard  Suspension  I  ( Formazin)  —  In  a  100-mI  volumetric  flask  mix  50  ml  hydrazine 
sulphate  solution  with  50  ml  haxamethylene  tetramine  solution.  After  24-hour  standing  at  25  ±  3°C. 
dilute  to  100  ml  with  demineralised  water  and  mix  well.  Prepare  fresh  monthly. 

5.5  Turbidity  Standard  Suspension  II —  Dilute  10  ml  turbidity  standard  suspension  I  to  100  ml  with 
demineralised  water.  The  turbidity  of  this  suspension  is  defined  as  40  Jackson  Turbidity  units  (JTU). 
Prepare  fresh  weekiy.  This  suspension  may  be  diluted  as  required  to  prepare  more  dilute  turbidity 
standards. 

6.  Sample  Handling  and  Preservation  —  Preservation  of  sample  is  not  practical.  Analysis  should 
begin  as  soon  as  possible.  Refregeration  or  chilling  to  4°C  is  recommended  to  minimize  micro- 
biological reaction. 

7.  Procedure 

7.1  Turbidimeter  Calibration  —  Follow  the  manufacturer's  operating  instructions.  Measure  the  standards 
on  turbidimeter  covering  the  range  of  interest.  If  the  instrument  is  already  calibrated  in  standard 
turbidity  units,  this  procedure  will  check  the  accuracy  of  calibration. 


Adopted  23  February  1SS4 


O  July  1985,  B!S 


Gr  1 


BUREAU     OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 

IAANAK    BHAVAN,  9    BAHADUR    SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 

NEW  DELHI   110002 


IS  :^3025  (  Part  10)  -1984 

12  Turbidity  Less  Than  40  Units  —  Shake  the  sample  to  disperse  the  solids.  Wait  until  air  bubbles 
disappear.  Pour   sample   into   turbidimeter   tube   and  read  turbidity  directly  from  the  instrument  scale 

or  irom  calibration  curve. 

7,3  Tu;h:dity  Greater  Than  40  Units  —  In  case  turbidity  values  are  greater  than  40  units,  dilute  the 
sample  wiih  turbidity-free  water  to  bring  the  values  within  range.  Take  readings  of  diluted  sample. 
Compute  ti.e  turbidity  of  the  original  sample  from  the  turbidity  of  the  diluted  sample  and  the  dilution 
factor. 

3.  Calculation  —  Calculate  the  turbidity  of  diluted  samples,  using  the  following  equation: 

Turbidity  units  — ~ 

whcie   - 

A  -  *  turbidity  units  found  in  diluted  sample, 
B  -■■-■  volume  in  ml  of  dilution  water  used,  and 
C  ■  -•■  volume  of  sample  in  ml  taken  for  dilution. 

0.  Report  —  Report  turbidity  as  follows: 

Turbidity  Range  in  unit  Record  to  the  Nearest 

005 

01 

1 

5 

10 

50 

100 


0- 

1 

1  - 

10 

10  - 

40 

40- 

100 

100- 

400 

400- 

1  000 

Greater  than  1  000 

EXPLANATORY     NOTE 

The  turbidity  of  sample  is  the  reduction  of  transparency  due  to  the  presence  of  particulate  matter 
such  as  clay  or  silt,  finely  divided  organic  matter,  plankton  or  other  microscopic  organisms.  These 
cause  light  to  be  scattered  and  absorbed  rather  than  transmitted  in  straight  lines  through  the  sample. 
The  method  is  applicable  to  drinking,  surface  and  saline  waters  in  the  range  of  turbidity  0-40  NTU, 
Higher  values  may  be  obtained  by  dilution  of  the  sample.  The  values  are  expressed  in  nephelometric 
turbidity  units  (NTU).  The  NTU  considered  comparable  to  the  previously  reported  Jackson  Turbidity 
units  (JTU)  and  Formazin  Turbidity  units  (FTU).  The  standard  method  for  the  determination  of 
turbidity  is  based  on  Jackson  candle  turbidimeter  and  the  lowest  turbidity  values  that  can  be  measured 
on  this  instrument  is  25  units.  As  turbidity  of  treated  water  is  usually  in  the  range  of  0-5  units  indirect 
secondary  methods  have  been  used  which,  however,  do  not  duplicate  the  results  obtained  on  Jackson 
Candle  Turbidimeter  for  ail  the  samples.  Due  to  fundamental  differences  in  optical  systems,  results 
obtained  with  different  types  of  secondary  instruments  do  not  check  closely  with  one  another  even 
though  instruments  are  precalibrated  against  candle  turbidimeter.  Use  of  suspensions,  of  different 
types  of  particulate  matter,  for  preparation  of  calibration  curves  may  also  cause  discrepancies.  Most 
commercial  turbidimeters  for  measuring  low  turbidities  give  comparatively  good  indications  of  the 
intensity  of  light  scattared  in  one  particular  direction  predominantly  at  right  angle  to  the  incident 
light. 

This  method  supercedes  clause  6  of  IS  :  3025-1964  'Methods  of  sampling  and  test  (physical  and 
chemical)  for  water  used  in  industry'. 


Printed  at  New  India  Printing  Press,  Khurfa.  India 


