IS 17874 (Part 1) : 2022 
AIRA ATA 
Indian Standard 


arr Ft URETA EICHE 


ATT 1 a a Salad ATA: TAH 
great ft ATTA NT 


Glossary of Yoga Terminology 


Part 1 Standardized Terminology for 
Commonly Used Terms Related to Yoga 


ICS 01.040.11, 11.020.99 


© BIS 2022 
weds AAA TILT 
VAN ee OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
FAST TE TH ATT Te fer 110002 
A MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
A NEW DELHI 110002 


www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2022 Price Group 7 


Ayush Sectional Committee, FAD 26 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Ayush 
Sectional Committee and approval by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


The word ‘Yoga’ is derived from the Sanskrit root ‘Yuj’, meaning “to join’ or ‘to yoke’ or ‘to unite”. Yoga is a 
holistic and an integral approach that gives physical health, mental contentment and spiritual enrichment as it gives 
many beneficial results in pursuit of high level wellness. 


Patafjala Yoga Sutra is considered to be one of the foundational texts of classical Yoga. Yoga is practiced 
worldwide by millions of people in many forms and variations owing to its preventive and curative potential 
for lifestyle-related disorders. Yoga places great importance on healthy lifestyle including Acara (appropriate 
activities), Vicara (appropriate thoughts and attitude), 4har (appropriately healthy and nourishing diet) and Vihára 
(appropriate recreational activities to relax body and mind). 


There are numerous commonly used technical terms which are specific to Yoga including the terminology 
pertaining to topics like Satkarma, Yogasana, Pranayama etc. There is a tendency to interpret such terms 
subjectively. Moreover, several terms are common to Ayurveda as well as Yoga but are used with slightly different 
connotation. To allay any such ambiguity, this Part 1 of the Standard has been formulated to provide standardized 
definitions of commonly used terms related to Yoga. Subsequent parts of this Standard shall address the 
terminologies specific to various Yoga Practices such as Satkarma, Yogásana, Pranayama and Dhyana 
(meditation). 


The inputs for formulation of this standard have been derived from the information available in the public domain 
in print and electronic media including authoritative books of Yoga. It is advisable that various Yoga practices as 
mentioned in the standard should be done under the guidance/supervision of a Yoga Expert. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 17874 (Part 1) : 2022 


Indian Standard 
GLOSSARY OF YOGA TERMINOLOGY 


PART 1 STANDARDIZED TERMINOLOGY FOR 
COMMONLY USED TERMS RELATED TO YOGA 


1 SCOPE 
1.1 This standard (Part 1) covers brief 
description/definition of terminologies related to 


common Yoga terms. The original terms appearing in 
the text have been transliterated and defined for clear 
understanding of the concept for those who are not in 
Yoga. These terms may be used by having the 
background of researchers, academicians, regulators, 
clinical practitioners and other enthusiasts interested in 
the science of Yoga. 


1.2 The other standards in the series intend to cover the 
description of various Yoga Practices including 
Satkarma, Yogäsana, Pranayama and Dhyana 
(meditation) etc. 


2 TRANSLITERATION USED FOR WRITING 
SANSKRIT WORDS IN THE GLOSSARY FOR 
COMMON YOGA TERMINOLOGY 


a=% h= 3: da=s ya=% 
a= ka =P dha=& ra=Y 
i=3 kha=% ņa = U la = 1 
i-$ ga= 7 ta=d va=d 
u=\J gha = 4 tha = 4 $a =Y 
ü=% da= S da=% sa = Y 
r=» ca=4 dha = 4 sa=4 
T=% cha = Y na=5"1 ha = 8 
e=U ja=5 pa=U ksa = & 
ai =UÚ jha==Y pha=% tra=7 
o= at ñ=3A ba=3 jfia=9 
au = Sit ta=C bha = Y 

m= 31 tha = 3 ma = 3H 


IS 17874 (Part 1) : 2022 


3 GLOSSARY FOR COMMON YOGA TERMINOLOGY 


Table 1 Common Yoga Terminology 


English Transliteration 


(Clause 3) 


Description 


Sl Term 
No. 
1 ant * 
2 ATST-ANT 
3 4-10 
4 aia 
5 STT-ATT 
6 Ha-ıTT 
7 AT-ITT 
8 25-11 
9 TTST-IT 


Yoga * 


Astänga-Yoga 


Karma-Yoga 


Bhakti-Yoga 


Jñana-Yoga 


Mantra-Yoga 


Laya-Yoga 


Hatha-Yoga 


Raja-Yoga 


The word Yoga has been derived from Sanskrit root 
(dhátu) ‘Yuj’ which means to “join”, to ‘unite’ or to ‘yoke’ 
to get cognitively absorbed (Samadhi). According to 
Maharishi Patañjali, Yoga is the control of the 
modifications (Vrtti) of the mind stuff (Citta). As per 
Yogic scriptures the practice of Yoga leads to the union 
of an individual consciousness with that of the universal 
consciousness. 


The School of Yoga that deals with eight limbs of Yoga as 
advocated by Maharishi Patañjali. It comprises of Yama, 
Niyama, Asana, Pranayama, Pratyahara, Dháraná, 
Dhyana, and Samadhi. 


The school of Yoga that deals with Yoga of action, a path 
to self-realization attained through harmonizing the 
actions without desire toward its fruits. 


The school of Yoga that deals with Yoga of devotion, a 
path to self-realization attained through worship of a 
personal God. 


The school of Yoga that deals with Yoga of knowledge and 
wisdom, a path to self-realization, attained through sacred 
knowledge of reality. 


The school of Yoga that deals with mantra chanting which 
is a combination of specific syllables when recited 
properly generates vibration and ultimately leads union 
of an individual soul with the supreme soul. 


The school of Yoga that deals with the state of absorption 
of the mind in the consciousness and also pacification of 
prana by overcoming subliminal impressions (Vasana) 
that distract the mind. To this hankering behind the object 
of the senses is to be avoided. It is attained by practices such 
as Nadanusandhana, Sambhavimudra etc. 


The school of Yoga that emphasizes bodily postures, 
regulation of breathing and cleansing processes, etc. as 
means to spiritual perfection. The literal meaning of Hatha 
is (ha-sun, tha-moon) sun and moon. Another meaning of 
Hatha is “with force” or “with effort” to create balance in 
both is called Hatha-Yoga. 


The school of Yoga that deals with Astanga-Yoga of 
Patañjali. In the context of Hatha-Yoga, the word Räja- 
Yoga is used for the highest state of mind called as 
Samädhi. 


Term 


IS 17874 (Part 1) : 2022 


Table 1 (Continued) 


English Transliteration 


Description 


11 


14 


15 


16 
17 


18 


19 


20 


23 
24 


Prat-amT 


TA- TH 


Kriya-Yoga 


Svara- Yoga 


Tantra- Yoga 


Ghatastha-Yoga 


Kundalini-Yoga 


Maha-Yoga 


Astanga 


Siksma-Vyayama 
Sthüla-V yayama 


Sürya Namaskara 


Indriya 


Svasa 


Prasvasa 
Svasa-Prasvasa 


Citta 


The school of Yoga that deals with Yoga of action. 
According to Sage Patañjali, Kriya-Yoga includes 
Tapas (cleansing of the body through fasting and other 
vows), Svadhyaya (study of scriptures and recitation/ 
Japa of pranava and such other mantras) and /$wara 
Pranidha na (surrender to God). 


The school of Yoga that deals with the science of breath. 
It emphasizes the systematic and controlled flow of 
breath through the nostrils (Svara) that leads to 
realization of cosmic consciousness. 


The school of Yoga that deals with a path of ritual 
and esoteric practices to awaken shakti (latent cosmic 
energy). 


The school of Yoga that deals with purification of 
Ghata. ‘Ghata’ refers to the body-mind complex 
through which Räja-Yoga or Samadhi is achieved. 


The school of Yoga that deals with expounding the 
awakening of energy (dormant spiritual force) and 
inherent consciousness within the human body and 
mind. 


The school of Yoga that consisting of Mantra-Yoga, 
Hatha-Yoga, Laya- Yoga and Raja-Yoga. 


Eight Limbs. 
Subtle (micro) practices. 
Gross (macro) practices. 


Sun salutation. It is a sequential combination of Yogic 
postures performed dynamically in synchrony with the 
breath. 


It refers to organs of the body responsible for sensing 
and movement (action). There are five organs of action 
(Karmendriya) and five organs of senses/knowledge 
(¡ñanendriya). During the practice, a Yoga practitioner 
perceives the world through the Jñanendriya and 
responds via Karmendriya. The manas is affected by 
what it perceives through the indriya. 


Inhalation. 


Exhalation. 


The process of Yogic inhalation and exhalation. 


Individual consciousness including the subconscious 
and unconscious layer of Citta. In Samkhya Philosophy, 
Citta essentially means the three internal organs, that is, 
Buddhi (intellect), Ahamkara (ego) and Manas (mind). 


IS 17874 (Part 1) : 2022 


Term 


Table 1 (Continued) 


English Transliteration 


Description 


26 


27 
28 


29 
30 
31 


32 
33 


34 


35 


36 
37 


38 


39 


40 


Ùa 


Vrtti 


Klesa 


Kriya 


Yama 


Ahimsa 
Satya 
Asteya 


Brahmacarya 


Aparigraha 


Niyama 


Sauca 


Santosa 


Tapa 


Svadhyaya 


Isvara-Pranidhana 


Asana 


It refers to mode of behaviour of Citta, the mental 
attributes that keeps the mind disturbed or engaged. 
In Patafijali Yoga, these are Pramäna (true 
knowledge), Viparyaya (false knowledge), Vikalpa 
(conceptualization), Nidra (sleep) and Smrti (memory). 


Afflictions. There are primordial and ultimate factors or 
cause of misery and pain. They are Avidya, Asmita, 
Raga, Dvesa and Abhinivesah. 


It refers to action or practices in Yoga. 


It means ethical disciplines. They can also be interpreted 
as rules of morality for society. This is first limb of 
Astanga-Yoga of Maharishi Patañjali, comprises 
of Ahimsa (non-violence), Satya (truthfulness),Asteya 
(non-stealing), Brahmacarya (abstinence), and 
Aparigraha (non-possessiveness). 


Non-violence both physical and mental. 
Truthfulness. 


Non-stealing either by doing or saying anything or 
thinking (not stealing by thought, word or deed). 


Abstinence. 


Non-possessiveness. Giving up the tendency to 
accumulate objects of utility and enjoyment which 
makes the mind free and its practice helps to lead 
towards spiritual path. 


It means restraints. The second limb of Patafijali’s 
eightfold path of Yoga, which consists of the practice of 
purity (Sauca), contentment (Santosa), austerity 
(tapas), self-study (Svadhyaya), and surrender to God 
(Isvara-Pranidhana). 


Cleanliness or purity of both mind and body or external 
and internal. 


Contentment. It brings unparalleled happiness. 


Austerity. Tapa means intense sadhana which cleanses 
physical and mental impurities. It is one of the 
constituent of Kriyä-Yoga also. 


Study of self and scriptures. It is one of the constituent 
of Kriya -Yoga and Niyama. 


It refers to surrender to the God. It is one of the 
constituent of Kriya- Yoga and Niyama. Here God refers 
to the innermost awareness or his/her consciousness. 


It refer to sitting or a seat. As per Maharishi Patañjali, 
1t is a bodily posture which confirms to steadiness and 
comfortable position. It is one of the components of 
Astänga-Yoga and Hatha-Yoga. 


IS 17874 (Part 1) : 2022 


Table 1 (Continued) 
SI Term English Transliteration Description 
No. 

41 asta Tadasana Tada means Palm tree and in this äsana, body resembles 
Palm tree. This Asana teaches one to attain stability and 
firmness and forms the base for all the standing Asana. 

42 CEIC Vrksasana Vrksa means tree. The final position of this Asana 
resembles the shape of a tree. 

43 Waseda Pädahastäsana Päda means foot, hasta means hands. Therefore, 
Pädahastäsana is the äsana involving keeping the palms 
down towards the feet. 

44 AST Ardha Cakräsana Ardha means half. Cakra means wheel. In this posture, 
the body is formed like the shape of a half wheel. 

45 rarest Trikonäsana Trikona means triangle. In this äsana, the final body 
posture resembles triangle, made by the trunk, arms and 
legs. 

46 acc Bhadräsana Bhadrá means gracious and blessed. It is considered 
to be one of the four main äsanas according to 
Hathapradipikä and other three äsanas are Siddhásana, 
Padmasana and Simhasana. 

47 Aaa Vajrasana Vajrasana means thunderbolt posture or kneeling 
position. While doing meditation in this posture, one 
should close his/her eyes at the final stage. 

48 ISTAT Usträsana Ustra means camel. The body in this posture resembles 
a camel. 

49 MMH T Sasakäsana Sasaka means hare. The body in this posture resembles 
the hare. In some Yoga text it is also called as 
Sasangásana which means moon. 

50 SUAHTSHTAT Uttänamandükäsana Uttäna means upright and Manduka means frog. The 
final position of Uttänamandükäsana resembles an 
upright frog. 

51 FATT Vakrsasana Vakra means twisted. In this Asana, the spine is twisted 
which has a rejuvenating effect on its functioning. 

52 ARTIT Makaräsana Makara means crocodile. In this äsana, the body 
resembles the crocodile. 

53 ASTA Bhujangäsana Bhujanga means cobra. In this äsana, the body is raised 
like the hooded cobra. 

54 tas Salabhäsana Salabha means locust. In this äsana, final body posture 
resembles the shape of a locust. 

55 GRECIA Setubandhasana Setubandha means formation of bridge. In this posture, 
the body is positioned like a bridge. 

56 SAAT eras Uttäna Pädäsana Uttana means raised-upward and Pada means leg. In 


this Asana, the legs are raised upward in supine 
position. 


IS 17874 (Part 1) : 2022 


Table 1 (Continued) 


Term English Transliteration 


Description 


58 


59 


60 


61 


62 
63 
64 


65 


66 


67 


69 


70 


71 


SERGII Ardha Halāsana 


TARA Pawanamuktäsana 
TaTIT Saväsana 
WT aT Pranayama 
Re Püraka 
am Recaka 
PERF Kumbhak 
AMAT-FFIE Antar-Kumbhaka 
ATET-PEAA Bahya-kumbhaka 
FAA pE AH Kevala-kumbhaka 
AMAT Nädisodhana Pranayama 
SUT ATA 


IH ATUTATH Bhramari Pranayama 


AAA moraa Sitali Pränäyäma 


aA TT Sītakārī Pranayama 


af onara Bhastrikáa Pranayama 


Ardha means half and Hala means plough. This posture 
is known as Ardha Halásana because in its final 
position, the body resembles half the shape of an Indian 
plough. 


Pawana means wind and mukta means to release. 
Pawanmuktäsana is useful in removing wind or 
flatulence from the stomach and intestines. 


Sava means dead body. The final position in this äsana 
resembles dead body. 


Pränäyäma is a process in which the regulation of 
breathing is done through various techniques, aiming to 
achieve higher stages of Hatha-Yoga Sädhanä. 


Process of controlled inhalation. 
Process of controlled exhalation. 
Process of controlled retention or holding of the Breath. 


Process of controlled holding/suspension of breath after 
inhalation. 


Process of controlled holding/suspension of breath after 
full exhalation, where the lungs are made optimally 
empty/empty to the optimum extent. 


This is the state when the movement of the breath 
cease naturally due to systematic advancement in the 
practice of Sahita kumbhaka (Antar-Kumbhaka and 
Bahya-kumbhaka). 


It refers to alternate nostril breathing means Püraka 
(inhalation) and Recaka (exhalation) through the left 
and right nostrils (also called as alternate breathing) 
with or without kumbhaka (retention of breath). 


The word Bhramari is derived from ‘Bhramara’ means 
black bee. During the practice of this Pranayama, the 
humming sound is produced through nostrils, this sound 
resembles the buzzing of a black bee. 


The word Sitali means cooling. This Pranayama helps 
to calm the mind and gives cooling effect on mind and 
body. 


In Sitakari Pranayama, the sound '‘sit' is made during 
inhalation. The Sanskrit word 'Kari' means that which 
produces the sound. This practice helps to produce 
coolness in the body. 


Bhastrika derived from the word 'Bhastra' which means 
bellows of black smith. In this practice one should inhale 
and exhale through both nostrils rapidly, then retain 
breathe after inhaling through right nostril as per 
capacity followed by exhalation through the left nostril. 


SI 


IS 17874 (Part 1) : 2022 


Table 1 (Continued) 


Term English Transliteration 


Description 


72 


73 


74 


75 


76 


77 


78 


81 


82 


83 


SATÁN ATUTATH Ujjayı Pranayama 


TATEIT Pratyahara 


ATTUT Dhäranä 


tr Dhyäna 


ameh Samādhi 


qep Satkarma 


afa Neti 


wet ate Jala Neti 


qa att Sutra Neti 


aa arte Vastra Dhauti 


GIGI Nault 


ated Basti 


HATA ATA Kapalabhatt 


Ujjayi comes from the Sanskrit prefix ‘Ud’ added to 
root ‘ji’. ‘Ujji? means ‘to be victorious’ and Ujjayi,thus 
means ‘one who is victorious’. It is performed by partial 
closing of glottis, producing a light sonorous sound. 


Withdrawing of the senses from the contact of their 
respective objects and then drawing them inwards 
towards the citta. It is one of the fifth limb of the 
Astanga- Yoga. 


Concentration, the sixth limb (anga) of Patañjali's 
eightfold path of Yoga, consisting of the prolonged 
focusing of attention on a single mental object. 


Contemplation, the seventh limb (anga) of Patafjali’s 
eightfold path of Yoga. It is a process where there is an 
uninterrupted flow of thought/consciousness towards 
the object of contemplation. 


Culmination of meditation, state of oneness of mind with 
the object of concentration; supramental consciousness; 
the eighth limb of Astanga-Yoga. 


“Sat” means ‘six’ and ‘Karma’ means ‘action’. These 
are six cleansing practices in Hatha-Yoga used for the 
purification of the body. It comprises neti, dhauti, naulı, 
basti, trataka and Kapalabhatı. 


It refers to nasal cleansing practice. It can be done with 
Jala (water), Sūtra (thread), Dugdha (milk) or Ghrta 
(ghee/purified butter). It helps to remove toxins from 
the nasal passage. 


It refers to nasal cleaning by passing saline lukewarm 
water through each nostril alternately by using Neti Pot. 


It refers to done for nasal cleaning by inserting a soft 
thread through the nose of the length of one handspan 
so that it comes out of the mouth. It should be done with 
both nostrils. 


Vastra means cloth. Vastra Dhauti is a technique of 
cleansing the stomach and esophageal tract with a piece 
of cloth. 


Practice of contracting and isolating the rectus 
abdominis muscles by manipulating stomach as per the 
technique mentioned in Hatha-Yoga. 


Practice that is intended to clean the lower abdomen, 
especially the descending colon. 


The word Kapála means skull and Bhati means toshine. 
It rejuvenates the skull (head) and mental functions by 
breathing rapidly through the nostrils with emphasis on 
exhalation. 


IS 17874 (Part 1) : 2022 


Table 1 (Continued) 

SI Term English Transliteration Description 

No. 

85 IEF Trätaka It refers to the looking intently with an unwavering gaze 
at a point until tears are shed. It is performed for 
cleansing and strengthening the eyes. 

86 pret Kuñjala It is a process of cleansing the stomach by voluntarily 
vomiting using warm water with or without salt. 

87 In Cakra Cakra is circling motion or wheel. It refers to the 
pranic/psychic centre in the subtle body responsible 
for specific physiological and psychic functions; 
conjugation point of Nadis. 

88 HAT AR Mülädhära Cakra Mülädhära is one of the Cakras, located at the base of 
the spine and connected to the earth element. 

89 arts aH Svädhisthäna Cakra Svadhisthana is one of the Cakras, located at the pelvis 
and associated with the water element. 

90 HAR aF Manipura Cakra Manipura is one of the Cakras, located at the navel 
center and associated with the fire element. 

91 aed AH Anāhata Cakra Anähata is one of the Cakras, located at the heart center. 

92 faite aH Visuddhi Cakra Visuddhi is one of the Cakras, located near the base of 
the throat. 

93 AT AH Ajña Cakra Ajnais one of the Cakras, located between the eyebrows. 

94 TEATT AR Sahasrara Cakra Sahasrara is one of the Cakras (literally, thousand- 
petaled lotus) located just above the crown of the head. 

95 ATET Nädı Subtle energy channels through which flows the life 
force (prana). It is believed to have 72 000 nadis and 
among them, there are three important Nadis-Ida, 
Pingala and Susumna. 

96 SET aret Ida Nadi It refers to the left nostril, running from the left side of 
the spine from Miladhara Cakra to Ajná Cakra. 

97 Fra Et Pingala Nadi It refers to the Right nostril, running from the right side 
of the spine from Miladhara Cakra to Ajna Cakra. It 
travels opposite to the /da Nadi. 

98 gar Ast Susumna Nadi It refers to the main Nadi resides in the center of the 
spinal cord and considered to be active when both the 
nostrils (/da and Pingala) are equally dominant. 

99 peter Kundalini It is a form of energy (Sakti) believed to be located at 
the base of the spine, in the Maladhara Cakra. 

100 art Agnisära Kriyä The word ‘Agni’ means fire and ‘Sara’ means essence. 
According to Hatha Yogic Tradition, the essence of fire 
is located at the navel region and Kriya means action. 
Manipulation of this is called as Agnisara Kriya and it 
is associated with Manipura Cakra. 

101 Hat Mudrä It refers to the gesture or symbols attitude which 


expresses and channelizes cosmic energy within the 
mind and body. 


IS 17874 (Part 1) : 2022 


Table 1 (Continued) 

SI Term English Transliteration Description 

No. 

102 Fra Cif mudrä Attitude of consciousness in which the first finger is 
kept at the root of the thumb, the last three fingers are 
separated. 

103 ITA HAT Jnäna mudrā Psychic gesture of knowledge in which the index finger 
is joined with the tip of the thumb, the other three 
fingers are spread apart. 

104 Rem HaT Nāsikāgra mudrā Hand position adopted during Pranayama to alternate 
the flow of breath through the nostrils. 

105 qua Ast Sanamukhí mudrä In this mudrá one is supposed to close the seven gates 
of perception with the fingers of both hands. It is one 
of the mudrá in Hatha-Yoga. 

106 Ge Bandha Itrefers to lock. These are the neuromuscular locks which 
redirects the flow of energy or präna in the body and 
locks it into a specific area. It is one of the components 
of Hatha-Yoga. 

107 STAAT TE Jalandhara Bandha It refers to throat lock in which the chin rests forward 
upon the sternum, arresting the flow of breath through 
the throat. It is one of the bandhyatryas. 

108 Seat Uddiyäna Bandha It refers to abdominal retracting lock; drawing in of 
the abdomen towards the backbone after exhaling. It is 
one of the bandhyatryas. 

109 qa del Mila Bandha It refers to contraction of the perineal muscles in the 
male and the cervix in the female body. It is one of 
the bandhyatryas. 

110 Hal aa Maha Bandha Great Lock. It is the combination of Mila Bandha, 
Jalandhara Bandha and Uddiyana Bandha with 
Kumbhaka. 

111 FIT Kosa It refers sheath; realm of experience and existence. 

112 Ta LT Pafica Kosa Five layer of sheaths of human existence as described in 
Taittirlya Upanishad. It comprises of Annamaya Kosa, 
Manomaya Kosa, Pranayama Kosa, Vijnanamaya Kosa 
and Anandmaya Kosa. 

113 ATAT HLM Annamaya Kosa It is related to physical sheath. 

114 FATA ATT Manomaya Kosa It is related to mental sheath. 

115 ATA FYT Pranayama Kosa The sheath related to vital energy (prana). 

116 fasta AST Vijhanamaya Kosa The sheath of intuition or higher knowledge. 
117 AACA ALM Anandmaya Kosa The sheath of bliss and supra mental consciousness. 

118 ATT ATA Präna Väyu It is responsible for the breathing process and is located 
in the region of nose to chest. 

119 AMT ATT Apana Vayu It is responsible for the elimination process through 


urinary/excretory system in the region of lower 
abdomen. 


IS 17874 (Part 1) : 2022 


122 


123 


124 


125 


126 


127 


128 


129 


Term 


TEHETHTT 


Table 1 (Continued) 
English Description 
Transliteration 


Samána Vayu 


Udäna Väyu 


Vyana Vayu 


Guna * 


Tri Guna * 


Sattva-guna * 


Rajo-guna * 


Tamo-guna * 


Tattva 


Pafica-maha-bhita 


10 


It is responsible for digestive and assimilation in the region of 
stomach. It comes between apdna vayu and präna vayu. 


It is responsible for the speech and higher activities in the region 
of throat. 


It is responsible for the circulation of body fluids and is present 
throughout the body. 


Quality of the nature that is threefold capacity of manifest Sakti, 
Prakriti, Prime Nature; namely Sattva, Räjas and Tamas. 


In Yoga, Samkhya and many schools of Vedanta, one of the 
three primary constituents of nature (Prakriti):Sattva 
(principle of lucidity), Rajas (principle ofdynamism) and 
Tamas (principle of inertia). 


Tri means Three and Guna means Quality. It refers to three 
principal of prakriti (Nature) namely, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. 


It is characterized by lightness, knowledge and 
enlightenment. 


It is characterized by dynamism, movement or oscillation. 


It is characterized by inertia, dullness, laziness andignorance. 


Tattva is a Sanskrit word meaning ‘principle’, ‘reality’ or 
‘truth’. According to various Indian schools of philosophy, a 
tattva is an element or aspect of reality. In some traditions, they 
are conceived as an aspect of deity. Although the number of 
tattvas varies depending on the philosophical school, together 
they are thought to form the basis of all our experience. The 
Samkhya philosophy uses a system of 25 tattvas, while shaivism 
recognizes 36 tattvas. 


These are the five great elements and basis of all cosmic 
creation. These elements have different characteristicsand 
also account for different faculties of humanexperience. In 
Ayurveda and Indian philosophy, the human body is 
considered to be made of these five elements. These 
elements are: Prithvi (Earth), Jala (Water), Agni (Fire), Vayu 
(Air), Akasha (Space). 


SINo. 


130 


Term 


STATT TI 


IS 17874 (Part 1) : 2022 


Table 1 (Continued) 
Transliteration Description 


Akasa Tattva 


131 


132 


133 


134 


135 
136 
137 
138 
139 


140 


141 


142 


143 


ary da * 
aR qa * 
wet da * 
ql da * 


IT 
FIAT 
TER AR 
HTT MTT 
asta * 


Tea * 


are aotaq* 


an ata* 


ara 3% * 


Vayu Tattva * 


Agni Tattva * 
Jala Tattva * 
Prthvi Tattva * 
Sarira 
Sthüla Sarira 
Süksma Sarira 
Karana Sarira 


Darsana * 


Sadadarsana * 


Samkhya Darsana * 


Yoga Darsana * 


Nyaya Darsana * 


Ether. It refers to one of the Pañca-maha-bhútas. 


Air. It refers to one of the Pañca-maha-bhútas. 


Fire. It refers to one of the Pafica-maha-bhitas. 


Water. It refers to one of the Pafica-maha-bhitas. 


Earth. It refers to one of the Pañca-maha-bhútas. 
Body. 
Gross form of Body. 


Subtle or astral form of Body. 
Causal or etheric form of Body. 


In Indian tradition, the word used for philosophy is ‘Darsana’. 
This word comes from the sanskrit root ‘drish’ (to see, to 
experience) 


Darsana is divided into two category — Astika and Nästika 
schools of thought. The Astika darsana called as Sadarsana (six 
systems — Sämkhya, Yoga, Nyaya, Vaisesika, Mimamsa and 
Vedanta). 


The nastika darsana includes Carvaka, Buddhism, and 
Jainism. 


The Astika darsana called as Sadarsana (six systems). Astika is 
derived from the Sanskrit root ‘asti’ means onewho believes in the 
existence of a Self/Soul or Brahman,etc. It has been defined in one 
ofthree ways: 


1. as those who accept the epistemic authority of the 
Vedas; 


2. as those who accept the existence of atman; and 
3. as those who accept the existence of Ishvara. 


It is one of the Sadadarsana. Samkhya philosophy regards the 
universe as consisting of two independentrealities purusa 
(consciousness) and prakrti(matter). These two realities exist 
parallel withoutaffecting each other. 


It is one of the Sadadarsana. It refers to Yoga school’s 
systematic studies to integrate oneself physically, mentally and 
spiritually has influenced all other schools of Indian 
philosophy. 


It is one of the Sadadarsana. In Sanskrit Nydya literally means 
logic, rules, method or judgment, is oneof the six orthodox 
(astika) schools of Hinduism. This school’s most significant 
contributions to Indian philosophy is systematic development of 
the theory of logic, methodology, and its treatises on 
epistemology. 


IS 17874 (Part 1) : 2022 


Table 1 (Continued) 


SINo. 


Term 


English 
Transliteration 


Description 


144 


145 


146 


147 


148 


149 


150 


aarti aa * 


1-2 


ate a 


sa-a 


A-a 


Vaisesika Darśana * 


Mīmāmsā *. 


Vedānta * 


Bauddha-Yoga 


Bauddha Darśana 


Jain-Yoga 


Jain Darsana 


It is one of the Sadadarsana. ‘Vaiśeşika ’means 'particularist' and 


is based on the term ‘visesa’ meaning 'particulars'. The Vaisesika 


Darśana is a system of ontology which means it is concerned 
with ordering and classifying the universe into fundamental 
components and categories. It is therefore pluralistic and also 
realistic. 


It is one of the Sadadarsana. In sanskrit “Mimámsa” means 
“reflection” or “critical investigation” and thus refers to a tradition 
of contemplation which reflectedon the meanings of certain 
Vedic texts. This traditionis also known as Pürva-Mrmämsä 
because of its focus on the earlier (púrva) Vedic texts dealing with 
ritual actions. 


Itis one of the Sadadarsana. Vedänta also called as Uttara 
Mimamsa literally means ‘end of the Vedas’. Vedanta reflects 
ideas that emerged from, or were aligned with, the speculations 
and philosophies contained in the Upanishads, specifically, 
knowledge and liberation. 


It refers to bodhi (awakening) or nirvana (cessation), which is 
traditionally seen as the permanent end of suffering (duhkha) and 
rebirth. 


It comes under nästika darsana which does not believe in the 
existence of a soul or self or authority of Vedas. 


The three main pillars of Jain-Yoga (Jainism) are ahimsa (non- 
violence), anekantavada (non-absolutism), and aparigraha (non- 
possessiveness). 


It comes under nästika darsana which does not believe in the 
existence of a soul or self or authority of Vedas. 


* For the purpose of definition from Ayurvedic perspective, Indian Standard (IS 17424 Part 1-5) Glossary of 
AyurvedicTerminology may be referred. 


12 


IS 17874 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Ayush Sectional Committee, FAD 26 


Organization(s) 


Ministry of Ayush, New Delhi Association 
of Manufacturers of Ayurvedic 
Medicines, New Delhi 


Ayurvedic Drug Manufacturers Association, 
Mumbai, Maharashtra 


Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic 
Sciences, New Delhi 


Central Council for Research in Yoga and 
Naturopathy, New Delhi 


Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, 
Lucknow 


Defence Research and Development Organization, 
New Delhi 


Dabur India Limited, Ghaziabad 


Indian Yoga Association, New Delhi 


Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga, 
New Delhi 


National Ayurveda Research Institute for 
Panchakarma, Cheruthuruthy 


National Botanical Research Institute, 


Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 
National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 


National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur, 
Rajasthan 


Pharmacopoeial Commission of Indian Medicine 
and Homoeopathy, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh 
Quality Council of India, New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


DR D. C. KATOCH (Chairman) 


DR V. SASHIBHUSHAN 
SHRI ARJUN MULTANI (Alternate) 


DR NAGESH SANDU 
SHRI NIMISH SHROFF (Alternate) 


DR ARJUN SINGH 
DR (MISS) SHRUTI KHANDURI (Alternate) 


DR B. VENKATESWAR RAO 
SHRI SURENDER SANDHU (Alternate) 


DR KARUNA SHANKAR 


DR A. D. SEMWAL 

DR NIDHI SANDAL (Alternate) 

DR DHRUV K. NISHAD (Young Professional) 
DR RAJIV RAI 

DR RANJAN MITRA (Alternate) 

DR VINOD KUMAR UPADHYAYA (Young Professional) 
SHRI ANIL JAUHRI 

SHRIS. KRISHNAMURTHY (Alternate) 

Miss RENU JAIN (Young Professional) 


DR ISHWAR BASAVARADDI 
SHRIMATI HIMANI SHOKHAND (Alternate) 


DR V. C. DEEP 

DR ASWANIP. S. (ALTERNATE) 

DR REMYAE. (Young Professional) 
MISS SAYYADA KHATOON 

SHRIC. H. V. RAO (Alternate) 


DR VIVEK SHARMA 
DR SANJEEV SHARMA 
DR SUDIPTA KUMAR RATH (Alternate) 


DR P. K. PRAJAPATI 
DRG. V. R. JOSEPH (Alternate) 
SHRI JITENDRA PAL SINGH (Young Professional) 


DR MANISH PANDE 
DR VANDANA SIROHA (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (FAD) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio) | 


Member Secretary 
DR PRADEEP KUMAR 
DUA SCIENTIST ‘C’ 


(FAD), BIS 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www .standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 26 (17237). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6' Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8' Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


{ 2323 7617 


Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg { 
Chandigarh 160019 re 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 
2254 1216 
Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), { 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. NOIDA. 
PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


