Wdta Ah IS 1055 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Ratón ache aoaaa — fate 


(RT YAE ) 


Nicotine Sulfate Solution — 
Specification 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 65.100.10 


BIS 2023 


ARA HAR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM HAF, 9 SEEL ME HHL AMT, ag fare - 110002 
w MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2023 Price Group 4 


Pesticides Sectional Committee, FAD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Pesticides Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Divisional Council. 


Nicotine sulfate solution is extensively used in the control of insect pests of agricultural importance. It is 
manufactured from waste tobacco and from the liquors obtained from factories making chewing and smoking 
tobacco. The waste tobacco is macerated with water and lime, and then steam-distilled. The distillate is neutralized 
with sulphuric acid and concentrated. 


Nicotine sulfate solution is manufactured to contain 40 percent (m/m) of nicotine. 


This standard was first published in 1957. Subsequently one amendment was issued. In first revision standard was 
being revised to make its requirements up to date. 


In year 2020 vide S.O. 1196 (E) dated 20 March 2020, the nicotine sulfate was banned by Government of India 
for domestic use but continued to manufacture for export. In this revision, the standard has been brought out in 
the latest style and format of the Indian Standards. It also incorporates one amendment issued to this standard. 


In the preparation of this standard, due consideration has been given to the provisions of the Insecticides Act, 1988 
and the Rules framed thereunder and Standards of Weights and Measures (Packaged Commodities), Rules 1977. 
However, this standard is subject to the restrictions imposed under the Act and Rules wherever applicable. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed, or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 1055 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
NICOTINE SULFATE SOLUTION — SPECIFICATION 
( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the requirements and the 
methods of sampling and test for nicotine sulfate 
solution. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards, given below contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards. 


IS No. Title 

IS 1070: 1992 Reagent grade water (third 
revision) 

IS 8190 Requirement for packing of 


(Part 2) : 1988 pesticides: Part 2 Liquid 


pesticides (second revision) 
IS 10627: 1983 Methods for sampling of 
pesticidal formulations 
3 REQUIREMENTS 
3.1 Description 


The material shall be a clear, yellowish brown to 
deep, brown aqueous solution of the dibasic salt, 
nicotine sulfate, and may have acrid odour. It shall 
be free from sediment, scum, sludge, suspended 
matter or other extraneous impurities. 


3.2 Nicotine Content 


The material shall contain not less than 40.0 percent 
by mass of nicotine when tested by the method 
prescribed in Annex A. 


3.3 Sedimentation 


The material shall satisfy the requirement of the 
sedimentation test prescribed in Annex B. 


4 PACKING 


The material shall be packed as per requirements 
given in IS 8190 (Part 2). 


5 MARKING 


5.1 The containers shall be securely closed and shall 


bear legibly and indelibly the following information: 


a) Name of the material; 

b) Name and address of the manufacturer; 

c) Batch number; 

d) Date of manufacture; 

e) Date of expiry; 

f) Net quantity; 

g) Nominal simazine content, percent (m/m); 

h) Cautionary notice as worded in the 
Insecticides Act, 1968, and Rules framed 
thereunder; and 

j) Any other information required under the 
Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) 
Rules, 2011. 


5.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
products may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


6 SAMPLING 


When freshly manufactured material in bulk 
quantity is offered for inspection, representative 
samples of the material shall be drawn and tested as 
prescribed in IS 10627 within 90 days of its 
manufacture. When the material is offered for 
inspection after 90 days of its manufacture, sampling 
shall be done as prescribed in IS 10627. However, 
the criteria for conformity of the material when 
tested, shall he the limits of tolerances, as applicable 
over the declared nominal value and given under 
clause 3.2 of this standard. 


7 TESTS 


7.1 Tests shall be carried out by the appropriate 
methods referred to in clause 3.2 and 3.3. 


7.2 Quality of Reagents 


Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and 
distilled water (see IS 1070) shall be employed in 
tests. 


NOTE — 'Pure chemicals' shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities which affect the results of analysis. 


IS 1055 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2.2) 


DETERMINATION OF NICOTINE CONTENT 


A-1 METHOD 
A-1.1 


The method consists in steam distilling the nicotine 
from an alkaline medium, converting it into a salt 
by collecting the distillate in an acid medium, 
precipitating with silicotungstic acid and finally 
weighing the precipitate. 


A-2 REAGENTS 

A-2.1 Liquid Paraffin 

A-2.2 Sodium Hydroxide Solution — Aqueous, 
40 percent (m/v). 


A-2.3 Phenolphthalein Indicator Solution — 1.0 
percent (m/v). Dissolve 1 g of phenolphthalein in 
60 ml of rectified spirit and dilute to 100 ml with 
water. 


A-2.4 Dilute Hydrochloric Acid — (1 : 4) and 
(1 : 100 0) by volume. 


A-2.5 Silicotungstic Acid Solution — Dissolve 
120 g of silicotungstic acid (4H20.SiOz. 
12WO3.22H20) in water and dilute to one litre. The 
solution should be free from cloudiness and green 
in colour. 
NOTE — The silicotungstic acid should be white or pale 
yellow crystals free from green colour. Of the several 
silicotungstic acids, 4H20.S10,.10W03.3H,0 and 


4H20.Si0,.12W03.20H,0 do not give crystalline 
precipitates with nicotine and should not be used. 


A-2.6 Methyl Orange Indicator Solution — 0.04 
percent (m/v), in aqueous ethyl alcohol (20 percent 
by volume). 


A-3 PROCEDURE 


A-3.1 Weigh accurately 0.5 g to 1.0 g of the 
material in a suitable tared weighing tube. 
Quantitatively transfer the weighed material to a 
500 ml Kjeldahl flask using water to wash the last 
traces of the material into the flask. If necessary, 
add to the contents of the Kjeldahl flask a little of 
liquid paraffin to prevent frothing during 
distillation, add a few small pieces of pumice to 
prevent bumping. Make the contents of the flask 
alkaline by adding a slight excess of sodium 
hydroxide solution, using phenolphthalein as 
indicator. Fit the mouth of the Kjeldahl flask with a 
two-holed rubber stopper through which passes the 
stem of a trap bulb and an inlet tube for steam. 
Connect the free end of the trap bulb to a well 
cooled condenser, the lower end of which dips 
below the surface of 10 ml of dilute hydrochloric 
acid (1 : 4) contained in a suitable receiving flask. 


Connect the inlet tube to the source of steam and 
distil rapidly with the current of steam. When the 
distillation is well under way, heat the Kjeldahl 
flask using a Bunsen burner to reduce the volume 
of the contents of the flask as far as practicable 
without causing bumping or undue separation of 
insoluble matter. Continue the distillation until a 
small quantity of the distillate shows no cloudiness 
or opalescence when treated with a drop of 
silicotungstic acid solution and a drop of dilute 
hydrochloric acid (1 : 4). Confirm the alkalinity of 
the residue in the Kjeldahl flask with 
phenolphthalein indicator solution. Reduce the 
volume of the distillate by concentrating it on a 
steam bath (see Note) and make up the volume of 
the concentrating distillate to a convenient volume 
in a volumetric flask with water at room 
temperature. Thoroughly mix the contents of the 
volumetric flask and filter through a dry filter 
paper, if it is not clear. Collect the filtrate in a 
convenient flask. Test a portion of this filtrate with 
methyl orange indicator solution to confirm its 
acidity. 

NOTE — By heating on a steam bath the nicotine content 

of the distillate is not affected. 


A-3.2 Pipette an aliquot (see Note) of the filtrate, 
containing about 0.1 g of nicotine, into a beaker and 
add at the rate of 3 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid 
(1 : 4) for each 100 ml of the aliquot and one 
millilitre of silicotungstic acid solution for every 
0.01 g of nicotine supposed to be present in the 
aliquot. Stir the contents of the beaker thoroughly 
and let stand overnight at room temperature. Before 
filtering, stir the contents of the beaker to see that 
the precipitate settles down quickly and is in a 
crystalline form. Filter the contents of the beaker 
through an ashless filter paper. Wash all the residue 
remaining in the beaker on to the filter using dilute 
hydrochloric acid (1 : 1 000) at room temperature. 
Wash the filter with dilute hydrochloric acid 
(1 : 1 000) until a few millilitres of the filtrate from 
the tail of the funnel do not produce a precipitate or 
opalescence when tested with a few drops of the 
distillate containing nicotine (see A-3.1). Transfer 
the filter paper containing the precipitate to a tared 
platinum crucible, dry carefully and ignite the filter 
paper until all carbon is oxidized. Finally heat the 
platinum crucible over a Meker burner for not more 
than 10 minutes. Cool the crucible in a desiccator 
and weigh. 


NOTE — If the nicotine content of the material is very 
low, an aliquot containing at least 0.01 g of nicotine 
should be used. 


4 CALCULATION 
A-4.1 Nicotine content of the material, 
tb = 11.41mV 
percent by mass => 


where 


m = mass, in g, of the residue (see A-3.2); 


IS 1055 : 2023 


V = total volume, in ml, of the concentrated 
distillate after making up at room temperature 
(see A-3.1); 


M= mass, in g, of the material taken for steam 
distillation (see A-3.1); and 


v = volume, in ml, of the aliquot of the filtrate 
taken for the precipitation (see A-3.2). 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 2.3) 


SEDIMENTATION TEST 


B-1 PROCEDURE 


Transfer 10 ml of the material to a 100 ml conical 
flask. Add to it 50 ml of water and mix the contents 
of the flask by vigorously shaking for about five 
minutes. Allow the flask to stand at rest for one hour 
and examine for any sediment at the bottom of the 
flask. 


B-2 REPORT 


The material shall be deemed to have satisfied the 
requirement of the test if there is no sign of any 
sediment at the bottom of the conical flask. 


IS 1055 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Pesticides Sectional Committee, FAD 01 


Organization 


Directorate of Plant Protection Quarantine and Storage, 
Faridabad 


All India Biotech Association, New Delhi 


Central Insecticide Board and Registration Committee, Faridabad 


Central Insecticide Laboratory, Faridabad 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 


Crop Care Federation of India, New Delhi 


Crop Life India, New Delhi 


CSIR -Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, New Delhi 
FMC India Pvt. Limited, Bengaluru 

IDMA Laboratories Limited, Chandigarh 

Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 

Indian Pest Control Association, New Delhi 


Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology, Gurgaon 


Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture, Chennai 


National Centre for Integrated Pest Management, New Delhi 


National Institute of Plant Health Management, Hyderabad 


Pesticide Manufactures and Formulators Association 
of India (PMFAD), Mumbai 


Regional Pesticides Testing Laboratory, Chandigarh 


Representative(s) 
DR RAVI PRAKASH (Chairperson) 
SHRI SAURABH SINGHAL 
SHRI SHAH JI DHAR (Alternate) 


SECRETARY 
DR VANDANA SETH (Alternate) 


DR ARCHANA SINHA 
SHRI SUBHASH CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SITARAM DIXIT 
DRM. S. KAMATH (Alternate) 


DR J. C. MAJUMDAR 


SHRI ASITAVA SEN 
Ms NIRUPAMA SHARMA (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
DR SHEELENDRA P. SINGH 


ADVISOR (STANDARDS) 
SHRI CHIRAG PATEL 
DR INDRA RAI 
DIRECTOR 

DR TANWEER ALAM 
SHRI UDAYAN GHOSH 
DR M. VAIRAMANI 


JOINT DIRECTOR OF AGRICULTURE (RES.) 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR LAB (Alternate) 


DR SUMITRA ARORA 


DR MAHESH SAINI 
Ms T. SRIDEVI (Alternate) 


DR ARCHANA SRIVASTAVA 
DR UDAY KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI V. VASU 


IS 1055 : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 


In Personal Capacity (4-6-90/2/8/2, Sri Devi SHRIC. V. RAO 
Nilayam Tejaswinagar Coloni, Attapur, 
Hyderabad — 500048) 


In Personal Capacity (263, Sector 28, Faridabad SHRI VIPIN SAINI 
—121008) 
BIS Directorate General SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, 


SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND HEAD (FOOD AND 
AGRICULTURE) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex- officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI KULDEEP MITTAL 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(FOOD AND AGRICULTURE), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication 8 Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:FAD 01 (19693). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


