Waa Wah IS 516 (Part 5/Sec 1) : 2018 
Indian Standard 


gipa hhe — utero agfaar 
qm 5 gdpad hoe ch aa T 
Ws | Ace Wes aT WaT 


( Ye FRI ) 


Hardened Concrete — Methods 
of Test 


Part 5 Non-destructive Testing of Concrete 
Section 1 Ultrasonic Pulse Velocity Testing 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.100.30 


© BIS 2018 


aR AA ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM TH, 9 aega VEL AM, ae feeet-110002 
Vesey” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2018 Price Group 7 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 02 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 5/Section 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the 
draft finalized by the Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


Testing plays an important role in controlling the quality of cement concrete work. Systematic testing of raw 
materials, fresh concrete and hardened concrete, is an inseparable part of any quality control programme for 
concrete. This helps achieve a higher efficiency of the materials used and greater assurance of the performance of 
the concrete, in regard to workability, strength and durability. The test methods used should be simple, direct and 
convenient to apply. This standard was prepared with this objective in view. 


This standard was first published in 1959. In this first revision, it was decided to review and update the various 
existing test methods of concrete taking into consideration the latest international practices and developments in 
this field in the country, and also to introduce certain new test methods, wherever required. In the process, the 
various existing test methods covered in IS 516: 1959 ‘Methods of tests for strength of concrete’ have been 
revised. The revision of the standard is being brought out taking into consideration primarily the corresponding 
ISO standards while also examining the other best practices world over and in the country. In addition, test 
methods for determination of additional properties have been included in areas such as permeability, initial surface 
absorption, corrosion of reinforcement, carbonation of concrete (field test) and, creep of concrete. Also, for better 
understanding and implementation, some of the other test methods which were spread over in number of other 
Indian standards have been brought together under the fold of IS 516 as its various parts, such as the splitting 
tensile strength, ultrasonic pulse velocity test, rebound hammer test, bond in reinforced concrete, and determination 
of water soluble and acid soluble chlorides. This is with a view to making the standard complete in all respects, 
and rendering it a comprehensive source of provisions for testing of concrete and reference in other Indian Standards. 


In this revision, IS 516 has been split in to twelve parts. The other parts in the series are: 

Part 1 Determination of strength of hardened concrete 

Part 2 Determination of properties of hardened concrete other than strength 

Part 3 Making, curing and determining compressive strength of accelerated cured concrete test specimens 

Part 4 Sampling, preparing and testing of concrete cores 

Part 5 Non-destructive testing of hardened concrete 

Part 6 Determination of drying shrinkage and moisture movement of concrete samples 

Part 7 Determination of creep of concrete cylinders in compression 

Part 8 Determination of modulus of elasticity in compression 

Part 9 Determination of wear resistance 

Part 10 Determination of bond in reinforced concrete 

Part 11 Determination of Portland cement of hardened hydraulic cement concrete 

Part 12 Determination of water soluble and acid soluble chlorides in hardened mortar and concrete 
This standard (Part 5/Section 1) describes Ultrasonic Pulse Velocity test method for use on hardened concrete. 


This test method shall be applicable as and when published, in place of the corresponding IS 13311 (Part 1) : 1992 
‘Methods of non-destructive testing of concrete: Part 1 Ultrasonic pulse velocity’, which shall be superseded after 
the publication of this standard. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 516 (Part 5/Sec 1) : 2018 


Indian Standard 


HARDENED CONCRETE — METHODS OF TEST 


PART 5 NON-DESTRUCTIVE TESTING OF CONCRETE 
Section 1 Ultrasonic Pulse Velocity Testing 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 5/Section 1) specifies non-destructive 
test methods for use on hardened concrete. This standard 
covers the principles, apparatus and test procedures of 
ultrasonic pulse velocity testing. In addition, influence 
of test conditions and some general guidance on the 
interpretation of test results are also given. 

NOTE — In view of the limitations of each method of non- 

destructive testing of concrete, it is essential that the results of 


tests obtained by one method shall be complimented by other 
tests and each method shall be adopted very carefully. 


2 ULTRASONIC PULSE VELOCITY TEST 


2.1 Principle 


The ultrasonic pulse is generated by an electroacoustical 
transducer. When the pulse is induced into the concrete 
from a transducer, it undergoes multiple reflections at 
the boundaries of the different material phases within 
the concrete. A complex system of stress waves is 
developed which includes longitudinal (compressional), 
shear (transverse) and surface (Raleigh) waves. The 
receiving transducer detects the onset of the longitudinal 
waves, which is the fastest. Because the velocity of the 
pulses is almost independent of the geometry of the 
material through which they pass and depends only on 
its elastic properties, pulse velocity method is a 
convenient technique for investigating in-situ concrete. 
The underlying principle of assessing the quality of 
concrete is that comparatively higher velocities are 
obtained when the quality of concrete in terms of density, 
homogeneity and uniformity is good. In case of poorer 
quality, lower velocities are obtained. If there is a crack, 
void or flaw inside the concrete which comes in the way 
of transmission of the pulses, the pulse strength is 
attenuated and it passes around the discontinuity, thereby 
making the path length longer. Consequently, lower 
velocities are obtained. The actual pulse velocity obtained 
depends primarily upon the materials and mix proportions 
of concrete. Density and modulus of elasticity of 
aggregate also significantly affect the pulse velocity. 


2.2 Apparatus 


The apparatus for ultrasonic pulse velocity measurement 
shall consist of the following. 


2.2.1 Electrical Pulse Generator 


2.2.2 Transducers — One Pair — Piezoelectric and 
magneto-strictive types of transducers may be used, 
the latter being more suitable for the lower part of the 
frequency range. 


Frequencies as low as 10 kHz and as high as 200 kHz 
can sometimes be used. High-frequency pulses have a 
well-defined onset but, as they pass through the 
concrete, they become attenuated more rapidly than 
pulses of lower frequency. It is therefore preferable to 
use high-frequency transducers (60 kHz to 200 kHz) 
for short path lengths (down to 50 mm) and low 
frequency transducers (10 kHz to 40 kHz) for long path 
lengths (up to a maximum of 15 m). Transducers with 
a frequency of 25 kHz to 100 kHz are found to be useful 
for most applications. 


2.2.3 Standard Calibration Bar — Two standard 
calibration bars, as per details given in 2.3.1 shall be 
provided by the manufacturer of the apparatus for 
calibrating the apparatus. 


2.2.4 Amplifier 


2.2.5 Electronic Timing Device — It shall be capable 
of measuring the time interval elapsing between the 
onset of a pulse generated at the transmitting transducer 
and the onset of its arrival at the receiving transducer. 
Two forms of the electronic timing apparatus are 
possible, one of which uses a cathode ray tube on which 
the leading edge of the pulse is displayed in relation to 
the suitable time scale, the other uses an interval timer 
with a direct reading digital display. If both the forms 
of timing apparatus are available, the interpretation of 
results becomes more reliable. 


2.3 Performance Requirement of Apparatus 


2.3.1 The apparatus shall be capable of measuring transit 
times to an accuracy of +1 percent over a range of 
20 microsecond to 10 millisecond. For this, it is 
necessary to check the overall performance by making 
measurements on two standard reference specimens in 
which the pulse transit times are known accurately. The 
two reference specimens (usually steel bars) shall have pulse 
transit times of about 25 microsecond to 100 microsecond 


IS 516 (Part 5/Sec 1) : 2018 


respectively; these times being specified by the supplier of 
the equipment to an accuracy of +0.2 microsecond. The 
shorter of the reference specimens shall be used to set 
the zero for the apparatus and the longer one shall be 
used to check the accuracy of transit time measurement 
of the apparatus. The measurement obtained shall not 
differ from the known value for the reference specimen 
by more than +0.5 percent. 


NOTE — It is advisable to follow the equipment manufacturer’s 
instructions for calibration of the equipment. 


2.3.2 Along with the calibration of the equipment as 
described in 2.3.1, it is also advisable to perform a zero 
time check on the unit by applying a coupling agent to 
the transducers and pressing the faces together. Check 
the zero adjustment on regular intervals. 


2.3.3 The electronic excitation pulse applied to the 
transmitting transducer shall have a rise time of not 
greater than one quarter of its natural period. This is to 
ensure a sharp pulse onset. 


2.3.4 The interval between pulses shall be low enough 
to ensure that the onset of the received signal in small 
concrete test specimens is free from interference by the 
reverberations produced within the preceding working 
cycle. 


2.3.5 The apparatus shall maintain its performance over 
the range of ambient temperature, humidity and power 
supply voltage as stated by the supplier. 


2.3.6 When using long leads (above 20 m) caution shall 
be taken during transit time measurement that the leads 
do not come into close contact with each other. In case 
the leads are close together, it may pickup unwanted 
signals from the transmitter lead resulting in incorrect 
and unstable readings. 


2.4 Procedure 
2.4.1 Surface Preparation 


At the point of observation, the concrete surface shall 


R 


1A Direct transmission 


Key 
T = transmitter 
R = receiver 


1B Semi-direct transmission 


be suitably prepared and any plaster or other coating 
shall be removed to expose the concrete surface. For 
this purpose, the use of carborundum stones or grinders 
may be adopted. However, care shall be taken to avoid 
any damage to concrete surface or concrete structure. 


2.4.2 Ultrasonic Measurements 


Place the two transducers on opposite faces (direct 
transmission), or on adjacent faces (semi-direct 
transmission), or on the same face (indirect or surface 
transmission) (see Fig. 1). Although the direction in 
which the maximum energy is propagated is at right 
angles to the face of the transmitting transducer, it is 
possible to detect pulses that have travelled through 
the concrete in some other direction. Direct transmission 
method of ultrasonic pulse velocity measurements is 
the most efficient method and shall be adopted, if 
possible. However, sometimes, it may be necessary to 
place the transducers on opposite faces but not directly 
opposite each other. Such arrangements shall be 
regarded as a semi-direct transmission [see Fig. 1B]. 


The third method for measurement of ultrasonic pulse 
velocity is the indirect transmission method 
[see Fig. 1C]. The indirect transmission arrangement 
is the least sensitive and shall be used when only one 
face of the concrete is accessible, or when the quality 
of the surface concrete relative to the overall quality is 
of interest. The method for measurement of ultrasonic 
pulse velocity by indirect transmission is explained in 
Annex A. 


2.4.3 Determination of Ultrasonic Pulse Velocity for 
Different Transducer Arrangements 


2.4.3.1 Factors 
measurements 


influencing pulse velocity 


There are various factors which influence pulse velocity 
measurements, such as, 


a) surface condition and moisture content of 
concrete; 


b) path length, shape and size of concrete 


1C Indirect transmission 


Fic. 1 POSITIONING OF TRANSDUCERS 


member; 

c) temperature of concrete; 

d) stress to which the structure is subjected; 

e) reinforcing bars; 

f) contact between the transducer and concrete; 
and 


g) cracks and voids. 


The effect of various factors on pulse velocity 
measurement is explained in Annex B. In order to 
provide an accurate measurement of pulse velocity, it 
is necessary to take into account the various factors 
that influence the measurements as explained in 
Annex B. 


2.4.3.2 Procedure 


2.4.3.2.1 The ultrasonic pulse is produced by the 
transducer which is held in contact with one surface of 
the concrete member under test. After traversing a 
known path length L in the concrete, the pulse of 
vibrations is converted into an electrical signal by the 
second transducer held in contact with the other surface 
of the concrete member and an electronic timing circuit 
enables the transit time (7) of the pulse to be measured. 
The pulse velocity (V) is given by: 


V=L/T 


Once the ultrasonic pulse impinges on the surface of 
the material, the maximum energy is propagated at right 
angles to the face of the transmitting transducer and 
best results are, therefore, obtained when the receiving 
transducer is placed on the opposite face of the concrete 
member (direct transmission or cross probing). 


However, in many situations two opposite faces of the 
structural member may not be accessible for 
measurements. In such cases, the receiving transducer 
is also placed on the same face of the concrete member 
(surface probing or indirect transmission). Surface 
probing is not as efficient as cross probing, because 
the signal produced at the receiving transducer has 
amplitude of only 2 to 3 percent of that produced by 
cross probing and the test results are greatly influenced 
by the surface layers of concrete which may have 
different properties from that of concrete inside the 
structural member. The indirect velocity is invariably 
lower than the direct velocity on the same concrete 
element. This difference may vary from 5 to 20 percent 
depending largely on the quality of the concrete under 
test. For good quality concrete, a difference of about 
0.5 km/s may generally be encountered. For the 
procedure and for calculating the exact value of 
ultrasonic pulse velocity by surface probing 
(see Annex A). 


2.4.3.2.2 To ensure that the ultrasonic pulses generated 
at the transmitting transducer pass into the concrete and 


IS 516 (Part 5/Sec 1) : 2018 


are then detected by the receiving transducer, it is 
essential that there be adequate acoustical coupling 
between the concrete and the face of each transducer. 
Typical couplants are petroleum jelly, grease, liquid soap 
and kaolin glycerol paste. If there is very rough concrete 
surface, it is required to smoothen and level an area of 
the surface where the transducer is to be placed. If it is 
necessary to work on concrete surfaces formed by other 
means, for example trowelling, it is desirable to measure 
pulse velocity over a longer path length than would 
normally be used. A minimum path length of 150 mm is 
recommended for the direct transmission method 
involving one unmoulded surface and a minimum of 
400 mm for the surface probing method along an 
unmoulded surface. 


2.4.3.2.3 Since size of aggregates influences the pulse 
velocity measurement, it is recommended that for direct 
transmission method, the minimum path length shall 
be 100 mm for concrete in which the nominal maximum 
size of aggregate is 20 mm or less and 150 mm for 
concrete in which the nominal maximum size of 
aggregate is between 20 and 40 mm. 


2.4.3.2.4 In view of the inherent variability in the test 
results, sufficient number of readings are taken by 
dividing the entire structure in suitable grid markings 
of 300 x 300 mm or even smaller. Each junction point 
of the grid becomes a point of observation. Larger grid 
spacing up to maximum 500 x 500 mm may be adopted 
for general overall assessment of larger structures 
having uniform cross-section showing no signs of 
distress. The number of individual test points or grid 
spacing depends upon the size of the structure, the 
accuracy required and the variability of the concrete. 
Transducers are held on corresponding points of 
observation on opposite faces of a structural element 
to measure the ultrasonic pulse velocity by direct 
transmission, that is, cross probing. If one of the faces 
is not accessible, ultrasonic pulse velocity is measured 
on one face of the structural member by surface probing. 


2.4.3.2.5 Surface probing in general gives lower pulse 
velocity than in case of cross probing and depending 
on number of parameters, the difference could be of 
the order of about 0.5 km/s. In view of this, it is 
recommended that, in surface probing method the 
pulse velocity may be increased by 0.5 km/s, for 
values > 3.0 km/s. 


2.5 Interpretation of Results 


2.5.1 The ultrasonic pulse velocity of concrete is mainly 
related to its density and modulus of elasticity. This in 
turn, depends upon the materials and mix proportions 
used in making concrete as well as the method of 
placing, compaction and curing of concrete. 


IS 516 (Part 5/Sec 1) : 2018 


For example, if the concrete is not compacted as 
thoroughly as possible, or if there is segregation of 
concrete during placing or there are internal cracks or 
flaws, the pulse velocity will be lower, although the 
same materials and mix proportions are used. 


2.5.2 The quality of concrete in terms of uniformity, 
incidence or absence of internal flaws, cracks and 
segregation, etc (indicative of the level of workmanship 
employed) can be assessed using the guidelines given 
in Table 1. This table is only for concrete quality grading 
and shall not be used for estimating the concrete grades 
from ultrasonic pulse velocity values. 


Table 1 Velocity Criterion for Concrete 
Quality Grading 
(Clause 2.5.2) 


SI Average Value of Pulse Velocity Concrete Quality 


No. by Cross Probing Grading 
km/s 
(E9) (2) (3) 
i) Above 4.40 Excellent 
ii) 3.75 to 4.40 Good 
iii) 3.00 to 3.75 Doubtful” 
iv) Below 3.00 Poor 


D Tn case of ‘Doubtful’ quality it may be necessary to carry out 
further tests. 


2.5.3 Since actual values of the pulse velocity obtained, 
depend on a number of parameters, any criterion for 
assessing the quality of concrete on the basis of pulse 
velocity as given in Table | can be held as satisfactory 
only to a general extent. However, when the comparison 
is made amongst different parts of a structure, which 
have been built at the same time with supposedly similar 
materials, construction practices and supervision, the 
assessment of quality becomes more meaningful and 


reliable. Whenever the UPV values are lesser by more 
than 10 percent of average value of the member/part of 
structure, the location shall be considered as having 
internal flaws or segregation caused by poor 
workmanship or there could be micro cracks. 


2.5.4 The assessment of compressive strength of 
concrete from ultrasonic pulse velocity values is not 
adequate because the statistical confidence of the 
correlation between ultrasonic pulse velocity and the 
compressive strength of concrete is not very high. The 
reason is that a large number of parameters are involved, 
which influence the pulse velocity and compressive 
strength of concrete to different extents. However, if 
actual concrete materials and mix proportions adopted 
in a particular structure are available, then estimate of 
concrete strength can be made by establishing suitable 
correlation between the pulse velocity and the 
compressive strength of concrete specimens made with 
such materials and mix proportions, under 
environmental conditions similar to that in the structure. 
The estimated strength may vary from the actual 
strength by +20 percent. The correlation so obtained 
may not be applicable for concrete of another grade or 
made with different types of materials. If correlation 
graph is not available but the velocities on concrete 
cubes are available, the average pulse velocities in 
members of structures are not expected to deviate by 
more than 10 to 15 percent of the pulse velocity values 
obtained on concrete cubes (dry surface). 


2.5.5 The procedure for estimating the depth of a surface 
crack using ultrasonic pulse velocity measurement is 
given in Annex C. 


2.5.6 The procedure for determining the dynamic 
Young’s modulus of elasticity (E) of the concrete is 
given in Annex D. 


IS 516 (Part 5/Sec 1) : 2018 


ANNEX A 
(Clauses 2.4.2 and 2.4.3.2.1) 
DETERMINATION OF PULSE VELOCITY — INDIRECT TRANSMISSION 


A-1 With indirect transmission, there is some 
uncertainty regarding the exact length of the 
transmission path because of the significant size of the 
areas of contact between the transducers and the 
concrete. It is therefore preferable to make a series of 
measurements with the transducers at different distances 
apart to eliminate this uncertainty. 


A-2 To do this, the transmitting transducer shall be 
placed in contact with the concrete surface at a fixed 
point x and the receiving transducer shall be placed at 
fixed increments x, along a chosen line on the surface. 
The transmission times recorded shall be plotted as 


a 


fara E 


points on a graph showing their relation to the distance 
separating the transducers. An example of such a setup 
is shown in Fig. 2 and the plot is shown in Fig. 3. 


A-3 The slope of the best straight line drawn through 
the points [tan (@)] shall be measured and its inverse 
be recorded as the mean pulse velocity along the chosen 
line on the concrete surface. Where the points measured 
and recorded in this way indicate a discontinuity, it is 
likely that a surface crack or surface layer of inferior 
quality is present and a velocity measured in such an 
instance is unreliable. 


Fic. 2 TRANSDUCER SETUP 


Key 
x = distance, in millimetres 
t = time, in microseconds 


T = transmitter 
R = receiver 


Fic. 3 PULSE VELOCITY DETERMINATION BY INDIRECT (SURFACE) TRANSMISSION 


5 


IS 516 (Part 5/Sec 1) : 2018 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 2.4.3.1) 
FACTORS INFLUENCING PULSE VELOCITY MEASUREMENTS 


B-1 GENERAL 


In order to provide a measurement of pulse velocity 
that is accurate and repeatable and which depends 
essentially on the properties of the concrete under test, 
it is necessary to take account of the various factors 
that influence pulse velocity and its correlation with 
various physical properties of the concrete. 


B-1.1 Influence of Surface Conditions and Moisture 
Content of Concrete 


Smoothness of contact surface under test affects the 
measurement of ultrasonic pulse velocity. For most 
concrete surfaces, the finish is usually sufficiently 
smooth to ensure good acoustical contact by the use of 
a coupling medium and by pressing the transducer 
against the concrete surface. When the concrete surface 
is rough and uneven, it is necessary to smoothen the 
surface to make the pulse velocity measurement 
possible. 


In general, pulse velocity through concrete increases 
with increased moisture content of concrete. This 
influence is more for low strength concrete than high 
strength concrete. The pulse velocity of saturated 
concrete may be up to 5 percent higher than that of 
similar dry concrete. In general, drying of concrete may 
result in somewhat lower pulse velocity. 


B-1.2 Influence of Path Length, Shape and Size of 
the Concrete Member 


As concrete is inherently heterogeneous, it is essential 
that path lengths be sufficiently long so as to avoid any 
error introduced due to its heterogeneity. In field work, 
this does not pose any difficulty as the pulse velocity 
measurements are carried out on thick structural 
concrete members. However, in the laboratory where 
generally small specimens are used, the path length can 
affect the pulse velocity readings. The velocity of short 
pulses of vibrations is independent of the size and shape 
of the specimen in which they travel, unless its least 
lateral dimension is less than a certain minimum value. 
Below this value, the pulse velocity may be reduced 
appreciably. The extent of this reduction depends mainly 
on the ratio of the wave length of the pulse vibrations 
to the least lateral dimension of the specimen but is 
insignificant, if the ratio is less than unity. Table 2 gives 
the relationship between the pulse velocity in the 
concrete, the transducer frequency and the minimum 
permissible lateral dimension of the specimen. 


If the minimum lateral dimension is less than the 


wavelength or if the indirect transmission arrangement 
is used, the mode of propagation changes and, therefore, 
the measured velocity will be different. This is 
particularly important in cases where concrete elements 
of significantly different sizes are being compared. 


Table 2 Minimum Specimen Dimensions 
(Clause B-1.2) 


SI Transducer Pulse Velocity in Concrete 
No. Frequency 
3.50 4.00 4.50 
km/s km/s km/s 
kHz Minimum Permissible Lateral 
Specimen Dimension, in mm 
(E9) (2) (62) 4) (5) 
i) 24 146 167 188 
ii) 54 65 74 83 
ili) 82 43 49 55 
iv) 150 23 27 30 


B-1.3 Influence of Temperature of Concrete 


Variations of the concrete temperature between 5°C 
and 30°C do not significantly affect the pulse velocity 
measurements in concrete. At temperatures between 


3010 60°C there carr be reduction in pulse velocity up 


to 5 percent. Below freezing temperature, the free water 
freezes within concrete, resulting in an increase in pulse 
velocity up to 7.5 percent. 


B-1.4 Influence of Stress 


When concrete is subjected to a stress which is 
abnormally high for the quality of the concrete, the pulse 
velocity may be reduced due to the development of 
micro-cracks. This influence is likely to be the greatest 
when the pulse path is normal to the predominant 
direction of the planes of such micro-cracks. This 
occurs when the pulse path is perpendicular to the 
direction of a uniaxial compressive stress in a member. 
This influence is generally insignificant unless the stress 
is greater than about 60 percent of the ultimate strength 
of the concrete. 


B-1.5 Effect of Reinforcing Bars 


The pulse velocity measured in reinforced concrete in 
the vicinity of reinforcing bars is usually higher than in 
plain concrete of the same composition. This is because 
the pulse velocity in steel is 1.2 to 1.9 times the velocity 
in plain concrete and, under certain conditions, the first 
pulse to arrive at the receiving transducer travels partly 
in concrete and partly in steel. The apparent increase 
in pulse velocity depends upon the proximity of the 
measurements to the reinforcing bar, the diameter and 


number of the bars and their orientation with respect to 
the path of propagation. 


B-1.6 Contact Between Transducer and Concrete 


Poor contact will affect the reading. It is essential to 
use grease or other couplants to improve the contact 
between the transducer and the concrete as 
per 2.4.3.2.2. 


B-1.7 Cracks and Voids 


When an ultrasonic pulse travelling through concrete 
meets a concrete-air interface, there is negligible 
transmission of energy across this interface. Thus, any 
air-filled crack or void lying immediately between two 
transducers will obstruct the direct ultrasonic beam 
when the projected length of the void is greater than 
the width of the transducers and the wavelength of 
sound used. When this happens, the first pulse to arrive 
at the receiving transducer will have been diffracted 
around the periphery of the defect and the transit time 
will be longer than in similar concrete with no defect. 


It is possible to make use of this effect for locating 
flaws, voids or other defects greater than about 100 mm 
in diameter or depth. Relatively small defects have little 
or no effect on transmission times, but equally are 
probably of minor engineering importance. Plotting 


IS 516 (Part 5/Sec 1) : 2018 


contours of equal velocity often gives significant 
information regarding the quality of a concrete unit. 


In cracked members, where the broken faces of the 
members are held tightly together in close contact by 
compression forces, the pulse energy may pass 
unimpeded across the crack. As an example, this may 
occur in cracked vertical bearing piles. If the crack is 
filled with liquid which transmits the ultrasonic energy 
(like in marine structures), the crack is undetectable 
using digital reading equipment. Measurements of 
attenuation may give valuable information in these 
cases. 


A grid shall be drawn on the concrete member with its 
points of intersection spaced to correspond to the size 
of void that might significantly affect its performance. 
A large survey of measurements at the grid points 
enables a large cavity to be investigated by measuring 
the transit times of pulses passing between the 
transducers when they are placed so that the cavity lies 
in the direct path between them. 


The size of such cavities may be estimated by assuming 
that the pulses pass along the shortest path between 
the transducers and around the cavity. Such estimates 
are valid only when the concrete around the cavity is 
uniformly dense and the pulse velocity can be measured 
in that concrete. 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 2.5.5) 


ESTIMATION OF THE DEPTH OF A SURFACE CRACK USING ULTRASONIC 
PULSE VELOCITY MEASUREMENT 


TRANSMITTING 
TRANSDUCER 


RECEIVING 
TRANSDUCER 


Fic. 3 MEASUREMENT OF DEPTH OF CRACK BY ULTRASONIC PULSE 
VELOCITY METHOD 


IS 516 (Part 5/Sec 1) : 2018 


Longitudinal pulse velocity = a 


Distance travelled in uncracked concrete = 2x 
(see Fig. 3) 


Distance travelled in cracked concrete = 2y x° +h? 


4x? + 4h? 
a 


T? (in cracked concrete) = 


; 4x 
TZ (in uncracked concrete) = —- 
a 


Therefore 
To x +h? 
Ts = x? 
Or 
2 
h=x r <1 
T, 
where 
T, = travel time around the crack, 


c 
T, = travel time along the surface of the same type 
of concrete without any crack, and 


h = depth of crack (see Fig. 3). 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 2.5.6) 


DETERMINATION OF DYNAMIC YOUNG’S MODULUS OF ELASTICITY USING 
ULTRASONIC PULSE VELOCITY MEASUREMENTS 


D-1 The dynamic Young’s modulus of elasticity (£) 
of the concrete may be determined from the pulse 
velocity and the dynamic Poisson’s ratio (1), using the 
following relationship: 


pa PUtwWU-2 wr" 
A-uy) 
where 


E = dynamic Young’s Modulus of elasticity, in 
MPa; 


p = density, in kg/m; and 
V = pulse velocity, in m/s. 
The above relationship may be expressed as: 


E=pfwVv 


where 


Q+) 0-2 u) 
A-uy) 


f= 


The value of the dynamic Poisson’s ratio varies from 
0.20 to 0.35, with 0.24 as average. However, it is 
desirable to have an independent measure of it for the 
particular type of concrete under test. The dynamic 
Poisson’s ratio may be obtained from measurements 
on concrete test-beams of the pulse velocity (V) along 
with length (/) of the beam and the fundamental resonant 
frequency (n) of the beam in longitudinal mode of 
vibration. From these measurements, the factor f (4) is 
calculated by the relation: 


2nl)? 
r= SD 
where 
n = fundamental resonant frequency in cycles per 
second; and 
l = length of specimen, in m. 


IS 516 (Part 5/Sec 1) : 2018 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 02 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (144, Summer Breeze, Kuravankonam, 
Kowdiar, Thiruvananthapuram 695 003) 

ACC Ltd, Mumbai 

Ambuja Cements Limited, Ahmedabad 

Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 

Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 

Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 

Cement Manufacturers’ Association, Noida 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 

Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Conmat Technolgies Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 

Construction Chemical Manufacturers’ Association, Mumbai 

Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 

Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science 
and Technology, New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Construction Company Limited, Mumbai 


Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, New Delhi 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Representative(s) 


Suri Jose Kurian (Chairman) 


Suri S. A. KHADILKAR 
SHRI RAMAN SADANAND PARULEKAR (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. DESAI 
Dr BIBEKANANDA Monapatra (Alternate) 


Suri L. R. BisHNor 
Suri Sourav Acuarya (Alternate) 


SHRI SUSHANTA Kumar BAsu 
Suri D. R. Sekor (Alternate) 


Suri J. K. PRASAD 
Suri C. N. Jna (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH BHARGAVA 
Dr S. K. Hanpoo (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
Suri RasesH Khare (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. SINGH 
SHRI SUBHASH GuRRAM (Alternate) 


Suri J. B. SENGUPTA 
Suri Satish PANpEy (Alternate) 


Dr K. RAMANJANEYULU 
Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Suri N. Sıva Kumar (Alternate) 


Director (CMDD) (N&W) 
Deputy Director (CMDD) (NW&S) (Alternate) 


Dr A. K. CHATTERJEE 
SHRI SUBRATO CHOWDHURY (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR SURLAKER 
Suri NiLoTPOL Kar (Alternate) 


SHRI LAXMAN SINGH 
SHRI VUAY SHANKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDER MOHAN 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI ANURAG SINHA (Alternate) 


Suri V. N. HEGGADE 
Suri S. C. Upapuyay (Alternate) 


Suri SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
Dr CHETAN HAZAREE (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK BANSAL 


SHRI MAHESH TANDON 
Suri GANESH JUNEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEK NAIK 
SECRETARY GENERAL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


ProF Devpas MENON 
Dr Manu SANTHANAM (Alternate) 


IS 516 (Part 5/Sec 1) : 2018 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi 


Institute for Solid Waste Research and Ecological Balance, 
Visakhapatnam 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, 
Army HQ, New Delhi 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, New Delhi 
National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 
National Test House, Kolkata 

Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 

Nuvoco Vistas Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


OCL India Limited, New Delhi 
Public Works Department, Govt of Tamil Nadu, Chennai 


The India Cements Limited, Chennai 


The Indian Hume Pipe Company Limited, Mumbai 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 

The Ramco Cements Limited, Chennai 

Ultra Tech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer Education, 
New Delhi 


In personal capacity [B-806, Oberoi Exquisite, Oberoi Garden 
City, Goregaon (East), Mumbai] 


In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha Road, Nagpur) 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari Nagar, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (E-1, 402, White House Apartments, 
R. T. Nagar, Bengaluru) 


Representative(s) 


Pror V. K. Gupta 
Dr BHUPINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SECRETARY GENERAL 
Director (Alternate) 


Dr N. BHANUMATHIDAS 
Suri N. Katinas (Alternate) 


May Gen S. K. SRIVASTAV 
Suri Man Sincu (Alternate) 


Suri A. P. PATHAK 
Suri A. K. Panpey (Alternate) 


Suri V. V. ARORA 
Dr S. Harsu (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIR SINGH 
Surimati S. A. Kausuit (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri RaGcuupati Roy (Alternate) 


Suri Pranav DESAI 
SHRI RAVINDRA KHAMPARIA (Alternate) 


Dr S. C. AHLUWALIA 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 


Dr D. VENKATESWARAN 


Suri P. R. BHAT 
Suri S. J. Snan (Alternate) 


Dr H. C. VISVESVARAYA 
Suri S. H. Jam (Alternate) 


Suri Barası K. Moortuy 
SHRI ANIL Kumar Pirai (Alternate) 


SHRI SURYA VALLURI 
Dr M. R. Kataat (Alternate) 


Suri M. A. U. KHAN 
Suri B. Muxuopapuyay (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. JAIN 


Suri L. K. JAN 
Suri R. C. WAsoN 


Suri S. A. REDDI 


BIS Directorate General Suri SANJAY Pant, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (Civil Engg) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Surmati Divya S. 
Scientist ‘B’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


Concrete Sub-committee, CED 2:2 


Organization Representative(s) 


In Personal Capacity, (144, Summer Breeze, Kuravankonam, 
Kowdiar, Thiruvananthapuram 695 003) 


ACC Limited, Mumbai 
Ambuja Cement Limited, Ahmedabad 


Suri Jose Kurian (Convener) 


Suri Aviit CHAUBEY (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. DESAI 
Dr BIBEKANANDA Mouapatra (Alternate) 


Suri AVINASH D. SHIRODE 
Suri K. K. MEGHasuyam (Alternate) 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), Bengaluru 


10 


Organization 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Bureau of Design for Hydel and Irrigation Project, Bhopal 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Civil-Aid Technoclinic Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers Pvt Ltd, Ghaizabad 
CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

CSIR — Central Soil & Materials Research Station, New Delhi 

CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 

Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science 
and Technology, New Delhi 

Elkem South Asia Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 

Hindustan Constrution Company Ltd, Mumbai 

Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 

Indian Institute of Structural Engineering, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Society of Structural Engineers, Mumbai 
Irrigation and Power Research Institute, Amritsar 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, ECC Division, Chennai 
Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, 
Army HQ, New Delhi 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 
National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, Haryana 


National Council for Cement & Building Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Institute of Technology, Warangal 


11 


IS 516 (Part 5/Sec 1) : 2018 


Representative(s) 
Suri L. R. BisHNor 
Suri Sourav Acuarya (Alternate) 


Suri J. K. PRASAD 
Suri PANKAJ Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. KHARE 
Suri Buacwati Prasan Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
Suri RasesH KuAreE (Alternate) 


SHRI M. S. SUDARSHAN 
Suri R. NAGENDRA (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


Dr Rases DEOLIA 
Suri H. C. Arora (Alternate) 


Suri J. B. SENGUPTA 
Suri Satish PANDEY (Alternate) 


Suri RAJEEV KUMAR 
Suri M. Rasa (Alternate) 


Dr B. H. BHARATH KUMAR 
Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDER MOHAN 


SHRI BRAJESH MALVIYA 
SHRI SURENDRA SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI ANURAG SINHA (Alternate) 


SHRI Manish MOKAL 
SHRI SUDEESH RAJENDRAN (Alternate) 


DR CHETAN HAZARE 
Suri AvinasH HARDE (Alternate) 


Suri K. C. TAYADE 
SECRETARY GENERAL (Alternate) 


Suri D. S. Josui 
SHRI HEMANT VADALKAR (Alternate) 


Dr B. BHATTACHARJEE 
Dr SHASHANK BISHNO! (Alternate) 


Dr SUDHIR MISHRA 
Dr MANU SANTHANAM 
DR ASHOK Kumar JAIN 


Suri D. S. Josui 
SHRI HEMANT VADALKAR (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (RESEARCH) 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Dr B. SIVARAM SARMA 
Suri S. MANOHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. SRIVASTAV 
Suri Man Sincu (Alternate) 


Suri A. P. PATHAK 
Suri A. K. Panpey (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. YApAv 
Suri Pawan Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri V. V. ARORA 
Suri S. SHARMA (Alternate) 


Dr C. B. KaMmEswaRa Rao 
Dr D Rama Sesuu (Alternate) 


IS 516 (Part 5/Sec 1) : 2018 


Organization 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


Pidilite Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Ready Mixed Concrete Manufacturers’ Association, Mumbai 


Research, Design & Standards Organization (Ministry of Railways), 
Lucknow 


Shapoorji Pallonji and Company Private Limited, Mumbai 
Tandon Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 

Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 

Ultra Tech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 

Water Resource Department, Govt of Madhya Pradesh, Mumbai 


In personal capacity (452 Sector 14, Sonipat, Haryana) 
In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha Road, Nagpur) 


In personal capacity [B-806, Oberoi Exquisite, Oberoi Garden 
City, Goregaon (East), Mumbai] 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari Nagar, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (E-1, 402, White House Apartments, 
R.T. Nagar, Bengaluru) 


In personal capacity (M1 F1 VGN Minerva Apartments, 
Guruswamy Road, Nolambur, Chennai) 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri N. M. Rao (Alternate) 


Dr Suguna NAIK 


SHRI VIJAYKUMAR R. KULKARNI 
SHRI ANIL KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Jont Director (B&S)/CB-I 
Jont Director (B&S)/CB-II (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH BONDE 
Suri D. N. VisHwanat (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH TANDON 
Suri Vinay Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri S. N. DIWAKAR 
Suri Manos Kumar De (Alternate) 


Dr V. RAMACHANDRA 
Dr A. K. Sincu (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. KHARE 
Suri B. P. Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. JAN 
Suri L. K. JAN 
Suri A. K. JAIN 


Suri R. C. WAsoN 


Suri S. A. REDDI 


Dr C. RAJKUMAR 


Panel for Revision of Indian Standards on Test Methods for Concrete, CED 2:2/P7 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari Nagar, 
New Delhi 110064) 


ACC Limited, Mumbai 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 
Civil-Aid Technoclinic Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 


Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 


Hydraulic & Engineering Instrument, New Delhi 
Indian Concrete Institute, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


12 


Representative(s) 


Suri R. C. Wason (Convener) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Dr V. M. SHARMA 


SHRI AJAY PRAKASH MATHUR 
Suri RasesH Kuare (Alternate) 


Suri U. S. VIDYARTHI 


Dr R. NAGENDRA 
SHRI SUNIL V. SONNAD (Alternate) 


Dr A. K. PANDEY 
Suri S. K. Sincu (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr P. SRINIVASAN 
Dr S. BHASKAR (Alternate) 


Dr CHETAN HAZAREE 
Suri Avinash Harpe (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR TIWARI 


Dr RADHAKRISHNA PILLAI 
Dr Ravinpra Gettu (Alternate) 


Dr SHASHANK BISHNOI 
Dr S. Gupta (Alternate) 


IS 516 (Part 5/Sec 1) : 2018 


Organization Representative(s) 


Larsen & Toubro Ltd, ECC Division, Chennai Suri B. StvaRAMA SARMA 
Suri S. MANouar (Alternate) 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh SHRI V. V. ARORA 

Suri S. C. SHARMA (Alternate) 
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 

Suri A. K. LAHaRIA (Alternate) 
RDC Concrete (India) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai Suri K. TAGORE 


Suri V. MEIKANDA Moortuy (Alternate) 


Ready Mixed Concrete Manufacturers’ Association, Mumbai SHRI VIJAYKUMAR R. KULKARNI 
SHRI JEAN PHILIPPE THIERRY (Alternate) 


In personal capacity (50 Mangla Apartments Kalkaji, New Delhi) Dr S. C. Marti 
In personal capacity (Type IV/17, Presidents Estate, New Delhi) Suri K. H. BABU 


13 


(Continued from second cover) 


This revision has been taken up to incorporate the modifications found necessary in the light of experience gained 
in its use and also to bring it in line with the latest development on the subject. Significant modifications in this 
revision include, 


a) the various provisions of IS 13311 (Part 1) have been incorporated after necessary modifications. 

b) the details on the frequencies of transducers have been updated. 

c) necessary caution has been included to avoid interference when using long leads. 

d) more details have been included on surface preparation. 

e) velocity criterion for concrete quality grading has been revised. 

f) more details have been given on the effect of various factors on pulse velocity measurements. 

g) a procedure for estimating the depth of surface crack using ultrasonic pulse velocity measurement has 
been included. 


In the formulation of this standard, assistance has also been derived from ISO 1920-7 : 2004 ‘Testing of 
concrete — Part 7: Non-destructive testing of hardened concrete’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical-values (revised)’. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 02 (10900). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


