(Reaffirmed 2000)

IS : 11494- 1986

Indian Standard
CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF SURFACE FARM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
Farm Drainage
Chairman DR A. M. MICHAEL Members DR A. K. BHATTACRARYA ( Alternate to Dr A. M. Michael ) Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar DR M. C. AGARWAL Tocklai Experimental Station, Jorhat DR BHUPAL SIN~H G. B. Pant University of Agricultural and DR H. S. CHAUIIAN Technology, Pantnagar DR SEWA RAX ( Afternate ) PWD Irrigation ( North ), Belgaum CHIEF ENQINEER SUPERINTENDINQ ENGINEER DIREC~o~IGNS ) ( Alternate ) Irrigation Research and Development, Pune EXECUTIVP:ENGINEER ( Alternate ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi DIRECTOR ( FCM ) Hulaul Group Cooperative Society. Sirsi SHRI V. S. HEQDE Indi& Hum6 Pipe-Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI N. G. JOSHI Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana SHRI S. D. KHEPAR DR SITA RAM SINQH ( Alternate ) SRRI V. PATTABHI Hyderabad Industries Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI A. K. GUPTA ( Alternate ) University of Agricultural Sciences, Bangalore DR H. PURNAPRA~NACHA~ Rajendra Agricultural University, Patna DR R. K. RAI Damodar Valley Corporation, Calcutta DR T. K. SARKAR Wavin India Limited, Madras SHRI G. K. SRINIVASAN SHI~I K. R. RANQARAJAN ( Alternate ) Khadi and Village Industries Commission, Bombay SHRI V. VASIJDEVAN SHRI B. P. SRIVASTAVA ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SHRI T. PURNANANDAX, Director ( Agri & Food ) Secretary SIZRI R. N. SRARIXA Joint Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1 @ Copyright 1986 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means-except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

Sectional

Committee,

AFDC 47
Institute ( ICAR ),

Representing Indian Agricultural New Delhi Research

IS : 11494- 1986

Indian Standard
CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION AN-D MAINTENANCE OF SURFACE FARM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 January 1986, after the draft finalized by the Farm Drainage Sectional Committee bad been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Surface drainage on slowly permeable when excess water drainage are: a) b) is normally required for efficient crop production soils with restricted topography. It is not required is removed naturally. The objectives of surface on land equipment, surface damage or in surface

To prevent water from ponding drains that are crossed by farm To remove excess water the above

in time to prevent without

to crops, and

c) To accomplish

excess erosion.

0.3 Complete drainage systems shall be planned and designed after considering a11 aspects. The collection system consisting of the land surface and shallow drains removes excess surface water from individual areas within fields. The disposal system consisting of some what larger ditches receives drainage water from the collection system and removes it from the farm. Transitions, including structures, that permit drains to discharge into larger or deeper drains must provide for adequate erosion control without holding water on field surfaces for excessive periods of time. The system shall be designed as an integrated component of the land and water management activity on the farm. 0.4 This standard and maintenance is intended to serve as a guide for proper of surface drainage systems in the farms. construction

0.5 In preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from ASAE EP 302 : 2-1973 `Design and construction of surface drainage systems on farms in humid areas', published by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers, USA. 2

IS: 11494=1986 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in The number of significant places retained accordance with IS : 2-1960". in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the recommended practice for construction maintenance of surface farm drainage systems. 2, TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard definitions given in IS : 11495-1986 shall apply. 3. DESIGN 3.1 Design of the surface drainage system shall with IS : 11495-19867. 4. CONSTRUCTION 4.1 Good quality construction is essential for adequate drainage. Qualified engineers should be responsible for surveys, designs, layouts and checking to guarantee that construction meets specifications. Land owners and contractors shall be provided with complete information necessary for construction. 4.1.1 Land smoothing will provide adequate drainage only if depressions are eliminated by smoothing the laud surface. ROW drains, field drains, and/or laterals shall be installed in the remaining low areas. 4.1.2 Land grading is hampered by trash and vegetation which shall be destroyed or removed prior to construction and kept under control while the work is being done. Ploughing trash under the land surface is not recommended. 4.1.2.1 Fields shall hard pans. The field readings taken at stakes be graded when wet, the soil. be scarified prior to construction if there are surface shall be firm when surveyed so that staff will reflect the true elevations. Fields shall not because this impairs the physical condition of ). be done in accordance 7 and

*Rules for roundingoff numerical values ( mid *Code for designof surface drainage system. 3

IS : 11494 - 1986 4.1.2.2 Grading shall be checked prior to and following the finishing operations. A tolerance of 30 mm may be allowed in checking, provided there are no reverse grades in row direction.
4.1.2.3 Land smoothers shall be passed over the field surface at The first two passes shall be least three times as a finishing operation. on opposite diagonals to the stake lines, and the last pass shall be in the row ~direction. 4.1.2.4 Fields shall be scarified smoothing operations to loosen the material with the underlying soil. 4.1.3 The O-4 percent. slope in the direction either before cut surfaces of drainage or after and to shall the final land blend the fill be 02 to

usually

4.1.4 Field drains shall be constructed to runoff water from the cultivated areas. crossable by farm equipment.

facilitate quick disposal of These may be shallow and

4.1.5 Field drains shall be located along the lowest edge of the field. If the fields are long in the direction of drainage, there may be more than one field drain. 4.1.6 Collector drains shall be constructed as per the hydraulic design Such variation may be and with variation in cross section if required. made at the point of road crossing where a permanent structure exists. 4.1.6.1 Runoff water from the field may be allowed to fall in the However, such entry collector if it is not feasible to have field drains. points shall be planted and burried pipe outlets shall be provided from the field into the collector. 4.1.6.2 In the event of constructing culverts at road and collector junctions, the culvert capacity should be more than the maximum This will ensure that the culvert will not act as a designed discharge. bottleneck at any time during the drainage. 4.1.6.3 The productive soil dug out during the construction of collector drain shall be uniformly spread over the cultivated areas if possible. Otherwise, all the soil material dug out shall be used to construct farm road after the drain and to make a protective levee along The loose soil shall be put at the edge of the field adjacent to the drain. least 50 cm away from the edge of the drain to avoid falling back of the soil into the drain during monsoon. 5.

CONSTRUCTION
work.

EQUIPMENT
equipment and 4 skilled operators are required

5.1 Proper construction
for good quality

IS : 11494 - 1986 5.1.1 Tractor and scraper combinations are used for excavating for hauling excavated material to fill areas, and for spreading excavated material. Tractors and scrapers are used for land grading, and to construct and maintain field drains and diversions. Under favourable conditions, they are used to construct~and maintain field laterals with flat side slopes. Wheel type tractors have been used with scrapers for levelling when lead length is over 50 m. Self-loading ( carry all ) scrapers operated by tractors are used for short lead length when earth Animal drawn scrapers are suitable for levelling movement is heavy. small holding.
5.1.2 Land smoothers, commonly known as land leviers or land planes operated by tractors are used for land smoothening or to finish land grading. They will automatically fill small low areas and remove small They cannot accomplish the major high areas when traversing a field. grading operations done by tractors and scrapers. Land smoothers are used periodically to maintain the surface of land that has previously Animal drawn wooden Rat are suitable been graded or smoothened. for land smoothening in small scale operations. 5.1.3 Motor graders and animal and tractor drawn `V' ditchers are used to excavate re!atively small channels, such as field drains or field laterals, where the excavated material can be spread or shaped along one or both sides of the channels. 5.1.4 Draglines and beckhoes size drainage channels. are used to construct and maintain large

6. EROSION 6.1 Erosion

CONTROL

of deep productive soils in fields that require surface drainage may be of little direct economic importance. On shallow soils, erosion may over a period of time result in irreparable losses in productivity. Sedimentation that results from erosion obstructs nearby channels. The justifiable intensity of erosion control measures on field surfaces is, therefore, dependent on the depths of productive soils and the relative costs of preventing erosion and maintaining channels. 6.1.1 Erosion control on land surfaces is norma!ly required only where land grades exceed 1'0 percent or where there are reverse row grades. By concentratimg water and causing it to overflow row beds, reverse row grades are a major contributing cause of erosion across rows. Graded rows, precisely constructed so that there are no reverse row grades and that each row carries its own water, are an effective erosion control practice. 6.1.2 Field drain side slopes and the row middles immediately above the field drains are subject to riil erosion with resultant sedimentation in 5

IS : 11494 - 1986
the field drains. To control this erosion, portions of field drains that are 0.15 m below field level or below row middles shall be vegetated except vegetation is not necessary for field drains re-established yearly. 6.1.3 Field drains witch grades of about O-3 percent and steeper shall be vegetated to prevent channel erosion. The initial erosive grades vary somewhat with~soils. 6.1.4 Field laterals are subject to serious erosion in some areas where they are located on erodible soils and steeper grades. There laterals should be vegetated. Where there is a doubt, the maximum permissible grade for unvegetated channels should be checked. Permissible grades are dependent on the scour conditions which are likely to occur in the channels. 6.1.5 Sedimentation in field laterals is usually expected. In areas where sedimentation is anticipated, field laterals should be overcut 0.1 m or more to provide for sedimentation. 6.1.6 Inlets to field laterals for surface water shall be constructed only at planned points. -Continuous low levees, spread spoil or spoil banks shall prevent entry except at planned inlets. 6.1.7 The outlets of field drains and field laterals shall be checked for erosiveness. In some cases the depths of channels can be controlled by design to reduce or eliminate erosion. In other cases the water level in the larger channels may reduce velocities sufficiently to effectively control erosion. Where additional erosion control measures are indicated, graded channel transitions shall be considered. Such transitions may be grass waterways or non-vegetated channels, depending on the erosion potential. When graded transitions are not adequate for erosion control, pipe drops, chutes, drop structures or other suitable erosion control structures shall be used. 6.1.8 Pipe drops are relatively inexpensive, usually have long lives, and provide crossings for field roads. Pipe drops shall have design capacities of 1.25 to 1.5 times the rate of flow indicated on the drainage curves. Small diameter pipe drops are subject to blockage by debrish. Hydraulic radius of the pipe line of the range 0.25 to O-4 percent depending upon the size and overfall at the drain junction O-15 to 0.3 below design grades shall be provided. 6.1.9 AI1 uncultivated field laterals, side slopes and spoil banks shall be vegetated as soon as practical after cunstruction. Vegetative plants shall be selected for their erosion resistance, wildlife habitat and beautification values. 6

IS% 11494 - 1986 7. MAINTENANCE 7.1 Timely maintenance is essential for continued adequate performance of a drainage system. Maintenance operations shall be planned when the system is designed. Inspection of the entire drainage system should be made following heavy rainfall, and at least once each year. Tillage operations should retain the shape of field surfaces as initially constructed. The two-way plough is desirable for primary tillage because dead furrows and back furrows can be eliminated or located to meet the needs of the drainage system. Where the one-way plough is used, dead furrows and back furrows shall be kept to a minimum, and shall be located so they will not restrict water flow. Unless dead and back furrows are parts of the drainage systems as in bedding, their locations shall be alternated annually. 7.1.1 Field drains may require cleaning following tillage operations. When the field drains are not cultivated, weed growth shall be kept under control by mowing, spraying, or burning. 7.1.2 Field laterals require periodic maintenance. Suitable chemical weed and bush sprays are effective in controlling cattails, williows, and Mowing is effective where side slopes are other undesirable vegetation. not steeper than 3 : 1. Controlled grazing of livestock is a good method. Laterals require clean out where excess deposition has occurred. 7.1.3 Land grading maintenance is critical during the first year or two after construction. Settlement of the fill areas may make serveral annua1 land smoothing operations necessary. In some cases, particularly where deep fills have been made, it may be necessary to ut and fill again with tractors and scrapers to eliminate depressions and reverse row grades. It is recommended that the land planning operation be substituted for one of the secondary tillage operations. The final land maintenance operations shall be in the direction of the crop rows. 7.1.4 Transitions shall be checked Removal of deposition downstream maintenance required. frequently for restriction of drainage. from the transition may be the only

7.1.5 Pipe drops shall be checked and maintained to see that the flow is not restricted, that overtopping of the fills is not causing excessive erosion and that piping is not occurring along the conduits.

7

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units
QUANTITY

SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS)
UNIT
metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole
SYMBOL

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary QUAXTITY Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units Units

m kg
S

A K cd mol

UNIT radian steradian

SYMBOL

rad sr

QUANTITY
Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance force' Electromotive Pressure, stress

UNIT

SYaaROL N 1 1

DEFINITION N = 1 kg.m/ss J = 1 N.m 1 J/s 1 Wb/m*

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt pasta 1

J
W Wb T Hz s V Pa

1 W = 1 1 1 T =

1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-l) S = 1 A/V V = 1 W/A

1 Pa w 1 N/m*

