( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS:9OOO(PartVII)-1979

Indian Standard
BASIC ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING PROCEDURES FOR ELECTRONIC * AND ELECTRICAL ITEMS
PART VII IMPACT TEST

Environmental
Chairman

Testing

Procedures

Sectional

Committee,

LTDC

2

Representing Ministry of Defence ( R&D )

MAJ-GEN D. SWAROOP Members

BRIG N. DAYAL Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-COL V. K. KHANNA ( Alternate ) DI;;ST;R STANDARDS( S&T ), Research, Designs & Standards Organization, Ministry of Railways, Lucknow JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( S&T )-I, RDSO ( Alternate ) JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( E-III ), RDSO ( Alfernate ) GENERAL SECRETARY Society of Environmental Engineers, Bangalore SHRI GH.~SITA SINQH Research Central Electronics Engineering Institute ( CSIR ), Pilani SHRI B. P. GHOSJX National Test House, Calcutta SHRI J. G. JAIN Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers` Association, Bombay CENTRAL STANDARDIZATION OFFICER ( Altemztc ) SHRI JOHN FRANCIS Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHRI S. P. KULEARNI Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay DR P. K. DUTTA ( Alternate 1 Lucas-TVS Ltd, Madras SRRI V. A. M~RARI \ SHRI C. RANQANATR `AN ( Alternate ) BRIG Y. NIRVLA Instrumentation Ltd, Kota SHRI D. V. PETKAR Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay SHRI P. S. K. PRASAD Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI D. S. GOPALAKRISHNA ( Alternate ) SHRI C. V. RAQHVRAMAN National Radio & Electronics Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. V. RAO Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI A. SATYANARAYANA( Alternate ) ( Continued on pokr 2 ) INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Zndiun Copyiiht Act ( XlV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

( Conhusdfiom

page 1 ) Representing
All India Instrument Manufacturers' Association, Bombay & Dealers'

Mrmbsrs SHRI P. SANDELL

SHRI H. C. bBMA ( &.Wt~~te ) Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI T. V. A. SUBRAMANIAX SHRI G. C. SAXENA ( Alteracts ) Ministry of Defence ( LCSO ) SERI K. N. TIWARI SEIU P. K. SHUKLA ( Ahrnat6 ) ' Department of Electronics, New Delhi DR R. C. TRIPATHI Directorate General of Observatories, New Delhi SHSI M. VAIDYANATH~ National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), DR R. P. WADEWA New Delhi SHBI P. SURYAN~LRAYANA ( Ahnatc ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SHRI R. C. JAIN, Deputy Director ( Electronics )

secr6tary
SH~I HARCHARAN SIN~R Deputy Director ( Electronics ), IS1

Panel Conucnn Smzr G. R. GHOSH

for Mechanical

Tests,

LTDC

2

: P8

Ministry of Defence ( DGI )

Mcmbcrs
SERI S. G. BEAT ( Ahnat to Shri G. R. Ghosh ) SHRI D. S. GOPALAKXISENA SHBI S. P. KULKARNI DR P. K. DUTTA I Alternat j SEBI C. RAN~ANATHAN ' SHRI P. SURYANARAYANA SHRI S. P. THUKRAL Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore Peico Electronics and Electricals Ltd, Bombay Lucas-TVS Ltd, Madras National Laboratory Physical New Delhi Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay Ministry of Defence ( LCSO ) ( CSIR ), Trombay,

SHRI K. N. TIWARI SJZRI P. K. SHUKLA ( Altcrnutc) Indian Telephone SERI M. S. VENKATESHAIAE Snnr A. SATYANARAYANA ( Altrmatc ) -

Industries Ltd, Bangalore

IS : 9000 ( Part VII ) - 1979

Indian Standard
BASIC ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING PROCEDURES FOR ELECTRONIC AND ELECTRICAL ITEMS
PART VII IMPACT TEST

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part VII ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 16 November 1979, after the draft finalized by the Environmenltal Testing Procedures Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 The differences in environmental testing procedures for component type items and equipment type items are fast disappearing in the context It is, therefore, found necessary to have of technological developments. uniform testing procedures wherever possible. This series of standards on environmental testing procedures ( IS : 9000 ) has been prepared with this objective. This is also in line with the principle adopted by IEC TC 50 Environmental Testing in developing unified series of standards on environmental testing procedures by International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.2.1 It is proposed to withdraw the existing Indian Standards, namely, IS : 589-1961* and IS : 2106t series dealing with environmental tests for electronic components and equipment respectively, as soon as the tests mentioned therein are covered in the new series ( IS : 9000 ). 0.3 The impact procedures: a) c) Shock Drop test prescribed in this standard includes the following

test; and topple test; test.
for electronic and

b) Bump test; d) Free fall test; and e) Free fall, repeated

*Basic climatic and mechanical durability tests for components electrical equipment ( revised ). TEnvironmental tests for electronic and electrical equipment. 3

IS : 9000 ( Part VII ) - 1979 0.4 In the preparation
derived IEC Pub 68-2-27 Part 2: Tests Commission. IEC Pub 68-2-29 Part 2: Tests Commission. of this standard, from the following: considerable assistance has been

( 1972 ) Basic environmental testing procedures, Shock. International Electrotechnical Test Ea:

( 1968 ) Basic environmental testing procedures, - Test Eb: Bump. International ElectrotechnicaI environmental testing procedures, and topple, primarily for equipment Electrotechnical Commission.

IEC Pub 68-2-31 ( 1969 ) Basic Part 2: Tests - Test EC: Drop International type specimens.

IEC Pub 68-2-32 ( 1975 ) Basic environmental testing procedures, Electrotechnical Part 2: Tests - Test Ed: Free fall. International Commission. . 0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in this standard, `if the fina vaIue, observed or calculated, off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. accordance with is to be rounded

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rcvi$td). 4

ZndianStandard
BASIC ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING PROCEDURES FOR ELECTROYIC AND ELECTRICAL ITEMS
PART VII IMPACT TEST

Section 1. SCOPE

1 Shock

1.1 This standard ( Part VII/Set 1 ) deals with the procedure for application of shock test on electronic and electrical items as a part of basic environmental tests. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions and explanation terms given in IS : 9000 ( Part I )-1977* shall apply. 3. OBJECT 3.1 The object of the shock test is to determine the suitability of compo nents and equipment for applications where they are subjected to nonrepetitive mechanical shocks and/or to assess their structural integrity, 4. GENERAL 4.1 The purpose of this shock test is to simulate the effects of relatively infrequent non-repetitive mechanical shocks likely to be encountered by equipments and components in service or during transportation. The simulation of continually repeated shocks and jolts is covered by other tests. In addition, the shock test may be used as a means of establishing the satisfactory design of the item so far as its structural integrity is concerned. 4.2 Whether an equipment or component, hereinafter referred to as an item, has to function during shock or merely to survive conditions of shock, should be clearly stated in the relevant specification. In &ha
*Basic environmental General. testing procedures for electronic

of

and electrical items: put `I

5

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set

1) - 1979

case, the relevant specification should always prescribe the acceptable tolerance on performance which allows the item to be considered satisfactory, or otherwise. 4.3 This test is primarily intended for unpackaged items and for items in their transport cases when the latter may be considered as part of the item itself. 4.4 For the purpose of this test, the item is always fastened machine during conditioning. to the shock

4.5 Bearing in mind present-day techniques in shock testing, this specification has been written in terms of prescribed pulse shapes with Since it is anticipated that at some time in the future shock tolerances. spectra may be used to specify the requirements of the test, the spectra of the pulse shapes included in this standard have been given in Appendix A for information purposes. 4.6 The half-sine pulse, the final-peak saw-tooth and the trapezoidal pulse are widely used in environmental testing and all are relatively easy to generate. The choice of pulse shape depends on many factors, and the difficulties inherent in making such a choice preclude giving a preferred order in this standard. 4.7 The Appendix characteristics A. of the different pulse shapes are discussed in

4.8 \Vhere low frequency response only is of interest, that is, if the product of the pulse duration and the highest frequency concerned is smaller than 0.2, any pulse shape with equal velocity change may be used since the shock spectra do not significantly differ in this range. 5. TEST EQUIPMENT AND MEASURING SYSTEM

5.1 Characteristics of Shock Machine - When the shock machine together with its fixtures are loaded with the item and any other load for the conditioning process, the applied shocks shall, at the monitoring point, ha+e the characteristics specified in 5.1.1 to 5.1.3. NOTE-In
specification,

certain cases, for
may allow tolerances

instance for highly reactive loads, the relevant less severe than those specified in this standard.

5.1.1 Basic Pulse Shapes - The shock machine shall be capable of generating a pulse approximating to one of the following nominal acceleration UerSus time curves.
NOTE-The

order

in which

the

pulse

shapes

are

listed

does

not

indicate

any

preference.

6

IS:9OOO(PartVII/Sec1)-1979 a) Final-peak
saw-tooth - Asymmetrical as shown by the dotted lines in Fig. triangle 1. with short fall time,

REFERENCE LINE CORRESPONDING TO PRE-PULSE

MINIMUM TIME DURING WHICH PULSE SHOULQ BE MONITORED

Nominal pulse Tolerance boundaries D = Duration of nominal pulse A = Peak acceleration of nominal pulse
---_

The reference line shall not differ more than t ever is the greater, from zero acceleration.

0.05 A or f

10m/Z ( f 1 8 ), which-

FIG. 1 FINAL-PEAK SAW-TOOTH PULSE

b)

Half-sine - One-half lines in Fig. 2.

cycle of a sine wave, as shown by the dotted times, as shown by the

Trapezoidal - With short rise and fall dotted lines in Fig. 3. rance

The true value of the actual pulse shall be within the as shown by the solid lines in the relevant figure.

limit

of tole-

5.1.2 Velocity Change Tolerance - For all pulse shapes, the actual velocity change should be within It 10 percent of the value corresponding to the nominal pulse. To determine the velocity change, the actual pulse should be integrated from 0'4 D before the pulse to 0'1 D beyond the pulse, where D is the length of the nominal pulse ( see Fig. 1 to 3 ).
7

IS t9000 ( Part VII/Set

1) - 1979

REFERENCE CORRESPOI WIN6 TO PRE-PULSE CONDITIONS 7 O-05 A -0905A

A

-4
- - -

MINIMUM

TIME DURING WHICH PULSE SHOULD BE MONITORED

I+-

Nonlinal pulse Tolerance boundaries
10 m/s2

A = Peak acceleration of nominal pulse The reference line shall not differ more than * 0'05 A or * ever is the greater, from zero acceleration.

D = Duration of nominal pulse

( * 1 g ), which-

FIG. 2

HALF-SINE PULSE

peak acceleration at 5.1.3 Transverse Motion - The positive or negative the monitoring point, perpendicular to the intended shock direction, shall not exceed at any time 30 percent of the value of the peak acceleration of the nominal pulse in the intended direction, when determined with a measuring system in accordance with 5.2.

5.2 Measuring

System

5.2.1 Monitoring - The shock pulse shall be measured by an accelerometer placed at the monitoring point. This point shall be the item fixing point nearest to the centre of the table surface, unless there is an item fixing point having a more rigid connection to the table, in which case this point shall be chosen.

5.2.2 Accuracy - The accuracy of the measuring it can be determined that the true value is within 5.2.3 Frequency Characteristics - The frequency measuring system, including the accelerometer, shown in Fig. 4. 8

system shall be such that the given tolerances. response of the overall shall be within the limits

IS : 9000 ( Part VIIjSec

1) - 1979

NOTE When it is necessary to employ filters to reduce the effect of any high frequency resonances inherent in the accelerometer, it may be necessary to avoid distortion of the reproduced waveform, to examine the amplitude and phase characteristics of the measuring system.

specified in the relevant specification, one of the shapes given in 51.1 and one of the severities given in Table 1 shall he chosen. For the selected pulse shape, the shock severity is given by a combination of the peak acceleration and the duration of the nominal pulse.
pulse

6. SEVERITIES 6.1 Unless otherwise

7. METHOD

OF MOUNTING -

7.1 General

The item shall be mechanically connected to the test Mounting fixtures equipment, either directly or by means of a fixture. shall be such as to enable the item to be submitted to shocks along the External connections various axes as specified for conditioning ( see 9 ). necessary for measuring purposes should add the minimum restraint and mass. Reference miy also be made to IS : 8456-1977*.

REFERENCE TO PRE-PULSE

LINE CORRESPONDING CONDITIONS

MINIMUM

TIME -

DURING -

WHlCH

THE

PULSE

SHOULD

BE

MONITORED

Nominal pulse Tolerance boundaries D = Duration of nominal pulse A = Peak acceleration of nominal pulse The referencr line shall not differ more than S= O-05 A or * 10 m/s' (A 1 g ), ever is the greater, from zero acceleration.

which-

FIG, 3
*Guidance on method of mounting

TRAPEZOIDAL of electronic 9

PULSE and electrical items for dynamic tests.

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set' 1) - 1979

-

10

Duration of Pulse Cm9

Low-Frequency cut-off WI -__A_-_7 -1 dB 16 16 4 -10 dB 4 4 1

High-Frequency cut-off WW -1 dB 15 5 5

Frequency Beyond Which the Response May Rise Above+ 1 dB @Hz)

<3 3<A18

40 25 25

FIGHT FREQUENCY 7.1.1 Mounting
as prescribed a) Clamping b) Clamping 7.1.2
Mounting

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MEASURING
The following specification:

SYSTEM may be used

of Components

methods

by the relevant

both the body and the leads, and the leads only.
of Equipments

a) The equipment shall be fastened to the shock machine by its normal means of attachment, or as prescribed in the relevant specification. Any additional stays or straps should be avoided. If cables, pipes, etc, are required to be connected to the equipment during the test as prescribed by the relevant specification, these should be arranged so as to add similar restraint and mass as in the normal installation. b) Equipment intended for use with isolators should normally be In exceptional cases, if it is impossible tested with its isolators. 10

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set to carry out the shock test using the correct isolators, for if equipment is mounted with other equipment in a mounting system, then the relevant specification may shock test of the stated severity on the single item using specified for this case.

1) - 1979 example, common permit a isolators

7.1.3 Gravitational Effect - The relevant specification shall state In this case, the whether the effect of gravitational force is important. item shall be so mounted that the gravitational force acts in the same direction as it would in use. Where the effect of gravitational force is not important, the item may be mounted in any attitude.
TABLE 1 SEVEZUTIE S FOR ( Clause 6. I ) CORREBPONDINCJ CORRESPONDING VELOCITY CEAXGE PEAK *-_-DURATION or ACCELERATION r-----THE PULSE (D) Final-Peak Half-Sine Trapez (A) Saw-Tooth (1) m/se 150 200 200 300 300 300 400 400 500 500 750 750 1000 1 000 2 000 2 000 5ooo 10 000 10 000 15 ooo 30 000 NOTE (2) ms 11 11 18 6 11 18 11 18 3 11 6 I1 6 11 3 6 1 1 o-5 0'5 cr2 (3) m/s O-83 1.10 1.80 0.90 1.65 2.70 2.20 3.60 0'75 2.75 2,25 4.13 3-00 I.50 3.00 6.00 2.50 5.00 2.50 3.75 3.00 (4) m/s 1'05 I%! 2.29 1'15 2'10 3.44 2'80 457 0'95 3-50 2.86 5.25 3.82 7.00 3.82 7-64 3.18 637 3.18 4.77 3.82 (5) m/s 1.49 1.98 S-24 1'62 2'97 4% 396 648 1.35 4.95 4'05 743 5.40 990 5% 10'80 MO 9'00 450 6.75 5.40 SHOCK TEST

Bold values are preferred values.

11

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/&c 8. INITIAL
checked,

1) - 1979

MEASUREMENTS
by the relevant and electrically specification. and mechanically

8.1 The item shall be visually inspected
as required

9. CONDITIONING 9.1 Unless otherwise prescribed in the relevant specification, three successive shocks shall be applied in each direction of three mutually perpendicular axes so chosen that faults are most likely to bz revealed ( that is, a total of 18 shocks ). Severity of the shock ( defined by the shape, acceleration and duration of the pulse ) shall be chosen from 6 as specified in the relevant specification. The relevant specification should state whether the item shall be operating and if performance checks are required at any stage. NOTE 9.2 Generally, no performance checks need to be carried out between shocks. by the~relevant and specification, specified the item shall check be operated shall be

If required

during carried

conditioning out.

performance

10. FINAL 10.1 The
mechanically

MEASUREMENTS
item shall be visually inspected checked, as required by the relevant and electrically specification. and

11. INFORMATION SPECIFICATION

TO BE GIVEN

IN THE RELEVANT
the following

11.1 When this test is incIuded in a relevant specification, details should be given as far as they are applicable:

4 b) 4 4 f)

Method

of mounting effect reactive

( see 7 ); ( see 7.1.3 loads: ); and duration ( see 8 ); of shocks ( see 9.1 ); ( see 9 ); as agreed between the purchecks ( see 6 ); ); tolerances ( see 5.1, Note );

Gravitational Case of highly Pulse shape Initial

( see 5.1.1

e>Severity,
$3Direction
Final

acceleration and number

measurements

h) 3 k)

Operational

and performance

measurements

( see 10.1 ); and

Any deviation in the test procedure chaser and the manufacturer.

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set

1

j-

1979

APPENDIX
( Chses
SHOCK SPECTRA

A

4.5 and 4.7 )

AND OTHER CHARACTERISTICS OF PULSE SHAPES

A-O. GENERAL A-O.1 This Appendix gives some information intended to guide the writer of the relevant specification and the test engineer in using this standard, especially in making the choice of pulse shapes, peak acceleration and duration. A-O.2 In order to utilize improved techniques in shock testing and to allow for furt.her development of shock machines, this test requires one of three pulse shapes, with a stated degree of severity, to be applied to the item fixing points and does not restrict the testing to specific machines. The choice of pulse shape and degree of severity should be made in accordance with technical considerations appropriate to the project or type of item. A-O.3 Methods of shock testing at the present time are based on various technical considerations and varying degrees' of accuracy are required, leading to a number of different pulse shapes and severities being specified. Not all methods can be regarded as acceptable from the standpoint of reproducibility of the specified test condition or for simulating the effects of actual shock environments. However, in order to obtain tests `which are both reproducible and which can be related to practical application, certain basic concepts have been taken into consideration in producing the test procedure for this shock test. The concepts involved are given below. A-l. THE SHOCK SPECTRUM CONCEPT

A-l.1 The acceleration shock spectra of various pulse shapes have been considered when preparing the shock test procedures, because they give a useful measure of the damage potential of the shocks in many important practical cases. It shall be recognized, however, that from certain points of view, they have limited applicability. A-l.2 This acceleration shock spectrum can be regarded as the maximum acceleration responses to a given shock excitation of undamped massspring systems as a function of the frequencies of the systems. The maximum acceleration of all parts forming oscillatory systems of an 13

IS:9ObO(PartVII/Secl)-1979 equipment or component determines, in most cases, the maximum mechanical stress of their attachments and the maximum relative displacement of their elastic members; it is, therefore, directly related to several important causes of damage and failure due to the shock environment. A-l.3 Let the framework in Fig. 5 be subjected to a shock excitation with a given pulse shape, that is, time history of the acceleration &xf/&s = a ( t ). The response of the systems will be oscillations with different acceleration time histories for the masses m depending on the resonance frequency.

m

=

Mass

k = Spring constant x = Displacement relative to a fixed co-ordinate

system

FIO. 5

FRAMEWORKOR Box CONTAININGOSCILLATORY SYSTEMS OF WHICHJI,JS ANDfa ARE EXAMPLES OF RESONANCE FREQUENCIES

A-l.4 An example of pulse shape with peak value A and duration D is shown in Fig. 6A, giving response accelerations d%/dtZ - UI ( t ), etc, as shown in Fig. 6B. A-l.5 The shock spectra ( see Fig. 6C ) result from an infinite number of frequencies and are plots of the different extreme acceleration responses a - in Fig. 6B, as functions of resonance frequency of the undamped linear mass-spring system. A-l.6 The positive initial shock spectrum, +I, in Fig. 6C, is the plot of the maximum response occurring during the pulse duration in the same direction as the exciting pulse: the a mart ( +I ) in Fig. 6B. A-1.7 The positive residual shock spectrum, -f-R, is the plot of the same maximum response occurring after the pulse duration: the a - f +R ). A-1.8 The negative initial shock spectrum, -I, is the plot of the maximum response during the pulse in the opposite direction to the exciting pulse: the a max(-I ,. 14

IS :9000 ( Part VII/Se.c 1) - 1979

A

I
0

TlWE

6A Exciting

Pulse

6C Spectra Which Result from an Infinite Number of Frequencies, with f,, f, and f, Shown As Finite Points on the Continuous Curves

I. 1

w
d'r
-2
"mm

(+I)

dt'

Onlax t+R,

D = Acceleratiqn A = Peak acceleration D = Duration a max = Extreme +I --I +R --R = Positive = Negative = Positive = Negative values Initial initial residual residual of the exciting pulse acceletation ot response pulse of the exciting

Olpl` (-I)

D

TlllE

"rnU (-R,

66

Responses

for f,, f, and f,

FIG. 6

ACCELERATION RESPONSE;

15

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set 1) - 1979 A-l.9 The negative
maximum response residual shock spectrum, -R, after the pulse: the amax (-R r. is the plot of the same

A-1.10 All four spectra
nance frequencies

are shown in Fig. 6C with the of the framework also noted.

examples

of reso-

A-l.11 As the damping

is assumed zero, the response after the pulse duration is a steady sinusoidal oscillation around zero acceleration. Thus, the positive residual and negative residual are images in the frequency axis of each other. Usually, only the positive residual is shown in presenting spectra.

A-1.12 The negative initial spectrum is everywhere less in magnitude than the positive initial spectrum for the pulse shapes of concern here. The shock testing procedure therefore requires testing in both directions along each axis. The maximum acceleration for the parts will then be determined by the positive initial spectrum in both directions. The negative initial spectrum is therefore omitted in the following. A-1.13 The envelope of the positive initial and residual spectra shows the It is maximum response acceleration of the masses whenever it occurs. However, in called the `maximax' response or overall shock spectrum. order to convey the requisite information clearly in this appendix, the initial and residual spectra are plotted separately. In practice, it is often difficult to find the precise duration, and in such cases, it is impracticable to determine these spectra individually.

A-1.14 T,he spectra can easily be generalized with respect to the peak value and duration for all shocks with the same arbitrary pulse shape. If, instead off and amax, the co-ordinate scales fD and amxjA are chosen, the shock spectra will be valid for any shocks of the same pulse shape, for example, half-sine 500 m/s2 and 1 I ms as well as half sine 15 000 miss and 0'5 ms. The spectra given in this appendix have therefore two co-ordinate scales: the fD versus amax/A and f versus urnax for a particular -example of duration and peak acceleration. A-2. THE
USE OF FIRST PRACTICAL CASES ORDER SHOCK SPECTRA IN

A-2.1 In components and equipment, the internal parts generally form more complicated systems than undamped systems, for instance seriesconnected multi-degree-of-freedom systems with damping, shown in Fig. 7. In this case, shock excited oscillations in one outer system may cause damage to an inner system by coupled resonance effects. These effects can be described by sets of higher order shock spectra, valid for given combinations of resonance frequencies of the mass-spring sub-systems.
16

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set

1) - 1979

I

FIG. 7

FRAMEWORK CONTAINING DAMPED MULTIDEGREE-OF-FREEDOM SYSTEM

A-2.2 If the resonance frequencies of the series-connected system are which is true in many practical separated to any significant extent, examples, the simple first order shock spectrum gives a reasonable measure for comparing the damage potential of shocks of different pulse shapes.

.

A-2.3 One important elect to he noted is that `the highest acceleration of the internal masses will be reached when resonances are excited during the period of the pulse. In this case, the oscillation acceleration will be superimposed upon that of the pulse itself. Hence, it will be evident from A-3 of this appendix that the greatest liability to damage in this respect will be when using short rise time pulses. A-2.4 In general, damping will have the effect of lowering the responses at intermediate frequencies during the pulse and at intermediate and higher frequencies after the pulse. The damping will decrease both the amplitude and the time during which any oscillatory content persists, thereby appreciably attenuating the response of any inner system. The damage potential of a shock is therefore in general lower for damped systems than for undamped, particularly for multi-degree-of-freedom systems. The shock spectra represent the worst of possible practical cases, as they are based on theoretically undamped responses. A-2.5 From the observations given above, it follows that the acceleration shock spectra presented as the positive initial and positive residual spectra of an acceleration shock pulse do not describe completely the damage 17

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set

1 ) - 1979

potential of the shock. Nevertheless, this simplified presentation is sufficient to allow an appropriate pulse shape to be chosen for actual configurations in practice. A-3.

THE SHOCK SHAPES

SPECTRA

OF THE

NOMINAL

PULSE

A-3.1 In this clause,

some, characteristics of the shock spectra of the recommended nominal pulse shapes are given in order to show advantages and disadvantages of these shapes when used for accurate shock testing. Accuracy is needed to cover the important general requirement of reproduc'il,ility of the tests among different testing laboratories and ~tlso in cases when simulation of a given shock environment is required.

A-3.2 Before comparing shock spectra, accurate shock testing requires a ,judgement of the importance of prolonged response oscillations represented by the residual spectra, compared with the short responses represented by the initial spectra. The judgement should be based on possible failure modes. A-3.3 l'he acceleration shock spectra of the recommended nominal pulse shapes have been plotted from the analytical formulae and are shown in Fig. 8, 9 and 10. The curves have been checked against corresponding shock spectra given by analogue computer. A-3.4 The form of the spectra for the same pulse shape is the same irrespective of pulse duration due to the use of non-dimensional scales. The generalized frequency scale,fD allows frequency scales for any duration D to be determined. The generalized response scale, amax/il, allows the determination of scales for any pulse peak value A. A-3.5 At lcw frequencies and up to fD - 0'2, the initial spectra are nearly the same, while the residual spectra are nearly proportional to the velocity change ( area ) of the pulse. This is the reason for the additional tolerance requirement on velocity change ( see 51.2 ). The trapezoidal pulse shape has the highest velocity change for a given peak acceleration and duration. A-3.6 In theintermediate frequency range 0'2 < fD < 10, the initial spectra show differences in level mainly depending on the rise time of the pulse. The final-peak saw-tooth pulse has longest rise time and shows the lowest response for a given peak value. The trapezoidal pulse shows the highest response for a given peak value due to the short rise time and the flat peak, allowing even the low-frequency oscillations to reach their peak before the instantaneous value of the originating pulse falls. 18

GENERALIZED b4AXIMUM RESPONSE

MAXIMUM

RESPONSE

FOR

A= 500 m/s1 ACCELERATION o

ACCELERATION

A

I s INITIAL

R = RESIDUAL

FIG. 8

SHOCK

SPECTRUM

OF A FINAL-PEAK

SAW-TOOTH

PULSE

GENERALIZED MAXIMUM RESPONSE

MAXIMUM RESPONSE FOR

A=5OOmls= ACCELERATION PEAK ACCELERATION T--Y -s \ / \ L A Q PULSE f SHAPE L ! I&

2
E a

2.0

If

'

m/s'

--loo0

1.6 1.6

I 1 ir

-750 I*&
-7.2 VO W6 0.6 I -500 I ,I I / I 1, ,

/ \ 9. / I
u\ \ \ I III

0I 0

D

II

_,

I It -

n-3

I 0.02
0.05

0.1

I

0.2
I i INITIAL

0.5

,

.-`1

1

4

5

I

.."I

10

GENERALIZED FREQUENCY

,n : Y

R = RESIDUAL

F1c.9

SHOCK

SPECTRUM

OF A SYMMETRICAL

HALF-SINEPULSE

GENERALIZED MAXIMUM RESPONSE

MAXIMUM RESPONSE

FOR A400m/s2

ACCELERATION

h

P
I = INITIAL R = RESIDUAL
I-

s P
I
Y

FIQ. 10

SHOCKSPECTRUM OF A SYMMETRICAL TRAPEZOIDAL PULSE

V

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set A-3.7 Also

1) - 1979

in this frequency range ( 0'2 < fD < 10 ), the residual spectrum of the saw-tooth pulse shows I relatively high and smooth course up to the first zero at approximately fD - 10. The frequency of this zero depends on the ratio of the rise and f?X times, the frequency increasing for steeper fall of the final peak. The residual spectra of the half-sine and trapezoidal pulses have repeated zeros beginning at relatively low frequewies, approximately fD = 1. This is due to the symmetry of these pulses and is a great disadvantage from the point of view of reproducibility of'the tests. Slight changes in pulse duration or symmetry may cause considerable changes in residual response and give different test results. A-3.8 At higher frequencies, the initial spectra approach amax/~ = 1 and the residual spectra zero. This is illustrated by the fact that a mass on a very stiff spring follows closely the acceleration-time history of the exciting pulse. The statement is valid for all pulse shapes having finite rise and fall times.

A-4. THE EFFECT

OF RIPPLE

A-4.1 Ripple on the originating pulse is the most important kind of deformation from the nominal pulse shape and therefore merits special consideration.
A-4.2 Oscillatory systems with low or no damping are very sensitive to ripple on the pulse. As an example, the effect on the shock spectrum of a half-sine pulse is shown in Fig 11. Suprrlrnposetl on the nominal 500 m/s2 ( 10 and 11 ms half-sine pulse is .I I!;(! I-lr \ipnal of 5'1 m/s2 amplitude >-:i 5; i m `s* initial amplitude percent ripple ) during the :intl:lilai ;xh damped with Q = 5 aftc-r- the` noi?`l'. .' ;;ulse. This produces a theoretical pulse comparable rlith tbc pui.;c,.\ ti 11ich may be obtained by shock machines. The effect as can be SYCI: 1:; considerable, especially on An increase of the ripple to 20 percent would the residual spectrum. increase the peak values to around (~,,,~Jil = 4. In general, ripple should therefore be avoided as far as possible in ordrr to preserve reproducibility of the test. A-4.3 Ripple frequencies in the low-frequency range fD < 0'2 have a negligible effect. Frequencies in the intermediate and high range fD > 0.2 give peaks at the ripple frequency, the response increasing with higher frequencies for a constant ripple amplitude. The residual spectrum is always relatively more affected than the initial. The initial spectrum of the pulse shape with short rise time, the trapezoidal, is sensitive only to The initial spectrum of the final-peak saw-tooth is high-frequency ripple. very sensitive to ripple in the whole intermediate and high-frequency range. 22

GENERALIZED MAXIMUM RESPONSE

MAXIMUM

RESPONSE

FOR

A-500

m/s2

ACCELERATION

a

I

V..

02
I E INITIAL

0.5

I

,"I

*

1

2

5

10

GENERALIZED

FREQUENCY

10

R = RESIOUAL

FIG. 11

SHOCK SPECTRUMOF A HALF-SINE PULSE WITH RIPPLE

IS : 9000 ( Part

VII/Set

1)

- 1979

A-4.4 Ripple which is only slightly damped and therefore extends for an appreciable time after the end of the intended nominal pulse can affect the residual spectrum considerably. A-4.5 When excessive ripple is present, the results of a shock test could be significantly different from those obtained in a test where the ripple is within the tolerance bands specified in this standard, in spite of the ripple effect being concentrated around the ripple frequency only. The tolerance bands around the nominal pulse- shapes are intended to take care of permitted ripple as well as other shape distortions. A-5. REPRODUCING THE PULSES BY A SINGLE EFFECTS PULSE OF VARIOUS SHOCK

A-5.1 The recommended shock pulses are not intended to simulate the but to reproduce, the effects of the real shocks encountered in practice, envirdnment by revealing the same damage and failures as far as possible. appropriate consideration of the For accurate shock testing, therefore, shock spectra of the real environment is necessary. However, this information is generally not available and is often limited to a statistical distribution of peak acceleration or to at? estimation of design level. A-5.2 Bearing in mind the wide range of types of shocks encountered in practice, it is worthwhile considering the possibility of using a single pulse to reproduce the effects of a number of shocks of given peak value and varying duration. A-5.3 The graph of Fig. 12, provides a comparison of the spectra of a series of half-sine pulses, with the spectra of a single saw-tooth waveform. It will be seen that there is a considerable degree of overlap of a series of half-sine pulses by a final-peak saw-tooth pulse of a`higher peak value, accepting some overtesting regarding initial spectrum.

24

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Sex

2 ) - 1979

Indian Standard
BASIC ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING PROCEDURES FOR ELECTRONIC AND ELECTRICAL ITEMS
PART VII IMPACT TEST

Section 1. SCOPE

2 Bump

1.1 This standard ( Part VII/Set 2 ) deals with the test procedure for application of bump test on electrical and electronic items as part of the basic environmental tests. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions terms given in IS : 9000 ( Part I )-1977; shall apply. 3. OBJECT 3.1 The object of this test is to determine the suitability of components and equipments for application where they are subjected to prolonged bumping and/or to assess their structural integrity. 4. GENERAL , 4.1 The purpose of this bump test is to produce in the item effects similar to those resulting from repetitive shocks likely to be encountered by equipments and components in service or during transportation. 4.1.1 Whether an equipment or component, hereinafter referred to as an item, has to function during bump or merely to survive conditions of bump, should be clearly stated in the relevant specification. In either case, the relevant specification should always prescribe the acceptable tolerance on performance which allows the item to be considered satisfactory, or otherwise.
*Basic General. environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items

and explanation

of

: Part I

27

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set 2 ) - 1979 4.1.2 This te,st is primarily intended for items in their transport cases when the latter of the item itself. 4.1.3 For the purpose of this test, the bump machine during conditioning.
5. TEST EQUIPMENT unpackaged items and for may be considered as part

item is always

fastened

to the

AND MEASURING

SYSTEM

5.1 Characteristics of the Bump Machine When the, bump machine and fixtures are loaded with the item and any other necessary load for the conditioning process, the applied bumps shall, at the monit.n-ing point, have the characteristics specified below.
In certain cases, for instance specification may allow tolerances standard. for highly reactive loads, the relevant less severe than those specified in this

5.1.1 Basic Pulse Shape - The bump machine shall be capable of generating a pulse approximating to one-half cycle of a sine wave as shown by dotted lines in Fig. 1.
The true values of acceleration and duration of the actual be within the li.mits of tolerance shown in Fig. 1.
`-NOMINAL BOUNOARIES PULSE

pulse shall

-TOLERANCE

FIG. 1

PULSE SHAPE ( HALF-SINE ) FOR THE BUMP TEST 28

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set

2 ) - 1979

5.1.2 Repetition Rate The repetition rate shall be such that between impulses the relative motion within the item shall be substantially zero and the value of acceleration at the monitoi-ing point shall be within the limits shown in Fig. 1.
NOTE to reduce I A bump secondary bumps

repetition rate of 1 to
to a minimum.

3

bumps per second is

usually

adequate

5.1.3 VeZocity Change - The actual velocity change shall be within zt 20 percent of the value corresponding to the nominal pulse given in7.1. To determine the velocity change, the actual pulse should be integrated from 0'4 D before the pulse to 0'1 D beyond the pulse, where D is the length of the nominal pulse ( see Fig. 1 ). 5.1.4 Transverse Motion - The positive or negative peak acceleration at the monitoring point, perpendicular to the intended direction of bumps, shall not exceed at any time 30 percent of the value of the peak acceleration of the nominal pulse in the intended direction, when determined with a measuring system in accordance with 5.2. 5.2 Measuring System

5.2.1 Monitoring - The acceleration shall be measured by an acceleroThis point shall be the item fixing meter placed at the monitoring point. point nearest to the centre of the table surface, unless there is an item fixing point having a more rigid connection to the table, in which case the latter shall be chosen. 5.2.2 Accuracy - The accuracy of the measuring system shall be such that it can be determined that the true value is within the given tolerances. 52.3 Frequency Characteristics - The frequency response of the overall measuring system! including the accelerometer, shall be within the limits shown in Fig. 2. NOSY --- When it is necessary to employ filters to reduce the effect of any highfrequency resonances inherent in the accelerometer, it may be necessary to avoid to examinr the amplitude and phase distortion of thr reprodured waveform, characteristics of the measuring system. 6. METHOD OF MOUNTING either

6.1 Mounting - The itc.m shall be fastened to the bump machine, dirertly or by means of a Gxture as specified below. 29

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Sec.Z ) - 1979 I
2SkHz I -1dB 1 5kHz

-lOdB -

II fill,, 1 4 Hz G?EQ"ENCY kliz , I 1 I II

FIG.

2

FREQUENCYCHARACTERISTIC OF THE MEASURING SYSTEM

Mounting fixtures shall be such as to enable the item to be subjected to bumps along the various axes as specified for conditioning ( see 9 ). External the minimum connections necessary restraint and mass. for measuring purposes should add

of mounting of compo6.1.1 Mounting of Components - For methods reference may be made to IS : 8456-1977*. The following nents, methods may be used as prescribed by the relevant specification: a) Clamping b) Clamping 6.1.2 Mounting both the body and the leads, and the leads only.

of Equipments
for use in an environment where in moving vehicles ) shall be fastened unless otherwise stated by the relevant

6.1.2.1 Equipment intended bumping takes place ( for example, by its normal means of attachment, specification.

*Guidance on method of mounting of electronic and electrical items for dynamic tests. 30

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set

2 ) - 1979

Equipmel,: intended for use with isolators should normally be tested If it is impossible to carry out the test using the with its isolators. if the equipment is mounted with other correct isolators, for example, equipment in a common mounting system, then the relevant specification may permit a bump test of stated severity on the single equipment using isolators specified for this case. If cables, pipes, etc, are required to be connected to the equipment during the test for measuring purposes, these should be arranged so as to add similar restraint and mass as in the normal installation. 6.1.2.2 When the bump test is employed to demonstrate a certain degree of robustness in an equipment which is normally protected by the equipment shall, unless otherwise specified, be mounted isolators, directly to the table, and the test carried out with the isolators removed or blocked. The relevant specification shall then give precise manner of mounting and on performing the test. instructions on the

6.1.2.3 When the bump test is employed to ascertain the capability of an equipment to withstand transportation, other than that inherent in its service use, the equipment shall be mounted only as prescribed by the relevant specification. 6.1.2.4 When mounting the equipment on the bump machine, stays or straps additional to those required or permitted by the relevant specification should be avoided. 6.1.3 Gravitational Effect - The relevant specification shall state whether the effect of gravitational force is important. In this case, the item shall be so mounted that the gravitational force acts in the same Where the effect of gravitational force is direction as it would in use. not important, the items may be mounted in any attitude.

7. SEVERITIES

7.0 A bump test severity is given by the combination of peak acceleration, duration and number of bumps. Unless otherwise prescribed in the relevant specification, one of the severities given in 7.1 and 7.2 shall be chosen.

31

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set 7.1 Acceleration Peak Acceleration (4) n-!/9 100 250 400 7.2 Number of Buriaps 10 10

2 ) - 1979 of the Pulse Corresponding Velocity Changk m/s 1'02 0'96 1'53

and Duration

Corresponding Duration of the Pulse (D) ms 16 6 6

1 000 f 4 000 5

7.3 Preferred Severity - For the testing of components and other small items, the preferred severity shall be 4 000 f 16 bumps at an acceleration of 400 m/s" with a pulse duration of 6 ms. 8. INITIAL MEASUREMENTS and mechanical!y

8.1 The item shall be visually inspected and electrically checked, as required by the relevant specification. 9. CONDITIONING

9.0 The relevant specification should state whether the item operating and if performance checks are required at any stage.

shall bc

9.1 Components - Unless otherwise prescribed in the relevant specifcation, the specified number of bumps shall be applied in the t\vo senses of three mutually perpendicular axes to six components, one mounted irr each of six attitudes. When the number of components available is less than six, the specified number of bumps shall be applied to the reduced number of components, in such a manner that a test is made in each of six attitudes. According to the number of components, the test shall be applied as follows: a) Three to Five - Three components shall be tested, each of them in two of the six possible attitudes making a total of 2 000 or 8 000 bumps to each component, according to the severity. 32

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set 2 ) - 1979
b)
TWO Each component shall be tested in three of the six possible attitudes, making a total of 3 000 or 12 000 bumps to each component, according to the severity.

c) One - The component shall be tested in each of the six possible attitudes, making a total of 6 000 or 24 000 bumps to the component, according to the severity.

9.2 Equipments

- Where the attitude of the equipment when mounted or transported is known, and since bumps arc generally of greatest significance in one direction ( usually vertical ), the specified number of bumps should be applied in that direction and attitude only. However, where the attitude is unknown, the specified number of bumps should be applied In this case, in each of the directions stated in the relevant specification. three mutually perpendicular directions are usually adequate. 10. FINAL MEASUREMENTS

10.1 The item shall be visually inspected and electrically cally checked, as required by the relevant specification.

and mechani-

11. INFORMATION TO BE GIVEN IN THE RELEVANT SPECIFICATION 11.1 When
details a) this test is included in the relevant specification, should be given as far as they are applicable: Method of mounting effect reactive ( see 6 ); ( see 6.1.3 ); (see 5.1 ); ( see 7.1 and 7.2 ); of bumps loads : tolerances and number ( see 8 ); checks ( see 9.0 ); ( components ( equipments ) ( see 9.1 ); ) ( see 9.2 ); for conditioning for conditioning the following

b) Gravitational c) Case of highly d) Severity, e) Initial f) g) Number h) Number and j) Final

acceleration

measurements of directions of directions

Operational

and performance

measurements

( see 10 ).

33

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set

3 ) - 1979

Indian Standard
BASIC ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING PROCEDURES FOR ELECTRONIC AND ELECTRICAL ITEMS
PART Section 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part VII/Set 3 ) deals with the procedures and topple test to assess the effects of knocks and jolts likely during repair work or rough handling of electronic and electrical
2. TERMINOLOGY for drop to occur items.

VII 3

IMPACT

TEST

Drop and Topple

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions terms given in IS : 9000 ( Part I )-1977* shall apply. 3. OBJECT 3.1 The object of this test is to assess electrical items likely to occur during in use. 4. GENERAL 4.1 This test includes
a) Dropping b) Dropping c) Toppling three distinct procedures:

and explanation

of

the effects upon electronic and repair work or rough handling

on to a face ( sge 9.2 ), on to a corner ( or push-over ( see 9.3 ), and ) ( see 9.4 ). is basically the same, but

4.1.1 The purpose of each of these procedures they represent different kinds of handling.

4.1.2 This test is not intended to be a precise test and a tolerance of f 10 percent is allowed on the heights and angles prescribed in testing procedures.
General.

*Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items : Part I

35

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set 4.2 This test
robustness

3 ) - 1979
degree of

may also be used to demonstrate a minimum for the purpose of assessing safety requirements.

4.3 This test is primarily
their transport cases, items themselves. 5. DESCRIPTION

intended for unpackaged items and for items in when the latter may be considered as part of the

OF TEST
test platform

APPARATUS
shall be used for this test.

5.1 A drop/toppling

5.2 The test platform shall consist of a steel plate not less than 6'5 mm thick which has been wet floated on and bolted down to a fully set concrete block at least 500 mm thick.

5.3 The dimensions
surface

of the test of the item under test.

platform

shall be

larger

than the largest

6. TEST

CONDITIONS

taken into account the manner in which the item will be handled in use and during repair, the relevant specification shall state the test procedures to be used and whether covers, cables, etc, are to be in position or not, the relevant specification shall also state whether the item is, or is not, operational during the test. 6.2 In the test procedures for dropping on to a face or corner, it is possible for the item to topple on to the next face instead of falling back Th' 1s shall be avoided on to the test face as intended. by a suitable method. 6.3 In any of the test procedures, nue rolling about the next edge. the item shall not be allowed to conti-

6.1 Having

6.4 Where the number of bottom edges exceeds four, the number of drops or topples shall be limited to 4 and the relevant specification shall prescribe the edges to be used for the test. 7. SEVERITIES

7.1 The height or distance
25 mm, 50 mm,

of drop may be selected 100 mm.

from the following:

36

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set 8. INITIkL MEASUREMENTS

3 ) - 1979

8.1 The item shall be visually inspected and electrically early checked, as required by the relevant specification.

and mechani-

9. CONDITIONING 9.1 During switched-of specification. conditioning condition, ( see 9.2 to 9.4 ), unless otherwise the items specified shall be in the in the relevant

9.2 Dropping on to a Face - The item, standing in its normal position of use on a platform specified in 5 is tilted about one bottom edge so that the distance between the opposite edge and the test surface is as prescribed by the relevant specification; or so that the angle made by the bottom It is then allowed to and the test surface is 30", whichever occurs first. fall freely on to the test surface: 9.2.1 The item shall be subjected edges. to 1 drop about each of four bottom

9.3 Dropping on to a Corner - The item, standing in its normal position of use on a platform specified in 5 is raised above the test surface by placing a wooden stud 10 mm high under one corner, and a 20 mm wooden stud, under the other adjacent corner of one of the bottom edges. The item is then lifted above the test surface by rotating it about the edge on the two studs, until the other corner adjacent to the 10 mm stud is raised as prescribed in the relevant specification, or so that the angle It is made by the item and the test surface is 30", whichever occurs first. then allowed to fall freely on the test surface. 9.3.1 The item shall be subjected to 1 drop on each of four bottom corners by applying the test along four bottom edges in turn. 9.4 Topple ( or Push-Over ) - The item, standing in its normal position of use on a platform specified in 5 is tilted about one bottom edge until it reaches a position of instability. It is then allowed to either fall over freely from this position on to an adjacent face; or fall back freely from this position on to the same face as specified in the relevant specification. 9.4.1 edges. The item shall be subjected to 1 topple about each of four bottom

37

IS : 9000 ( Part 10. FINAL

VII/Set

3 ) - 1979

MEASUREMENTS
and mechani-

10.1 The item shall be visually inspected and electrically cally checked, as required by the relevant specification. 11. INFORMATION SP",ZIFICATION TO BE GIVEN

IN THE RELEVANT
in

11.0 For items intended to withstand handling of the kind considered this standard, two dimensional ratios are important:

a) b)

The ratio of the height of the centre of gravity from the base to the smaller dimension of the base, hereinafter referred to as the C - g ratio. The ratio of the height of the item the base - the height ratio. to the smaller dimension of

If the c - g ratio is small, for example, less than 0'25, the item is unlikely to fall over due to sudden sideways displacements. If the height ratio is small, for example, less than 0'5, the item is unlikely to topple In such cases, over due to a sudden sideways force or blow at the top. the writer of the relevant specification should consider whether the topple test is applicable.

11.1 When the test is included in the relevant specification, details shall be given as far as thev are spplicable:

the following

4 Initial measurements ( see 8 ); b) Conditioning procedure ( see 9 ); c) Fitting of cables, covers, etc ( see 6.1 ); 4 Whether the item is operational or not e) Edges to be used in the test, where f) 9) h) 3 k)
The height Whether of drop on to a corner test is applicable

during there

the test ( see 6.1 ); are more than four

bottom edges ( see 6.4 ); The height of the drop on to a face ( see 9.2 ); ( see 9.3 ); or not ( see 11.0 ); if other topple

Number of drops/topple ( or push-over ), as applicable, than those specified in 9.2.1, 9.3.1 and 9.4.1; and Final measurements ( see 10 ).

38

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set 4 ) - 1979

Indian Standard
BASIC ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING PROCEDURES FOR ELECTRONIC AND ELECTRICAL ITEMS
PART VII IMPACT 4 TEST

Section 1. SCOPE

Free Fall

( Part VII/Set 11 ) deals with the free fall test to assess the effects of the fall likely to be experienced during rough handling bf the electronic and electrical items.

1.1 This standard

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the
purpose of this standard, the definitions and explanation terms given in IS : 9000 ( Part I ) - 1977* shall apply. of

3. OBJECT 3.1 The object
degradation of the test is to determine mechanical in the specified performance of an item. weakness and/or

4. GENERAL 4.1 This test deals with
simulation of falls which an item, normally in the unpacked state, could undergo during handling and is normally restricted to two falls from a prescribed attitude onto a specified surface from a specified height. 4.2 This test is primarily intended for unpackaged items and for items in the transport cases when the latter may be considered as part of the items themselves.

5. DESCRIPTION 5.1 Test Surface The test surface
*Basic General.

OF TEST APPARATUS
A free fall test platform shall be used for this test. consist of a steel plate not less than 6'5 mm thick
testing procedures for electronic and electrical items

shall

environmental

: Part I

39

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set 4 ) - 1979
which has been wet floated on block at least 500 mm thick. 5.1.1 surface and bolted down to a fully shall be larger than set concrete !: largest

The dimensions of the test surface of the item under test.

5.2 Height of Fall - The height shall be measured from the part of the item nearest to the test surface, when the item is suspended prior to fall. 5.3 Method of Release - The method such as to allow free fall from the position of disturbance at the moment of release. of releasing the item shall be of suspension, with a minimum

6. SEVEIiITIES 6.1 The height of fall shall be chosen from the following:
25 mm, 50 mm, 100 mm, 250 mm, 500 mm, 1 000 mm.
NOTE 1 The bold values are preferred values. for heavy equipment to be subjected to the NOTE 2 - It may not be appropriate higher severities.

7. INITIAL

MEASUREMENTS and mechanically

7.1 The item shall be visually inspected and electrically checked, as required by the relevant specification.

8. CONDITIONING 8.1 During conditioning ( see 8.2 to 8.4 ), the items shall be in switchedoff condition, unless otherwise specified in the relevant specification.
8.2 The item in its normal attitudes in carrying or use, as prescribed in the relevant specification, shall be allowed to fall freely from a specified height ( see 6.1 ) on to a specified surface ( see 5.1 ). 8.3 Unless otherwise prescribed in the relevant specification, shall be subjected to 2 falls from each prescribed attitude. 8.4 If required by the relevant examined after each drop. specification, the item the item

may be visually

9. FINAL
checked,

MEASUREMENTS
as required by the relevant and electrically specification. and mechanically

9.1 The item shall be visually inspected 40

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set 10. INFORMATION SPECIFICATION TO BE GIVEN IN THE RELEVANT

4 ) - 1979

10.1 When this test is included in the relevant specification, details shall be given as far as they are applicable:
Height a> of fall ( see 6.1 ); is dropped ( see 8.2 );

the following

b) Initial measurements ( see 7 ); 4 Attitude from which the item 4 Number of falls, if other than e) Final measurements ( see 9 ).

two ( see 8.3 ); and

41

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

Indian S tankard
BASIC ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING PROCEDURES FOR ELECTRONIC AND ELECTRICAL ITEMS
PART Section VII 5 IMPACT Free Fall, TEST Repeated

i. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part VII/Set 5 ) deals with the test for free fall, repeated to assess the effects on an item which may be dropped frequently onto hard surfaces.
2. TERMINOLOGY

2.1 For the purpose of this

standard, the definitions terms given in IS : 9000 ( Part I )-1977* shall apply.

and

explanation

of

3. OBJECT 3.1 The object of the test is to determine mechanical degradation in the specified performance of an item.
4. GENERAL weakness and/or

4.1 This test simulates

repeated falls which may occur to such devices as connectors or small remote control units. Repeated falls onto a specified surface from a specified height are achieved by using a suitable apparatus, for example, a tumbling ( rotating ) barrel. intended for unpackaged
items,

4.2 This test is primarily 5. DESCRIPTION

OF THE

TEST

5.1 Each item is tested individually. The test consists of subjecting the item to a prescribed number of falls from a specified height onto a hard surface. The effect of the test is checked in relation to the changes, if any, in the mechanical and electrical parameters of the item.
*Basic environmental testing
General. procedures for electronic and electrical items

: Part I

43

IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Set 6. DESCRIPTION 6.1 The apparatus

5 ) - 1979 APPARATUS

OF TEST

shall be such that the prescribed number of falls from the specified height may be applied to individual items in accordance with the requirements of the relevant specification. One suitable form of apparatus is shown in Appendix A and is based on a- rotating or tumbling barrel. 7. SEVERITIES

7.1 Number

of Falls
given in 7.1.2 in the should relevant

7.1.1 The number of falls selected from the list be related to the intended usage of the item.

7.1.2 The total number of falls shall be as prescribed specification and shall be chosen from the following: 50, 100, 200, 500, 7.2 1 000. The height of fall shall be 500 mm.

Height

of Fall -

7.3 Rate minute.

of Falls

The rate of falls shall be approximately

10 falls per

7.4 Test Surface of steel of 3' 15 mm 10 mm thickness. 8. INITIAL checked,

The item shall fall on a smooth, hard, rigid surface thickness, backed by hardwood of approximately

MEASUREMENTS
in the relevant and electrically specification. and mechanically

8.1 The item shall be visually inspected
as prescribed

9. CONDITIONING 9.1 The item shall be placed prescribed number of falls. 10. FINAL MEASUREMENTS
and mechaniin the test apparatus and subjected to the

10.1 The item shall be visually inspected and electrically cally checked, as prescribed in the relevant specification. 11. INFORMATION SPECIFICATION TO BE GIVEN IN THE

RELEVANT
the following

11.1 When this test is included in the relevant specification, details shall be given as far as they are applicable:
a) Initial measurements ( see 8 ), 44

1S:9000(PartvI1/Sec5)-1979

b) cl

Number of falls ( s8e 7.1 ), and Final measurements ( see 10 ).

APPENDIX ( Chse 6.1 )
TUMBLING A-l. TEST APPARATUS ( ROTATING

A
) BARREL

A-l.1 One suitable form of apparatus for testing repeated falls is based on a rotating or tumbling barrel. Where a number of items has to he tested, the barrel may contain a number of sections, one item being placed in each section, so that simultaneous testing may be carried out. The dimensions of the barrel and/or its sections shall be as shown in Fig. 1. If the barrel is rotated at 5 rev/min, the item will be subjected to 10 falls per minute.

All dimensions
FIG. 1

in millimetres.

TUMBLING ( ROTATING ) BARREL. 45

