sıveiher “TTeTa” IS 17883 : 2022 
indian Standard 


qüri a: fem 
vöxrf"rar areğyun — ferid 


Geological Exploration for 
Tunnels — Guidelines 


ICS 93.160, 93.060 


O BIS 2022 


vefa? TiTTeR sri? 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
"rep: ver, 9 srerqumne: set ml, siz feveft — 110002 


in  /7/ MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEVV DELHI-110002 
VVVVVV.bis.gov.İn vVVVVV.standardsbis.in 


duly 2022 Price Group 6 


Geological Investigation and Subsurface Exploration Sectional Committee, VVRD 05 


FOREVVORD 


This Indian Standard vvas adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geological 
Investigation and Subsurface Exploration Sectional Committee had been approved by the VVater Resources 
Division Council. 


Tunnels have been an intrinsic part of infrastructure and energy development scenario in the country and their 
significance is increasing day by day. Many hydro-povver, irrigation and other vvater resources profects have 
experienced construction problems due to tunneling challenges especially vvhere long tunnels vvere involved. 
Similarly, a number of railvvay and highvvay tunnels are under excavation vvhere moderate to severe construction 
difficulties are being reported. A number of nevv tunneling profects in the country in communication sectors, such 
as highvvays and railvvays in the mountains and lift irrigation schemes particularly in peninsular İndia are being 
executed or are in the planning stage. 


Selection of proper site and fixing of tunnel alignments and advance knovvledge of tunneling media are mandatory 
requirements for any tunneling profects. To undertake systematic investigation and testing for tunnels and deliver 
a reliable geologic evaluation it has been felt necessary to have guidelines for geological investigations vvhich 
encompasses geological, geophysical, soil and rock mechanics investigations so that a consistent and systemic 
approach can be applied. İt is also important to understand that various methodologies, such as conventional drill 
and blast, and machine tunneling by TBMs and road headers are in vogue. These standard covers investigation 
and testing required for conventional drill and blast as vvell as for machine based tunnel boring or excavation by 
road headers. 


The standard has been framed to cover guidelines for development of detailed report after the conclusion of 
investigations so that the investigation data is available for engineers in proper format vvhere geological findings 
can be translated to engineering requirement. Such investigations should be able to deliver a reliable geological 
evaluation for preparation of geotechnical baseline report (GBR) also. The standard also aims to identify the rock 
types and their engineering significance for stability of tunnels, ground vvater conditions, minimizing geological 
surprises and unforeseen hazards in tunnels, profect cost and time overrun etc. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding vvhether a particular requirement of this standard is complied vvith the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance vvith 
IS 2:: 2022 “Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision) . The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17883 : 2022 


İndian Standard 


GEOLOGICAL EXPLORATITON FOR TUNNELS — 
GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard gives specific guidelines for geological 
investigation as requfred for fixing oftunnel alignments, 
to evaluate geologic conditions along the tunnel route, 
requirement of geotechnical analysis and proposals 
for rock support and treatment of vveak zones. İt also 
covers both surface and sub-surface investigations to 
be carrfed out in different stages of investigations. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed contain provisions, vvhich 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated vvere valid. All standards are subfect to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated in Annex A. 


3 GENERAL 


It may be noted that at all the stages a geological report 
is to be submitted along vvith engineering geological 
appraisal based on studies, investigations and testing 
carried out. Similarly, the geological maps and sections 
are also an outcome of the investigations carried out 
and are invariably a part of the report. Monitoring of 
health of the tunnel is necessary for long term stability 
of tunnel and as such recording and preservation of 
geological data is necessary. 


4 STAGES 
INVESTIGATIONS 


OF GEOLOGICAL 


Geological investigations for tunnels are normally 
carried out in four stages, as stated belovv: 
a) Reconnaissance or pre-feasibility stage — PFR 
stage, 
b) Preliminary investigation or feasibility stage — 
FR Stage, 
c) Detailed investigation or detailed proyect report — 
DPR Stage, and 


d) Construction stage. 


5 RECONNAISSANCE INVESTIGATIONS OR 
PRE-FEASIBILITY STAGE (PFR STAGE) 


In the reconnaissance stage the preliminary tunnel 
alignment is formulated or devised or conceived 
based on topographic geologic and engineering 


considerations. Reconnaissance stage investigations 
are of preliminary nature during vvhich the tunnel 
alignment, its 1ength, broad geological features are 
observed. Before the site visit, literature pertaining to 
regional geology should be revtevved. During this study, 
the available topographical map (Survey of India topo 
sheets 1 :: 50 000/1 : 25 000) and published geological 
maps are used to study the topography, geomorphology, 
broad geology and tectonics of the area, examine the 
approach and accessibility of the proyect area and 
tentatively locate the tunnel. The overall condition of 
the inlet and outlet of the tunnel are also examined. 
Alternative tunnel alignments may also be proposed 
for evaluation and selection of the preferred alignment. 


6 PRELIMINARY INVESTICATIONS OR 
FEASIBILITY STAGE (FR STAGE) 


During feasibility stage of investigations, the activities 
should be undertaken on 1 : 10 000/1 : 5 000 scale vvith 
contour interval of 5 m to 2 m around the profect area 
involving surface geological mapping follovved by 
subsurface explorations. The obfective is to finalize the 
tunnel alignment on the basis of surface investigations 
and precisely determine the subsurface geological 
features, such as rock types, structural features such 
as folds, faults etc. and other engineering properties of 
the rock types. The İocations of the tunneling problems 
are identified and attendant problems are identified 
vvith solutions for the guidance of the engineers. The 
investigations/explorations are taken to the stage at 
vvhich the tunnel alignment is decided. As mentioned 
above, surface geological mapping along all the 
proposed alternative alignments may be carried out 
in 1 : 10 000/1 : 5 000 scale on site specific survey 
sheets before finalizing the best feasible layout based 
on topographical, geological, hydrological and design 
considerations. Geological section along the tunnel 
should also be prepared. 


The emphasis is on site specific geological mapping, 
remote sensing follovved by geophysical investigation 
as applicable. In this stage the data generated should 
enable finalization of tunnel alignment and preparation 
for design inputs to estimate preliminary cost. 


7 DETAILED INVESTIGATION STAGE (DPR 
STAGE) 


The investigations carried out under this stage are 
primarily aimed at guiding the engineers for further 
optimization of tunnel alignment if required and 


IS 17883 : 2022 


assess the quantities of tunnel supports, rock mass 
strengthening, lining and grouting needs. İnvestigations 
may be further aimed to minimize geological 
uncertainties in the tunnel alignment for assessing the 
remedial measures. Rock properties shall be determined 
through in-situ test and/or laboratory test for deciding 
the requirement of tunnel support, lining and grouting. 
Sometimes, the data collected during this stage are 
found to be useful in resolving certain construction/ 
post construction stage problems. 


S CONSTRUCTION STAGE 


Geological investigations and recording of data are of 
paramount importance in construction stage also. For 
exploration of unknovvn areas or identified problematic 
area ahcad of tunnel face, activities, such as probe 
drilling, core drilling, tunnel seismic prediction, 
suitable geo-electrical survey or other geophysical 
investigations and instrumentation methods data are 
used. Depending on site condition the most appropriate 
technique(s) or a combination of techniques mentioned 
above are to be employed. Hovvever, critical reaches 
should be explored by confirmatory high-quality core 
drilling. 

3D geological mapping of tunnel along vvith rock mass 
classifications, development of sections, localized 
profections and any other test results form a very 
important part ofdocumentation during the construction 
stage and are guiding cornerstones for rock support and 
treatment methods. In the post construction stage also 
and after the lining, these records may be utilized for 
Tepairs or further necessary treatment. 


9 METHODS OF INVESTIGATION 


9.1 Reconnaissance or Pre-feasibility Stage 
(PFR Stage) Investigation 
Reconnaissance stage investigation is of very 


preliminary nature and it begins vvith initial study 
of the engineering proposal follovved by geologic 
literature revievvs from existing reports, maps, sections 
particularly for regional geology and tectonic setup. 
Subsequently site visit(s) is/are undertaken and this 
field visit(s) should be done by a small team of tvvo to 
three members dravvn from the disciplines of geology, 
engineering and hydrology (or a transport engineer). 
Before the field visit, the team members are required 
to collect secondary data namely, geological map(s) on 
1::50 00071 : 25 000 scale or as available, engincering 
details, such as location, approach and accessibility, 
proposed use of the tunnel and quantity of discharge, 
proposed to be passed through the tunnel (in vvater 
resources profects) or the dimensions of the transport 
vehicles or locomotives etc. proposed to pass through 
the tunnel (in transportation profects). 


The geological maps required for preliminary study 
are normally available from the Geological Survey of 


India (GST) or state directorate of geology and mining. 
VVhere required maps are not available from Geological 
Survey of India or state bodies, Engineer In-charge 
may decide to use other reputed resources. 


Depending on avaflability of satellite imageries, a 
preliminary study of the terrain, geomorphology and 
geology is to be undertaken. İn case satellite imageries 
are not readily available, the literature reports as 
available may be referred along vvith selective traverses 
in the area. 


During this stage, the rock types and preliminary 
data about ?oints, fractures and shears vis-d-vis tunnel 
alignment are identified and collected. The inlet and 
outlet portals of the proposed tunnel are located as per 
profect requirement. The requirements for dimensions 
of the tunnel based on the volume of vvater to be 
discharged or volume of traffic to pass through are also 
assessed. 


NOTES 


1 In case of variation betvveen recommended scales in this 
standard and referred standards, the scales suggested in this 
standard shall be follovved. 


2 During all stages, topographic surveys and geological 
mapping shall be follovved in accordance vvith 1S 5497 and 
IS 15686 respectively. 


9.1.1 Report Preparation 


The Pre-feasibility/reconnaissance 
include: 


report should 


a) Description of regional geology and main tectonic 
features around profect area, 


b) Geological map of tunnel alignment as the case 
may be shovving mafor litho units, faults and 
thrusts, mafor overburden areas, landslides and 
broad geo-hydrological features, 

c) Description and preliminary engineering 
assessment of rock types expected in the tunnel, 

d) Mafor problems, difficulties foreseen in the 
alignment, and 


e) Alternative alignment and recommendations. 


9.2 Preliminary Investigation or Feasibility Stage 
(FR) Stage Investigations 


9.2.1 Planning and Survey 


An elaborate planning is needed to conduct geological 
investigations for a tunnel proposed for construction. 
The sequence of planning requirement may be as given 
belovv: 


a) Based on revtevv of literature, regional geological 
map, PFR report, remote sensing studies the area 
required for site specific topographic survey 
should be demarcated. The area to be covered by 
the above survey should cater to the requirement 
of alternative studies for tunnel alignment and 
development of geological model, 


b) Large scale contour plan on 1 : 10 000/1 : 5 000 
scale vvith 5 meter or 2 meter contour interval is 
to be prepared either through Survey of India or 
survey using latest equipments like DGPS, total 
station, LIDAR technique and/or digital elevation 
modeling vvith ground checks, and 


Cc 


— 


In case of contrary observations or interpretations 
in regional geology and tectonics, the reports or 
maps from Geological Survey of India vvill have 
precedence over others. 


9.2.2 Remote Sensing Studies 


Depending on availability of satellite imageries a study 
of the terrain, geomorphology and geology is to be 
undertaken. Further a broad tectonic map of the area 
may also be prepared. This vvill be of greater use in 
inaccessible areas over the tunnel alignment. 


9.2.3 Geological Mapping 


Geological mapping is carried out on survey sheets 
prepared on 1 : 10 000/1 : 5 000 scale along vvith 
use of survey instruments or by GPS methodology. 
It is recommended that 1 : 5 000 scale vvith 2 m 
contour interval may be used in compact layouts vvith 
smaller length of tunnels. Hovvever, for longer tunnels 
1::10 000 scale vvith 5 m contour interval may to be 
used. İt is imperative that sufficient area is covered by 
geological mapping right across the tunnel alignment 
so that alternative alignments can be evaluated and 
construction adits or parallel tunnel if any can also be 
planned. And for this purpose, area right dovvn to river 
bank or İovver elevations belovv the tunnel level in an 
othervvise situation vvhere river is not present may be 
covered, if necessary. Strip geological mapping vvith 
a defined coverage say 200 m on either side may be 
avoided as it has been found that the same is not sufficient 
to make geological interpretations on many occasions. 


In the geological mapping for tunnels, areas of 
overburden and bed rock are demarcated. Further 
classification of overburden is also to be carried out 
vvhich is a good indicator of depth to bed rock. In the out 
crops it 1s preferable to assign identification numbers 
and note their discontinulty characteristics. A performa 
for collecting discontinuity and rock mass data is given 
in Annex B. VVhere further details of discontinuity 
are to be recorded, 1S 11315 (Part 1 to 10) may be 
referred. 


After surface geological mapping an outcrop map 
should be developed. This need to be read vvith the 
outcrop parameters collected on the performa. The 
follovving geological information/data is to be made 
available on the outcrop map: 


a) Occurrence of overburden, outcrops and 
disposition of various rock types. Vital rock mass 
parameters, such as rock strength, volumetric 
count of ?oints, degree of vveathering, geological 
structure, block description etc. and indications of 
neo-tectonics activity if any. 


IS 17883 : 2022 


b) Plotting of structural features, namely, 
bedding/foliation and foints. Complete discontinuity 
survey 1s required to be carried out for cach rock 
outcrop and for every ?oint set including orientation 
(strike and dip), spacing, aperture, type of filling etc. 


c) VVater springs and other evidences of vvater table 
are recorded. 


After the outcrop map is prepared and data is collected, 
interpreted geological map is to be developed vvhich is 
expected to contain the follovving: 


a) Occurrence of various rock types in the mapped 
area including interpreted contacts, 


b) Rock structural elements, namely, folds, faults, 
oints, shears, and 


c) Tectonic elements, namely, thrusts, shear zones, 
neo-tectonic evidences, etc. 


In the interpreted map over burden including foliage etc. 
is removed and underlying geological formation/rock 
types are depicted as they vvill appear belovv the covered 
areas. 


9.2.4 Sub Surface İnvestigations 


9.2.4.1 Geophysical investigation 


Itis suggested thatairborne time domain electromagnetic 
survey may be carried out in inaccessible terrain for 
ascertaining broad subsurface features for the entire 
tunnel length. The data thus generated needs to be 
correlated vvith results from surface and interpreted 
geological maps. Other methods such as seismic 
refraction survey, resistivity profiling/sounding or 
imaging, gravimetric surveys, ground penetrating 
radar (GPR) technique as applicable may be used 
for exploration at this stage. For guidance in seismic 
refraction and electrical resistivity methods IS 15681 
and IS 15736 may be referred. 


9.2.4.2 If necessary, the lovv cover zones under vvhich 
the tunnel is to planned may be probed by shallovv drill 
holes to estimate depth to bed rock. Necessary to be 
used/adopted for core drilling, presenting information 
and storage of core boxes have been given in 9.3.3.1 
under core drilling as vvell as in Annex C. 


9.2.5 Rock Tests 


The follovving geological data are utilized to prepare a 
geological section along the proposed tunnel alignment 
vvhich gives a tentative picture of the subsurface 
geological conditions. The geological map and the 
developed geological section form the basis for detailed 
subsurface geological investigation for gathering 
minute geological and geotechnical details required 
for tunnel excavation, designing of supports, lining and 
devvatering arrangements: 


a) Representative rock samples from various 
lithologies are to be collected for petrographic 
studies for proper nomenclature of mappable 
units, and 


IS 17883 : 2022 


b) Basic rock mechanic tests on representative samples 
from different lithologies like uniaxial compressive 
strength, point load index are recommended. 


9.2.6 Report Preparation 


The feasibility/preliminary investigation stage report 
should adhere to follovving requirements: 


a) Description of regional geology and main tectonic 
features around profect area, 


b) Geological map of tunnel alignment on 1 : 10 000 
scale shovving mafor litho units, faults and thrusts, 
mafor overburden areas, landslides and broad 
geo-hydrological features, 


c) Presentation of maps and drill hole logs in approved 
formats in geophysical reports as applicable: 


d) Geological section along the tunnel, 

e) Description and preliminary engineering 
assessment of rock types expected in the tunnel 
after integration of all the data generated, 


f) Mafor risks, difficulties foreseen in the tunnel to be 
mentioned, and 


g) Recommendations. 


9.3 Detailed Investigations or Detailed Profect 
Report (DPR) Stage 


9.3.1 Updating of Outcrop and İnterpreted Geological 
Map 


During the feasibility, stage outcrop and interpreted 
maps are developed on 1 : 10 000/1 : 5 000 scale after 
the carlier geological mapping campaign. In case nevv 
outcrops or exposures from foot paths etc. are visible 
vvith improved accessibility, the same may be mapped 
and geological plans and section be updated. 


Critical reaches (lithological contacts, lovv cover zones, 
nallah crossings, and probable fault/shear zones) may be 
seen and revtevved again. Areas surrounding adit portals 
may be mapped at 1 : 500/1 : 200 scale, 3-D geological 
logging of drifts (at portals) may be carried out in 
1::50/1 : 100 scale and geological logging of drill holes 
to be carried out in 1 : 100 scale. The scales given in 
IS 4464 and IS 15686 be referred at extant. 


Reasonable geological profection is a prerequisite for 
development of a realistic sub-surface geological model 
along tunnel alignment. An interpreted geological 
map combining surface geological mapping, remote 
sensing, geophysical survey, drilling/drifting etc. should 
be prepared during DPR stage along vvith sub surface 
geological model along tunnel alignment. Accordingİy, 
outcrop and interpreted maps should be updated during 
the DPR stage. In critical lovv cover reaches, such as 
nallah 1ntersections or important geological contacts 
etc., observed survey sections (1 : 2 000 scale or larger) 
need to be developed for adequacy of cover and safety 
of the tunnel. The details should be supplemented vvith 
core drilling. 


9.3.2 Geophysical Methods 


In remaining areas other than conducted in FR stage 
or in case the alignment has been modified, seismic 
refraction, electrical resistivity 1maging, GPR methods 
etc. may be used. These investigations should precede 
exploratory drilling and drifting activities. Hovvever, it 
should be aimed to complete all geophysical surveys in 
FR stage only. 


9.3.3 Sub Surface İnvestigations 


9.3.3.1 Core drilling 


Drilling is planned yudiciously along the tunnel 
alignment at locations vvhere there is less cover over 
the tunnel grade or vvhere certain adverse geological 
features are suspected, As mentioned in 9.2.4 it is 
expected that lovv cover reaches along the tunnel 
alignment have been investigated by shallovv drill 
holes. If drilling has not been carried out in FR stage, 
, it shall be done during the DPR stage. Hovvever, in 
case there is a modification in the tunnel alignment due 
to geological, design or engineering considerations 
further exploration by drilling should be carried out. 


To augment geological logging, bore hole geophysical 
logging may be done particularly vvhen core recovery is 
poor. Depending on the site conditions and vvhether the 
hole is uncased or cased, one or more of the follovving 
methods may be useful: 


a) Bore hole camera/optical methods, 
b) Electrical methods, 

c) Sonic/acoustic methods, and 

d) Natural gamma logging. 


Drilling is also carried out slightly invvard from the 
portal locations to decipher the geological conditions of 
the portal locations. Suitable drill holes are to be placed 
for confirmation of geological contacts, vveak zones, 
fracture/shear zones, vvater table etc. It is not alvvays 
necessary that the depth of the hole may be dov to 
invert of tunnel grade. Appropriate depth to delineate 
inclination of beds or contacts may be decided on 
the basis of sections prepared. Notvvithstanding 
the above, a minimal of at least one drill hole per 
kilometer irrespective of the depth based on geological 
considerations is considered a necessary input during 
the DPR stage investigations. 


In case any area remains unknovyn even after 
conventional investigations and vvhich may be 
detrimental to smooth completion ofprofect, directional 
core drilling should be undertaken to cover such areas. 


Appropriate drilling rigs vvith necessary accessories 
and experienced crevv are to be deployed for drilling. 
The drilling operation should be properly monitored 
and for drilling methodology guidance from IS 6926 
may be follovved. The location of holes, depths, types 
of casing, core barrel, etc. are decided as per the site 


condition and geology. Driller should try to regulate the 
speed of drilling so that cores do not get broken, use 
double or triple tube core barrels fitted vvith core lifter 
for obtaining maximum core recovery. Daily drilling 
report should be submitted for regular revtevv in the 
standard proforma for the purpose of giving instructions 
regarding change in the operational procedure, stopping 
the hole, etc. For guidance in drilling and recording of 
data IS 5313 and IS 4464 may be referred. 


The cores, including the sludge samples, are to be kept 
in the standard core boxes (see IS 4078). The core 
boxes shall be numbered run segregated and lengths 
marked and cach box shall be photographed. Lengths 
of the individual cores should also be marked. The core 
boxes are presented for geological logging in the format 
as referred in IS 4464. After the geological logging, 
the core boxes should be stored at a suitable place as 
directed by the Engineer In-charge. VVater pressure 
testing should also be conducted in all the bore holes. 
Peefer IS 5529 (Part 1) and IS 5529 (Part 2)). 


NOTE — İt may practically be not possible alvvays to carry out 
exploratory drilling after every one km interval along tunnel 
en-route due to various constraints, hovvever efforts should 
be made to optimize drilling in a vvay to obtain maximum 
geological information as per site suitability and keeping in 
vievv logistics, time and economics. 


9.3.3.2 Drifting 


Drifts are of standard size 1.8 x 2.2 m and may extend 
to a depth of 30 to 50 m from the portal face in bed rock 
or to a required location. 


The drifts provide direct access to examine and 
study the rock formation, its quality, presence of 
discontinuities and their dimensions, etc. The drifts 
also facilitate carrying out of some iz sif tests, such as, 
closure measurements, deformability modulus, shear 
test, in situ stress condition, etc. The 3-D geological log 
on 1 : 50 scale should be prepared marking orientation, 
thickness of rock units, the shear seams/zones and their 
thickness, foint pattern. Based on actually observed 
geological data, the Rock Mass Rating (RMR) and 
Rock Mass Quality (Q) and Geological Strength Index 
(GSD should be assessed to decide the requirements of 
rock bolting, grouting, tunnel supports and devvatering 
arrangements. 


9.3.4 Rock Mechanic Tesis 


9.3.4.1 Laboratory testis 


The rock cores as vvell as lump/block samples 
obtained from drilling and surface geological 
mapping and rock samples obtained from drifting are 
subiected to laboratory testing for determination of 
physico-mechanical properties, namely, sbpecific 
gravity, modulus of elasticity, Poisson”s ratio, 
unconfined compressive strength, tensile and shear 
strength, svvelling index (for 7oint infillings), slake 
durability, etc. 


IS 17883 : 2022 


For the purpose of reference, specialized tests for TBM 
includes brittleness index, Sievers-/ value, drilling rate 
index, Cerchar abrasivity index, uniaxial compressive 
strength, tensile strength, modulus of elasticity and 
poisons ratio. A list of tests to be conducted is given in 
Annex €. 


9.3.4.2 İn-situ tests 


In situ tests are normally carried out to understand the 
rock mass behavior vvhich includes: 


a) Deformation characteristics, and 
b) In-situ rock stress measurements, vvhere requfired. 


Generally, in-situ tests are carried out inside the drifts 
if constructed along the intake, at the proposed adit 
locations etc. In case substantial length of adit or tunnel 
is expected in overburden, proper geotechnical testing 
such as gradation analysis, permeability, basic and 
index properties of overburden material, shear strength 
parameters should be determined. 


9.3.5 Modeling and Rock Mass Classification 


The data generated during surface and subsurface 
investigations needs to be analyzed so as to evaluate the 
rock-mass behavlor during tunneling. These data can 
be systemized for preparing geological model of the 
tunnel. Modern tools like 2D/3D geological modeling 
are available and these should be used to predict the 
geological behavior ofrock mass over critical stretches. 
The results may lead to better engineering yudgments in 
optimizing the tunnel support requirements. 


9.3.5.1 Rock mass classification 


Characterization of rock mass may be carried out using 
vvidely applicable/acceptable classification systems like 
RMR, Q and GSI (geological strength index) rock mass 
characterization for tunnels using above systems should 
be carried out fudiciousİy and it vvould be appropriate to 
use more than one method simultaneously and compare 
the outcomes before finalizing the rock classes and 
corresponding support systems İseec IS 13365 (Part 1), 
IS 13365 (Part 2), 1S 13365 (Part 3) and IS 13365 
(Part 4)). 


9.3.6 Geo-hydrological Studies 


Geo-hydrological studies ofthe tunnel area, establishing 
groundvvater table, natural springs/geothermal springs 
and their elevation are undertaken so as to postulate the 
likely groundvvater problems and suggesting remedial 
measures, such as, grouting of the tunnel vvalİs and the 
crovvn arcas, providing drainage holes and devvatering 
arrangements during and after the tunnel excavation. 


Geohydrological condition along the tunnel may 
be determined using drilling/vvater pressure testing, 
geophysical survey and installing piezometers inside 
the drill holes vvherever required. Study of nearby 
springs, na/lahs etc. can also provide good ideas about 
the geo hydrological conditions. Guidelines are also 


IS 17883 : 2022 


available in IS 14330. Monitoring of vvater levels in all 
the completed holes is necessary (refer 1S 6935). 


9.3.7 Kinematic Analysis 


Kinematic analysis using geotechnical softvvare may 
be carrfed out for stability analysis of potential vvedges 
using the average discontinuity data collected during 
geological mapping/scan line survey. The analysis 
results may be used for finalizing suitable support 
system. 


9.3.8 Report 


Detailed investigation stage report should adhere to 
follovving minimal requirements: 


a) Description of regional geology and main tectonic 
features around profect area, 


b) Geological map of tunnel alignment on 1 : 5 000 or 
1::10 000 scale as the case may be shovving ma/or 
litho units, faults and thrusts, mafğor overburden 
areas, landslides and broad geohydrological 
features, 


c) Geological section along the tunnel and adits as 
required on suitable scale (1 : 2 000 for adits to 
1::5 000/1 : 10 000 for main tunnel): 


d) Geological map of portals on 1 : 200/1 : 500 scale, 
e) Geophysical reports, 


f) Presentation of maps and drill hole logs in 
approved format, 


g) Results and reports of rock mechanic or soil tests 
if any, 

h) Description and preliminary engineering 
assessment of rock types expected in the tunnel 
and tentative percentages of rock types and rock 
classes expected, 


Dp Mafor problems, difficulties foreseen in the 
alignment, 


k) In case of tunneling through overburden, the same 
may be specially mentioned along vvith solutions, 


m) Solutions for negotiating difficult zones and 
precautions to be undertaken, 


n) Overall geotechnical evaluation based on 
geological, geophysical, rock mechanics and 
classification data, 


p) For TBM Tunnels specialized evaluation is 
required regarding rock strength, foint spacing 
blockiness or othervvise, shear zones, cutter 
specifications, probing mechanisms, support 
methodology, treatment of vvater ingress and 
finally lining methodology: and 


q) Recommendations. 


NOTE — DPR is a comprehensive document that covers 
entire geological and geotechnical data follovved by their 
interpretations and outcome of these interpretation are the 
input parameters for design and contract framing. Accordingly 


depending upon the requirement of the ovvner the data 
presented in the DPR may be utilized to prepare Geological 
Factual Report (GFR), Geological Interpreted Report (GIR) 
and Geological Baseline Report (GBR) as the case may be. 
Any subsequent confirmation test results may be suitably 
added to the document. 


9.4 Construction Stage Investigations 


The methods for construction stage investigations are 
generally of routine nature and same as done during 
previous stage ofinvestigation. Certain methodology of 
blast pattern and blasting most suitable to the tunneling 
media may also be evolved and follovved. Besides, the 
follovving activities continue as routine vvorks: 


a) Take photograph of tunnel face after each blast 
during the geological mapping: 

b) 3-D geological mapping of progressive tunnel 
excavation, 

c) Recording of groundvvater seepage along vvith 
mapping: 

d) Reassessing the rock mass behavior, carrying 
necessary design corrections, 


e) To facilitate changes in tunnel supports ifrequired, 


f) Adopting most suitable tunneling method based 
on rock type and nature of rock structures, 


g) Keeping the 3-D tunnel logging record on 1 : 100 
or 1 :: 200 scale for future reference. 


h) Correlate likelihood of any problem during 
tunneling as envisaged during investigation stage 
vvith actual encountered condition and if required 
should propose additional support/restoration 
measures (pre-grouting, fore poling, pipe roofing 
etc.) and mid-course design corrections, 


9) The data obtained during construction can be 
subiected to numerical modelling on suitable 
computer program for precise understanding of 
rock mass behavltor, and 


k) Rock mass behavior in the tunnel is monitored by 
installing the instruments on regular basis. 


9.4.1 Ahead of Face Hnvestigation 


There should be provision of deep probe holes and 
core drill holes from tunnel face to explore the geology 
ahead of the tunnel face. These holes are required vvhile 
tunneling through highly varying vveak and fragile 
geology, such as in the Himalayas. The probe holes 
drilling should be taken vvith extreme precautions. 
Probe should be done preferabİy in entire stretch of the 
tunnel and necessarily in critical reaches identified in 
the contract documents. Probe holes means percussion 
drilling in vvhich core is not recovered. Hovvever, 
a record of penetration rate in mm/min, colour and 
quantity of return vvater and identification of crushed 
rock chips if any, should be maintained along vvith 
machine details. Core drill holes means drilling vvith 
core recovery and logging and such drill holes are 


proposed to delincate vveak zones, fracture zones or 
shear zones ahead of tunnel face. VVhenever required, 
special face investigation technique like TSP and Beam 
may be used ahcad. 


9.4.2 Mapping and Rock Classification 


3D geological logging of the tunnel on approved 
formats along vvith rock mass classification should be 
carried out to maintain records and also advice for rock 
support. These logs are also used to verify the results 
from investigation as mentioned in 9.4.1. 


In the case of tunnels driven by shielded TBMs vvhere 
rock mass is notexposed for mapping the machine should 
have provisions for advance core drilling in addition 
to geophysical methods, such as TSP/geoelectrical 
scanning technology to generate geological data. 
VVhereas probe drilling (percussion/non-coring) needs 
to be carried out continuousİy, core drilling should be 
done on the basis of site recommendation or any other 
special design requirement. 


Alternatively, the record from the machine such as 
RPM and rate of penetration should be maintained and 
correlated vvith geological formations and hardness of 
rock. 


9.4.3 İnstrumentation 


Instrumentation is the activity vvhich is undertaken 
concurrently vvith tunnel excavation. The obfective of 
instrumentation is to knovv precise rock mass behavior 
affecting the tunnel stability and support competence. 
The follovving instruments are generally installed 
to monitor the rock mass behavior affecting tunnel 
stability: 

a) Closure pegs are fixed on the tunnel vvall to record 

periodic closure in the tunnel vvall and roof, 


IS 17883 : 2022 


b) Multipoint borehole extensometers to assess the 
extent of broken zone around tunnel opening, 


c) Load cells on supports to measure rock İoads being 
transferred by the rock to the installed supports, 

d) Pressure cells betvveen the supports and tunnel 
vvall rocks, 

e) Piezometers may be required to monitor the 
seepage pressure, and 


f) Optical targets for monitoring of tunnel 
convergence. 
The frequeney of instruments, such as tape 


extensometers in the tunnel should be based on 
geological and rock conditions. It may be requfired at 
closer spacing of say 5/10 m and sometimes even at 
an interval of 100 m to 500 m depending on rock mass 
condition and behavior. Readings of instrumentation 
results needs to be thoroughly observed and 
correlated vvith geological conditions for effective 
utilization/decision making. 


9.4.5 Documentation 


It is necessary to record and preserve 3D geological 
logs, classification data, results of probe holes and other 
tests carried out during construction stage also. Details 
of grouting and instrumentation data generated are also 
required to be recorded. Periodically, a geotechnical 
memo (preferably once a month or quarter) may be 
brought out giving details ofsuch activities and records. 
The frequency may be reduced as per requirement of 
design office or vvhile dealing vvith problems. At the 
end ofthe profect a comprehensive document regarding 
the geological and geotechnical conditions in the tunnel 
along vvith remedial measured adopted and supports 
provided is to be prepared. 


IS 17883 : 2022 


1S No. 


4078 : 1980 


4464 : 2020 


5313 :2020 


5497 : 2008 


5529 (Part 1): 
2013 


5529 (Part 2): 


2006 
6926 : 1996 


6935 : 1973 


11315 (Part 1): 
1987 


11315 (Part 2) : 
1987 


11315 (Part 3) : 
1987 


11315 (Part 4): 
1987 


11315 (Part 5) : 
1987 


11315 (Part 6) : 
1987 


ANNEXA 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Code of practice for indexing 
and storage of drill cores 
(first revision) 


Code of practice for presentation 
of drilling information and 
core description in foundation 
investigation (second revision) 


Guide for core drilling observations 
(second revision) 


Guide to topographical surveys 
for river valley proyfects 
(second revision) 


Code of practice for in-situ 
permcability test: Part 1 Test in 
overburden 


In-situ permeability tests: Part 2 
Tests in bedrock (second revision) 


Diamond core drilling — Site 
investigation for river valley 
profects — Code of practice 


(first revision) 


Method for determination of vvater 
Tevel in a bore hole 


Method for the quantitative 
description of discontinuities in 
rock masses: Part 1 Orientation 


Method for the quantitative 
description of discontinuities in 
rock masses: Part 2 Spacing 


Method for the quantitative 
description of discontinuities in 
rock masses: Part 3 Persistence 


Method for the quantitative 
description of discontinuities in 
rock masses: Part 4 Roughness 


Method for the quantitative 
description of discontinuities in 
rock masses: Part 5 VVall strength 


Method for the quantitative 
description of discontinuities in 
rock masses: Part 6 Aperture 


IS No. 


11315 (Part 7) : 
1987 


11315 (Part 8) : 
1987 


11315 (Part 9) : 
1987 


11315 (Part 10) : 


1987 


13365 (Part 1): 
1998 


13365 (Part 2): 
2019 


13365 (Part 3) : 
1997 


13365 (Part 4): 
2014 


14330 : 1996 


15681 : 2006 


15686 : 2006 


15736 : 2007 


Title 


Method for the quantitative 
description of discontinuities in 
rock masses: Part 7 Filling 


Method for the quantitative 
description of discontinuities in 
rock masses: Part $ Seepage 


Method for the quantitative 
description of discontinuities in 
rock masses: Part 9 No. of sets 


Method for the quantitative 
description of discontinuities in 
rock masses: Part 10 Block size 


Quantitative classification system 
of rock mass — Guidelines: Part 1 
RMR for predicting of engineering 
Properties 


Quantitative classification systems 
of rock mass — Guidelines: Part 2 
Rock mass quality for prediction 
of support pressure, support 
system and engineering properties 
in underground openings 
(first revision) 


Quantitative classification system 
of rock mass —Guidelines: Part 3 
Determination of slope mass rating 


Quantitative classification system 
of rock mass — Guüidelines: Part 
4 Geological strength index (GST) 


Groundvvater investigations for 
hydraulic structures — Guidelines 


Geological exploration by 
geophysical method (seismic 
refraction) — Code of practice 


Recommendations for preparation 
of geological and geotechnical 
maps 

Geological exploration by 
geophysical method (electrical 
resistivity) — Code of practice 


ANNEXB 
(Clause 9.2.3) 


PERFORMA FOR COLLECTING DISCONTINUTTY AND 
ROCK MASS DATA FOR TUNNELING 


IS 17883 : 2022 


Profeet: 


Location/Structure: 


Outerop No. 


Toint Set No. 


Type of ?oint 


Dip amount 


Dip direction 


Toint description Length/direction 


Type of termination 


Persistence (m) 


Spacing (m) 


Aperture (mm) 


Roughness 


Alteration 


Type of filling 


Rock mass description 1 Rock type 


Strength 


No. of ?oint sets 


Degree of vveathering 


Geological structure 


SRF 


VVater seepage 


Block description 
Block size Block dimension 


No. of foints/m” 


Remarks 


Date Engineer Incharge 


IS 17883 : 2022 


ANNEX€C 
(Clauses 9.2.4.2 and 9.3.4.1) 


GEO-PARAMETERS RELATED TO TUNNELING 


Parameter Location İ Feasibility Stage / DPR Stage / Construction Stage 

() (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Physical Properties of Rock 
Density test Lab A N A 
VVater absorption test Lab A N A 
Porosity test Lab A N A 
Mineralogical and petrographic analysis Lab — N — 
P and S vvaves velocity Site A N A 
Hardness Lab A N — 
Slake durability test Lab — N N 
Mechanical Properties of Intact Rock 
Uniaxial compressive strength Lab/Site N N A 
Elastic constants under uniaxial stress / Lab/Site — N A 
conditions 
Tensile strength Lab/Site A N A 
Shear strength Lab/Site N N A 
Point load strength index Lab/Site — N A 
Hoek — brovvn constant Lab — N — 
Rock (oint Properties 
Toint shear strength Lab A N N 
Toint roughness coefficient Lab A N N 
Toint vvall compressive strength Lab A N N 
Basic and residual friction angel Lab A N N 
Peak shear strength Lab A N N 
Normal stiffness Lab A N N 
Shear stiffness Lab A N N 
Thermal Properties of Rocks 
Specific heat Lab A N N 
Thermal conductivity Lab A N N 
Coefficient of thermal expansion Lab A N N 
Other Parameters 
In-situ stress Site m N -— 
Deformability modules Site A N A 
Permeability test Site — N — 
Piezometric level measurement Site N N — 
VVater flovv measurement in tunnel Site — — N 
VVater flovv measurement of springs Site — A N 
Chemical analysis of vvater Lab A N A 
Abrasivity” Lab A N — 
Drillability” Lab -— N — 


NOTE —A : Advisable, N : Necessary: and (”) : for TBM Tunneling 


10 


IS 17883 : 2022 


ANNEXD 
(Forevvord) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Geological Investigation and Subsurface Exploration Sectional Committee, VVRD 05 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity 


AECS Engineering and Geotechnical Services 
Pvt Ltd, Noida 


AFCONS Infra Structure Limited, Mumbai 
AIMIL Limited, Nevv Delhi 
Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research, 
Roorkee 


Central Soil and Material Research Station, 
Nevv Delhi 


Central VVater and Povver Research Station, Pune 


Central VVater Commission, Nevv Delhi 


Ferro Concrete Construction (T) Pvt Ltd, Indore 


Geological Survey of India 
Gufarat Engineering Research Institute 


Himachal Pradesh Povver Corporation Limited, 
Shimla 


Tammu 6 Kashmir State Povver Development 
Corporation Limited 


M/s Parsan ÖOverseas Ltd 


Narmada Control Authority, Indore 


National Institute of Rock Mechanics, Kamataka 


NHPC Limited, Faridabad 


THDC India Limited, Rishikesh 


Uttarakhand al Vidyut Nigam Limited, Dehradun 


National Thermal Povver Corporation Limited, Noida 


Representative(s) 


Di P. C. NAVANI (Chairman) 


SHRI SAN/EEV TREHAN 
DR TANU RAGHUVANSHI (4 /zernate) 


DR SUNIL BASARKAR 
SHRI P. S. BANSOD (A /fernate) 


SHRI HEMAN MANCHANDA 
SHRI LAXMIDHAR MOHAPATRA (4 /ternate) 


Dia KOovsHiıK PANDIT 
Di P. K. S. CHAVHAN (4 /ternate) 


DR 1 K. MOHNOT (4 /fernate) 
DR.ANIL SVVARUP (4 /fernate) 


SHRI N. P. HONKANADAVAR 
SHRI HARIDEV (4 /ternate) 


Dh G. DHANUN/AYA NAIDU 
SHRI V. CHANDRASEKHAR (A /ternate 1) 
SHRI B. SURESH KUMAR (Z2/ternate 1) 


DIRECTOR (FE dt SA) 
DIRECTOR CMDD (E 6z NE) (A /eernate) 


Di MAHAVIR BIDASARIA 


DR SANDIP KUMAR SOM 
DR SAIBAL GHOSH (4 /ternate) 


SHRI B. H. CHAUDHARI 
SHRI SANTAY SHRIVASTAV (4 /fernate) 


DR POONAM BINTOLKAR, AGM 
SHRI NAVNEET GUPTA, DY GM (A /ternate) 


SHRI RAvı PANDITA, CHIEF ENGINEER 


SHRI SANVAY RANA 
SHRI ASHUTOSH KAUSHIK (A/fernate) 


SHRI M. K. CHAUHAN 


DR A?AY KUMAR NATTHANI 
DR SANDEEP NELLIAT (A /ternate) 


SHRI SHYAM LAL KAPIL 
SHRI AVAY SINGH (/A/ternate 1) 
SENIOR MANAGER (GEOPHYSICS) (A/ternate 11) 


SHRI NAVEEN KUMAR .AIN 
SHRI BHUVNESH KUMARİÜGZ /ternate) 


SHRI AZ?AY KUMAR 
SHRI KAILASAH CHANDRA ÜNİTYAL (A /fternate) 


DIRECTOR (PRO/ECTS) 
DR HARISH BAHUGUNA (4 /fernate) 


IS 17883 : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 
Im Personal Capacity, (Sector 21 C, Faridabaad, SHRI İMRAN SHAYEED 
Haryana 121001) 
m Personal Capacity, (Sector PH 1, Greater Noida, SHRI GOPAL DHAVVAN 
UP 201310) 
BIS Directorate General SHRI R. BHANU PRAKASH, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (VVRD) 


TREPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)) 
Member Secretary 


SHRI DUSHYANT PRAVAPATI 
SCIENTIST “D” (VVRD), BIS 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the 5ureaz of İndian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form vvithout 
the prior permission in vvrriting of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication 6z Sales), BIS. 


Revievv of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also revievved 
periodically: a standard along vvith amendments is reaffirmed vvhen such revtevv indicates that no changes are 
needed: if the revievv indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the vvebsite- 
VVVVVV.biS. goV.in or vvvvvv.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: VVRD 05 (17646). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Nevv Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 VVebsite: vvvvvv.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tovver-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, Nevv Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8 Floor, Plot No 7/7 dz 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, VVest Bengal 700091 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.LT. Campus, TV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

VVestern 5 Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHVVAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNATL 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUVVAHATI, 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. İAIPUR. /1AMMU 6 KASHMIR. 
VAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOVV. MADURAIL MUMBAL NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RATKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, Nevv Delhi 


