IRT HAF IS 13539 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


ARO — IT EU asia BN 
AA AAT cht AAA 


(TT FATT ) 


Power Tiller — Recommendations 
on Selected Performance and 
Other Characteristics 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 65.060.10 


© BIS 2018 


anda HA SAN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR UT, 9 SEGUE TH HM, ay Redi 110002 


Wa SÍ MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2018 Price Group 7 


Agricultural Machinery and Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 11 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Agricultural Machinery and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1992 and subsequently revised in 2008. The first revision was published 
in 2008 to incorporate the ‘minimum performance standard’ issued by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare for the purpose of institutional financing. 


The major changes in this revision are as follows: 
a) Definition of power tiller has been added; 
b) Supplementary tests have been omitted to improve the quality of the products; 
c) Number of minor defects has been reduced from five to three; 
d) Additional clauses for Torture test and material test are introduced; 
e) Following categories of tests have been made evaluative from non-evaluative: 
1) Maximum power under 2 h test (engine performance); 
2) Specific fuel consumption corresponding to maximum power (engine performance); 
3) Maximum equivalent crankshaft torque (engine performance); 
4) Maximum coolant consumption (engine performance); 
5) Power at rated engine speed (rotary shaft performance); 
6) Specific fuel consumption corresponding to power at rated engine speed (rotary shaft performance); 
7) Maximum equivalent rotary shaft torque (rotary shaft performance); 
8) Maximum operating temperature of rotary transmission oil (rotary shaft performance); and 
9) Maximum drawbar power (drawbar performance). 
The composition ofthe Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised ).’ The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 13539 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


POWER TILLER — RECOMMENDATIONS ON SELECTED 
PERFORMANCE AND OTHER CHARACTERISTICS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the following: 


a) Tolerances on the values declared by the 
manufacturer and in certain cases minimum/ 
maximum values of the performance 
characteristics, statutory requirements under the 
relevant Act(s) of the agricultural power tillers; 
and 


b 


wma 


Criteria for determining variants and new model 
of power tillers for the purpose of testing and 
certification. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard listed below contains provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. The standard is subject to revision, 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent editions of the standard listed below: 


IS No. Title 
IS 9935 : 2002 Power Tiller — Test code (second 
revision) 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Power Tiller 


Power Tiller is an agricultural machinery used for 
soil preparation having a single axle, in which the 
direction of travel and its control during field operation 
is performed by the operator. It is self-powered, self- 
propelled, and can pull cultivator, harrow, plough, 
various seeder, harvester and such other suitable 
attachments. The equipment may be walk behind or 
riding attachment type and should be capable of being 
coupled to a trailer that can be used for transportation 
of goods of not less than | ton capacity. The maximum 
speed of the power tiller when coupled to a trailer shall 
not exceed 22 kmph. The minimum rated horse power 
output of the power tiller engine shall not be less than 8 
bhp (Break Horse Power). 


3.2 Confidential Test 


The test conducted for providing confidential 
information on the performance of power tiller 


whether ready for commercial production or not, or to 
provide any special data that may be required by the 
manufacturer/applicant. 


3.3 Commercial Test 


The tests conducted on indigenous or imported power 
tillers ready of commercial production or sale or already 
in commercial production, for establishing performance 
characteristics. For this purpose test sample shall be 
randomly selected by the testing authority from the 
regular production or imported lot. Single prototype/ 
unit would not be considered for initial commercial test 
(ICT) test. 


3.3.1 Initial commercial Test 


The tests conducted on indigenous or imported 
prototype of power tillers ready for commercial 
production. 


3.3.2 Batch Test 


The tests conducted on power tillers which have 
already undergone initial commercial test and are being 
manufactured, imported/sold commercially in the 
country. 


3.4 Evaluative Requirements 


Requirements under this category are the ones 
which are mandatory for acceptance of the Power 
Tiller for the purpose of subsidies/institutional 
financing. The authorized testing agency will assess 
the performance of the power tiller under test and 
release the report. 


3.5 Non-evaluative Requirements 


Requirements under this category are the ones which 
are not mandatory for acceptance of the power tiller 
for the purpose of subsidies/institutional financing. 
However, the testing agency may observe the 
performance for these requirements and record in the 
test report. 


4 ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA FOR 
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERISTICS 


4.1 The product may be accepted for performance after 
confirming compliance to all evaluative requirements. 
Performance characteristics of power tiller along with 
the tolerances with respect to the declared values and 
in certain cases minimum/maximum values are given 
in Table 1. 


IS 13539 : 2018 


Table 1 Parameters Applicable for Qualifying 


Minimum Performance Criteria 
( Clause 4.1) 


SI. No. Characteristic Category (Evalirative/ Requirement Tolerance Remarks 
Non-evaluative) 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1. Engine Performance: 
a) Maximum power under Evaluative To be declared by the Declared value to — 
2h test, kW (hp) manufacturer be achieved with 
a tolerance of + 
10 percent 

b) Power at rated engine Non-Evaluative -do- -do- — 

speed, kW (hp) 

c) Specific fuel consumption Evaluative -do- +5 percent = 

corresponding to maximum 

power [see (a) above, g/ 

kWh (g/bhph)] 

d) Specific fuel consumption Non-Evaluative To be declared by the + 5 percent = 

corresponding to power at manufacturer 

rated engine speed [see (b) 

above, g/kWh (g/bhph)] 

e) Maximum equivalent Evaluative To be declared by the +10 percent — 

crankshaft torque, Nm manufacturer 

f) Maximum operating temperature, °C: 

1. Engine oil Evaluative To be declared by the Nil The declared 
manufacturer under high value should 
ambient conditions not exceed 

maximum value 
specified by the 
oil company and 
the observed 
value under 
high ambient 
conditions 
should not 
exceed the 
declaration. 
Applicant shall 
supply the 
recommendation 
of oil company 
along with the 
application 
form. 

ii. Coolant Evaluative To be declared by the Nil Declared value 
manufacturer under high shall be less than 
ambient conditions the boiling point 

of coolant under 
pressurized 
condition of the 
test. 

g) Lubricating oil Evaluative Not exceeding 1 percent Nil The value 

consumption, g/kWh (g/ of SFC at maximum would be based 

bhph) power under high ambient on the test 
conditions conducted under 
high ambient 

conditions. 

h) Maximum coolant (water) Evaluative Coolant consumption should Nil — 

consumption (percent of not exceed 35 percent of the 

total coolant capacity) total coolant capacity under 
high ambient condition. 

3) Smoke level Evaluative As per CMVR requirements Nil E 


IS 13539 : 2018 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


Category (Evaluative/ 


to apply the brake, N 


under CMVR 


SI. No. Characteristic : Requirement Tolerance Remarks 
Non-evaluative) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
k) Overheating tendency of Evaluative Satisfactory completion of — — 
the engine two hours test under high 
ambient condition 
Rotary Shaft Performance: 
a) Maximum power, kW Evaluative Minimum 80 percent of — — 
(Ps) observed maximum bhp of 
power tiller 
b) Power at rated engine Evaluative Minimum 75 percent of = = 
speed, kW (Ps) observed rated bhp of power 
tiller 
c) Specific fuel consumption Evaluative To be declared by the + 5 percent — 
corresponding to power at manufacturer 
rated engine speed [g/kWh 
(g/bhph)] 
d) Maximum equivalent Evaluative -do- + 8 percent — 
rotary shaft torque, Nm 
(kgfm) 
e) Maximum operating Evaluative -do- Nil The applicant 
temperature of rotary shall supply the 
transmission oil °C recommendation 
of oil company 
along with the 
application form. 
Drawbar Performance: 
a) Concrete track (with pneumatic wheels): 
i) Maximum drawbar pull Evaluative Minimum 65 percent of Nil — 
corresponding to 15 percent static mass with ballast 
wheel slip, (kgf) 
ii) Maximum drawbar Evaluative To be declared by the — 10 percent = 
power, kW (Ps) manufacturer 
111) Maximum transmission Evaluative To be declared by the Nil The declared 
oil temperature, °C manufacturer value should 
not exceed the 
maximum value 
specified by the 
oil company and 
the observed 
value should 
not exceed the 
declaration. 
Applicant shall 
supply the 
recommendation 
of oil company 
along with the 
application form. 
Brake Performance: 
a) Service brakes: 
i) Service brakes Evaluative Should meet the — IS 9935 may 
requirements under CMVR also be referred 
ii) Maximum force exerted Evaluative As per the requirements u IS 9935 may 


also be referred. 
Based on the 
test conducted 
‘Yes/No’ as 
applicable may 
be indicated 


IS 13539 : 2018 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


SI. No. Characteristic Category Gya nate Reguirement Tolerance Remarks 
Non-evaluative) 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
iii) Observation on rotation Evaluative As per CMVR = Based on the 
on drive wheels (power test conducted 
tillers) at a slope of 12 ‘Yes/No’ as 
percent with trailer having applicable may 
gross mass recommended be indicated 
for haulage 
b) Parking brakes: 
Observation on rotation of Evaluative No rotation of drive wheels = Based on the 
cranked wheels at the slope at a slope of 18 percent test conducted 
of 18 percent, facing up and facing up and facing down ‘Yes/No’ as 
facing down applicable may 
be indicated 
5. Air Cleaner Oil Pull Over: 
Maximum percentage of oil Evaluative 0.20 percent = = 
pull over (mass basis) 
6. Noise Level: 
a) Maximum ambient noise Evaluative As per CMVR = The observed 
emitted by the power tiller, value should 
dB(A) be within the 
permissible 
limits 
b) Maximum noise at -do- As per CMVR = -do- 
operator’s ear level dB(A) 
7. Amplitude of Mechanical Vibration at: 
a) Steering handle grips Non-evaluative 100 u, Max — — 
b) Gear levers -do- 100 u, Max — — 
c) Clutch/brake lever(s) -do- 100 u, Max — — 
d) Rotary shaft speed -do- 100 u, Max = — 
change lever 
e) Steering clutch levers -do- 100 u, Max — — 
f) Accelerator lever -do- 100 u, Max — — 
g) Operators seat -do- 100 u, Max = — 
h) Foot rest (if provided) -do- 100 u, Max — — 
8. Haulage Performance: 
a) Gross load of trailer (t) Non Evaluative To be declared by the — — 
manufacturer 
b) Distance travelled/litre of -do- -do- + 10 percent — 
fuel consumption, km 
c) Fuel consumption (cc/ -do- -do- + 10 percent — 
km/ gross load tonne) 
9. Wet Land Cultivation : 
Suitability for Wet Land Evaluative Effective sealing to be — The entry of 


Cultivation 


provided for engine sump, 
clutch assembly, gear box, 
chain case and rotary shaft 
housing 


mud/ water 
should not 
take place in 
components/ 
sub-assemblies 
such as engine, 
clutch, gear 
box, chain case 
and rotary shaft 
housing 


Table 1 ( Concluded ) 


Category (Evaluative/ 


IS 13539 : 2018 


SI. No. Characteristic ; Requirement Tolerance Remarks 
Non-evaluative) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
10. Stationery Operations Evaluative Should have the provision = — 
for power outlet for 
stationery operations or 
recommended agricultural 
appliances 
11. Discard Limit, mm: 

a) Cylinder bore diameter Evaluative To be specified by the = Values for 
manufacturer in printed discard limits as 
literature specified by the 

manufacturers 
should be 
mentioned 
for such 
components. 

b) Piston clearance -do- -do- — -do- 

c) Ring end gap -do- -do- — -do- 

d) Ring groove clearance -do- -do- — -do- 

e) Radial clearance of big -do- -do- — -do- 

end Bearing 

f) Axial clearance of big end -do- -do- — -do- 

Bearing 

g) Radial clearance of main -do- -do- — -do- 

bearings 

h) Axial clearance of main -do- -do- — -do- 

bearings 

1) Crank journal ovality -do- -do- — -do- 

j) Thickness of clutch lining -do- -do- — -do- 

12. Safety Requirements: 

a) Provision of guards on Evaluative = = — 

moving parts including 

Rotary Tiller (Rotavator) 

b) Location and direction Evaluative Yes — — 

of exhaust emission to be 

away from the operator 

and machines for stationary 

operation 

c) Covers on hot parts -do- Yes — — 

d) Locking of parking stand -do- Yes = = 

lever 

e) Protective shield for -do- Yes = E 

rotavator to prevent flying 

of mud and stones 

f) Accidental engaging of -do- Yes = = 

reverse speed gear when 

rotary is in operation 

g) Provision of headlights -do- Yes = = 

13. Literature Evaluative To be submitted by — = 


manufacturer along with the 
application 


IS 13539 : 2018 


5 ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA 
BREAKDOWNS/DEFECTS 


IN CASE OF 


5.1 The product may be accepted subject to the 
following conditions: 


a) There is no ‘critical breakdown’ during its 
validation after all tests; 


b) There are not more than one “major breakdown’; 
and 


c) There are not more than three “minor defects’ 
during the test and the frequency of each is not 
more than two. 


5.2 In case of multiple consequential failures resulting 
from a single defect/breakdown, the primary single 
defect/breakdown shall only be counted. 


5.3 Categorizations of defects in terms of ‘Critical’, 
‘Major’ and ‘Minor’ for various sub-assemblies/parts 
are provided in the Annex A, Band C. 


6. TEST REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 The initial commercial test of power tiller shall be 
made compulsory to meet the requirements of field 
worthiness of the power tiller. 


6.2 The field test duration for initial commercial test 
will be 35 h with rotary tiller (rotavator) operations 
including dry land and wetland cultivation and for 
batch test no field test will be conducted if, no major 
breakdowns are observed in the field test during ICT of 
the power tiller. 

NOTE — The field test may be conducted during ICT/Batch 


test in the various soil conditions so that the suitability of 
Power tiller across the country can be accessed. 


6.3 First batch test shall be carried out after 3 years 
from the date of release of initial commercial test 
report and subsequent batch tests after a period of every 
5 years from the previous batch test. 


6.4 The batch test of the variant model shall also be 
regulated as given in 7.3. 


7 CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING NEW 
MODEL OF POWER TILLERS 


7.1 Fixation of Base Model with its Variants within 
Certain Parameters 


A base model shall be defined as the one, which has 
defined specifications. Manufacturer will specify the 
base model along with list of variants, which could be 
added or deleted or supplemented to arrive at variants of 
the subject base model. The power tiller will be tested 
as per relevant Indian Standard and initial commercial 
test (ICT) report duly released. 


7.2 Beyond the above definition of base model and its 
variants, other changes would be construed as model 
change. 


7.3 All the variants and their identifiable configuration 
shall appear in the test report of the base model. 


7.4 For variants, following checks shall be made (on 
fresh sample only) for conformity of sample as being 
the same as tested earlier: 


a) Specification in full, and 


b) Two hour rotary test under normal ambient 
conditions. 


7.5 For variants which can be converted at test site, the 
variant model can be derived by adding or deleting the 
variant features in the same sample of base model and if 
any tests are required, the same can be conducted on the 
derived variant power tiller. If manufacturer desires, a 
separate variant power tiller may be submitted and the 
relevant tests may be carried out. 


7.6 Variants 


The variant model(s) may be arrived from a base model 
by the addition/deletion/supplementation of any one 
or more of the features (see Table 2). The variants shall 
be subjected to test(s) as stated against each feature of 
variant. 


8 TORTURE TEST 
8.1 This test is basically for: 


a) Maneuverability of power tiller under field 
conditions; and 


b) To find out loosening of bolts, sheet metal 
components, functioning of critical components 
under bumpy field conditions on test track. 


8.2 Suitable 50 to 100 m test track shall be developed 
by testing institute with obstacles like circular pits (size 
10 cm depth and 30 cm diameter spaced at a distance 
of 1.5 m alternatively for each wheel and covered 
25 percent oftrack length), parabolic strips ofreinforced 
cement concrete (RCC)/plastic material (size: hump of 
10 cm height placed at equidistance of 1 m alternatively 
for each wheel and covered 25 percent of track length). 
The design of the track should be such that every wheel 
alternatively should face obstacle and one wheel should 
remain in plane surface condition of test track and in 
50 percent portion of track both the wheels shall face 
obstacle at the same time for circular pits and parabolic 
strips 25 percent each of track length. 


8.3 Test Method 


8.3.1 The power tiller to be operated in speed of 2 kmph 
for a distance of 2 km length. 


8.3.2 After above testing, check for the following: 


(a) Bolt loosening; and 


(b) Visual observation of cracks, breakdowns etc. 


9 MATERIAL TEST 


The 


manufacturer 
specification (chemical composition) of the following 


shall declare the 


material 


c) Crank shaft; 
d) Connecting rod; 
e) Cam shaft; 


f) Transmission case; and 


IS 13539 : 2018 


g) Engine and Transmission gears. 


critical components of power tiller (minimum 3 number 
of chemical constituents on weight basis (in percent) of 
each critical component): 
a) Crank case; 
b) Cylinder head; 


Table 2 Determination of Variants 
( Clause 7.6) 


NOTE — The composition of material declared by the 
manufacture shall be within the tolerance limit of + 5 percent. 


SI. No. Features of Variant Tests/Inspection that will be Whether 2 h Rotary 
Required on the Feature of Variant Test (Under Natural 
Ambient Conditions) 
Required? 
4) (2) 3) (4) 
(i) Single/dual/dry/wet/independent clutch/Increase No test required. Only physical inspection. No 
in size of clutch 
(11) Specification of dry/wet air cleaner, its location, Physical inspection only if air cleaner is changed No 
etc. from wet to dry type Air cleaner. Oil pull over 
test as per IS 9935 if the air cleaner is changed 
from dry to wet type or combination thereof. 
(iii) Location and routing of exhaust system No test required. Only Physical inspection No 
(iv) Location and type of operating controls like Inspection or otherwise as per the relevant No 
pedal, gear shift levers, etc. Indian Standard(s) 
(v) Different types of gear box (with or without Nominal speed test Yes 
synchronizer, constant mesh, etc.) 
(vi) Addition of number of speeds with add-on Nominal speed test Yes 
modules and modifications in gear ratios to 
meet end customer requirements resulting in 
variations less than or equal to 15 percent of the 
nominal speed in maximum speed measured on 
base model. 
(vii) Fitment/change of engine accessories such If capacity of radiator is reduced by more than Yes 
air compressors, radiators, oil coolers, water 10 percent of that of base model or the oil cooler 
separators, expansion tank with special coolant, is removed, then engine test under high ambient 
additional hydraulic pumps, fuel tanks, etc. condition to be conducted. 
No test required only physical inspection in other 
cases. 
(viii) Steering systems Inspection or otherwise as per the relevant No 
Indian Standard(s) 
(ix) Tyre and increase in size of brake and system- Inspection against the Central Motor Vehicle No 
disc, drum, oil immersed brakes. Rule (CMVR) requirements. 
(x) Type of actuation systems for brake and clutch For brakes, inspection against the CMVR No 
(mechanical/ hydraulic/pneumatic) requirements. 
For clutch: No test required and measurement of 
actuation force inspection or otherwise as per the 
relevant Indian Standard(s) 
(xi) Provision of accessories like drawbars, towing Inspection or otherwise as per the relevant Yes in case of Spark 


hooks, spark arrestors etc. (Manufacturers may 
recommend minimum and maximum towing 
heights). 


Indian standard(s) 


arrester only. 


IS 13539 : 2018 


Table 2 ( Concluded ) 


SI. No. Features of Variant Tests/Inspection that will be Whether 2 h Rotary 
Required on the Feature of Variant Test (Under Natural 
Ambient Conditions) 
Required? 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
(xiii) Alternate specification, features and location of Inspection or otherwise as per the relevant No 
electrical and instrumentation Indian Standard(s) 
(xiv) Different tyre sizes No test is required when one step up/lower tyres No 
are used on the recommended rim (as per CMVR). 
If more than one step up or lower tyres are used 
then drawbar performance and brake test. 
(xv) Sheet metal/styling including colour and decals/ Physical verification and visibility test in case of No 
sticker change and any change in model name, change in sheet metal styling. 
when base model name also exists. 
(xvi) Position and type of hydraulic pump drive Physical inspection. No test is required, if the No 
pump speed remains same. 
(xvii) Change related to ergonomics, safety, comfort Inspection against relevant Indian Standard(s) No 
(xviii) Change in the location and type of Nominal Nominal speed test No 
speed test final reduction or brake location 
without affecting the theoretical speeds meeting 
[see SI. No.(vi)] 
(xix) Type of FIP No test if the declared power is within tolerance No 
specified in Table 3. If variation exceed, then (Ifdeclared power does 
engine performance Test not exceeds tolerance 
limit specified in 
Table 3) Yes otherwise 
(xx) Regulatory requirement No test if engine power, displacement and rated No 
speed is maintained within base model tolerance 
as specified in Table 3. 
Inspection as per CMVR requirements, etc. 
Table 3 Difference between Base Model, 
Variant and a New Model 
SI. No. Parameters Base Model Variant New Model 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Engine operating principal (spark/ No change No change change 
compression ignition, two/four stroke) 
ii) No. and arrangement of cylinders No change No change change 
iii) Engine power Power variation not Power variation exceeding Power variation above 
exceeding 10 Percent of 10 percent but not 20 percent of declared 
declared value exceeding 20 percent of value 
the declared values 
iv) Engine displacement Variation in engine Variation in engine Variation in engine 
displacement subject to displacement subject to displacement subject to 
qualifying power-variation qualifying power-variation qualifying power-variation 
as mentioned in Sl. No. (iii) as mentioned in SI. No. (iii) as mentioned in SI. No. (iii) 
v) Rated engine speed Variation in rated engine Variation in rated engine Variation in rated engine 
speed subject to qualifying speed subject to qualifying speed subject to qualifying 
power-variation as power-variation as power-variation as 
mentioned in SI. No. (iii) mentioned in SI. No. (iii) mentioned in SI. No. (iii) 
NOTES 


1 The term ‘declared value” refers to the declared value of the base model tested under ICT. 


Power tiller/engine model name of any variant power tiller can be entirely or partially different from base model power tiller/engine. 


2 
3 The manufacturer can opt for model change even if the parameter in Sl. No. (iii), (iv) and (v) are met. 
4 


Wherever only physical inspection is required as per the above table, the inspection can be carried out at the manufacturer’s/dealer’s 


site/nearby testing Institute. 


ANNEXA 
( Clause 5.3) 


IS 13539 : 2018 


CATEGORIES OF BREAKDOWNS/DEFECTS (POWER TILLERS) 
( Critical Breakdown ) 


Code Aggregate Critical Defects Sub-assembly/Part Applicable Norms 
(1) (2) 3) (4) (5) 
ci Engine Engine seizure Piston-liner As under col 3 and 4 
C2 do do Main/big end bearings do 
C3 do Breakage of Piston do 
C4 do do Connecting rod do 
c5 do do Crankshaft do 
C6 do do Lubricating oil pump do 
C7 do do Fuel injection pump do 
C8 do do Governor do 
C9 do do Engine block do 
C10 do do Cylinder head do 
Cll do do Valve system do 
C12 Transmission do Clutch housing do 
C13 do do Gear box housing do 
C14 do do Axle do 
C15 Brake System do Actuating linkage parts do 
C16 Wheel Equipment do Wheel hub do 
C17 do do Wheel rim do 
C18 do do Wheel bolts do 


IS 13539 : 2018 


ANNEXB 
( Clause 5.3) 


CATEGORIES OF BREAKDOWNS/DEFECTS (POWER TILLERS) 


( Major Breakdown ) 
Code Aggregate Critical Defects Sub-assembly/Part Applicable Norms 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Mj 1 Engine Breakage Fan blade As under col 3 and 4 
Mj 2 do do Oil sump do 
Mj 3 do do Engine head do 
Mj 4 do do Fuel tank do 
Mj 5 do do Radiator do 
Mj 6 do Burst/cracked High pressure do 
Mj7 Transmission do Clutch assembly do 
Mj 8 do do All gearing do 
Mj 9 do do All shaft do 
Mj 10 do do All bearings do 
Mj 11 do do Gear shifting do 
Mj 12 Wheel assembly do Wheel bearings do 


10 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 5.3 ) 


CATEGORIES OF BREAKDOWNS/DEFECTS (POWER TILLERS ) 


IS 13539 : 2018 


( Minor Breakdown ) 
Code Aggregate Critical Defects Sub-assembly /parts Applicable Norms 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Mn 1 Engine Leakage from Radiator As under col 3 and 4 
un de = ae Ki de 
Mn 3 do => Seals do 
Mn 4 do = O-rings do 
Mn 5 do Malfunctioning Fuel injector do 
Mn 6 Transmission Leakage from Gasket do 
Mn7 do do Seals do 
Mn 8 Wheel assembly do Wheel hub do 
Mn 9 Sheet metal Minor cracks — do 
Mn 10 Electricals do Dynamo/ alternator do 


11 


IS 13539 : 2018 


ANNEXD 
(Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Agricultural Machinery and Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 11 


Organization 
Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Bhopal 


Agriculture Machinery Manufacturers Association, Pune 


ASPEE Agro Equipment Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai 


Central Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institute, Budni 


CAPTAIN Tractors Pvt Ltd., Rajkot 

Chaudhary Charan Singh Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar 
Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Bhopal 

CLAAS (India ) Pvt. Ltd, Moriband, Punjab 

Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 


Department of Agricultural Engineering, 
Govt. of Madhya Pradesh 


Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 
John Deere India Pvt. Ltd., Pune 


Maharana Pratap University of Agri & Tech., Udaipur 
Ministry of Agriculture, New Delhi 


National Innovation Foundation, Department of Science and Technology 


National Plant Protection Training Institute, Hyderabad 


North Eastern Region Farm Machinery Training & 
Testing Institute, Biswanath Chariali, Assam 


Northern Region Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institute, 
Hisar 


Power Tillers Manufacturers Association 
Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 


Project Coordinator, AICRP on Ergonomics & Safety in Agriculture, 
CIAE, Bhopal 


Project Coordinator, AICRP on Utilization of Animal Energy, 
CIAE, Bhopal 


Southern Region Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institute, 
Anantapur 


Tractor Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


VOICE, New Delhi 
BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 
Suri PAWAN KUMAR 
Scientist ‘B’, BIS 


12 


Representative(s) 
Dr K. K. SINGH (Chairman) 


SHRI BALACHANDRA BABU 
Dr SURENDRA SINGH 


SHRI JATIN S PATEL 
Suri GANGADHAR M. VARPE 


SHRI J. J. R. NARWARE 
Suri C. V. CHIMOTE 


SHRI SHAILASH MOVALIYA 
Dr VIJAYA RANI 

Dr P. S. TIWARI 

SHRI K.P, SINGH 

DR SITARAM DIXIT 


SHRI RAJESH CHOWDHURY 


Dr KANCHAN KUMAR SINGH 


SHRI VIVEK JOSHI 
Suri CHANDRASHEKHAR DESHMUKH, 
Suri A. G. RAMAKRISHNAN 


Dr A. K. MEHTA 


Suri V. N. KALE 
Suri A. N. MESHRAM 


SHRI MAHESH PATEL 
Suri RAKESH MAHESHWARI 


Dr VipHu KAMPURATH P. 


Suri K. K. NAGLE 


Suri P. K. PANDEY 


Suri B. SATHYAMURTHY 
Dr GURSAHIB SINGH MANES 


Dr C. R. MEHTA 


Dr M. Din 


SHRI P. P. Rao 


SHRI R. P.VASUDEVAN 
Suri T. R. KESHWAN 


SHRI B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 


SHRI P. RAJESH, Scientist “E” & HEAD (FAD) 
(REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio) 


IS 13539 : 2018 


Panel on Power Tiller 


Organization Representative(s) 

Deptt of Agriculture & Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture SHRI V. N. KALE, ADDITIONAL COMMISSIONER 
(MACHINERY) (Convenor) 

Central Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institute Suri J. J. NARWARE (Member) 

Southern Region Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institute Suri P. P. Rao (Member) 

Tractors Manufacturers Association Suri Mout Kumar (Member) 

Power Tiller Manufacturers Association Suri B. SATYAMURTHY (Member) 

Captain Tractors SHRI SHAILASH MOVALIA (Member) 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 11 (11933). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


