IS12710:1989 (Reaffirmed 2000)

Indian Standard
ACOUSTIC EMISSION TESTING GLOSSARY OF TERMS

UDC

620.179*16 AET : 001*4

@I BIS 1990

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Price Group 2

Non-destructive

Testing

Sectional

Committee,

SMDC

25

FOREWORD
This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian draft finalized by the Non-destructive Testing Sectional Structural and Metals Division Council. Standards Committee on 5 April 1989, after the had been approved by the

Non-destructive testing by acoustic emission is being used in the country for a variety of inspection jobs and it was felt necessary to define the various terms used in the field. The terms commonly used in the applications of acoustic emission techniques are covered in this standard. This standard is based on ASTM E 610-82 `Standard definitions of terms relating to acotistic emission', issued by the American Society for Testing and Materials, USA and Code IV of the code subgroup of European Working Group on Acoustic Emission,

IS 12710:1989

Indian Standard

ACOUSTIC EMISSION TESTINGGLOSSARY OF TERMS
1 SCOPE 1.1This standard defines the terms commonly used in acoustic emission testing ( AET ).
2 TERMINOLOGY 2.1 Acoustic Emission ( AE ) The class of phenomena whereby transient elastic waves are generated by the rapid release of energy from localized source within a material, or the transient elastic waves so generated. Acoustic emission ( AE ) is the recommended term for general use. Other terms that have been used in AE literature include: a) Stress wave emission ( SWE ) b) Micro-seismic activity, and c) Emission or acoustic emission with other qualifying modifiers. 2.2 Acoustic Emission Channel An assembly of a sensor, preamplifier or impedance matching transformer, filters, secondary amplifier or other instrumentation as needed, connecting cables, and detector or processor. 2.3 Acoustic Emission Count ( N ) The number of times the acoustic emission signal exceeds a preset threshold during any selected portion of a test. 2.4 Acoustic Emission Count Rate ( N") The time rate at which emission counts occur. 2.5 Acoustic Emission Event A local material emission. change giving rise to acoustic of the principal resonant frequency at the .-3 dB points.

b)

Transducer ( Flat Response)

- Transducer whose frequency response has no resonance within its specified frequency band, the bandwidth to - 3 dB being defined and the ratio between the upper and lower limits of the band being typically not less than 10.

cl

Transducer

which due to nances narrow

( Wide Band ) - Transducer uses the mechanical amplification the superposition of multiple resoto give high sensitivity in several bands within a specified wide band.

d)

(Single Ended ) - A piezoelectric single element transducer. the output pole of which is isolated from the case and the other pole being at the same potential as the case. Transducer (D@zrential) - A piezoelectric e) twin-element or dual-pole transducer, the output poles of which are isolated from the case and are at a floating potential.

Transducer

2.8 Acoustic Emission Signal

An electrical signal obtained by detection of one or more acoustic emission events. 2.9 Acoustic Emission Signal Amplitude The peak voltage of the largest excursion attained by the signal waveform from an emission event. 2.10 Acoustic Emission Signature A characteristic set of reproducible attributes of acoustic emission signals associated with a specific test article as observed with a particular system under specified test instrumentation conditions. 2.11 Acoustic Emission Waveguide A device that couples elastic energy from a structure or other test object to a remotely mounted sensor during AE monitoring. An example of an acoustic emission waveguide would be a solid wire or rod, that is, coupled at one end to a monitored structure and to a sensor at the other end. 2.12 Arrival Time Interval ( ATi] ) The time interval between the detected arrivals of an acoustic emission wave at the ith and ith sensors of a sensor array. 1

2.6 Acoustic Emission Event Energy The total elastic energy event. released by an emission

2.7 Acoustic Emission Sensor ( Transducer ) A detection device, generally piezoelectric, that transforms the particle motion produced by an elastic wave into an electrical signal.

a)

Transducer ( Resonant ) -Transducer which uses the mechanical amplification due to a resonant frequency ( or several close resonant frequencies ) to give a high sensitivity in a narrow end, typically ;t 10 percent

IS 12710 : 1989 2.13 Artificial Source an event, the device 2.17 Continuous Emission

Point where elastic waves, simulating are created. This term also defines used to create the waves. 2.14 Background The signal in em&ion events. origins. Noise

A qualitative description of the sustained signal level produced by rapidly occurring acoustic emission events.
NOTE -

the absence of any acoustic It has electrical and mechanical

Use of the term `continuous emission' is recommended only for describing the qualitative appearance Of emission signals. Figure 3 shows oscilloscope traces of ContinuouS emission signal at sweep late of 5 ms/cm.

2.15 Burst Duration Time interval between the first and last time the threshold was exceeded by the burst. 2.16 Burst Emission A qualitative description of discrete signal related to an individual emission event occurring within the material.
NOTE - Use of the term `burst emission' is recommended only for describing the qualitative appearance of emission signals. Figure 2 shows an oscilloscope trace of burst emission signals.
I b RlSE PEAK TIME

2.18 Couplant A material used at the structure-to-sensor the transmission of face to improve across the interface during energy emission monitoring. 2.19 Cumulative Acoustic Distribution, E ( V )
signals

interacoustic acoustic Amplitude with US a

Emission

The number of acoustic emission events that exceed an arbitrary amplitude function of amplitude V.

AMPCITUOE
G DOWN COUNTS

I

b

BURST

DURATION

I

J

I

FIG. 1 PARAMETERS OF CHARACTERIZING A BURST

FIG. 2 AN OSCILI.OSC-OPE TRA~-I!OF BUI~STEMISSION SIGNALS ( SWEEPRA'IE 01: 0.2 ms/cm ) 2

IS 12710 : 1989

FIG. 3

OSCUOSCOPE TRACES OF CONTINIJWSEMISSION SIGNALS ( SWEEP RATE OF 5 ms,/cm ) Treshold 2.27 Kaiser Effect The absence of detectable acoustic fixed sensitivity level until previously levels are cxcecded. 2.28 Logarithmic Acoustic Distribution, g ( V) The number of
signal amplitudes

2.20 Cumulative Acoustic Emission Crossing Distribution, Et ( F' )

The number of times the acoustic emission signal exceeds an arbitrary threshold as a function of the threshold voltage ( V ). 2.21 Delta ( t ), see 2.12 2.22 Differential Acoustic Distribution, .f ( V ) The number of acoustic between signal amplitudes v q- A C'( k' + delta V ) amplitude V. {( V) is the derivative of the cumulative F( V). Emission Amplitude

emission at a applied stress Amplitude

Emission

emission events with amplitudes V and as a function of the absolute value of the amplitude distribution

acoustic emission events with between V and alpha V ( where alpha is a constant multiplier ) as a function of the amplitude. Thi:; is a variant of the differential amplitude distribution, appropriate for logar-ithmically windowed data. 2.29 Parameter ( AE ) Distribution

2.23 Event Count ( NC > The number obtairled by counting acoustic emission cvcnt once. 2.24 Event Count Rate ( NC> ) The time rate of the event count. 2.25 Felicity Effect each discerned

A display of the number of times the acoustic emission parameter falls between the values x and .V : 6.~ as a function of .Y. Typical paramctcrs are amplitude, rise time and dur:ltion. 2.30 Pulser Transducer Transducer used as artificial Threshold source.

2.31 Reference

The appearance of signilicant acoustic emission at a stress level below the prcvioua maximum applied level, such as observed in composite materials. 2.26 Felicity Ratio

Present \ult;lce level which has to be exceeded, bcl`orc an AE signal is detected and processed ( Fig. I ). This threshold may be adjustable, lixcd or Iloalinz. 2.32 Itit& Down Count ,~(YJ2.3
tc1111. 2.33

acoustic

emission

count

the

prefcrrcd

Mcasurcmcnt of the l`ellciry cl`fcct is dcfincd as the ratio between the applied load ( prcssurc ) nt which the acoustic emission rcappcars during the next application of loading ( pressure ) and the previous maximum applied load ( prcsburc ). 3

Stimulation
as

The applicalinil of 3 stimulus, such prcssurc, heal, ctc, to a tcbt article acoustic cniission sources.

force, to excite

Standard Mark
The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Burrau of' ludian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Kegulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well delined systcJJJ of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products aru also Continuously checked by BIS for conformrty to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions uJlder which a licencc foJ- the USC of the Standard Mark may be granted to Jnanufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright should be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. SMDC 25 (3314)

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones : 33101 38, 331 13 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75 37 86 62 2 1843

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol,

41 29 16 6 32 92 95

Andherl (East)

BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD, COIMRATORE, HYDERABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHURANESHWAR, FARIDABAD, GHAZIARAD, GUWAHATI, JAJPUR, KANPUR, PATNA, TRlVANDRUM
Printed at

&poor

Art

Press .New

Delhi,

India

