(Reaffirmed 2005)

rs : 4393

- 1979

Indian Standard
BASIC REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ABATTOIR

( First Revision )
Meat
Chairman DR C. M. SINGH Members DR B. PANDA (Alternate to Dr C. M. Singh ) AGRICULTURAL M A R K E T I N G ADVISER TO THE GOVERNMENT 0F INDIA SHRI S. JAYARAMAN ( Alternate ) SHRI D. S. CHADHA

Industry

Sectional

Committee,

AFDC
Research

18
Institute ( ICAR ),

Representing Indian Veterinary Izatnagar

Directorate of Marketing and Inspection ( Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad Central Committee for Food Standards (Ministry of Health & Family Welfare ), New Delhi

SMT DEBI MUKHERJEE( Alternate ) Technical Standardization Committee ( Foodstuffs ) CHAPMAN ( Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation ), New Delhi SECRETARY ( Alternate ) Metal Box Company of India Ltd, Calcutta DR S. C. CHAKRAVORTY Regional Bacon Factory, Gannavaram SHRI D. B. P. CHANDRASEKHARA RAO DR S. S. KRISHNAMOORTHY ( Alternate ) Department of Agriculture ( Ministry of Agriculture DRA.K. CHATTERJEE & Irrigation ), New Delhi Central Leather Research Institute ( CSIR ), Madras DR S. DIVAKARAN DR K. J. SCARIA ( Alternate ) Central Dairy Farm, Aligarh GENERALMANAGER SHRI K. S. BISHT ( Alternate ) Directorate of Remount Veterinary Services, Army BRIG KARAN SINGH Headquarters MAJ S. K. GUPTA (Alternate) Mafco Factory, Bombay DR R. R. MALLYA Central Food Technological Research Institute DR M. N. MOORJANI f CSIR 1. Mvsore DR B. R. BALIGA ( Alternate ) Municipal Corporation of Delhi MUNICIPAL HEALTH OFFICER SUPERINTENDENT ( SLAUGHTER HOUSE) ( Alternate ) ( Continued on pup 2 )
@

Copyright

1979 INSTITUTION

INDIAN This publication is protected

STANDARDS under the Indian

Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by an means except with written permission of the rmgement of copyright under the said Act. publisher shall be deemed to be an in r.

1s t 4393 - 1979
( Continued from page 1 ) Members Representing Madras Veterinary College, Madras DR R. RAMAMURTH~ DR M. P. ARUMU~AM ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI S. RAMASWAMY New Delhi SHRI S. N. PANDEY ( Alternate ) DRT.R. SHARMA Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore SHRI L. A. RAMANATHAN I \ Alternate I COL R. N. TANEJA Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquarters LT-COL K. N. ACHARYA ( Alternate ) SWRI T. PURNANANDAM, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o@tio Member ) Director ( Agri & Food ) Secretary SHRI MANOHAR T. SANTWANI Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

Slaughter-House
Convener DR A. K. CHATTERJEE

and Equipment Subcommittee,

AFDC 18 : 8
of Agricul-

Department of Agriculture ( Ministry ture & Irrigation ), New Delhi

Members SHRI B. VENKATESWARLU ( Alternate to Dr A. K. Chatterjee ) Directorate of Marketing and Inspection ( Ministry AGRICULTURAL M A R K E T r N G of Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad ADVKF,RTO THE GOVERNMENT SHRI S. JAYARAMAN ( Alternate ) SHRI R. BHUTANI SHRI J. C. SAVLA ( Alternate ) SHRI A. CHAKRAVORTY SHRI V. NAGARAJU ( Alternate ) SHRIS. DIVAKARAN Vulcan Lava1 Ltd, Bombay

Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ), Durgapur Central Leather Research Institute Madras Central Dairy Farm, Aligarh Essex Farms Pvt Ltd. New Delhi ( CSIR ),

GENERALMANAGER SHRI ANAND K. GOYLE SHRIARUN K. GOYLE ( Alternate ) Directorate of Animal Husbandry, Government of DR A. H. KHAN Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad Steel Plant Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. H. MIRCHANDANI SHRI M. G. MANSUKHANI( Alternate ) Central Food Technological Research Institute DR M. N. MOORJANI I ,- CSIR 1. ,I Mvsore I DR B. R. BALIGA ( Alternate) Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay SHRI T. R. PATWARDHAN &RI V. B. SHIRODKAR( Alternate ) Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay SHRI B. P. S. PURI SHRI S. D. PANDIT ( Alternate) Industrial Plants & Waste Treatment Corporation, SHRI I. K. SHANKAR SRRI NAGENDRA SHARMA Indi?~m%~erinary Izatnagar Research Institute ( ICAR ),

2

Indian Standard
BASIC REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ABATTOIR

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 27 April 1979, after the draft finalized by the Meat Industry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council.
0.2 Though millions of animals like sheep, goats, pigs and large animals are slaughtered every year in the country, the conditions of abattoirs where these animals are slaughtered are far from satisfactory. These abattoirs have not been constructed on modern lines and they do not fulfil the requirements of hygiene, sanitation, public health and of the prevention of cruelty to animals. This standard has been formulated to help in improving the present conditions of abattoirs and in guiding the construction of new ahattoirs on modern lines specially with a view to having greater utilization of slaughter-house by-products. 0.3 This standard was first published in 1967. The present revision incorporates a number of modifications and additions like those of improved lay-outs, flow diagrams and requirements for installations and plant wastes disposal. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the typical layout plan, and basic requirements for an abattoir for carrying goats, pigs and large animals.
*Rules for rounding off numerical ~ahe.s (*e&d).

hygienic and sanitary, out slaughter of sheep,

3

IS : 4393 - 1979 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, 1971* shall apply. 3. LOCATION 3.1 Abattoirs may be located outside or on the periphery of a city or town and shall be away from an airport. Care should, however, be taken to see that these are easily accessible to the patrons and do not adversely Main services, such affect the transport of meat to the market place. as potable water, electricity and proper hygienic sewage disposal facilities, are a prerequisite and should be provided.
NOTE - In case the construction is within the municipal limits, plan for construction shall follow the relevant bye-laws prescribed by the municipal authorities of the place.

the definitions given in IS : 1982-

4. LAYOUT 4.1 The a) b) c)

PLAN

abattoirs shall have the following essential facilities: Resting pl.ace for animals before slaughter; Adequate facilities for ante-mortem inspection; Carrying out humane slaughter;

d) Flaying, dressing and washing of the carcasses; e) Hanging carcasses and edible offal; f) Handling by-products; g) Inspection of meat consumption; h) Laboratory; j) Staff welfare; k) Segregation ward for sick/diseased animals; and m) Adequate water supply. In addition, the facility may also be provided for rendering plant and an incinerator. 4.1.1 A flow diagram for basic operation of an abattoir is shown in Fig. 1 for information and guidance only. The layout of entire abattoir, as far as possible, should have a forward flow. 4.1.2 A typical layout plan for slaughtering up to 400 sheep or goats and pigs or both per day is shown in Fig. 2. The layout shows the two
*Code of practice for ante-mortem revision) . and post-mortem inspection of meat animals (Jirst

and

disposal

of meat

unfit

for

human

4

1s : 4393 - 1979

EXHAUSTED CIV" CATTLE

EXHAUSTED

LIVESTOCK

7
GRAZING YARD

s!T!x

GOBER
JliARMACEUnCbj BLOOD HEADS AND HORNS GAS

i PLANT

CARCASS

WEIGHING

TO

BUTCHERS MARKETING

FOR

TO

BUTCHERS MARKEtfNG

FOR

0 ' @ g%Z

' GLANDS DRY

OVARIES

BLOOD BY-PROOUCT SALE

RENDERING MANURE/GAS

FIG, 1

ABATTOIR FLOW DIAGRAM

IS : 4393 - 1979
abattoirs with common separation wall and is for the regions where religious sentiments permit it. Typical flow diagrams for sheep and goats and pigs are given in Fig. 3 and 4 respectively. Typical flow diagram and layout plan for slaughtering up to 100 cattle per day are shown in Fig. 5 and 6 for information and guidance only. The plan may vary depending on shape and size of plot, number of animals to be slaughtered per day and individual requirements of a particular abattoir. 4.1.3 Should the retail or wholesale market for finished goods be required to be included within the complex itself, the same should be physically excluded from the rest of the establishment in such a manner that the customers have an access only to these sections where such business is transacted. 4.2 Abattoirs shall have an adequate separation between clean and unclean sections, which shall be arranged in such a way that from the introduction of a live animal into the abattoir up to the emergence of meat and offal classed as fit for human consumption, there shall be a continuous process, without any ponibility of reversal, inter-section or over lapping between the live animals and meat, and between meat and by-products or waste. Typical flow diagrams for offals and by-products ( rendering) are given in Fig. 7 and 8. 5. UNITS IN AN ABATTOIR

5.1 In view of the facilities have the following units:
a) Reception b) Lairages, halls, c) Slaughter d) Ancillary e) Refrigerated

to

be

provided

( 4.1 ),

the

abattoir

shall

area or resting

grounds,

accommodation, room.

and

5.1.1 Reception Area or Resting area of adequate size or resting to veterinary inspection before 24 hours. This shall have the

Grounds -The abattoir shall have reception grounds where the livestock are subjected they are passed on to lairage for resting for following facilities.

5.1 .l .l Unless all animals are arriving on hoof, proper ramps for direct unloading of animals from trucks or railway wagons should be provided. The ramps should directly lead to ante-mortem area with office room for veterinary inspector. 5.1.1.2 The reception fbr watering and examining area or resting grounds shall have facility animals before sending to holding pens.

7

STUNNING TILTING

TONG PENS I KNIVES I. ~~ <NIVES iEAD CHUTES HIGH PRESSURE

B ..
8 w"

I

1

HANGING

FROM LAIRAGES

FIG. 3

SHEEP AND GOATS SLAUGHTER FLOW

DIAGRAM

FIG. 4

PIG SLAUGHTER FLOW DIAGRAM

FIG.5

CATTLE SLAUGHTER FLOW DIAGRAM

EMERGENCY

SLAUGHTER ENTRANCE' FROM MIRAGE

5TUNNING PEN IF REOUIRED (CHRISTIAN 1

355m

~BLEEDING

RAIL

I

AND TROUGH PMENT LMANAGER AND OFFICE STORE

L DRESSING

TROLLV

19 20 z; 23

Animal

Stunned

(CHRISTIAN) \

or

L%tf&) Bleeding Rail ( CHRISTIAN Animal Stuck ( CHRISTIAN ) Head Detached and Washed (a) (b) Carcass Positioned on to for Siding

LEGEND Stuck 24 25 ) 26 27 28 Cradle 29

Carcass at Half Hoist Fat Removed to Fat Trolly Carcass Slung Off on Dressing Rail Red ORal to Carrier on Red Offal Rail Hide Removed to Hide Room Carcass Split. Side Trimmed and Wiped Sides Weighed and Passed to Detention Room or Pre-Cooler

FIG, 6

TYPICAL LAYOUT PLAN FOR AN ABATTOIR (CATTLE)

PACK ING

TABLE

r-2

+PAUNCH BUTCHERS

TO

ASiNG

STRIPPER

.CASING TO BUTCHERS

MAMUPE

TO

BY-PRODUCTS I

FATS HEARTS LIVERS c LUNGS KIDNEYS SPLEENS

TO

BUTCHERS

FIG. 7

CATTLE, PIG AND GOAT OFPALS FLOW DIAGRAM

1

PREBRFAKER

rl

n

FIG. 8

BY-PRODUCTS ( RENDERING ) FLOW DIAGRAM

w" I

IS : 4393- 1979 5.1.1.3 Separate isolation pens shall be provided with watering and feeding arrangements for (a) animals suspected to be suffering from contagious and infectious diseases, and (b) fractious animals, in order to segregate them from the remaining animals. 5.1.1.4 Adequate holding area shall be provided according to the The holding area shall have water and class of animals to be slaughtered. feeding facilities. The resting grounds should have overhead protective shelters. 5.1.2 Lairages -The lairage shall be adequate in size for the number of animals to be laired. The space provided in the pens shall be not less than 2.8 m2 per large animal and 1.6 ms per small animal. The animals shall be kept separately depending upon their type and class. The lairage shall be so constructed as to protect the animals from heat, cold and rain. The lairage shall have adequate facilities for watering and ante-mortem inspection as given in 5.1.1.1 to 5.1.1.4. 5.1.2.1 Where separate lairages or sections are to be provided for livestock meant for JHATKA, HALAL or Jewish slaughter, complete visual separation shall be effected and entrances shall be as far apart as possible. 5.1.3 Slaughter Halls - Separate provisions, wherever required, shall be made in an abattoir for slaughtering, dressing and processing of: a) Sheep and goats ( HALAL ), b) Sheep and goats ( JHATKA c) Sheep and goats (Jewish), d) Pigs, and e) Large animals. The slaughter halls and ancillary accommodation thus provided shall be separated, keeping in view the economic and local requirements, by solid walls depending upon the site. Exits to such sections shall be kept as far apart as possible. 5.1.3.1 Separate space shall be provided for stunning (wherever The curbing should be applicable ), bleeding and dressing of the carcasses. not less than 150 mm high and 100 mm wide with the top sloped not less than 45". 5.1.3.2 Knocking section may be so planned as to suit the animal and particularly the ritual slaughter, if any. It should have facility to slaughter crippled animals brought from ante-mortem inspection yard to slaughter department and also the floor and hand washing facilities. An animal shall not be slaughtered in sight of other animals. The knocking section and dry landing area associated with it shall be so built that escape 14 ),

IS : 4393 - 1979
from this section can be easily carried out by an operator without allowing the animal to pass the escape barrier. This may normally be accomplished by an arrangement such as placing vertical pipes 150 mm in diameter, 1.5 m high on prepared vertical pipe inserts, about 120 mm high or the internal diameter of the pipe used for the vertical placed not less than 500 mm apart. 5.1.3.3 A curbed-in bleeding area of adequate size should be provided. It shall be so located that the blood shall not be splashed on other animals being slaughtered or on the carcass being skinned. Blood drain and collection should be immediate and proper. A floor wash point should be Also a hand-wash basin and knife provided for intermittent cleaning. sterilizer should be provided for the sticker to sterilize knife and wash his hands periodically. 5.1.3.4 Dressing area - Dressing of carcasses should not be done on floor. Adequate means and tools for dehiding or belting of the animals should be provided. Means for immediate disposal of hides or skins should be provided. Hides or skins should be immediately transported either in a In no closed wheel barrow or by a chute provided with self-closing door. case the hides or skins should be spread on slaughter floor for inspection. Floor wash point and adequate number of hand wash basins with sterilizer Means for immediate disposal of should be provided in this section. legs, horns, hooves, etc, should be provided through spring load floor chutes or side wall doors or closed wheel barrows. In case wheel barrows or trucks are used, care should be taken that at no point wheel barrow or truck has to ply under the dressing rails and a clear passage is provided for movement of the trucks. 5.1.3.5 l$scera inspection facilities - Adequate space and suitable and properly located facilities shall be provided for inspection of the viscera of This department shall have the various types of animals slaughtered. adequate facilities for hand washing, tool sterilization and floor washing and contrivances for immediate separation and disposal of condemned material. Adequate arrangements may be made for identification, inspection and correlation of carcass, viscera and head. 5.1.3.6 Carcuss washing -A curbed and separately drained area or an area of sufficient size sloped 33 mm per metre to a floor drain, where approved carcasses may be washed with a jet of water, should be provided. 5.1.4 Ancillary Accommodation room and hanging space shall be provided for of stomachs and intestines. This room shall have a and viscera cleaning and separating departments edible and inedible sections for further processing. preferably be separated from the slaughter floor,

5.1.4.1 A separate emptying and cleaning separate exit. Pluck should be divided into Those sections should

IS : 4393 - 1979 except for one or two connecting doorways provided with solid, self-closing doors, completely covering the opening. 5.1.4.2 Suitable and sufficient facilities shall be provided for the isolation of meat requiring further examination by the veterinary inspector in a suitable laboratory within the premises of the abattoir. 5.1.4.3 Suitable and sufficient accommodation shall be provided for the retention of all meat condemned as unfit for human consumption and shall be locked up separately. 5.1.4.4 Labour welfare facilities - Well located toilet rooms should be provided in the abattoir building sufficiently away from slaughter walls. A separate hall with lockers and shower facilities should be provided. Adequate drinking water and washing facilities should be provided at convenAdequate facilities for canteen and first-aid should also be ient locations. provided. 5.1.4.5 If a separate block for hide curing or skin drying is not provided in the abattoir, the hides or skins may be stored in a separate room and removed daily by the licensees. 5.1.4.6 Similarly, if rendering facilities are not provided, the condemned material should be denatured and held in watertight metal containers in suitable inedible product room pending daily removal by contractors. 5.1.5 Refrigerated Room - Hanging halls if air-conditioned should have temperature not higher than 10�C. Two retaining compartments constructed of rust-resistant wire gauge or expanded metal portion extending from about 75 mm above ground to ceiling should be provided, one for holding retained carcasses and the other for holding the carcasses affected with
Cysticercus bovis. 5.1.6 If the incidence of Cysticercus bovis is high, it is advisable to have a freezer with storage for 10 days at a temperature not higher than - 9.5%. 6. RAILS

FOR

CARCASSES

6.1 Rails ( see IS : 662%1972* ) with hooks of suitable rust-proof metal or mild steel shall be provided for hanging the carcasses and similar provision for plucks shall be made, permitting free circulation of air. The hooks shall be suitably cleaned and sterilized regularly. 6.2 The height and length of rails, provided for bleeding and dressing, shall be in accordance with Table 1. *Specification for slide rails for use in abattoirs. 16

*

IS : 4393 - 1979
OF BLEEDING

TABLE

1

REQUIREMENTS OF HEIGHT AND LENGTH AND DRESSING RAILS ( Clause 6.2 )

SL No. (1)

CARCASS (2)

HEIGHT (3) mm

LENGTHPER

CARCASS
(4) mm 450 600 900

POSITION OF FIG. (5)

i) ii) iii) iv)

Bleeding rail for goats and pigs

sheep,

*3 000 to 2 200 4 500 to 5 000 2 000 to 2 200 3 200

2 and 12 of Fig. 2 Throughout 4 and 13 of Fig. 2 Throughout

Bleeding rail for large animals Dressing rail for sheep, goats and pigs Dressing rail for large animals

1 800 for legging, dehiding and 2 400 for evisceration and further

*Falling at the rate of 10 mm per 1 000 mm ( for gravity rail ).

6.3 The space required per carcass and the distance between in hanging or chill room, shall be in accordance with Table 2.
TABLE 2 REQUIREMENTS BETWEEN RAILS

the

rails

OF SPACE PER CARCASS AND DISTANCE JN HANGING OR CHILL ROOM SPACE PER CARCASS

SL No.

C.4~cAss

BETWEEN RAILS

DISTANCE (4)
mm

HEIGHT OF RAILS

(1)
i) ii)

(2)
Sheep and goats Pigs: a) Mass of pig 70 kg and over b) Mass of pig below 70 kg

(3)
mm

(5)
mm 2000 to 2 200 Min ( single changing) 2 000 to 2 200 2 000 to 2 200 3 200 (for halves ) and 2 000 to 2 200 for quarters

300 to 400

300 to 400

450 to 600 300 to 400 450 to 600

450 to 600 300 to 400 800 to 1000

iii)

Large animals

17

IS : 4393 - 1979 7. CIVIL CONSTRUCTION

li

7.1 Ante-mortem and Pen Area-The area impervious material such as concrete non-slippery able to stand wear and tear by hooves, or brick, drainage facilities. Curbs of impervious material should be provided around the borders of livestock entrances. The pen should preferably be covered.

should be paved with herring-bone type suitand pitched to suitable 150 to 300 mm high pen area, except at the

7.2 Plant Building -Materials used shall be impervious, easily cleansMaterials such as wood, plaster able, and resistant to wear and corrosion. boards, which are absorbent and board, and porous acoustic-type difficult to keep clean should not be used in edible departments. 7.2.1 Floors - The floors should be non-absorbent and non-slippery rough finish, and shall have suitable gradient for drainage. with

7.2.2 Coves - Coves with radii sufficient to promote sanitation should be installed at the juncture offloors and walls in all rooms and not less than 100 mm. 7.2.3 Interior Walls - Interior walls should be smooth and flat and constructed of impervious materials such as glazed brick, glazed tile, smooth surf&cd Portland cement plaster, or other non-toxic, non-absorbent mateWalls should be provided with suitable rial applied to a suitable base. sanitary type bumpers to prevent damage by hand trucks, carcass shanks, and the like. It is recommended that the interior walls should have washable surface up to the height of 2 m from the floor so that the splashes may be washed and disinfected. 7.2.4 CeilingsCeilings should be of good height ( 5 m or more is desirable in work rooms ). So far as structural conditions permit, ceilings shall be smooth and flat. Ceilings shall be constructed of Portland cement plaster, large size cement asbestos boards with joints sealed with a flexible seiling compound, or other acceptable impervious material and finished so as to minimise condensation, mould development, flaking and accumulation of dirt. The walls (above glazed type portion) and ceiling may be painted with water-resistant paint to maintain them clean. 7.2.5 Window Leclges - Window ledges should slope at 45' to promote sanitation. To avoid damage to glass in windows from impact of hand trucks and similar equipment, the window sills should be 1 200 mm above the floor level. Proper ventilation through mechanical venting or through working vents should be provided in the roof structure. 7.2.6 Doorways and Doors - Doorways through which product is transferred on rails or in hand trucks shall be at least 1 500 mm wide, except for the doors used in connection with rails approximately 3 000 mm Doors shall either be of rust-resistant high can be at least 1 500 mm wide. 18

IS : 4393 - 1979 metal having welded affixed which sealing or if made with rust-resistant metal construction throughout, tight soft wood, thay shall be clad or both sides with soldered or seams. Door jambs shall be clad with rust-resistant metal securely so as to provide no crevices for dirt or vermin and the juncture at the door joins the walls shall be effectively sealed with a flexible compound.

7.2.7 Screens and Insect Control - All windows, doorways, and other openings that may admit flies should be equipped with effective insect and rodent screens. ` Fly chaser ' fans and ducts or air curtains shall be provided over doorways in outside wall of food handling areas that are used for dispatch or receiving. 7.2.8 Rodent-Proojng - Except in the case of solid masonry walls constructed of glazed tile, glazed brick, and the like, expanded metal or wire mesh, not exceeding 12.5 mm mesh, shall be embedded in walls and floors at their junction. This mesh should extend vertically and horizontally to a sufficient distance to exclude the entrance of rats and other rodents. 7.2.9 Stairs - Stairs in edible product handling departments shall be of impervious construction with solid treads and closed risers and shall have side curbs of similar material 150 mm high measured at the front edge of the treads. Floor openings for chutes, etc, and for stairways except at entrances should have curbs of impervious materials, such as concrete or metal, at least 300 mm high, to prevent floor drainage from entering such chutes. 7.3 Vehicular Areas for Trucks - Concrete paved areas, properly drained and extending at least 6 metres from building, loading docks or livestock platforms shall be provided at places where vehicles are loaded or unloaded. Pressure washing jets and disinfection facilities for trucks carrying animals should be provided. 7.4 Drainage 7.4.1 All parts of floors where wet operations are conducted should be well drained. As a general rule, one drainage inlet should be provided for each 37 m2 of floor space. A slope of about 20 mm per metre to drainage inlets should be provided for usual conditions. It is important that the floors slope uniformly to drains with no low spots which collect liquid. Floor drains should not be provided in freezer rooms or dry storage areas. When floor drains are installed in rooms where the water seal in traps is likely to evaporate without replenishment, they should be provided with suitable removable metal screw plugs.

19

IS : 4393 - 1979 7.4.2 Traps and Vents on Drainage Lines - Each floor drain, including blood drains, should be equipped with a deep seal trap (I'-, U-, or S-shape ). Drainage lines shall be properly vented to the outside air and be equipped with effective rodent screens.
7.4.3 Sanitary Drainage LinesDrainage lines from toilet pans and urinals should not be connected with other drainage lines within the plant and may not discharge into a grease catch basin. Such lines shall be installed so that if leakage develops, it shall not affect the product or the equipment. 7.4.4 All floor drains should be so constructed and the floor so made that these can be easily cleaned and then shall be a minimum area to be drained p-r outlet. It is recommended that `U' drains set with satisfactory covers should be used and made totally fly-proof and rodent-proof. 7.4.5 Special Drainage Requirements - In certain departments, special floor drainage is required. For example, floor drainage valleys are essential under the dressing rails for hogs, calves, and sheep. Such valleys shall be about 600 mm wide and integral with the floor. The valleys shall slope at least 10 mm per metre to drains with the vdlleys. In so-called on the rail cattle slaughtering departments, floor valleys under the dressing rails shall be provided unless the floor drainage is carefully localized wit'n drainage inlets placed advantageously beneath the dressing rails. 8. LIGHTING AND VENTILATION

8.1 Unrefrigeratcd work rooms should be provided with ad,:quatc direct natural light and ventilation or ample artificial light and ventilation by mechanical means. Uncoloured glass having a high transmissibility of light may be used in skylights and windows. The glass area should be approximately one-fourth the floor area of a workroom. This ratio should be increased where there are obstructions, such as adjacent buildings, overhead catwalks, and hoists, which interfere with the admittance of direct natural light. Well distributed artificial lighting of good quality should be provided at all places where adequate natural light is not available or is insufficient. 8.2 Every abatttir shall be so constructed that meat inspection may be carried out in daylight. Sockets for the use of inspection lamps shall be provided at convenient places. 8.3 Every abattoir shall be provided with well-distributed artificial light of an overall intensity of not less than 200 lux throughout the slaughter hall and workrooms and at places where meat inspection is carried out, the overall intensity of artificial light shall be not less than 500 lux. 20

IS : 4393 - 1979 8.4 Every abattoir shall be provided with suitable and sufficient means of ventilation to the outside air. The construction of the slaughter hall should be so arranged that the dressed carcasses are not exposed to direct sunlight. 9. SUPPLY OF WATER 9.1 A sufficient, safe, potable and constant supply of fresh water shall be available at adequate pressure throughout the premises. 9.1.1 The pressure for the general purpose of floor washing, etc, may preferably be 200 to 330 kPa for thorough floor cleaning. 9.1.2 For thorough and efficient washing of carcasses, a higher pressure of 1 000 to 1 700 kPa is recommended. 9.1.3 Floor washing point may be provided preferably 37 m2 on slaughter floor and working departments. 9.1.4 The water distribution for minimum

plant may be located at the load centre.

9.2 A constant supply of clean hot water shall be available in the slaughter hail and workrooms during working hours. 9.2.1 Hot water is required at not less than 82?C for frequent of equipment. sterilizing

9.3 Every sanitary convenience in an abattoir shall be supplied with water by means of suitable flushing appliance. 9.4 Suitable facilities for washing of hands ( including adequate supplies of hot and cold running water, nail brushes and soap or other detergent ) Where non-potable shall be provided for persons working in an abattoir. water is used for fire control, etc, it shall be carried in completely separate lines preferably identified by colour and with no cross-connection or back siphonage with lines carrying potable water. 10. EQUIPMENT CONSTRUCTION

such equipment as utility boards, other 10.1 General -Excepting equipment shall be constructed either of rust-resisting metal such as stainless steel or galvanized metal with smoothness of high quality commercial hot dip. The galvanized metal is generally not desirable where high resistance to corrosive action of food products and cleaning compounds is ' required. Plastic may be used. In that case plastic shall be abrasion- and nontoxic and should not contain, heat-resistant, shatter-proof, any constituents that may affect the meat or meat products during contact. 21

IS : 4393 - 1979 10.2 Accessibility
and reach

for Cleaning and Maintenance
zone shall and inspection. be readily accessible to sight

10.2.1 All parts of the product
for cleaning

10.2.2 Where necessary for proper cleaning and inspection, equipment shall be easily demountable. To facilitate this dismantling, quick opening devices that require no tools or, such simple tools as a mallet and an open-end wrench shall be provided. Bayonet joints, butterfly clamps, spring bolts, and other similar devices are desirable for connecting or closing parts of equipment. Where parts should be retained by nuts and bolts, the design shall provide for fixed studs with wing nuts, rather than bolts to a tapped hole. 10.2.3 adjacent entrance All bearings shall be located outside the product zone and if thereto, shall be constructed with a readily removable seal at the of the shaft, into the product zone. shall be provided radii are required with radii to facilitate continuous,

10.2.4 Interior corners of equipment ( minimum 6 mm ), except where greater drainage and cleaning.

10.2.5 All welding within the product zone shall be smooth, even and relatively flush with the adjacent surfaces.

10.2.6 All parts of the product zone shall be free of recesses, open seams and gaps, crevices, protruding ledges, inside threads, inside shoulders, inside bolts or rivets and deal ends. 10.2.7 Where necessary for sanitary maintenance, equipment constructed and installed so as to be completely self-draining. shall be

10.2.8 Care shall be taken to prevent contaminating product by lubriIf drip pans cants used in overhead motors, gears, and similar devices. are necessary, they should be easily accessible for inspection and removable for cleaning. 10.2.9 ,411 safety or gear guards shall be readily and inspection. 10.2.10 All external surfaces shall be free of pen seams, gaps, 10.3 Non-acceptable used in an abattoir: a) Copper b) C.idmium c) Equipment d) Enamel e) Lead. Materials removable for cleaning

that do not contact with food products crevices and inaccessible recesses. The following materials shall not be

and its alloys in equipment in any form in equipment with painted containers or equipment

used for edible products; handling edible and products; zone;

surface in product

is not desirable,

22

IS : 4393 - 1979

10.3.1 For elimination of f%tigue and comfortable working for labourers the working table should be at waist height of the worker to work in standing position. If the table is at more height ( that is 800 mm to 860 mm) it should have a platform incorporated for the balance height above 860 mm.
10.3.2 Working platform for on-the-rail operations should be of such height that the slaughter man has neither to stoop too low or stretch himself to his operation zone, and he should be able to reach operation zone in his natural standing position.

11. INSTALLATION 11.0 Following points should be strictly observed during equipment from hygiene and sanitation point of view.
installation of

11.1 All permanently mounted equipment shall either be installed sufficiently away from walls ( minimum 300 mm ) to provide access for cleaning and inspection, or should touch the walls. 11.2 All permanently
mounted equipment shall either be installed sufficiently above the floor ( minimum 300 mm) to provide access for cleaning and inspection or be completely sealed (watertight ) to the floor area.

11.3 Wall-mounted cabinets and electrical connections ( such as switch boxes, electrical control panels, and BX cables ) shall be installed at least 25 mm from equipment or walls or shall be completely sealed to the equipment or walls.
11.4 Water-washing equipment, such as soaking and cooking vats, sausage stuffing tables, can sterilizers, and casing preparation equipment, shall be installed so that waste water from each unit is delivered through an interrupted connection into the drainage system without flowing over the floor. Valves on drainage lines serving such equipment should be easily cleansable Soaking and shall be mounted flush with the bottom of the equipment. and cooking vats should be provided with overflow pipes at least 50 mm in The upper end of each overflow pipe should be equipped diameter. with an open-end cleanout tee to facilitate cleaning. 11.5 Vent stacks from covered cooking vats or hoods over hook tanks shall bc so arranged or constructed as to preclude drainage of condensate back into the vats. 11.6 All tables or other equipment having water on the working surface shall be provided with turned-up edges. The height of the turned-up edge depends on the volume of water used and the operations conducted. In no instance should the turn-up be less than 25 mm. 23

IS : 4393 - 1979 12. PLANT WASTE WATER DISPOSAL

12.1 An efficient method of disposing of plant wastes should be provided. If permitted by local bye-laws, the plant waste may be discharged into a municipal sewer system, as this is most desirable. If the wastes are discharged into a stream, the flow of water shall be sufficient at all seasons of the year to carry the sewage well away from the plant. The sewage so discharged should be reasonably free of organic material such as fat and manure. If a private septic tank or sewage disposal system is used, it shall be efficiently designed and operated so as not to produce objectionable conditions on or near the official premises. Normally, for removal of grease and manure catch basins and vibrating screen with hopper, respectively, should be provided. 12.2 Catch Basin for Grease Recovery - Catch basin for the recovery of grease should be suitably located and not placed in or near edible products department or area where edible products are unloaded from or loaded on to vehicles, To facilitate ready cleaning, such basins should have inclined bottoms and should be without covers. They should be so constructed that they may be completely emptied of their contents for cleaning. A hose connection for furnishing hot water for cleaning purposes should be provided at convenient locations near the basin. The area surrounding an outside catch basin should be paved with impervious material, such as Suitable facilities concrete, and provided with suitable drainage facilities. should be provided for the transfer of grease to the point of disposal after it is skimmed from the basins by mechanical or other means. 12.3 Manure Removal -A separate drain line for water containing manure should be provided. This waste water may be pumped by wet pit or dry pit non-clog pumps and manure screened out and disposed of by mechanical or the other suitable means. Some consideration as in catch basin should be given for location of this plant. 15. SAFETY REQUIREMENT first

13.1 There shall be adequate fire fighting arrangements and portable aid fire appliances shall be fixed in accordance with IS : 2190-1971*.

*Code of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of first-aid fire appliances, portable (jrst revision).

24

