(Reaffirmed 2012)

IS : 6542 - 1972

Indian Standard
CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR FRUIT AND VEGETABLE CANNING UNITS
Food Hygiene, Sampling and Analysis Sectional
Chairman
MAJ-GEN M. S. BOPARAI

Committee,

AFDC 36

Representing
Directorate General of Services, New Delhi Armed Forces Medical

Members
AORICULTURAL M A R K E T I N o ADVISER TO TEE GOVERNMENT op INDIA DR J. S. PRUTEI ( Alternate ) SHRI V. N. AMBLE Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Faridabad

Institute of Delhi

Agricultural

Research

Statistics,

New

SARI K. S. KRISHNAN ( Alternate ) Central Committee for Food Standards, New Delhi DR K. BAWJHI SARI D. S. CHADHA ( Alternate) Public Analyst to the Government of Madras SHRI K. BALASUBRAMANIAN Corporation of Calcutta, Calcutta DR G. C. DAS

DR P. K. DATTA
SHRI

Bombay Municipal Corporation, Bombay EXECUTIVE HEALTH OFFICER MUNICIPAL ANAT,YST ( Al&mate) Corooration of Madras. Madras HEALTEI OFFICTW I Food & Nutrition Board ( Ministry of Agriculture DR P. K. KYMAL DR R. C. SINHA ( Alternate) Y. N. LAKSBMAN DR G. M. VERMA (Alternate) F. G. T. MENEZES

SDKU~~AR DE DR C. A. MULLEY ( Alternate)

All India Institute of Hygiene & Public Calcutta National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal

Health,

New Delhi

), of

SHRI

Defence Food Defence )

( R & D ), Mysore

Research

Laboratory

( Ministry

SHRI

SHRI D. MITRA SHRI S. N. MITRA PUFW~~ALYBT

( FOOD

and

Directorate of Sugar & Vanaspati ( Ministry of Agriculture ), New Delhi Public Analyst to the Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta Public Analyst to the Government of West Bengal ( Confinued on page 2 )

INDIAN
hlANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, ~9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH 1 ZAFAR MARG

IS : 6542 - 1972 ( Continued from
page I ) Retiresen ting

Members DR T. N. RAXACRANDRA RAO

Central Food Technological Research Institute ( CSIR ), Mysoie SRRI C. T. DWARXANATR ( Alternate ) COL R. R. Rno QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters LT.COL 0. P. KAPUR ( Alternate ) Department of Health & Family Planning, GovernDR SEAM SINQH SEXBON ment of Puniab. Chandixarh SENIOR COMMERCIAL OYFVXR Chief Catering dfficer, Northern Railway
DA ?F.Ezz~ LT-&L b. N. TYAQI DR A. G. AJWANI ( Alrematc ) SHRI P. C. VIN DR HARI BFIAQWAN,

Statistics Department, Healklhfepartment,

ISI, New Delhi Municipal Corporation

of

Director ( Agri & Food )

The Coca-Cola Export Corporation, New Delhi Director General, ISI ( Ex-oficio Member )

Secretary
SHBI s.

K. SUD

Assistant Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

Hygienic

Codes Subcommittee,

AFDC

36 : 5

MAJ-GEN M. S. BOPARAI Members
DIRECTOR ( HEAI~TH ) HEALTH OFFICER HEALTH OFFIOER PSOF N. MAZUIYZDAB DR D. V. PARULEKAR

Directorate General of Services, New Delhi

Armed

Forces

Medical

DR B. RANQANATHAN DR D. V. S. K. RAO
SECRETARY SENIOR MABXETINQ

OFFICER

Ministry of Railways, New Delhi Corporation of Calcutta, Calcutta Corporation of Madras, Madras All India Institute of Hygiene & Public Health, Calcutta Bombay Municipal Corporation, Bombay National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal Britannia Biscuit Co Ltd, Bombay Central Committee for Food Standards, New Delhi Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Nagpur

(FP)

DR R. C. SINHA
SHRI P. c.

DEPUTY SENIOR MARXETINQ OFFICER ( FP ) ( Alternate)

%N

Food and Nutrition Board ( Ministry of Agriculture ), New Delhi The Coca-Cola Export Corporation, New Delhi

2

IS : 6542- 1972

Indian Standard
CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR FRUIT AND VEGETABLE CANNING UNITS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards lnstitution on 28 April 1972, after the draft finalized by the Food Hygiene, Sampling and Analysis Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Consumers do not have the available knowledge or means of determinFor this, they rely on ing the hygienic quality of the food they purchase. the hygienic standards of various industries that prepare and handle foods. Unless the factory producing the food is governed by a strict hygienic code in respect of layout, plant and personnel, the quality of food produced cannot be considered as safe. These factors have been taken into consideration in the preparation of this code. 0.3 This code is an adjunct to IS : 2491-1972*, and it covers requirements specific to the fruit and vegetable canning units. 0.4 This code is subject to the provisions in the Factories Act, 1948 and the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954, and the Rules framed thereunder, and the Fruit Products Order, 1955 as amended from time to time. 0.5 The basic principles of hygiene underlining the technical advice in this code should be applied with appropriate modifications to all fruit and vegetable canning units.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This code prescribes the hygienic conditions required for establishing and maintaining fruit and vegetable canning units. 2. SITE 2.1 Such a unit shall preferably be situated in an open, clean and healthy surroundings far away from road-side, where lot of dust arises due to vehicular traffic; garbage dumps; cattle sheds; open sewage drains or other places likely to breed flies. It shall be at a considerable distance from other *Code for hygienic conditions for food processing units (firsf revision).

3

IS:6542-1972

industrial factories spreading dust, smoke and disagreeable odours which adversely affect the quality of canned products. There should also be facilities for the disposal of cannery waste. 3. BUILDING
3.1 Structure shall be of permanent nature and shall be suitable in size, construction and design to facilitate maintenance and hygienic operations for processing purposes. It should provide sufficient space for housing of equipment and storage of material (raw as well as finished products) as is necessary for hygienic operations. The material of construction shall be of brick, plaster, cement, concrete, tile or any other equivalent materials which ensure cleanliness.

3.2 No portion ~of building shall be used for domestic purposes or other types of food preparations unless separated by suitable partitions or locations or other effective means so as to avoid contamination of the product with undesirable micro-organisms, odour, chemicals, filth or other foreign material. 3.3 Single storey building should have a clear internal height of 5 to 6 m to provide for natural light and air circulation, which in addition helps in removing steam from the processing hall. 3.4 Floor -The floor should be constructed of impervious material which may be cleaned easily. A slope of 1 cm to I.5 cm per linear metre is considered necessary for drainage. The floor should be covered with acid proof tiles and jointed with acid proof cement, or if the floor is made of cement concrete, it should be covered with apoxyresin, acid proof cement or other acid proof compositions. Very smooth floors should be avoided as they become slippery whencovered with water or greasy material. 3.5 Walls and Ceilings - Interior surface of the walls should be smooth and non-absorbent to prevent accumulation of dust and vapours and It should be covered with washable paint or glazed facilitate cleaning. tiles up to a height of 1 to l-5 m. Walls and ceilings should be of light colour, possibly white to minimize the contrast between work and surroundings and to give maximum reflection for better lighting and reducing the shadows. The ceiling should be painted with light colour for good illumination, cheerful surroundings and cleanliness. The junction of the floor with the walls and the junction between the two walls should be rounded to prevent accumulation of dust. 3.6 Drainage-Effective drainage should be provided to drain off the large quantity of water used for washing of the raw material, machinery, equipment furniture, floor, etc, 15 to 30 cm half circular drains with glazed pipe at the bottom should be provided. The slope of the floor should be towards the drains and the farthest end of the floor from the drain should not be more than 5 m. The drain openings should be provided with screen 4

IS : 6542 - 1972 traps to prevent solid matter -from clogging the drains. The ends of the drains leading to the outside of the factory should be made rodentproof by providing screens. The screens shall be examined periodically and replaced or cleaned, if necessary. The drains should have water seals of minimum 5 cm dia. At least 50 percent of the length of the drain should be covered to facilitate the movement of trolleys. Mesh type cover for the drain would be better to prevent habitation of cockroaches and rodents in closed areas of the drain. 3.7 The unit shall be adequately lighted and ventilated keeping in view the number of workers, their hours of work and nature of operation, Ventilation and Jighting shall also be in accordance with the Factories Act, 1948, as amended from time to time. Proper ventilation is essential to prevent condensation and dripping. Exhaust fans should be provided where necessary. 3.8 The unit shall be made flyproof, rodentproof and birdproof and should be provided with self-closing double doors. The doors and windows should be covered with flyproof wire-gauze, and they should open outwards. 3.9 The rooms and the area surrounding the building should be kept clean and dust-free. 3.10 The building shall be maintained liness at all times. 4. PLANT LAYOUT in proper state of repair and clean-

4.1 The machinery and equipment should be placed with sufficient space to permit easy accessibility for cleaning and maintenance. It is desirable that at least 50 percent space in the factory should be free for movement of personnel. 4.2 Fast moving belts, gears and other hazardous parts of machinery should Fire extinguishers should be placed at an easily be properly guarded. accessible place and emergency exits must be available for the employees. The provision for safety of workers given in the Factories' Act, 1948 as amended uptodate should be taken into consideration in the layout of the factory. 5. FACTORY AND PROCESSING HYGIENE 5.1 Rubbish shall be collected in covered receptacles and shall not be allowed to scatter on the floor of the factory. It should be disposed of in a manner which is not detrimental to the hygiene of the surroundings of the disposal. 5.2 Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent mould growth on equipment and internal structures of processing and storage rooms. Adequate steps shall be taken to prevent infestation by cockroaches and other household pests. 5

IS : 6542 - 1972 5.3 When

pesticides are used, care shall be exercised contamination of equipment and mother materials. Under stances shall these be used during processing.

to prevent no circumroom,

5.4 Floors and drains shall be kept clean. In the manufacturing drain shall be provided with detachable covers. 5.5 On no account shall the manufacturing/processing converted into a store room.

room be used or

5.6 There shall be separate store rooms for raw and the packing materials and these rooms shall be free from dampness. 5.7 No lavatory, sink, cesspool, or garbage shall be so situated or maintained that odours or fumes therefrom pervade any room where the product is prepared or stored. 5.8 Proper places shall be provided buckets and other cleaning gear. for storage of brooms, brushes,

5.9 The factory eflluents shall be disposed of from the factory in a manner which is not detrimental to the hygiene of the factory and its surroundings. The effluents shall not be let off on roads or in the open outside the factory premises. 5.10 Window glass and dust free at all times. light fittings shall be maintained clean and

5.11 There shall be no cobwebs in any part of the unit. domestic animals shall not be allowed in any part of the unit.

Birds and

of Wastes and Refuse-Suitable facilities for the 5.12 Disposal collection and removal of refuse, floor sweepings and dirt in covered containers and for hygienic disposal of-wastes should be provided.

5.15 Blown Containers -Blown containers should be opened and the containers and their contents disposed of in a hygienic manner as advised When stored prior to disposal they should by the local health authority. be kept in a room separate from edible products. In view of the grave hazard to health every precaution should be taken to ensure that food from blown containers is not consumed. 5.14 Manual handling of fruit and vegetable products during filling into Suitable equipment should be cans or bottles should be minimum. The use of rubber gloves may be orovided for the purpose. &commended in special cases where the product has -to be handled by hands. 5.15 The tinned products should be finally closed by any other method, such as soldering or tinning. 6 by sealing and not

X3:65425.16 It should be ensured that etc) are both clean and sanitized. 6. INSTALLATION AND the containers (cans, jars

1972

or bottles,

CONSTRUCTION be installed on a

OF EQUIPMENT foundation of durable,

6.1 All equipment shall easily cleanable material.

6.2 Equipment shall be placed away from the walls with a view to providing facilities for inspection and cleaning. 6.3 Pipelines for conveying the product from one point to the other should be direct and as short waspossible and without any dead ends, Valves so that they may be cleaned internally by flushing with water. and taps in the line should be of removable type and should have ~full way opening to avoid formation of small pockets of stagnant food. 6.4 The equipment should be constructed and installed in such a manner as to facilitate efficient cleaning and sanitization and easy dismantling and assembling of all the parts that come in contact with the product. All the equipment, containers, lids and pipes shall be smooth, impervious All the materials used for construction of those and corrosion resistant. surfaces which come into contact with the product shall be non-toxic. 6.5 Ail electrical connections, such as switch boxes, control boxes, conduit cables shall be installed in such a way as to facilitate proper cleaning. All equipment coming into contact with raw material or the products shall be kept clean. 7. EQUIPMENT AND CONTAINERS CLEANLINESS

7.1 All the processing systems shall be thoroughly cleaned with chlorinated water (at least 50 ppm available chlorine) after every processing run to remove the micro-organisms, if any, and followed by washing with potable water to remove the residual chlorine in the system. 7.2 All the containers and lids should be cleaned thoroughly with the use of sodium carbonate or sodium bicarbonate or any other suitable detergent solution and sanitized with at least 50 ppm chlorine solution prior to their use. The.residual chlorine may be removed by flushingthe equipment with .potable water before use. : 7.3 Tables and work benches used for cutting and packing fruits and vegetables should have stainless steel or aluminium alloy or marble tops. The table and work benches top shall always be maintained in good condition' and cleaned thoroughly before and after use. 7

IS : 6542- 1972 8. WATER
SUPPLY

8.1 Water required for fruit and vegetable preservation should be potable and free from contamination. The water should not be alkaline or very hard and should be free from organic matter. Presence of iron and sulphur compounds in it render it unsuitable for making syrups or brine. It should be colourless, odourless and tasteless. `, 8.2 There shall be an adequate supply of safe and potable water `(see IS : 4251-1967* ). Running water under pressure shall be easily accessible to all rooms and areas in which food is handled and equipment are washed. 8.3 The equipment shall be so installed and used that back liquid into the potable water lines is precluded. 8.4 Hot and cold water in ample supply shall be provided up needs, where necessary. 8.5 The storage tanks for water should, covered with tight fitting lids, examined once every six months. The date of last be prominently displayed on the storage siphonage of

for plant

clean-

unless completely sealed, be kept regularly and cleaned out at least cleaning and next cleaning shall tanks.

8.6 The water shall be periodically examined as desired by the licensing authority, chemically and bacteriologically. A record of such examination shall be maintained. 9. EMPLOYEE HYGIENE

9.1 Every person employed for food handling in -the factory shall be medically examined by an authorized registered medical practitioner and the examination shall include X-ray of the chest for tuberculosis. The examination shall also include: examination of stool for protozoa1 and helminthic infestation for those parasites which are transmitted by ingestion, and for the presence of Salmonella, Shigella species and Vibro cholerae; urine; and blood examination for venereal diseases. Subsequently, the employee shall be medically examined once in a year or more frequently, if necessary, to ensure that he is medically fit and free from communicable diseases. A record of such examination shall be maintained.

9.1.1 It shall be impressed
medical typhoid, charging famihes.

on employees that they should notify the officer and management, cases of fever, vomiting, diarrhoea, dysentery, boils? cuts and sores and ulcers (however small), disears and notifiable diseases occurring in their own homes and

;Quality tglerances for water for processed food industry.

8

IS : 6542-1972
9.1.2 NO worker who is suspected to be suffering from any of the disorders listed in 9.1.1 shall be permitted to work inside the unit. The supervisor shall check the personal hygiene of the workers before the start of work and whenever they enter any processing room after any absence. 9.2 Employees shall keep their finger nails short and clean and wash their hands with soap or detergent and water before commencing work and after Towels used for each absence, specially after using sanitary conveniences. No worker shall allow his hands or any drying hands should be clean. part of his body or clothing to come into contact with food. He should adopt strict hygienic practices so as to avoid adding any microbial contamination to the material.

,(

9.3 All employees

shall be inoculated and vaccinated against the enteric groups of diseases once a year and against smallpox once in two years. In case of an epidemic all workers shall be inoculated. A record shall be maintained. 9.4 No worker wear. shall be allowed to work without proper clothing and footwhite) or

9.5 Employees shall be provided with clean uniforms ( preferably aprons or both and clean washable caps, where necessary.

9.5.1 Separate room or place for changing the clothes The clothes shall not be hung in any processing room.

shall be provided, but put on just

9.5.2 The uniforms shall not be worn outside the plant before starting the work and changed when leaving.

9.6 Eating, spitting, nose cleaning or the use of tobacco in any form or chewing betel leaves shall be prohibited within the manufacturing, packing Notice to this effect shall be prominently and storage area of the unit. displayed and enforced. 9.7 Sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences shall be provided, maintained and kept clean in every factory. The conveniences shall be properly lighted. Separate conveniences shall be provided for each sex. No convenience shall open directly into any work room in the factory. The convenience shall always be maintained clean and in good repairs. 9.8 Sufficient number of wash basins with adequate provisions of nail brushes, soap and towels, latrines and urinals in the prescribed manner should be provided, conveniently situated and accessible to workers at all times while they are at the factory (see also Table 3 of IS: 1172-1971* 1. The wash basins should be installed in or alongside the sanitary conveniences.
*Code rmirion ). for basic requirements for water supply, drainage and sanitation (mnd.

9

INDIAN
ON

STANDARDS

Food Hygiene, Sampling and Analysis
IS: 2491-1972 5059-1969 5126 (Part Code for hygienic conditions for food processing units (Jirst reuision) Code for hygienic conditions bakery units I )-1969 Glossary of general Methodology for large scale biscuit manufacturing terms for sensory evaluation units and

of foods: Part I

5126 ( Part II )-1969 Glossary of general terms for sensory evaluation of foods: Part II Quality characteristics 5398-1969 5399-1969 5400-1969 5401-1969 5402-1969 5403-1969 5404-1969 5835-1970 5837-1970 5838-1970 5839-1970 5886-1970 5887-1970 6540-1972 6541-1972 Methods of estimation of thiamine ( Vitamin B1 ) in foodstuffs Methods of estimation of riboflavin (Vitamin B, ) in foodstuffs

Methods for estimation of nicotinic acid ( Niacin ) in foodstuffs Methods for detection Method Method for standard and estimation plate count count of coliform bacteria in foodstuffs

of bacteria

in foodstuffs

for yeast and mould for handling

of foodstuffs for microbiological analysis

Code of practice Methods Hygienic Methods Hygienic Methods Methods diseases

of samples

for estimation conditions

of Vitamin

D in foodstuffs manufacturing C in foodstuffs storage and sale of ice-creams A ( Ratinol ) in foodstuffs and food-borne of ice for human of midday units

for soft drinks of Vitamin

for estimation conditions

for manufacture, of carotenes of bacteria conditions

for estimation for detection

and Vitamin responsible

for food poisoning and handling and

Code for hygienic consumption

for manufature for establishment

Code for hygienic conditions school meal programmes

maintanance

'

1 a

b
AMENDMENT NO. 1 TO CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS AND VEGETABLE CANNING UNITS Alterations w-m--FOR FRUIT DECEMBER 1983

I

IS:6542-1972

(Page 7, clause 7.2, Zins 2) - Substitute the following for the existing line: 'of sodium carbonate, 1 to 1.5 percent concentration or any other suitable detergent' (Page 8, clause 8.1, tine excess iron' for 'of iron'. (Page 8, clause 9. J* lines the following: 3) - Substitute 'of 6 and 7) - I&lets

'urine; and blood examination for venereal diseases.' (Page 9, otaws for the existing: 9.3) - Substitute the following

`9.3 All employees shall be inoculated against typhoid and paretyphoid A diseases on their first appointment and thereafter once in every five years~..In case of epidemic all workers shall be inoculated. A record shall be maintained.' Addendum ----(Page 7, ctattse 7.3) - Add the following new . matter at the end of 7.3: 'with potable water and sanitization at a concentration of approximately 25 ppm of chlorine.' (AFIX: 36) Reprography Unit, ISI, I?ewDelhi, India

