IJDC615 451

: 616,72

089.28

IS : 12165 - 1987 IS0 5839 - 1985
Indian Standard
( Reaffirmed 1997 )

. ( IS0

BASIC REQUIREMENTS FOR ORTHOPAEDIC JOINT PROSTHESES
Title : Implants

for Surgery -

-

Orthopaedic )

Joint

Prostheses
Uational Foreword

Basic Requirements

This Indian Standard, which is identical with IS0 5839-1985 `implants for surgery - Orthopaedic oint prostheses - Basic requirements' issued by the International Organization for Standardization 1 IS0 ) was adopted by the Bureau of In`dian Standards on the recommendation of Orthopaedic nstruments and Accessories Sectional Committee and approval of the Consumer Products and Medical Instruments Division Council. In the adopted standard, certain terminology Jsed in Indian Standards; attention is particularly a) Wherever the words `International be read as #Indian Standard'. b) Comma practice sross Standard' and conventions are not identical drawn to the following: appear, referring in to this standard, Indian Standards,

with

those

they should
the current

( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker.

References 7
International Implants -Part Standard Metallic stainless Corresponding Indian Standard

SO 5832 materials steel IS0 5832 materials

for surgery 1: Wrought

IS : 5347 ( Part 2 )-1986 Requirements for orthopaedic implants : Part 2 Wrought stainless steel IS : 5347 ( Part 3 )-I984 Requirements for implants : Part 3 Unalloyed prthopaedic titanium IS : 5347 ( Part 4 )-I984 Requirements for orthopaedic implants: Part 4 Wrought titaniun 6-aluminium 4-vanadium allcy IS : 5347 ( Part 5 )-I 984 Requirements for orthopaedic implants: Part 5 Cobalt chromium molybdenum casting alloy IS : 5347 ( Part 6 )-I 984 Requirements for orthopaedic im,plants: Part 6 Wrought cobaltchromium-tungsten-nickel alloy IS : 5347 ( Part 7 )-1984 Requirements for orthopaedic implants :.Part 7 Wrought cobaltnickel-chromium-molybdenum alloy IS : 5347 ( Part 8 )-1984 Requirements orthopaedic implants : Part 8 Forgeable cold-formed-cobalt-chromium-nickel-molybdenum-iron alloy IS Acrylic resin cements : 8641-1984 orthopaedic implants ( first revision ) for and

Implants for surgery - Part 2: Unalloyed

- Metallic titanium Metallic titanium

IS0 5832 Implants for surgery materials - Part 3: Wrought 6-aluminium 4-vanadium alloy

IS0 5832 Implants for surgery - Metallic materials - Part 4: Cobalt-chromiummolybdenum casting alloy IS0 5832 Implants for surgery - Metallic' materials - Part 5: Wrought cobalt chromium-tungsten-nickel alloy IS0 5832 Implants for surgery - Metallic materials - Part 6: Wrought cobalt-nickelchromium-molybdenum alloy IS0 5832 Implants for surgery - Metallic materials - Part 7: Forgeable and cold formed cobalt-chromium-nickel molybdenum-iron alloy IS0 5833/l Implants for surgery - Acrylic resin cements -- Part 1: Orthopaedic applications IS0 6474 Implants materials based for surgery on alumina Ceramic

for

IS : 5347 ( Part 9 )-1984 Requirements For orthopaedic implants : Part 9 Ceramic material based on aluminia

Adopted 10 April 1987
BUREAU MANAK OF BHAVAN,

@ April

1985, BIS I STANDARDS SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

Gr 3

INDIAN 3 BAHADUR

NEW DELHI

IS : 12165 - 1987 IS0 5839 - 1985
The Orthopaedic Instruments and Accessories Sectional Committee has reviewed the provisions of the following IS0 standards and has decided that these are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard, till equivalent Indian Standards are available: . ISO. 5834 Implants for surgery - Ultrahigh Powder form; Part 2 Moulded form IS0 IS0 IS0 6018 labelling Implants for surgery General molecular requirements weight for polyethylene; marking, Part 1: and

packaging

7206/I Implants for surgery - Partial and total hip joint Classification, designation of dimensions and requirements 7207/l Implants for surgery - Partial and total knee joint Classification, definitions and designation of dimensions

prostheses prostheses -

Part 1: Part 1:

2

IS : 12165 is0 5839

- 1987 - 1985

.

0

Introduction

f) g) h)

wrist joint prostheses; finger joint prostheses; toe joint prostheses.

Orthopaedic joint prostheses are designed to transmit load and translate movement under high stress conditions. The task of preparing International Standards to cover all eventualities is complicated by the limited range of biologically suitable materials. The purpose of this International Standard, and of other International Standards relating to joint prostheses, is to provide direction in the control of manufacture and standard specifications for the different components of prostheses.
`,

Guidance on the use of joint prostheses is given in the annex.

2

References
Metallic materials -

IS0 5832, implants for surgery Part 1: Wrought

The insertion and removal of a prosthesis for the purposes of... trial fitting at the time of the operation can damage the prosthesis. For this reason, reduction tests should be carried out using a test prothesis, except in those cases where the prostheses are designed with protection for the bearing areas of the components. It is important, once implantation has been completed, that no components are used again after removal. It is also necessary to take into account requirements for components of prostheses for partial and total replacement of particular joints. IS0 7206/l and IS0 Mo7/1 deal, respectively, with partial and total hip joint prostheses and partial and total knee joint prostheses. Requirements for acrylic bone cement, commonly used in the implantation of joint prostheses, may be found in IS0 5833/l.

`.`,,.A.. .

stainless steel. .I

Part 2: Unallo$&ititziiiiirm.

-.
alloy.

Part 3: Wrought titanium 6-aluminium Qvanadium
Part 4: Cobalt-chromium-molybdenum

casting alloy. alloy.

'

Part 5: Wrought cobalt-chromium-tungsten-nickel
Part all0 y. Pert 7: Forgeable and cold-formed molybdenumiron alloy. for surgery applications. Ultra-high molecular Acrylic 6: Wrought

cobalt-nickel-chromiummolybdenurn

cobalt-chromium-nickel-

IS0 5833/l,
Part I

Implants

resin cements

-

: Orthopaedic

IS0 5S3, Implants for surgery polyethylene form. forms. Part 1: Powder Part 2: Moulded

weight

1

Scope

and field

of application

This International Standard specifies basic requirements for partial and total joint prostheses used in orthopaedic surgery, including those such as: a) b) cl d) e) hip joint prostheses; knee joint prostheses;

IS0 6018, Implants
marking, packaging

for surgery General requirements and labelling. 1)

for

IS0 6474, implants for surgery alumina.

Ceramic materials based on

ISO 72%/l, ankle joint prostheses; shoulder joint prostheses;
IS0 720711, prostheses -

Implants for surgery - Partial and total hip joint Part 7: Classification, designation of dimensions

and requirements. Implants for surgery Partial and total knee joint definitions and designation

elbow joint prostheses;

prostheses - Part 1: Classification, of dimensions.

1) At presentat the stage of draft.

3

IS:12t65-1987 IS0 5839 - 1985

3

Materials

5

Design

NOTE - All components Should be manufactured using recognized methods of quality control, for example those used in the production of aerospace components.

Stainless steel shall not ba used in combination with any other metal or alloy. Stainless steel, unalloyed titanium and titanium alloys shall not form the contiguous bearing surfaces of joint prostheses.

3.1

Met&
NOTE tory : The following combinations have been found to be satisfac-

Metal components for joint prostheses shall be made of one or more of the following materials:

a) Stainless steel/polyethylene; b) Cobalt-based alloys/polyethylene;
Cl

wrought stainless steel of composition 6, in accordance with IS0 5632/l (see clause 5);
unalloyed titanium, in accordance with IS0 5632/2;

Unalloyed titanium/polyethylene; Titanium alloy/polyethylene; Alumina/polyethylene; Alumina/alumina.

d) e)

wrought titanium 6-aluminium 4-vanadium alloy, in accordance with IS0 5632/3; cobalt-chromium-molybdenum cordance with IS0 5632/4;

-

f)

-

casting alloy, in ac6 alloy, in Finish

wrought cobalt-chromium-tungsten-nickel accordance with IS0 5632/5:

6.1
6.1.1

Metals
General

wrought cobalt-nickel-chromium-molybdenum alloy, in accordancewith IS0 5632/6;
forgeable and cold-formed cobalt-chromium-nickelmolybdenum-iron alloy, in accordance with IS0 56397.

The surfaces of metallic components, when examined with the naked eye (corrected if necessary), shall be free of imperfections such as scale, toolmarks, nicks, scratches, cracks, cavities, burrs and other defects that would impair the serviceability of the implant. The surfaces, when examined with the naked eye (corrected if necessary), shall be free of embedded or deposited finishing materials or other contaminants. Components shall be cleaned, degreased, rinsed and dried. All polishing operations shall be performed using an iron-free medium. 6.1.2 Bearing surfaces

3.2

Plastics

Components made of ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene shall be made of material complying with the requirements of IS0 5634. NOTES

I

Referencemay be made to IS0 5833/l for requirements for acrylic

resin cements. 2 Components made of ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene should be stabilized, and the methods of processing and storing should maintain the dimensional stability of the component. Local heating should be avoided. Stress-relief annealing of semi-finished products may be required to ensure dimensional stability and freedom from distortion in the finished product. Details of suitable conditions should be obtained from the manufacturer of the polymer. The manufacturer of the component should keep records of the stabilization processes used.

Bearing surfaces shall be polished to a mirror finish. 6.1.3 Non-bearing surfaces

Non-bearing surfaces intended to be in contact with soft tissues shall have either a polished or a satin finish. 6.1.4 Surface treatment

All surfaces shall be rendered passive by a process suitable for

3.3

Ceramics

the metal concerned.

Components made of alumina ceramic materials shall be of material complying with the requirements of IS0 6474.

6.2

Plastics

materials
made of &s?ksnz928&k

The bearing surfaces of components

4

Sterility

shall, in the as-delivered condition, be free from particulate contamination when examined with the naked eye (corrected if necessary). At no stage shall the bearing surfaces beprepared
by a method employing an abrasive or polishing campound. be supplied either sterile or unsterile.

Prostheses and components shall, according to the require
ments of the purchaser,

4

IS : 12165 - 1987 IS0 5839 - 1985

7
7.1

Sterilization
General

of plastics .

components

9 9.1

Marking
Marking of components

Sterilization of components made of plastics materials shall be carried out by a verified method.
NOTE - The efficacy of the sterilizing process should be verified in a manner appropriate to the requirements of the reievant national authority.

Major components of joint prostheses shall be indelibly marked in accordance with the requirements of IS0 6018. All marking shall be located in a region of low stress and shall be performed in such a manner that the mechanical performance and corrosion resistance of the prosthesis are not significantly impaired. 9.1.1 Marking of metal components

7.2

Sterilization

by irradiation In addition to the requirements of 9.1, an identifying mark shall be applied to each component of the joint prosthesis, if physically possible. 9.1.2 Marking of plastics components

If methods of sterilization using ionizing radiation are used, no part of the component shall receive more than 3.5 Mrad during one sterilization. The dose shall be applied so as to maintain the functional geometry of the component. No component shall be sterilized by the manufacturer more than twice. The packaging materials of all components which are to be re-sterilized shall be discarded and the component re-packaged prior to sterilization. The absorbed minimum dose, the total cumulative dose and the number of times the component has been sterilized shall be stated on the package.
NOTE - Many national authorities require a minimum dose of 2,5 Wad, to be applied during sterilization by means of ionizing radiation.

Each component made of plastics material shall, if possible, be marked so as to identify the batch of material from which the component is made and for which records shall have been maintained. 9.1.3 Marking of ceramic components

8

Packaging

In addition to the requirements of 9.1, a unique serial number shall be applied to each component of the joint prosthesis, which shall relate to the type of material and details of manufacture.

Joint prostheses shall be packaged in accordance with the requirements of IS0 6018. Bearing surfaces shall be covered to protect the surfaces from damage. The protection shall comprise a material which leaves no debris or deposit on the surface of the prosthesis, nor induces chemical attack on the prosthesis under normal sterilization conditions.
NOTE - The protection during sterilization of bearing surfaces of unsterile components will form the subject of a future Technical Report.

9.2

Marking

of unit packages

or outer

containers

Unit packages or containers shall be marked in accordance with the requirements of IS0 6018. In addition, the package or container shall be marked with the markings of the different components it contains (sea 9.1) and, if appropriate, the marking required by clause 7. If.appropriate, instructions for sterilization shall be included.

5

IS : 12165 - 1987 IS0 5839 - 1985

Annex
.

Guidance on the use of joint prostheses
(This annex does not form part of the standard.)

A.1 If the unit container of a component made of plastics material is opened outside the control of the manufacturer and the component is not implanted at that time, the component should be discarded.

Ceramic components should not be sterilized by heat when fitted to the stem because the dissimilar coefficients of expansion of the ceramic material and the metal may introduce stresses in the ceramic component which can lead to cracking. Ceramic components sterilized separately by heat should be allowed to cool slowly in air to ambient temperature before fitting to a nrosthesis which should also be at ambient temperature. Great care should be exercised when fitting the components together; hand pressure only should be used unless otherwise recommended by the manufacturer.

A.2

A.3

If a critical surface, for example a bearing surface, of any component is damaged, the component should not be implanted.

The insertion and removal of a prosthesis for the purposes of trial fitting at the time of the operation can damage the prothesis. For this reason, reduction tests have to be carried out using a test prosthesis, except in those cases where the prostheses are designed with protection for the bearing areas of the components. The use of a test prosthesis precludes the risk of contamination of components that might occur during trial fitting. It is important, once implantation has been completed, that no components are used again after their removal.

A.4

Manufacturers should not refurbish any returned components that have been implanted in a patient.

A.5 Any component removed from a patient or otherwise exposed to infection or body fluids should be sterilized prior to dispatch for examination other than by a microbiologist. The sterilization of metal components which do not incorporate plastics materials can be carried out using steam or dry heat. If these methods cannot be used, the components should be rendered as safe to handle as possible by subjecting them to a recognized disinfection or sterilization procedure. Components made of plastics materials and those incorporating plastics materials should be carefully and thoroughly washed and then disinfected by immersion in a suitable solution such as freshly prepared 2 % buffered glutaraldehyde solution for a period of not less than 3 h at room temperature.

Reprography Unit, EIS, New Delhi, India

