Wdta Ah IS 8010 (Part 3) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


death Rare dan ae ch fer 
Testes 

UAT 3 Atf erat Aerator Rare 
(Teel FRAT ) 


Guidelines for Preparation of 
Technical Report 
Part 3 Industrial Potential Survey Reports 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 37.100.99 


© BIS 2023 


ARASH OAT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
ee ee HAH HA, 9 FRIST BS THK AMT, AE Reed - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 5 


Publication and Graphic Technology Sectional Committee, MSD 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 3) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Publication and Graphic Technology Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management 
and Systems Division Council. 


Industrial potential survey reports form a distinctive group of technical literature. They serve as vital tools in the 
process of industrial planning and development of different states/regions, A number of states/regions are 
presently engaged in exercises aimed at identifying specific project ideas in the light of natural and other resources 
and infrastructure facilities which could be taken up for implementation. 


These reports aim: 


a) To review briefly the broad economic setting of a state or region vis-a-vis demographic trends, 
agricultural economy, backward districts and the present industrial set up with reference to the natural 
resources; 

b) To examine the availability and adequacy of various infrastructure facilities; 

c) To discuss the industrial projects and possibilities based on minerals, chemicals, forest resources, 
agriculture etc; 

d) To specifically identify those industrial projects that hold promise to come up in the near future in the 
above groups; and 

e) To indicate the new orientation in the policy and in the institutional framework at the state or regional 
level necessary to create a suitable climate for promoting viable industrial projects. Such reports will be 
useful to various planning forums at the state, central and regional levels, term financing institutions, 
industrial development centres, investment promotion centres and potential entrepreneurs. 


The guidelines for the preparation of such reports aim to place various ‘industrial potential surveys' in a unified 
framework with a view to making these studies more comparable with each other, than has been possible hitherto. 


The Standard was first published in 1987. This revision has been brought out to bring the standard in the latest 
style and format of the Indian Standard. 


This standard (Part 2) is a part of IS 8010 series of standards under the general title “Guidelines for preparation of 
technical reports’. Other parts in this series are: 


Part 1 Research and development reports 


Part2 Feasibility reports 


The composition of Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 8010 (Part 3) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


GUIDELINES FOR PREPARATION OF TECHNICAL REPORTS 
PART 3 INDUSTRIAL POTENTIAL SURVEY REPORTS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 3) provides guidelines for the 
presentation of information and production of 
industrial potential survey reports. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the edition indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of these standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS 795:2013 Guide for perparation of 
abstracts (second revision) 


IS 1275: 2018 Information and documentation 
— Guidelines for the content, 
organization and presentation of 
indexes (second revision) 


IS 2381:2014 Information and documentation 
— Guidelines for bibliographic 
references and citations to 
information resources (third 
revision) 


IS 4731 :2009 Guide for preparation of 
manuscript of an article in a 
learned periodical 


IS 6660: 1972 Guide for illustrations in 
books 


IS 9400: 1980 Guide for the preparation of 
bibliographic description sheet 
for technical reports 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 Industrial Potential Survey Report — A 
document which brings out specific project ideas 
keeping in view the natural and other resources and 
infrastructure facilities available in a particular 


*If not included in the body of the Report. 


**May be included either in the end matter or as part of preliminary page. 


area/region and assists in further processing the 
project preparatory activities. 


4 SECTIONS OF INDUSTRIAL POTENTIAL 
SURVEY REPORT 


4.1 An industrial potential survey report will 
normally comprise the following elements: 


a) Front cover 
b) Preliminary pages: 
1) Title page, 
2) Back of title page, 
3) Bibliographic description sheet, 
4) Summary, 
5) Foreword, 
6) Table of contents, 
7) Abbreviations*, and 
8) Signs and symbols*. 
c) Body of the report: 
1) Introduction, 
2) Economic background, 
3) Infrastructure, 
4) Present industrial setting, and 
5) Potential industrial projects. 
d) End matter: 
1) Acknowledgement**, 
2) References, 
3) Bibliography, 
4) Tables*, 
5) Ilustrations* and graphs, 
6) Appendices, and 
7) Index. 


4.2 Front Cover 


The front cover may give the following: 


a) Report number*** and the month and year 
of preparation on the top right hand corner; 

b) Title of the report; 

c) Sub-titles, if any; 

d) Name(s) of person(s) who carried out the 
study; 


***The report number shall also be given on the top right hand corner of the back page. 


IS 8010 (Part 3) : 2023 


e) Name and address of the organization to 
which the study was entrusted; 

f) Name of the sponsoring authority; and 

g) Security classification, if any. 


4.3 Title Page 
The title page may include the following: 


a) Report number*** and the month and year 
of preparation on the top right hand corner; 


b) Title of the report; 

c) Sub-title, if any; 

d) Name(s) of the person(s) who carried out 
the study; 

e) Price, if any, if not given on the back of 
the title-page; 

f) Security classification, if any; and 

g) Name of the sponsoring authority. 


4.3.1 The title should be concise and should indicate 
clearly the subject of the report and should be 
exactly the same as on the title page and the cover. 


4.3.2 Information given on both the front cover and 
the title-page shall appear, as far as possible, in 
similar positions. 


4.4 Back of the Title Page 


Any special statements required to be incorporated 
by the sponsoring authority may be given on the 
back of the title-page, for example, limitations on 
reproduction, security, legal information, disposal 
instructions and restrictions in force. Price of the 
report, if any, may also be included on the back of 
the title-page. 


4.5 Bibliographic Description Sheet 


A bibliographic description sheet conforming to 
IS 9400 shall be provided to help in bibliographic 
control and facilitate processing of the document 
for the library and documentation purposes. The 
abstract given in the sheet shall conform to IS 795. 


4.6 Summary 


The summary shall contain an informative precis of 


the entire report. Besides bringing out definitive 
conclusions and recommendations on all the basic 
issues of the survey, the summary shall set out the 
industrial opportunities that can be developed into 
industrial projects. 


4.7 Foreword 


The foreword may bring out the background of the 
survey along with statements relating to the survey 
initiator and the agency carrying out the survey. 


4.8 Table of Contents 


The table of contents shall give the principal 
headings verbatim and in the order in which they 
appear in the report. 


4.8.1 Where two or more parts of a multi-section 
report are produced simultaneously, the complete 
table of contents shall appear in the first part. The 
second and subsequent parts may contain a table of 
contents specific to that particular volume. 


4.8.2 Where a multi-section report is produced in 
parts at intervals of time, a full table of contents 
should be included as an addendum to the final 
volume. 


4.9 Introduction 


a) Objectives of the report; 


b) Economic, industrial, financial, social and 
other related policies; 

c) Sectors of industry considered; 

d) Geographical coverage of the survey; 

e) Relevant information of the survey 
initiator; and 

f) Studies and investigations already 


performed and which are relevant to the 
present survey. 


4.10 Economic Background 


a) Physical features: 
1) Location, 
2) Climate, and 
3) Rainfall. 


***The report number shall also be given on the top right hand corner of the back page. 


b) Demographic trends; 

c) Population; 

d) Urbanization, literacy and tribal 
component; 

e) Occupational classification; 

f) Employment; 

g) Trends in income; 

h) Progress in trends in agricultural 
production, including the status of major 
inputs required, such as irrigation, 
fertilizers, pesticides etc; 

j) Natural resources available; and 

k) Skills available. 


4.11 Infrastructure 


a) The transport system; 


b) Road; 
c) Railways; 
d) Ports; 


e) Power supply (including tariff rates); 
f) Communications; 
g) Social infrastructure: 


1) Health, 
2) Education, and 
3) Housing, 

h) Banks; and 


j) Financial Institutions. 


4.12 Present Industrial Setting 


a) Location, type, capacity and number of 
existing units including a brief discussion 
on how these units have developed; 

b) Institutional framework for industrial 
development; 

c) Incentives and concessions offered; and 

d) Industrially backward areas. 


4.13 Potential Industrial Projects 


a) Mineral based industries; 

b) Forest based industries; 

c) Chemical and allied industries; 

d) Electronics and allied industries; 
e) Engineering and allied industries; 
f) Agro-based industries; 

g) Textiles; 

h) Small scale industrie; 

j) Village and cottage industries; and 
k) Tourism. 


4.14 Profiles of Candidate Projects 


The profiles of the candidate projects may be given 


IS 8010 (Part 3) : 2023 


setting out the following features: 


a) Project; 

b) Location; 

c) Capacity; 

d) Investment/outlay; and 
e) Remarks, if any. 


4.15 Acknowledgement 


Acknowledgement of help received in preparing the 
survey report should be made in a separate section. 


4.16 References 


References shall be provided for documents 
mentioned in the text and shall be listed and 
numbered in the order in which they first appear in 
the text. The bibliographical form shall conform to 
IS 2381 and titles of periodicals should be 
abbreviated in accordance with IS 18. Where an 
original source is quoted from an intermediary 
source, both shall be cited, with the intermediary 
preceded by the words ‘quoted in’. 


4.17 Bibliography 


This is a list of references in addition to those cited 
in the text of the report. If included the bibliography 
should indicate whether it is comprehensive or 
selective. 


4.18 Tables, Illustrations and Graphs 


Tables, illustrations and graphs should preferably 
appear at the appropriate places in the body of the 
text, but where space considerations or reprographic 
techniques preclude this, they may be put together 
as appendices. Tables and illustrations shall 
conform to the recommendations given in IS 4731 
and IS 6660 respectively. 


4.19 Abbreviations 


If a list of abbreviations is included it shall form 
part of the preliminary pages [see 3.1 (b)]. The list 
should contain only those abbreviations which are 
not in common use. In the absence of a list, 
abbreviations should be accompanied by their full 
form at the first instance of their use in the text. 


4.20 Signs and Symbols 


Signs and symbols used in the report should comply 


IS 8010 (Part 3) : 2023 


with the relevant Indian Standards on the subjects or 
other generally accepted systems of nomenclature. 
Greek symbols should be arranged separately. A list 
of these should be given along with the units of 
measurement arranged in alphabetical order. 


4.21 Appendices 


Appendices should give details of explanations of 
methods and techniques summarized in the main 
text together with supplementary matter which 
cannot be accompanied in the main body of report. 


4.22 Index 


A lengthy report should have an index complying 
with IS 1275. 


5 PAGINATION AND NUMBERING 
5.1 Page Number 


Pages shall be numbered in international form of 
numerals consecutively throughout the report. Blank 
pages shall be avoided wherever possible but if they 
occur they shall be counted in the page numbering. 
However, blank leaves used as separators shall not 
be taken into account for numbering. 


5.2 Section Number 


Sections shall be numbered throughout the main 
body of the text and appendices. The numbering of 
sections in appendices shall follow a separate 
sequences from that of the main text. International 
form of numerals shall be used for section 
numbering. If necessary, the alphabet or Roman 
numerals may be used for appendices. 


5.3 Reference Number 


Identification numbers, letters or marks for literature 


reference shall be printed as superscripts or, if on 
the line, in parentheses immediately following the 
relevant word or phrase in the text. Different 
sequence shall be used for foot-notes and 
bibliographical references. 


5.4 Other Material 


Tables, illustrations, drawings and graphs shall be 
numbered in separate sequence in international form 
of numerals. 


6 PRODUCTION 

6.1 Type 

Type faces and the line spacing shall, be so chosen 
as to facilitate reading and shall not be less than 
10 point for the text matter. 

6.2 Size 

The report shall be in A4 size (210 mm x 297 mm). 


6.3 Columns 


For printed reports, more than one column may be 
used. 


6.4 Covers 


Cover should be of sufficient strength to protect the 
contents for a reasonable period. 


6.5 Binding 


Any style of binding, giving a substantial or 
permanent anchorage down the left-hand side of the 
report is acceptable, provided it allows the text of the 
report to lie reasonably flat without damage to the 
spine. 


IS 8010 (Part 3) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Publication & Graphic Technology Sectional Committee, MSD 06 


Organization 


Guru Jambheshwar University, Hisar 


Authentication Solution Providers' Association 
(ASPA) Former Hologram Manufacturers 
Association of India, New Delhi 


Avantika Printers Private Limited, New Delhi 


Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute (CPPRD), 
Saharanpur 


Delhi Printers ‘Association, New Delhi 


Department of Printing Technology, Anna 
University, Chennai 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA), 
Bengaluru 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA), 
Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


Directorate of Printing, New Delhi 


Future Schoolz, Kochi 


Government Institute of Printing Technology, 
Mumbai 


Indian Printing Packaging and Allied Machinery 
Manufacturer’s Association IPAMA), Noida 


IPP Services, Training and Research Pvt Ltd 
(IPPSTAR), Noida 


Jadavpur University, Kolkata 


Joy D-Zign Engineers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Kumar Printers Pvt Ltd, Palwal 


Manipal University, College of Printing, Manipal 


Map Printing Division, Survey of India, New Delhi 


Pressman Solutions, Chennai 


Principal, AGPC, Shivakasi 


Printing Technology, COET, Pune 


Representative(s) 


PROF (DR) ANJAN KUMAR BARAL (Chairperson) 


SHRI CHANDER SHEKHAR JEENA 
SHRI NITYANAND SHENOY (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKTNATH PANDEY 


SHRISANJAY TYAGI 
SHRIR. D. GODIYAL (Alternate) 


SHRIB. D. MENDIRATTA 
SHRI SUNIL JAIN (Alternate) 


PROF N. RAJESWARI 


DR N. K. MURTHY 


CoL M. MURALIDHARAN 
SHRI JANARDHAN K. (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI KULAKKADA PRADEEP 
SHRI JOSE THOMAS (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER DESHPANDE 


SHRI S. DAYAKAR REDDY 
SHRI PRASHANT VATS (Alternate I) 
SHRI NAVEEN GUPTA (Alternate II) 


SHRI NARESH KHANNA 


DR ARPITAM CHATTERJEE 


SHRI N. S. MANKU 


SHRI SANDEEP BHARGAVA 


SHRI AMRUTHARAJ H. KRISHNAN 
SHRI RAMNATH SHENOY (Alternate) 


SHRI B. K. GUPTA 
SHRI EQUERAR AHMAD (Alternate) 


SHRI K. PANTHALA SELVAN 
DR M. NANDAKUMAR 


PROF MADHURA MAHAJAN 


IS 8010 (Part 3) : 2023 


Organization 


Production Manager, Sheetfed Module, ITC, Chennai 


RSG Solutions, New Delhi 


The Department of Printing Technology, Anna 
University, Chennai 


The Regional Institute of Printing Technology, 
Jadavpur Kolkata 


Trigon Digipack Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity, (Dcrust University Campus, 
Murthal, Sonepat - 131039) 


In Personal Capacity,(Plot 12, Cross Road 2 
Lokhandwala Complex, Andheri West, 
Mumbai - 400053) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


ER K. NATARAJAN 


SHRI ISHANT KALKAL 


DR K. SENTHIL V ADIVU 


PROF SHANKHYA DEBNATH 


SHRI ASHOKAN KRISHNAMOORTHY 


PROF RAJENDRA ANAYATH 


PROF KIRAN PRAYAGI 


SHRI ANUJ SWARUP BHATNAGAR , SCIENTIST ‘F’/ 
SENIOR DIRECTOR AND HEAD (MANAGEMENT AND 
SYSTEMS) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL 


(Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI ASHISH V. UREWAR 
SCIENTIST ‘C’/DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
(MANAGEMENT AND SYSTEMS), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 06 (21381). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


