INATA Ah IS 18299 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ESE AR TAT AT 
WATT Viet UTA HATT — SRT 


Structural Design and Proof 
Checking Consultancy Services for 
Structures — Requirements 


ICS 91.010.01, 91.010.20, 91.010.30, 91.080.01, 93.010 


© BIS 2023 


anda AS eat 


Ly BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
= wb rr wa, 9 Fe Me HHL AM, Ag feet - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 7 


Construction and Related Engineering Services Sectional Committee, SSD 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Construction 
and Related Engineering Services Sectional Committee had been approved by the Service Sector Division 
Council. 


The need for correct structural design and proof checking of structural designs has been recognized as an important 
step in ensuring safety and durability of the structures and also for public safety in tandem with the rapid 
advancement in engineering and the fast pace of development that is happening in the country. Adding confidence 
and reducing risk through such a process is essential, since it provides risk mitigation on account of errors in the 
design stage and thus ensures safety. 


The intent of this standard is to: 


a) overcome the shortcomings of the current practices and terminologies being followed (in the government 
and private sectors) and suggest those that ought to be adopted and followed as a matter of good and 
sustainable practices; 

b) eliminate subjectivity/arbitrariness and bring transparency, uniformity, and inclusiveness in the 
qualification requirements and appointment of a Principal Design Consultant (PDC) and a Proof Checking 
Consultant (PC); 

c) remove ambiguities that are evident or implied, by defining and thus clarifying the various associated 
terms; and 

d) elaborate the scope of services, deliverables, and associated responsibilities for the owner, PDC, PC and 
constructor so that all stakeholders can take informed decisions while procuring and/or delivering such 
services. 


While preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been taken from Recommended Guidelines on Proof 
Consultancy Services for Buildings published by Indian Association of Structural Engineers. 


This Indian Standard defines the scope and responsibilities of various stakeholders, different models of 
appointment of PDC, and different categories of proof checking based on project delivery modes. It also includes 
the minimum qualification and experience of team members and team leaders of PDC and PC. 


This Indian Standard excludes peer reviewing of structural designs where the reviewer has not been appointed by 
the owner. 


The educational qualification and experience of the team leader of PDC and PC mentioned in this standard are 
the minimum requirements. However, users of such services may take appropriate decisions on it based on the 
nature, importance and scope of work. A licensed/registered/empaneled structural engineer, where the practice 
exists, may be appointed to act as the team leader of PDC/PC if it meets the requirements of the standard. The 
intention of this standard is not to replace the registration and licensing system but to guide and bring uniformity. 


The scope of the standard provides durability and sustainability aspects in services provided by PDC and PC apart 
from functionality, safety and economic aspects. Considering the current scenario for structural design and proof 
checking of structural designs, it is expected that PDC and PC should take up the project comprehensibly apart 
from traditional roles. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, observed, or 
calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules 
for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 18299 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


STRUCTURAL DESIGN AND PROOF CHECKING 
CONSULTANCY SERVICES FOR STRUCTURES — 
REQUIREMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers requirements of structural 
design and proof checking consultancy services for 
all types of civil engineering structures. It also 
includes responsibilities, educational 
qualifications, and deliverables expected from all 
the stakeholders. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Comprehensive Design Consultant (CDC) 
— The individual or the organization responsible 
for comprehensive multidisciplinary engineering 
consultancy services including structural design 
services. 


2.2 Constructor — The individual or 
organization appointed by the owner that is 
responsible for the execution of the construction 
works as per approved drawings and 
specifications. 


2.3 Design-Bid-Build Mode (Traditional 
Mode) — The project delivery mode in which the 
owner is responsible for providing the design and 
drawings, technical specifications and Bill of 
Quantities (BOQ) to the constructor for the 
execution of the works. 


NOTE — The constructor is responsible for the 
execution and delivery of the project. 


2.4 Design and Build Mode — The project 
delivery mode in which the owner provides the 
detailed scope, performance specifications and 
design requirements at the time of bidding to the 
constructor. 


NOTE — The design, execution and delivery are the 
responsibility of the constructor. 


2.5 Design Service Life — Period considered for 
which a structure or a part of it is to be used for its 
intended purpose with periodic inspection and 
routine maintenance, but without major repair 
being necessary. 


2.6 Field Work — Construction work related to 
structures. 


2.7 Owner — The individual or organization that 
owns the project and engages the constructor, 
Principal Design Consultant (PDC), 
Comprehensive Design Consultant (CDC), and 
Proof Checking Consultant (PC), as required. 


2.8 Principal Design Consultant (PDC) — The 
individual or the organization responsible for 
structural analysis and design of the structures. 


2.9 Proof Checking — Checking of structural 
designs by an individual or organization that is not 
a part ofthe original design team. 


2.10 Proof Checking Consultant (PC) — The 
individual or the organization responsible for 
proof checking. 


2.11 Structural Design — Implies all the stages 
related to a structure that includes 
conceptualization, planning, analyses, designs, 
drawings, detailing, considering but not limited to 
serviceability, constructability, durability, 
sustainability, and maintainability, to ensure that 
the structure performs the functions specified 
over its intended design service life as per 
applicable standards. 


NOTE — Structural design includes ensuring the 
completeness and correctness of parameters incorporated 
in the structural analysis, loading and load combinations, 
and design of the structure to ensure compliance with the 
structural design requirements of the construction 
contract, relevant safety standards, codes and best 
engineering practices as well as model studies where 
required and duly incorporating the requirements of the 
technology know-how suppliers, system and equipment 
vendors, specialist consultants, as engaged by the 
owner/constructor/CDC. 


2.12 Team Leader — The person responsible for 
overseeing and coordinating the work of the team 
engaged in the structural analysis and design or its 
proof checking and having authority to sign on 
behalf of the team. 


3 REQUIREMENTS FOR SERVICES 


When determining the requirements for the 
structural design and proof checking consultancy 
services offered to the owner/constructor/CDC, the 
PDC and the PC shall ensure that the following 


IS 18299 : 2023 


requirements, but not limited to, are complied 
with: 


a) all applicable statutory and regulatory 
requirements; 

b) functional requirements of the structure 
(inter alia of technology know-how 
suppliers, system and equipment 
vendors, specialist consultants, and 
others); 


c) consideration of the relevant construction 
stage loadings; 

d) design service life of the structure as per 
applicable standards; 

e) delivery of services as per agreed 
timelines; 

f) consideration of risks including multi- 
hazard risks; and 

g) any specific requirements of the owner. 


4 APPOINTMENT OF PDC 


4.1 The owner/constructor/CDC (depending on 
project delivery mode) shall appoint the PDC for 
the structural design of the structures. 


4.2 In case of contracts where the structural 
design is in the scope of the constructor/CDC and 
structural design is done in-house by constructor/ 
CDC, the constructor/CDC shall be responsible 
and accountable to provide structural design for 
sound, safe and durable structures. The design 
team of the constructor/CDC shall have the 
qualification and the experience of PDC as 
specified in 9.2. 


4.3 In case the PDC is appointed by the 
constructor/CDC externally, the agreement 
between the owner and the constructor/CDC shall 
clearly stipulate the conditions for the 
appointment of PDC in terms of role, 
responsibility, experience, fee payable, etc. It shall 
be the responsibility of the constructor/CDC to 
inform the owner about the appointed PDC along 
with qualifications, and terms and conditions of 
appointment. Constructor/CDC, whoever 
appoints the PDC, shall be primarily responsible 
and accountable to provide structural design for 
sound, safe and durable structures. The PDC 
appointed shall have qualification and experience 
as specified in 9.2. 


5 APPOINTMENT OF PC 


5.1 The owner may appoint a PC for proof 
checking of the structural design of the structures 
prepared by PDC. 


5.2 The PC shall in all cases be always appointed 
by the owner so that the PC is never subservient 
to the constructor/CDC. 


5.3 In case the owner has an in-house design team 
having the qualification and experience as 
specified in 9.2, the owner may either take up the 
responsibility of PDC or PC. The owner shall 
never be both PDC as well as PC simultaneously 
for the same project. 


5.4 The constructor/CDC/PDC shall never act as a 
proof checking consultant for the same project. 


6 MODELS OF APPOINTMENT OF PDC 
AND PC 


The contractual model for the appointment of the 
PDC and the PC may vary according to the nature 
of the project and the project delivery mode. 


6.1 Model 1 — Owner Appointed PDC and PC 


The owner shall directly appoint both the PDC and 
the PC for structural designing and for proof 
checking, respectively. The good for construction 
(GFC) drawings shall be submitted by the PDC to 
the owner after approval by the PC as shown in 
Fig. 1. 


6.2 Model 2 — Constructor Appointed PDC 


A design and build constructor as well as a PC 
shall be independently appointed by the owner. 
The PDC shall be appointed by the constructor. 
The GFC drawings shall be submitted by the PDC 
to the constructor after approval by the PC. 
Thereafter, the constructor shall submit the design 
and GFC drawings to the owner for consent before 
execution of the work as shown in Fig. 2. 


6.3 All communications between the PDC, PC and 
the owner/constructor/CDC shall be documented. 


7 SCOPE AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
7.1 Owner 


The owner shall be responsible for the project 
either directly or through an appointed authorized 
representative or implementing agency. The 
owner shall also: 


a) prepare the contractual stipulations for the 
PDC, PC and ensure that they have the 
qualification and required experience to 
carry out their respective assignments as 
specified in 9.2; 


IS 18299 : 2023 


Proof Checking Consultant (PC) 


Issue of GFC drawings by PDC after approval by PC 


Principal Design Consultant 
(PDC) 


FIG. 1 FLOWCHART FOR COMMUNICATION UNDER MODEL 1 


Desien & Build Constructor 


Principal Design Consultant Proof Checking Consultant (PC) 
(PDC) 


Issue of GFC drawings by PDC after approval by PC 


Submission of drawings for consent before commencement of work 


FIG. 2 FLOWCHART FOR COMMUNICATION UNDER MODEL 2 


IS 18299 : 2023 


b) provide site specific data, design 
requirements like the design brief, the 
conceptual drawings, surveyed site plan, 
geotechnical investigation report, 
proposed materials and methods of 
construction, the relevant contractual 
conditions, the functional requirements, 
and constraints, if any, and any special 
construction loadings to the PDC in case 
of design- bid-build mode; 


NOTE — The design brief should cover all the functional 
needs and aspirations as well as any other special needs of 
the owner. It should also address the issues related to the 
site and the situation that the owner wants the PDC to 
incorporate in the structural designs. 


c) appoint the technology know-how 
suppliers, system and equipment vendors, 
and all specialist consultants as per project 
specific requirements; 


d) ensure that the scope of work for PDC and 
PC, including deliverables from them, 
shall be well defined and a workable time 
schedule given for structural design and 
proof checking; 


e) recognize that there can be differences of 
opinion between the PDC and the PC on 
the structural design issues that need to be 
resolved by the owner in consultation with 
the PDC and PC. In case of an unresolved 
difference in opinion, an independent 
third party view may be obtained by the 
owner. The third party shall also meet the 
qualification and experience criteria as 
specified in 9.2 for the PC. The decision 
of the owner shall be final; 


f) ensure that adequate supervision and 
quality control are provided by the owner 
or by appointing a suitable agency during 
various stages of construction and that the 
construction materials and methods are as 
specified in the contract drawings and 
specifications; 


g) ensure that the structure is used as 
intended and maintained adequately on a 
regular basis; 


h) ensure to include the intention to appoint 
PC, if applicable, as a condition of the 
contract with the PDC, constructor, and 
specialist consultants; 


j) ensure that the responsibilities of PDC/PC 
are clearly specified in the conditions of 
the contract to be made with them. The 
contract conditions between the 
stakeholders may have provisions 
regarding professional liability insurance; 
and 


k) avoid revisions and corrections in design 
inputs, and architectural and service 
drawings, which may impact the structural 
design, subsequent to submission of 
structural design by PDC, in case of design- 
bid-build mode. Revision/corrections in 
architectural and service drawings and other 
design inputs should be done only in 
exceptional and unavoidable circumstances. 


NOTE — The owner may issue a completion certificate 
to the PDC and the PC in relation to the requirements 
given in the design brief with reference to agreed 
functional requirements and deliverables. 


7.2 Principal Design Consultant (PDC) 


The involvement of PC shall not relieve the PDC of 
the responsibility towards the correctness, 
adequacy, and completeness of the structural 
designs. The PDC shall: 


a) ensure completeness and correctness of the 
structural designs, incorporation of 
requirements of the technology know-how 
suppliers, system and equipment vendors, 
various specialist consultants appointed for the 
project, optimization of the structural designs 
and reviewing architectural and service 
designs/drawings of the proposed structure 
from structural engineering considerations; 


b) ensure the availability and completeness of the 
information/reports from the owner/constructor 
/CDC as follows, and ensure that they are 
incorporated into the designs: 


1) the design brief, the functional 
requirements, and constraints if any, 
from the owner; 

2) topographical survey drawings; 

3) geotechnical investigations and 
recommendations; 

4) conceptual, detailed architectural and 
service drawings of the proposed 
structure; 

5) drawings for the proposed structures; 

6) proposed materials and methods of 
construction; 

7) relevant construction stage loadings; 

8) incorporation of notes/drawings 
regarding temporary safety 
requirements during construction; 

9) the relevant contractual conditions; 
and 

10) any other data relevant to the project 
and required for structural design; 


c 


ma 


d 


wm 


e 


nN 


== 


8 


h 


= 


=. 
— 


ensure submission of comprehensive 
design documents and drawings to the 
owner for proof checking.The analysis and 
design calculations (consisting of input and 
output data of the software and manual 
calculations, if any) shall be presented in a 
manner that is easily comprehensible and 
can be checked. Every document shall be 
page numbered. Design calculations shall 
be presented with adequate cross 
referencing to standards, Design Basis 
Report (DBR), and other documents, 
wherever necessary. The design notes shall 
contain explanatory sketches of the 
structure and loadings. All documents and 
drawings shall be physically and/or 
digitally signed with the date and stamped 
by the team leader ofthe PDC; 

ensure compliance with the observations 
raised by the PC. Differences of opinion 
between the PDC and the PC shall be 
resolved by the owner as specified in 
7.1(e); 

act independently of the PC, constructor, 
and any of their sub-constructors or 
consultants, and shall maintain 
confidentiality throughout; 

declare conflict of interest, if any, prior to 
accepting the assignment for structural 
design. In case a conflict of interest arises 
during the assignment, it shall be declared 
by the PDC immediately; 

enter into a written explicit agreement with 
the owner/constructor/CDC about the 
scope of work; 

give clarification to the construction team 
on the design and drawings provided by 
him during the construction stage; and 
prepare an inspection and maintenance 
manual pertaining to structural 
components, if desired by the owner. 


7.3 Proof Checking Consultant (PC) 


The PC shall not be part of the main team of 
structural design/PDC organization. The PC may be 
consulted by the PDC during the design process to 


provide 


preliminary thoughts, opinions, or 


comments on critical issues. The PC shall: 


2) 


b) 


c) 


review the completeness and correctness 
of the structural design documents and 
drawings produced by the PDC; 


act independently ofthe PDC, constructor, 
and any of their sub-constructors or 
consultants, and shall maintain 
confidentiality throughout; 

declare conflict of interest, if any, prior to 
accepting the assignment for proof 
checking except where the PC and the 


d) 


e) 


g) 


h) 


IS 18299 : 2023 


owner are the same. In case a conflict of 
interest arises during the assignment, it 
shall be declared by the PC immediately; 
enter into a written explicit agreement 
with the owner about the scope of work; 
document all the technical interactions 
with the PDC; 

thoroughly check the analysis and design 
calculation documents and structural 
drawings and be fully responsible (in 
addition and independent of the 
responsibilities of the PDC) for the 
accuracy and completeness of all the 
analyses, designs, and drawings of the 
structure, and issuing a certificate for 
proof checking. 

ensure that the structural system/scheme 
chosen by the PDC meets the parameters as 
specifiedin 7.2 (b); 

do independent calculations, if necessary, 
to form a basis for arriving at the 
conclusions. Independent calculations 
shall invariably be done for all large, 
complex, or important structures. All 
documents and drawings shall be 
physically and/or digitally signed with the 
date and stamped by the team leader of PC 
before submitting them to the owner; and 
be responsible for the correctness of the 
design in case the independent design has 
been carried out by PC as given in 8.2. The 
PC shall submit the calculations and 
certificate of proof checking to the owner. 


7.4 Constructor 


The constructor shall ensure proper supervision and 
quality control for each activity at the works by 
deputing qualified and experienced engineers and 
trained workers (skilled as well as unskilled) during 
all the stages of construction. The constructor shall 


also: 


a) 


b) 


9) 


ensure proper document control is 
followed at the site. The latest GFC 
drawings shall always be available at the 
site and the same shall be used for 
construction; 

ensure that the PDC shall have the 
qualification and experience as specified 
in 9.2 in case of design and build mode; 
provide site specific data and design 
requirements like the design brief, the 
conceptual drawings, surveyed site plan, 
geotechnical investigation report, 
proposed materials and methods of 
construction, the relevant contractual 
conditions, the functional requirements, 
and constraints if any, and any special 
construction loadings, to the PDC in case 


IS 18299 : 2023 


d) 


e) 


8) 


h) 


of design and build mode; 


ensure all the contract conditions and 
specifications are followed, and the project 
shall be delivered as per the latest GFC 
drawings; 

ensure the construction material, 
workmanship, and finish meet the 
requirements of the specifications as given 
in the contract and/or as per the relevant 
standards in case they are not specifically 
incorporated in the contract, whichever are 
more stringent; 

ensure that all the fabrication drawings and 
the methodology of construction to be 
adopted by the constructor are as agreed 
under the contract; 

avoid revisions and corrections in design 
inputs and architectural and services 
drawings, which may impact the structural 
design, after submission of structural 
design by PDC, in case of design and build 
mode. Revision/corrections in architectural 
and service drawings and other design 
inputs should be done only in exceptional 
and unavoidable circumstances; and 
ensure submission of as-built drawings to 
the owner. 


8 CATEGORIES OF PROOF CHECKING 


Proof checking can be done using any of the two 
categories as given in 8.1 and 8.2. The owner may 
decide the category of proof checking to be adopted 
depending on the type and complexity of the 
structure. 


8.1 Category 1 


a) The PDC shall prepare the DBR and 


b) 


c 


wm 


framing plans, and discuss them with the 
PC, who shall review and then approve the 
same; 


PDC shall also discuss with the PC, the 
method and mode of analyses and designs 
either manual or computerized, including 
the use of any specific computer programs, 
and idealization of the structure and its 
various elements, and the PC shall need to 
approve the same; 


For structures for which model studies 
(physical or digital) must be performed, the 
same shall also be discussed by the PDC 
with the PC. The model studies to be carried 
out and the agency, to be appointed by the 
owner, shall be decided. The report of the 
model study shall be submitted to the 
owner, who shall forward the 
results/reports of the model studies for 
review and discussion by the PDC and the 
PC with the agency appointed for the same. 


d) 


e 


ma 


ma 


8 


The PDC and PC shall convey their 
acceptance of the model study report, 
separately in writing to the owner; 


PDC shall carry out the analyses and 
designs, as discussed with and approved by 
the PC, and thereafter, prepare the 
structural drawings, and submit the entire 
package to the PC for the latter’s scrutiny 
and approval; 


This interaction between PDC and PC can 
be carried out periodically at various stages 
of the project to suit the construction 
requirements; 


PC shall communicate approval for the 
analyses and later for the designs in writing; 
and 

PC shall sign the structural GFC drawings 
after signing by the PDC. The signed 
drawings shall then be submitted to the 
owner. 


8.2 Category 2 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


The PC and PDC shall discuss and finalize 
a mutually agreed DBR including 
conceptual structural system and schematic 
drawings; 


The PDC shall have the freedom to 
analyze, design and detail the structure, 
and submit only the structural drawings to 
the PC; 


The PC shall carry out independent 
analysis and designs and shall review and 
approve the structural drawings, in part, or 
of the complete structure and sign the 
GFC drawings. The PC shall submit the 
independent analysis and designs to the 
owner; and 


The PC shall communicate approval in 
writing and sign the structural GFC 
drawings after signing by the PDC. The 
signed drawings shall then be submitted to 
the owner. 


NOTE — In Category 2, if there is a difference in the 
final results of the analyses between those done by the 
PDC and the PC, then both shall discuss the same based 
on the available accepted literature and references, to 
resolve the matter and finalize the analyses and designs 
so that the drawings based on the agreed approach could 
be issued. In case, if any difference of opinion remains 
between the PDC and the PC, then the owner shall 
resolve them as specified in 7.1 (e). 


9 SUPPORT 


9.1 General 


The PDC and PC shall have adequate resources 
which shall inter alia include competent manpower, 


qualified and experienced structural design 
engineers, draftsmen, and other associated 
manpower, infrastructure, equipment, and 


environment for operation of all the processes and 
other facilities required to perform and complete 
the work effectively, accurately and within the 
timeframe mutually agreed to with the owner. 


NOTE — Infrastructure should inter alia include 
the following: 

a) Registered office and associated utilities; 

b) Requisite computer hardware and software; and 


c) Transportation resources. 


9.2 Minimum Qualification and Experience of 
PDC and PC 


9.2.1 The owner/constructor/CDC shall make sure 
that the PDC and the PC, as applicable, engaged for 
the project have the requisite minimum 
qualification and relevant experience in similar 


IS 18299 : 2023 


works for the structural analyses, designing, and 
drawing for the project concerned as given in 
Table 1. 


NOTE — The owner may decide the additional 
qualification for PDC or PC based on the type of 
structure, health safety, and disaster (like an earthquake, 
flood, cyclone, etc.) vulnerability requirements. 


9.2.2 The team leader of both the PDC as well as 
the PC shall be an engineer who is engaged in the 
practice of structural engineering and shall have 
experience in the design of structural systems 
comparable in type, size, and complexity to those 
under consideration. 


9.2.3 All PDC and PC team members engaged in 
structural analysis and design shall possess a 
minimum educational qualification of B.E./B.Tech 
(Civil) or equivalent degree recognized by the All 
India Council for Technical Education/University 
Grants Commission. 


Table 1 Minimum Qualification and Experience of Team Leader of PDC and PC 


(Clause 9.2.1) 


SI No. Type of Structure Team leader of PDC Team Leader of PC 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Buildings up to the height B.E./B.Tech (Civil) with 5  B.E./B.Tech (Civil) with 7 years of 
of 15 m and culverts years of experience in experience in structural engineering 
(length up to 6 m). structural engineering practice with designing and field work 
practice with designing and of relevant structures. The 
field work of relevant 7 years of experience shall comprise a 
structures. The 5 years of minimum of 5 years exclusively in 
experience shall comprise a structural designing. 
minimum of 3 years 
exclusively in structural 
designing. 
11) Buildings of height more B.E./B.Tech (Civil) with B.E./B.Tech (Civil) with 10 years of 


than 15 m and up to 50 m 
and minor bridges (bridge 
length up to 60 m). 


7 years of experience in 


structural engineering 
practice with designing and 
field work of relevant 
structures. The 


7 years of experience shall 
comprise a minimum of 5 
years exclusively in structural 
designing. 


experience in structural engineering 
practice with designing and field work 
of relevant structures. The 
10 years of experience shall comprise a 
minimum of 7 years exclusively in 


structural designing. 


IS 18299 : 2023 


Table 1 (Concluded) 


SINo. Type of Structure Team leader of PDC Team Leader of PC 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

111) Buildings of height more B.E./B.Tech (Civil) with Master’s degree with major in 
than 50 m and specialized 10 years of experience in structural engineering and 10 years of 
structures such as but not structural engineering experience in structural engineering 
limited to tunnels, bridges, practice with designing and  practicewith designing and field work 
flyovers, elevated roads, field work of relevant of relevant structures. The 10 years of 
dams, chimneys, industrial, structures. The experience shall comprise a minimum 
marine, and special 10 years of experience shall of 7 years exclusively in structural 
structures. comprise a minimum of designing. 

7 years exclusively in 

structural designing. OR 
B.E./B.Tech (Civil) with 15 years of 
experience in structural engineering 
practice with designing and field work 
of relevant structures. The 15 years of 
experience shall comprise a minimum 
of 10 years exclusively in structural 
designing. 

NOTES 


1 In case of Master’s degree in structural engineering, the required minimum experience may be reduced by 1 year and in case of a doctoral degree in 
area of structural engineering, it may be reduced by 2 years. This note shall not be valid for SI No. (iii) of Table 1. 
2 The team leader of PDC and PC can be academic faculty member of recognized engineering institutions with relevant design experience as 


given above. 


IS 18299 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction and Related Engineering Services Sectional Committee, SSD 06 


Organization 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


B&S Engineering Consultants Private Limited, 
Noida 


CI - Indian Green Building Company Council, 
Hyderabad 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Confederation of Construction Products and 
Services, New Delhi 


Construction Industry Development Council, 
New Delhi 


Construction Skill Development Council of India, 
Gurugram 


Consulting Engineers Association of India, 
New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers Private 
Limited, Ghaziabad 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited, Delhi 


Department of Delhi Fire Services, Govt of NCT of 
Delhi, New Delhi 


Hilti India Private Limited, New Delhi 


Housing and Urban Development Corporation 
Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, 
New Delhi 


Indian Geotechnical Society, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology, Indore 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RANJIT SINGH (Chairperson) 


SHRI ALOK BHOWMICK 


SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR SOMA 


SHRI VINAYAK RAI 
SHRI PRADEEP GARG (Alternate I) 
SHRI AMRENDRA KUMAR JALAN (Alternate I) 


SHRI AMIT MALHOTRA 
MS SARITA BALODHI (Alternate) 


DR P. R. SWARUP 
PROF NIRANJAN SWARUP (Alternate I) 
SHRI ASHUTOSH BHARDWAJ (Alternate II) 


SHRI NARENDRA DESHPANDE 


SHRI A. P. MULL 


SHRI AMAN DEEP GARG 


SHRI D. C. GOEL 
SHRI RAJ KUMAR GUPTA 


SHRI ATUL GARG 
SHRI SANJAY KUMAR TOMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SHOUNAK MITRA 


SHRI DEEPAK BANSAL 


SHRI MANOJ K. MITTAL 


PROF G. L. SIVAKUMAR BABU 
DR A. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI DIVYA KUSH 


PROF SANDEEP CHAUDHARY 


IS 18299 : 2023 


Organization 


Indian Plumbing Skills Council, New Delhi 


Institute for Steel Development and Growth, 
Kolkata 


Institute of Engineers India, New Delhi 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, 
New Delhi 


National Accreditation Board for Certification 
Bodies, New Delhi 


National Buildings Construction Corporation 
Limited, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building 
Materials, Faridabad 


National Institute of Construction Management and 
Research, Pune 


Project Management Institute, New Delhi 


Town and Country Planning Organisation, 
New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity (Plot 22-A, Sector - 17 C, Palm 
Beech Marg Vashi, Navi Mumbai - 400705) 


In Personal Capacity (Grace Villa, Kadamankulam 
PO, Thiruvalla - 689583) 


Representative(s) 


SHRI VINAY GUPTA 
SHRI ROHIT KUMAR SAHA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARIJIT GUHA 
SHRIP. L. RAO (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH KUMAR 
SHRIK. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRIB. K. SINHA 
SHRI BIDUR KANT JHA (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY SHARMA 
SHRI PRATEESH TIWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI NOVMAN AHMED 
SHRI MUDIT BHATNAGAR (Alternate) 


DRB. P. RANGA RAO 
SHRI ARUP GHATAK (Alternate) 


DR ANIL AGARWAL 
SHRI RAJESH GOYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SESHA SAI 


SHRI JAGDEEP KUMAR KAPOOR 
SHRI SUDEEP Roy (Alternate I) 
SHRI HARPAL DAVE (Alternate II) 


SHRI V. N. HEGGADE 


SHRI JOSE KURIAN 


SHRI S. K. KANOGIA, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (SERVICE SECTOR) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENEAL (Ex-officio)] 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 
SHRI UMANG JAGGI 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(SERVICE SECTOR), BIS 


IS 18299 : 2023 


Subcommittee for drafting standard on Preconstruction Services, SSD 06 : 01 


Organization 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, New Delhi 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers India, 
Bengaluru 


B&S Engineering Consultants Private Limited, Noida 


Cengrs Geotechnica Private Limited, Noida 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Consulting Engineers Association of India, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers Private 
Limited, Ghaziabad 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology, Indore 
L&T Construction, Chennai 


National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 


Tandon Consultants Private Limited, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


SHRI MANOJ K. MITTAL (Convener) 


SHRI AVINASH D. SHIRODE 
SHRI SURYA PRAKASH (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK BHOWMICK 


SHRI SANJAY GUPTA 
SHRI RAVI SUNDARAM (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP GARG 
SHRI AMRENDRA KUMAR JALAN (Alternate) 


SHRI A. P. MULL 


SHRI AMAN DEEP GARG 


SHRI D. C. GOEL 

SHRI DIVYA KUSH 

PROF SANDEEP CHAUDHARY 
SHRIC. K. SOMARAJU 


SHRINOVMAN AHMED 
SHRIMUDIT BHATNAGAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAY GUPTA 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: SSD 06 (19914). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


