**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS/IEC 517 (1990) : Gas Insulated Metal Enclosed Switchgear 
for Rated Voltages of 12.5 kV and Above - Specification 
;etD 8: High Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS/IEC 517 (1990) 

72.5 ^ ^ 3ft^ ?^ srfSm? ^fecf ciWdl cTT^ 
% ^?tf^ mg MRc|c£i R<|T|R|i|N! - fcr%fe 

//?c//a/? Standard 

GAS INSULATED METAL ENCLOSED SWITCHGEAR 
FOR RATED VOLTAGES OF 72.5 kV AND ABOVE — 

SPECIFICATION 



ICS 29.120.60 



OBIS 1997 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

September 1 997 Price Group 1 5 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

High Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear Sectional Committee, ET 08 

CONTENTS 

Page 

NATIONAL FOREWORD 5 

Clause 

1 Scope 7 

2 Normal and special service conditions 7 

3 Definitions 7 

4 Rating 10 

4.1 Rated voltage 10 

4.2 Rated insulation level 1 

4.3 Rated frequency 11 

4.4 Rated normal current and temperature rise 1 1 

4.5 Rated short-time withstand cunrent 1 1 

4.6 Rated peak withstand current 1 1 

4.7 Rated duration of short-circuit 1 2 

4.8 Rated supply voltage of closing and opening devices and auxiliary circuits 1 2 

4.9 Rated supply frequency of operating devices and auxiliary drcutts 1 2 

4.10 Rated pressure of compressed gas supply for operating mechanisms 12 

4.101 Rated density of gas for insulation i2 

5 Design and construction 1 2 

5.1 Requirements for liquids in switchgear and controlgear 1 3 

5.2 Requirements for gases in switchgear and controlgear 13 

5.3 Earthing 13 

5.4 Auxiliary equipment 13 

5.5 Dependent power closing 13 

5.6 Stored energy closing 1 4 

5.7 Operation of releases 1 4 

5.8 Low and high pressure interlocking devices 1 4 

5.9 Nameplates 14 

5.101 Degree of protection 14 

5.102 Internal fault 15 

5.103 Enclosures 17 

5.104 Partitions 18 

1 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

Clause Page 

5.105 Pressure relief 19 

5.106 Disconnectors and earthing switches 19 

5.107 Interlocks 20 

5.108 Noise 20 

5.109 Provisions for dielectric tests on cables 21 

6 Type tests 21 

6.1 Dielectric tests 22 

6.2 Radio interference voltage (RIV) tests 28 

6.3 Temperature-rise tests 28 

6.4 Measurement of the resistance of the main circuit 28 

6.5 Short-time and peak withstand current tests 29 

6.101 Verification of making and breaking capacities 30 

6.102 Mechanical operation tests 30 

6.103 Verification of the degree ot protection for auxiliary circuits and moving parts 31 

6.104 Proof tests for enclosures 31 

6.105 Weatherproofing test 32 

6.106 Test under conditions of arcing due to an intemal fault 32 

6.107 Thermal stability test 33 

6.108 Operation tests at limit temperatures 33 

6.109 Gas tightness tests 34 

7 Routine tests 34 

7.1 Power-frequency voltage tests on the main circuit 35 

7.2 Dielectric tests on auxiliary and control circuits 35 

7.3 Measurement of the resistance of the main circuit 35 

7.101 Partial discharge measurement 35 

7.102 Pressure tests of enclosures 35 

7.103 Gas tightness tests 35 

7.104 Mechanical operation tests 36 

7.105 Tests of auxiliary electrical, pneumatic and hydraulic devices 36 

7.106 Verification of the correct wiring 36 

7.107 Tests after erection on site 36 

8 Guide to the selection of the switchgear for service 41 



IS lEC 517 (1990) 

Clause Pago 

9 Information to be given with enquines. tenders and orders 42 

9 101 Information with enquines and orders 42 

9 102 Information with tenders 43 

10 Rules for transport, storage, erection and maintenance 44 

10 1 Conditions dunng transport, storage and erection 44 
10.2 Erection 44 
10 3 Maintenance 44 



Annexes 

AA - Recommended method for the weatherproofmg test for outdoor gas-insulated 
metahenclosed swrtchgear 45 



BB - Methods for testing gas-insulated metal-enclosed swrtchgear under conditions 

or arang due to an intemal fault 48 



CC - Technical and practical considerations of site testing 



51 



DD ~ Gas tightness specifications and tests ^"^ 



IS/IEC517 (1990) 

Indian Standard 

GAS INSULATED METAL ENCLOSED SWITCHGEAR 
FOR RATED VOLTAGES OF 72.5 kV AND ABOVE — 

SPECIFICATION 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical to lEC Pub 517 ( 1990 ) Gas mbulalod metal pnclo^i d ,wit( hg«- it tor 
rated voltages of 72 5 kV and above issued by the International FlectrotechnicalCornmissior) wasacjof leci 
by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of tho High Voltage Switc hgear arui ^ ontroiqH u 
Sectional Committee ET 08 and approval of the Flectrotechnicai Division Council 

The text of the I EC Standard along with its Amendment No 1 has t)een approvfni as suitabjp lor publicatKxi ^ 
Indian Standard without deviations 

This standard specifies requirements for gas insulated metal enclosed switchgear in whu h thp insui itiot i 
obtained at least partly by an insulating gas other than air for alternating current of rated volt kh's ot / kV 
and above 

In this standard c ertain terminology and conventions arp not identical with thobe us( d in Indian Stand ird 
AtterUion is specially drawn to the following 

a) Wherever the words International Standard appear referring to this standard thpv should be r( acJ i- 

Indian Standard 

b) Comma ( ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Ir^dian Staruiards the ( urrent praf ti< t r to 
use a point ( ) as the decimal marker 

Only the Fnglish language text in the International Standard has be^n retained wtiile adopting it m thi •> Iruiiar^ 
Staridard 

For the purpose of deciding whether a partic ular requiremerU ot this star^dard is c omplied with th( tin \\ \\{i( 
observed or cak ulated expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded ott in ac ( orciaru \.'' \\U 
IS 2 1960 Rules for rounding off numerical values ( tevibe'd) The numt)er of significant plac f s retimed in tht 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard 

In this standard reference appears to certain International Standards tor which IncJian StandarcJs also t xist 
The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be sul:)stituted in their plac o are listed bf^low along with tlu ir 
degree of equivalence 



International Standard 

IEC44 4 1980 

Instrument transformers 

Part 4 Measurement of 
partial discharge 

IEC50(151) 1978 
International Electrotechnical 
Vocabulary Chapter 151 
Electrical and magnetic devices 

IEC50(441) 1984 
International Electrotechnical 
Vocabulary Chapter 441 

Switchgear controlgear and 
fuses 



C orrohponding Iridian htandatd 



ISm22 1985 



IS 1885 (Part 74) 1979 



IS 1885 (Part 17) 1979 



Dt\pPtr ot 

tqunakfk ^ 

Partially 
equivaU r^t 



Identical 



Technu ally 
r^quivalent 



IS/IEC 517 (1990) 

International Standard 



Corresponding Indian Standard 



Degree of 
Equivalence 



I EC 56 1987 

High voltage AC circuit breakers 

IEC60-2 1973 

High voltage test techniques, 

Part 2 Test procedures 

IEC129 1984 

AC disconnectors and earthing 

switches 

IEC137 1984 

Bushings for AC voltages above 

1000 V 



IS 13118 1991 



IS 2971 (Part 2) 1974 



IS 9921 (Parts 1 to 4) 



IS 2099 1986 



Identical 



Technically 
equivalent 



Technically 
equivalent 



Technically 
equivalent 



IEC141 

Tests on oil failed and gas 

pressure cables and their 

accessories 

IEC270 1981 

Partial discharge measurements 

IEC298 1990 

AC metal enclosed switchgear 
and controlgear for rated 
voltages above 1 kV and up to 
and including 52 kV 

I EC 480 1974 

Guide for the checking of SF6 

taken from electrical equipment 

IEC529 1989 

Degree of protection provided by 

enclosures (IP Code) 

IEC651 1979 
Sound level meters 

I EC 694 1980 

Common clauses for high 
voltage switchgear and 
controlgear standards 

I EC 859 1986 

Cable connections for gas 
insulated metal enclosed 
switchgear for rated voltages of ' 
72 5 kV and above 



No ISS Exists 



IS 6209 1982 



Under pnnt 



IS 12063 1987 



IS 9779 1981 



IS 12729 1988 



Technically 
equivalent 

Identical 



No ISS Exists 



Technically 
equivalent 



Technically 
equivalent 

Technicallv 
equivalent 



No ISS Exists 



ISIEC 517(1990) 



1 Scope 

This standard specifies requirements for gas-msulated metal-enclosed switchgear in which 
the insulation is obtained, at least partly, by an insulating gas other than air at atmos 
pheric pressure, for alternating current of rated voltages of 72,5 kV and above, for indoor 
and outdoor installation and for service frequencies up to and including 60 Hz 



For the purpose of this standard the term "switchgear" is used for "gas-msulated metal- 
enclosed switchgear" 

The gas-msulated metal-enclosed switchgear covered by this standard consists of indi- 
vidual components intended to be directly connected together and able to operate only in 
this manner 

This standard completes and amends, if necessary, the vanous relevant standards applying 
to the individual components constituting gas-msulated metal enclosed switchgear 



Unless otherwise specified, the gas-msulated metal enclosed switchgear is designed to be 
used under normal service conditions 

2 Normal and special service conditions 

Refer to clause 2 of lEC 694, with the following modification 

At any altitude the dielectric characteristics of the internal insulation are identical with 
those measured at sea-level For this insulation, therefore, no requirements concerning 
the altitude are applicable 

3 Definitions 

For the definitions of general terms used in this standard, reference is made to lEC 
50(441) and 50(151) The following definitions apply for the purpose of this standard 

3 101 Switchgear 

A general term covering switching devices and their combinauon with associated control 
measuring, protective and regulating equipment, also assemblies of such devices and 
equipment with associated interconnections, accessories, enclosures and supporting struc 
tures, intended m principle for use in connection with generation, transmission, distnbution 
and conversion of electric energy (lEV 441-1 1-02) 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

3 1 02 Metal-enclosed switchgear and controlgear 

Switchgear and controlgear assemblies with an external metal enclosure intended to be 
earthed, and complete except for external connections (lEV 441-12-04) 



3 1 03 Gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear 

Metal-enclosed switchgear m which the insulation is obtained, at least partly, by an 
insulating gas other than air at atmospheric pressure (lEV 441-12-05) 



NOTE This term generally applies to high voltage switchgear and controlgear 

3 1 04 Transport unit 

A part of gas-insulated switchgear suitable for shipment without being dismantled 

3 105 Enclosure 

A part of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear retaining the insulating gas under the 
prescribed conditions necessary to maintain safely the rated insulation level, protecting 
the equipment against external influences and providing a high degree of protection to 
personnel 

3 106 Compartment 

A part of gas-msulated metal-enclosed switchgear, totally enclosed except for openings 
necessary for interconnection and control 

NOTE A compartment may be designated by the mam component contained therein e g circuit breaker 
compartment busbar compartment 

3 107 Component 

An essential part of the mam or earthing circuits of gas-insulated metal*enclosed 
switchgear which serves a specific function (for example circuit-breaker, disconnector, 
switch, fuse, instrument transformer, bushing, busbar, etc ) 

3 108 Partition 

A part of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear separating one compartment from other 
compartments (lEV 441-13-06) 

3 109 Bushing 

A structure carrying one or more conductors through an enclosure and insulating it there- 
from, including the means of attachment 

8 



IS/IEC 517 (1990) 



3 110 Mam circuit 



All the conductive parts of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear included in a circuit 
which IS intended to transmit electrical energy (lEV 441-13-02) 

3 111 Auxiliary circuit 

All the conductive parts of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear included in a arcuit (other 
than the main circuit) intended to control, measure, signal and regulate (lEV 441-13-03) 

NOTE The auxiliary circuits of gas insulated metal enclosed switchgear include the control and auxiliary 
circuits of the switching devices 

3 112 Rated value 

A quantity value assigned, generally by a manufacturer, for a specified operating condition 
of gas insulated metal-enclosed switchgear (lEV 151-04-03) 

NOTE See clause 4 for individual rated values 

3 113 Ambient air temperature (of gas insulated metal-enclosed switchgear) 

The temperature, determined under prescribed conditions, of the air surrounding the 
external enclosure of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear 

3 114 Design temperature (of ttie enclosure) 

The highest temperature which can be reached by the enclosure under service conditions 

3 115 Design pressure (of the enclosure) 

The pressure used to determine the thickness of the enclosure 

3 116 Disruptive discharge 

Phenomena associated with the failure of insulation under electric stress, in which the 
discharge completely bridges the insulation under test, reducing the voltage between the 
electrodes to zero or almost zero 

NOTES 

1 The term applies to discharges in solid liquid and gaseous dielectrics and to combinations of thes<? 

2 A disruptive discharge in a solid dielectric produces permanent loss of dielectric strength (non self 
restoring insulation) in a liquid or gaseous dielectric the loss may be only temporary (self restoring 
insulation) 

3 The term "sparkover" is used when a disruptive discharge occurs in a gaseous or liquid dielectric Th«i 
term "flashover" is used when a disruptive discharge occurs over the surface of a solid dielectric in i 
gaseous or liquid medium The term ''puncture" is used when a disruptive discharge occurs through a solid 
dielectric 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

4 Rating 

The rating of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear comprises the following: 

a) rated voltage and number of phases; 

b) rated insulation level; 

c) rated frequency; 

d) rated normal current (for main circuits); 

e) rated short-time withstand current (for main and earthing circuits); 

f) rated peak withstand current (for main and earthing circuits), 

g) rated duration of short-circuit; 

h) rated values of the components forming part of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switch- 
gear, including their operating devices and auxiliary equipment; 

i) rated density of gas for insulation. 

The co-ordination of rated voltages, rated short-time withstand currents, rated peak 
withstand currents and rated normal currents of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear 
is under consideration. 



4 1 Rated voltage 

Refer to 4.1 and 4.1.2 of lEC 694 with the addition of the rated value 72,5 kV 

NOTE - Components forming part of the switchgear may have individual values of rated voltage in 
accordance with the relevant standards 

4.2 Rated insulation levei 

Refer to 4.2 of lEC 694 with the addition oi the following supplement: 

The switchgear comprises components having a definite insulation level. Although internal 
faults can largely be avoided by the choice of a suitable insulation level, measures to limit 
external overvoltages (surge arresters, protective sparkgaps) should be considered. 

NOTES 

1 Regarding the external parts of bushings (if any), refer to lEC 137 

2 The waveforms are accepted lightning impulse and switching impulse shapes, pending the results of 
studies on the ability of this equipment to withstand other types of impulses 

3 The choice between alternative insulation levels for a particular rated voltage should be based on 
insulation co-ordination studies taking into account also the self-generated transient overvoltages due to 
switching 



10 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

4.3 Rated frequency 

Refer to 4.3 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following rated values: 

16 2/3 Hz and 25 Hz 

4.4 Rated normal current and temperature rise 

4.4.1 Rated normal current 

Refer to 4.4.1 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following paragraph: 

Some mam circuits of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear (e.g. busbars, feeder 
circuits, etc.) may have different values of rated normal current They should preferably be 
selected from the following values: 

1 250 A - 2 000 A ~ 3 150 A - 4 000 A - 6 300 A 

4.4.2 Temperature rise 

Refer to 4.4.2 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following supplement: 

The temperature rise of components contained in the switchgear which are subject to 
standards not covered by the scope of lEC 694 shall not exceed the temperaturerise 
limits permitted in the relevant standard for those components. 

The temperature rise for accessible enclosures shall not exceed 30 K. In the case of 
enclosures which are accessible but need not be touched during normal operation, the 
temperature-rise limit may be increased to 40 K. 

NOTE - When applying a temperature rise equal to or titgher than 65 K for parts of the enclosure not 
accessible to the operator, every precaution is to be taken to ensure that no damage is caused to the 
surrounding insulating materials 

4.5 Rated short-time withstand current 

Refer to 4.5 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following paragraph: 

The rated short-time withstand current should preferably be selected from the following 
values: 

25 kA - 31.5 kA - 40 kA - 50 kA - 63 kA - 80 kA - 100 kA 

4.6 Rated peak withstand current 
Refer to 4.6 of lEC 694. 

NOTE In principle, the rated short-time withstand current and the rated peak withstand current of a mam 
circuit cannot exceed the corresponding rated values of the weakest of its series connected components 



11 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

4 . 7 Rated duration of short-circuit 
Refer to 4.7 of lEC 694, 

4.8 Rated supply voltage of closing and opening devices and auxiliary circuits 

Refer to 4.8 of lEC 694. 

4.9 Rated supply frequency of operating devices and auxiliary circuits 

Refer to 4.9 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following paragraph: 

The rated supply frequency of operating devices and auxiliary circuits is the frequency at 
which the conditions of operation and temperature rise of these devices and circuits are 
deternr^ined. 

4.10 Rated pressure of compressed gas supply for operating mecfianisms 
Refer to 4.10 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following paragraph: 

The pressure of the compressed gas supply is understood to be the pressure measured in 
the reservoir immediately before the operation. 

4. 1 01 Rated density of gas for insulation 

The rated density of gas for insulation is the density assigned by the manufacturer at 
which the switchgear is intended to be used in service. 

The minimum gas density is the value of the density assigned by the manufacturer at and 
above which the rated insulation level applies. 

Gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear may have several rated and minimum gas densi- 
ties for insulation, differing from one compartment to another. 

5 Design and construction 

Gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear shall be designed so that normal service, 
inspection and maintenance operations, earthing of connected cables, locating of cable 
faults, voltage tests on connected cables or other apparatus and the elimination of 
dangerous electrostatic charges, can be carried out safely, including the checking of 
phase sequence after erection and extension. 



The design of the equipment shall be such that the agreed permitted movement of founda- 
tions or thermal effects do not impair the assigned performance of the equipment. 



All components of the same rating and construction which may need to be replaced shall 
be interchangeable. 

12 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

The various components contained within the enclosure are subject to their relevant 
standards except where modified by this standard. 

5. 1 Requirements for liquids in switchgear and controlgear 
Refer to 5.1 of lEC 694. 

5.2 Requirements for gases in switchgear and controlgear 
Refer to 5.2 of lEC 694. 

NOTE - For chocking of sulphur hexafluonde in service, refer to tEC 480 

5.3 Earthing 

Refer to 5.3 of lEC 694. 

5.3. 1 01 Earthing of the main circuits 

To ensure safety during maintenance work all parts of the main circuits to which access 
is required or provided shall be capable of being earthed. In addition, it shall be possible. 
after the opening of the enclosure, to connect earth electrodes for the duration of the 
work. 

Earthing may be made by: 

a) earthing switches with a making capacity equal to the rated peak withstand current, 
if there is no certainty that the circuit connected is not live; 

b) earthing switches without a making capacity or with a making capacity lower than 
the rated peak withstand current, If there is certainty that the circuit connected is 
not live; 

c) removable earthmg devices, only by agreement between manufacturer and user. 

5.3. 1 02 Earthing of the enclosure 

The enclosures shall be capable of being connected to earth. All metal parts intended 
to be earthed, which do not belong to a main or an auxiliary circuit, shall be connected to 
earth. For the interconnection of enclosures, frames, etc., fastening (e.g. bolting or 
welding) is acceptable for providing electrical continuity. 

The continuity of the earthing circuits shall be ensured taking into account the thermal and 
electrical stresses caused by the current they may have to carry. 

5.4 Auxiliary equipment 
Refer to 5.4 of lEC 694. 

5. 5 Dependent power dosing 
Refer to 5.5 of lEC 694. 



13 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

5. 6 Stored energy closing 
Refer to 5.6 of lEC 694. 

5.7 Operation of releases 
Refer to 5.7 of lEC 694. 

5.8 Low and high pressure interlocking devices 

Refer to 5.8 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following supplement: 

For gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear it is recommended that a signal be provided 
when the gas density or gas pressure for insulation has fallen to the minimum value 
(see 4.101). 

5.9 Nameplates 

Refer to 5.9 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following supplement: 

Gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear, all Its operating devices and main components, 
as agreed between manufacturer and user, shall be provided with durable and clearly 
legible nameplates which shall contain the following information: 

- manufacturer's name or trade marl<; 

- type designation or serial number. 

It is recommended that the following data are also given- 

- rated voltage; 

- rated normal currents for busbars and circuits; 

- rated frequency; 

- rated short-time withstand current; 

- rated pressure for operation; 

- minimum gas density for insulation; 

- design pressure for enclosures. 

The individual nameplates of the components can be simplified provided common informa- 
tion for the switchgear is stated on one nameplate. 

NOTE - Tho word "rated" need not appear on the nameplates 

5.101 Degree of protection 

5.101-1 Degree of protection for the main circuits 

No specification applies to the main circuit and parts directly connected thereto. 



14 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 



5. 1 01 .2 Degree of protection for auxiliary circuits ar)d moving parts 



The degree of protection of persons against contact with live parts of auxiliary circuits and 
with any moving part (other than smooth rotating shafts and moving linl^ages) shall be indi- 
cated by means of one of the designations specified in table I. 

The characteristic numeral indicates the degree of protection provided by the enclosure 
with respect to persons, also to the equipment Inside the enclosure. 

Table I gives details of objects which will be "excluded" from the enclosure for each of the 
degrees of protection. 

The term "excluded" implies that a part of the body or an object held by a person, either 
will not enter the enclosure or, if it enters, that adequate clearance will be maintained and 
no moving part will be touched. 

Equipment for outdoor Installation provided with appropnate protection features shall be 
indicated by the characteristic letter W placed Immediately after the letters IP. 



The relevant service conditions shall be observed (see clause 2) in order to protect the 
equipment against atmospheric agents. 

Table 1 - Degrees of protection against ingress of foreign solid objects 
and against access to live or moving parts 



Designation 


1 
Definition 


IP2X 


Protected against solid objects greater than 12 mm in diameter and fingers or similar 
objects not exceeding 80 mm in length 


IP3X 


Protected against tools, wires, etc . of diameter or thickness greater than 2.5 mm and 
solid objects exoeedir>g 2.5 mm in diameter 


IP4X 


Protected against wires or strips of diameter or thickness greater than 1 .0 mm and solid 
objects exceeding 1 ,0 mm tn diameter 


IP5X 


Dust-protected, the ingress of dust is not totally prevented but dust does not mterlere with 
satisfactory operation of the equipment 



NOTE - The designation of the degree of protection corresponds to lEC 529 No degree of protection for 
auxiliary circuits against harmful ingress of water is specified in case of IP5X, category 2 is applicable 



5.102 Internal fault 

5.102.1 General 

A fault leading to arcing within gas*insulated metal-enclosed switchgear built to this stan- 
dard has a low order of probability. This results from the application of an insulating fluid 
other than air at atmospheric pressure which will not be altered by pollution, humidity or 

15 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

vermin. Further, the insulating qualities may be checked by dielectric tests on assembled 
units in the factory and on site. While the probability of such a fault is low, the probability 
of a fault occurring with personnel present is even lower, especially since gas-insulated 
sub-stations are closed electrical operating areas, the access to which is permitted only to 
authorized personnel. 

Examples of measures to avoid arcing due to an internal fault and to limit duration and 
consequences are: 

- insulation co-ordination; 

- gas-leakage limitation and control; 

- high-speed protection; 

- high-speed arc short-circuiting devices; 

- interlocking of switching devices; 

- remote control; 

- internal and/or external pressure reliefs; 

- checking of workmanship on site. 

Arrangements should also be made to minimize the effects of internal faults leading to 
arcing on the continued service capability of the switchgear. The effect of an arc should 
be confined to the compartment in which the arc has been initiated, or to the other 
compartments in the faulty section, if pressure relief is used between compartments within 
this section. After disconnection of the compartment or section, restoration of the normal 
operation of the remaining equipment should be possible. 



If, in spite of the measures taken, a test is agreed between manufacturer and user to 
verify the effect of arcing due to an internal fault, this test should be in accordance 
with 6.106. 

Tests would normally not be necessary in the case of single-phase enclosed switchgear 
installed in isolated neutral or resonant earthed systems and equipped with a protection to 
limit the duration of internal earth faults. 

5. 1 02.2 External effects of the arc 

In order to provide a high protection to personnel the external effects of an arc shall 
be limited (by a suitable protective system) to the appearance of a hole or tear in the 
enclosure without any fragmentation. 

The manufacturer shall provide sufficient information regarding the protective system 
employed. 

Manufacturer and user may agree upon a time during which an arc due to an internal fault 
up to a given value of short-circuit current will cause no external effects. 



5. 1 02. 3 Internal fault location 

The manufacturer of the switchgear should propose appropriate measures for fault loca- 
tion, if required by the user. 

16 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

5.103 Enclosures 

5.103.1 General 

The enclosure shall be of metal, permanently earthed and capable of withstanding the 
normal and transient pressures to which it is subjected in service. 

While the enclosures of gas-filled equipment conforming to this standard are permanently 
pressurized in service they are subjected to particular conditions of service which 
distinguish them from compressed air receivers and similar storage vessels. These 
conditions are: 

- enclosures envelop the main circuit not only to prevent hazardous approach to live 
or moving parts but are so shaped that when filled at or above the minimum gas density 
for insulation (see 4.101) they ensure that the rated insulation level (see 4.2) for the 
equipment is achieved (electrical rather than mechanical considerations predominate in 
determining the shape and materials employed); 



- enclosures are normally filled with a non-corrosive gas. thoroughly dried, stable and 
inert; since measures to maintain the gas in this condition with only small fluctuations in 
pressure are fundamental to the operation of the switchgear and since the enclosures 
will not be subject to internal corrosion, there is no need to make allowances for these 
factors in determining the design of the enclosures (however, the effect of possible 
transmitted vibrations should be taken Into account); 

- the service pressure employed is relatively low. 

For outdoor installation, the manufacturer shall take into account the influence of climatic 
conditions (see clause 2). 

5. 1 03.2 Design of enclosures 

The wall thickness of the enclosure shall be based on the design pressure as well as the 
following minimum withstand durations without burn-through: 

- 0.1 s for currents of 40 kA and above; 

- 0,2 s for lower currents. 

Pending international agreement on a standard procedure, methods for the calculation of 
the thickness and the construction of enclosures either by welding or casting may be 
chosen from established pressure vessel codes based on the design temperature and 
design pressure defined in this standard. 

NOTE - When designing an enclosure, account should also be taken of the following 

a) the possible evacuation of the enclosure as part of the normal filling process, 

b) the full differential pressure possible across the enclosure wails or partitions, 

c) the resulting pressure in the event of an accidental teak between the compartments in the case of 
adjacent compartments having different service pressures. 

d) the possibility of the occurrence of an internal fault (see 5 102) 



17 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

The design temperature of the enclosure is generally the upper limit of ambient air tem- 
perature increased by the temperature rise due to the flow of rated normal current. Solar 
radiations should be taken into account when they have a significant effect. 



The design pressure of the enclosure is at least the upper limit of the pressure reached 
within the enclosure at the design temperature. 

In determining the design pressure of the enclosure, the gas temperature shall be taken 
as the mean of the upper limits of the enclosure temperature and the main circuit 
conductor temperature with rated normal current flowing unless the design pressure can 
be established from existing temperature-rise test records. 

For enclosures and parts thereof, the strength of which has not been fully determined by 
calculation, proof tests (see 6.104) shall be performed to demonstrate that they fulfil the 
requirements. 

Materials used in the construction of enclosures shall be of known and certified minimum 
physical properties on which calculations and/or proof tests are based. The manufacturer 
shall be responsible for the selection of the materials and the maintenance of these 
minimum properties, based on certification of the material supplier, or tests conducted by 
the manufacturer, or both. 

5. 1 03.3 Gas tightness 

Because compressed gas is used for insulation a high degree of tightness is required for 
the enclosure. The permissible annual or daily escape of gas and the time between 
refillings for each type of compartment and for the complete installation should be stated 
by the manufacturer in accordance with annex DD. 

If requested by the user, in order to permit maintenance in a compartment when adjacent 
compartments contain gas under pressure, the permissible gas leakage across partitions 
should also be stated by the manufacturer. 



5.104 Partitions 

Gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear shall be divided into compartments in such a 
manner that both the normal operating conditions are met and a limitation of the effects of 
an arc Inside the compartment is obtained (see 5.102.1). 

For this purpose partitions are required to ensure that the dielectric characteristics in one 
compartment are not substantially altered when an adjacent compartment is at reduced 
pressure due to leaks or maintenance operations. They are generally of insulating material 
but are not intended by themselves to provide electrical safety of personnel, for which 
other means such as earthing of the equipment may be necessary; they shall, however, 
provide mechanical safety against the normal gas pressure still present in the adjacent 
compartment. 



A partition separating a compartment filled with insulating gas from a neighbouring 
compartment filled with liquid, such as a cable box or a voltage transformer, shall not 
show any leakage affecting the dielectric properties of the two media. 

18 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 



5. 1 05 Pressure relief 



Pressure relief devices in accordance with this subclause shall be arranged so as to 
minimize the danger to an operator during the time he is performing his normal operating 
duties in the gas-insulated substation if gases or vapours are escaping under pressure. 

NOTE - The term "pressure relief device* includes both pressure relief valves, characterized by an 
opening pressure and a closing pressure, non-reclosing pressure relief devices, such as diaphragms ar^i 
bursting disks 

5. 1 05. 1 Pressure relief valves to limit maximum filling pressure 

In the case of an enclosure permanently connected to a compressed gas supply, the 
devices employed for pressure regulation cannot be relied upon to prevent overpressure. 
Pressure relief valves of adequate size shall be fitted to prevent the pressure within the 
enclosure from rising to more than 1 % above the design pressure in the event of failure 
of the pressure regulation means. 

In the case of enclosures not permanently connected to a compressed gas supply, a 
pressure relief valve shall be fitted to the filling pipe to prevent the gas pressure from 
rising to more than 10 % above the design pressure during the filling of the enclosure 
Alternatively the valve may be fitted to the enclosure itself. 

After an opening operation of a pressure relief valve, it shall reclose before the pressure 
has fallen to 75 % of the design pressure. 

The filling pressure should be chosen to take into account the gas temperature at the time 
of filling, for example checking by temperature-compensated pressure gauges 



5. 1 05.2 Pressure relief devices to limit pressure rise in the case of an internal fault 

Since after an arc due to an internal fault the damaged enclosures will be replaced, 
pressure relief devices need only be proportioned to limit the external effects of the arc 
(see 5.102.2). 

in some designs pressure relief may be achieved by allowing the arc to burn through the 
enclosure at designated points. Where such means are employed the resultant hole is 
deemed to be a pressure relief device and consequently should fulfil the requirements 
given in 5.105 

NOTES 

1 In the case off an internal fault which causes yielding of the enclosure, the adjacent enclosures should 
be checked for absence of distorsion 

2 When bursting disks are used for pressure relief due regard should be paid to their rupture pressure in 
relation to the design pressure of the enclosure <see 3 115) to reduce the possibility of unintentional 
rupture of the disk 

5 1 06 Disconnectors and earthing switches 

The devices for ensuring the isolating distance between high-voltage conductors are consi- 
dered to be disconnectors which shall comply with lEC 129 Additional requirements are 
given in 6 102 and 7 104 

19 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

The requirement of lEC 129, that it shall be possible to know the operating position of the 
disconnector or earthing switch, is met if the position of the disconnector or earthing 
switch is indicated by a reliable indicating device 

The co-ordination of the insulation levels to earth and of the isolating distance is not 
necessarily obtained by the construction or design of the switchgear. Surge arresters or 
other means are recommended to perform such a co-ordination. For this type of switch- 
gear, there is no additional requirement necessary apart from the insulation level for the 
isolating distance, which shall be in accordance with item b) of 6 1 4 



It shall not be possible for the disconnector or earthing switch to open or to close inadver- 
tently due to forces which may occur in service, including those due to a short-circuit 



5 107 Interlocks 

Interlocks between different components of the equipment are provided for reasons ot sa- 
fety and for convenience of operation The following provisions are mandatory for mam cir- 
cuits 

- apparatus installed in mam circuits, which are used for ensuring isolating distances 
during maintenance work, shall be secured against reclosure, 

- earthing switches shall be secured against reopening 

It IS recommended that earthing switches having a short-circuit making capacity less than 
the rated peak withstand current of the circuit should be interlocked with the associated 
disconnectors 

It IS recommended that switches having a short-circuit making capacity less than the rated 
peak withstand current, or a breaking capacity less than the rated normal current, and 
disconnectors should be interlocked with the associated circuit-breaker to prevent opening 
or closing of the switch or disconnector unless the associated circuit-breaker is open. If 
the disconnectors are fitted with metallic screens, the interlock between contacts and 
metallic screens shall prevent 



- the metallic screen being interposed, if the contacts are not completely open, 

- the contacts from being closed, if the metallic screen is not completely retracted 

The provision of additional or alternative interlocks shall be subject to agreement between 
manufacturer and user. The manufacturer shall give all necessary information on the 
purpose and function of interlocks 

5. 1 08 Noise 

During an operation, the level of noise emitted by the switchgear should not exceed a spe- 
cified value. This value and the procedure of verification should be agreed between manu- 
facturer and user (see lEC 651). 



20 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 



5.109 Provisions for dielectric tests on cables 



Those parts of the gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear which remain connected 
to the cable shall be capable of withstanding the cable test voltages specified in the 
relevant cable standards for the same rated voltage (for oil-filled and gas-pressure cables 
seelEC 141) 

If It IS not acceptable to apply d c cable test voltages to the switchgear, special provisions 
for cable testing are to be made (e.g disconnecting facilities and/or increasing of the gas 
density for insulation) 



During dielectric tests on cables in general, the adjacent parts of the switchgear should be 
de-energized and earthed, unless special measures are taken to prevent disruptive 
discharges in the cable affecting the energized parts of the switchgear 



The location of suitable bushings for cable testing with d c and/or a c voltages should be 
provided at the cable connection enclosure or at the switchgear itself (see lEC 859) 

NOTE Attention is drawn to the fact that practically no safety margin is left in some cases between the 
rated power frequency test voltage for the isolating distance and the resulting voltage stress across the 
isolating distance due to the application of the d c cable test voltage while the other side of the isolating 
distance of the switchgear is still alive 



6 Type tests 

Refer to clause 6 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following 

Components contained in gas-insutated metal-enclosed switchgear which are subject to 
standards not covered by the scope of lEC 694 shall comply with and be tested in 
accordance with those standards, taking into account the conditions given in the following 
subclauses 

As a general rule, tests on switchgear components are carried out in accordance with the 
relevant standards of the apparatus 

In general type testing shall be carried out on a complete single-pole or three-pole 
functional unit of a typical switchgear bay Where this is impracticable, the type tests can 
be made on representative assemblies or sub-assemblioo 



Because of the variety of types, ratings and possible combinations of components, it 
isv impracticable to subject all arrangements of the switchgear to type tests The per 
formance of any particular arrangement may be substantiated by test data of comparable 
arrangements 



21 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

The type tests and verifications comprise. 

1 ) Normal type tests Subclause 

a) Tests to verify the insulation level of the equipment including partial 
discharge tests and dielectric tests on auxiliary circuits 6 1 

b) Tests to prove the temperature rise of any part of the equipment and 
measurement of the resistance of the mam circuit 6 3 and 6 4 

c) Tests to prove the ability of the mam and earthing circuits to carry 

the rated peal< and the rated short-time withstand current 6 5 

d) Tests to verify the making and breaking capacity of the included 
switching devices 6 101 

e) Tests to prove the satisfactory operation of the included switching 
devices 6 102 

f) Tests to verify the protection of persons against contact with live 

parts and moving parts 6 103 

g) Tests to prove the strength of enclosures 6 104 

2) Special type tests (subject to agreement between manufacturer and user) 

h) Tests to venfy the protection of the equipment against external 

effects due to weather and atmosphenc agents 6 105 

i) Tests to prove the radio interference voltage (RIV) level q 2 

l) Tests to assess the effects of aicing due to an internal fault g loe 

k) Tests to prove the thermal stability of solid insulation 6 107 

I) Tests to prove the satisfactory operation at limit temperatures q io8 

m) Gas tightness tests 6 109 



NOTE Some of the type tests may impair the suitability of the tested parts for subsequent use in service 

6 1 Dielectric tests 

6 1 1 Ambient air cor^ditions during tests 

Refer to 6 1 1 of lEC 694 

22 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

6. 1 .2 Wet test procedure 

Refer to 6.1.2 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following supplement: 

A wet test is only necessary for outdoor bushings which have not been tested previously 
under rain. 

For rated voltages of less than 300 kV, the test shall be a power frequency voltage test. 
For rated voltages of 300 kV and above, the test shall be a switching impulse voltage test. 

The test voltage and the test procedure shall be those specified in lEC 137. 

6.1.3 Conditions of switchgear and controlgear during dielectric tests 
Refer to 6.1 .3 of lEC 694 for those items which are applicable. 

6.1 .4 Application of test voltage and test conditions 

Subclause 6.1.4 of lEC 694 is not applicable. Because of the great variety of designs, it is 
not feasible to give specific indication of the tests to be performed on the main circuit, but. 
in principle, they shall cover the following: 

a) To earth and between phases: 

The test voltages specified in 6.1.5 shall be applied connecting each phase conductor 
of the main circuit in turn to the high-voltage terminal of the test supply. All other 
conductors of the main circuit and the auxiliary circuits are to be connected to the 
earthing conductor or the frame and to the earth terminal of the test supply. 

If an inspection window exists, a dielectric test is made with an earthed metal foil 
covering the accessible side of the inspection window. 

The dielectric tests shall be made with all switching devices (except earthing switches) 
closed. Attention shall be given to the possibility that switching devices in their open 
position may result in less favourable field conditions. Under such conditions, the test 
shall be repeated. 

When each phase is individually encased In a metallic enclosure, only tests to earth, 
and no test between phases, are carried out. unless bushings are used for external 
connections. 

b) Across the open position of switching devices: 

Each switching device in the main circuit shall be tested in the open position with the 
test voltages specified for circuit-breakers, switches or disconnectors in the respective 
standards related to the rated insulation levels (see 4.2). 



23 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

If, in the open position of a disconnector, an earthed metallic screen Is interposed 
between the open contacts, this contact gap is not an isolating distance 

When voltage or power transformers forming an integral part of the gas^insulated metal- 
enclosed switchgear have a reduced insulation level, they may be replaced during the 
dielectric tests by replicas reproducing the field configuration of the high voltage connec- 
tions Overvoltage protection devices shall be disconnected or removed during the tests 



When this procedure is adopted, the voltage or power transformers shall be separately 
tested m accordance with the relevant standard 



6 1 5 Test voltages 

The rated withstand voltages to earth and between phases (if any) shall be those specified 
m 4 2 of lEC 694. tables I III and IV 

~ 72,5 kV to 245 kV in columns (2) and (4). 
- 300 kV to 765 kV in columns (2) and (3) 

The rated withstand voltages across the isolating distance of disconnectors shall be those 
specified m lEC 694 for the pertinent rated insulation levels 



6 1 6 Lightning and switching impulse voltage tests 

Refer to 6 1 6 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following supplement 

Current transformer secondaries shall be short-circuited and earthed 



During the tests, the earthed terminal of the impulse generator shall be connected to the 
enclosure of the switchgear except that during some of the tests in accordance with 
Item b) of 6 1 4 the enclosure shall, if necessary, be insulated from earth in order that the 
voltage appearing between any of the live parts and the enclosure will not exceed the test 
voltage specified in item a) of 6 1 4 



6 1 7 Power-frequency voltage tests on the mam circuit 

Refer to 6 1 7 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following supplement 

The mam circuits of the switchgear shall be subjected to power-frequency voltage tests in 
dry conditions only 

During the tests, one terminal of the test transformer shall be connected to earth and to the 
enclosure of the switchgear, except that during the tests in accordance with item b) of 6 1 4 
the mid-point or another intermediate point of the voltage source should be connected to 
earth and to the enclosure in order that the voltage appeanng between any of the live parts 
and the enclosure will not exceed the test voltage specified in item a) of 6 1 4 

24 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

6. 1 .8 Artificial pollution tests 

Refer to 6.1.8 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following supplement 

These tests apply only to outdoor bushings of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear 
not previously tested and shall be performed only by special agreement between manu 
facturer and user 

6 1 .9 Partial discharge tests 

The measurement of partial discharges is a suitable means of detecting certain defects m 
the equipment under test and is a useful complement to the dielectric tests Experience 
shows that partial discharges may lead in particular arrangements to a degradation m the 
dielectnc strength of the equipment, especially of solid insulation On the other hand it is 
not yet possible to establish a reliable relationship between the results of partial discharge 
measurements and the life expectancy of the equipment owing to the complexity of the 
insulation systems used in gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear 



The measurement of partial discharges should be made as a type test to show, m correla 
tion with the other dielectric tests, if and where there are weak points with respect to thp 
dielectnc stresses resulting from the design of the equipment 



The test may be carried out on assemblies or sub-assemblies of the equipment used for 
all other dielectric tests, and should follow them 

The dielectric stresses during the measurement shall, as far as possible, be repre 
sentative of those which would occur in the complete installation of gas-insulated metal 
enclosed switchgear. 

6. 1 .9. 1 01 Test circuits and measuring instruments 

The test circuits and measuring instruments recommended and methods of calibration are 
given in lEC 270. 

A measuring instrument which permits an evaluation of the individual discharges is pre 
ferred. Additional information can be gained by measuring the quadratic rate expressed in 
coulombs squared per second 

The elements of the test circuit and the measuring instrument should be chosen so that 
the minimum measurable discharge intensity is not more than 50 % of the permissible 
partial discharge intensity 

6. 1 .9. 1 02 Test procedure 

The applied power-frequency voltage is raised to a pre-stress value U and maintained at 
that value for at least 10 s. Then, the voltage is decreased to the value U^ for measunng 
the partial discharge intensity. 

a) Equipment with single phase enclosures to be used on systems with solidly earthed 
neutral. 

p ^ 

25 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

b) Equipment with three-phase enclosures to oe used on systems with solidly earthed 
neutral. 

The test may be made with a three-phase or with a single-phase test circuit. 

Three-phase test circuit 

The enclosure is connected to the neutral of the voltage supply. 

The test voltage is measured between phases. 

L/p« 1.3 U L/^« 1.1 U 

Single-phase test circuit 

For the single-phase test the following two methods apply: 

1) With the manufacturer's agreement, each phase conductor of the main circuit shall 
be connected in turn to the voltage supply, the conductors of the other phases being 
earthed together with the enclosure: 

L/p« 1.3 U (7^= 1.1 U 

2) The test is made with two voltage supplies having one terminal earthed (see figure 1). 



T 




Figure 1 

The main supply is connected to one phase conductor; the auxiliary supply is 
connected to another phase conductor and Its voltage shall be chosen so that the 

voltage between these two phases is equal to V3 times the voltage of the main supply. 
The third phase conductor is connected to the earthed enclosure. The main supply shall 
be connected to each phase in turn. 

The test voltage is measured between the two live phases. 

(Vp- 1.3 U t/^» 1.1 U 

c) Equipment with single-phase enclosures to be used on systems without solidly 
earthed neutral. 

Up* 1.3 U L/d"^'"* ^ ^"^ ^d"^''' '^'^ 

d) Equipment with three-phase enclosures to be used on systems without solidly 
earthed neutral. 

The test may be made with a three-phase or with a single-phase test circuit. 

26 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

Three-phase test circuit 

The test voltage is measured between phases 

First, the enclosure and the neutral of the voltage supply are earthed, then the 
enclosure and each phase conductor in turn are earthed 

For each case L/ « 1 .3 L/ U^ « 1 .1 U 

Single-phase test circuit 

Each phase conductor is connected in turn to the voltage supply, the conductors of the 
other phases being earthed together with the enclosure 

U^ « 1.3 U L/^ « 1.1 U then U^ « 1.1 (7/V3 

NOTE if possible taking into account the actual background noise level the partial discharge inception 
and the partial discharge extinction voltages should be recorded as additional information 



6 1 9 103 Maximum permissible partial discharge intensity 

The maximum permissible partial discharge intensity at 1,1 L//V3 and at 1 1 L/ corres 
ponding to the applied test circuit should not exceed the following values 

~ cast resin insulated bushings and other insulators within 

the equipment 10 x 10"^^ C 

- line terminal and transformer bushings see lEC 137 

- voltage transformers having the following types of insulation 

liquid immersed or solid see lEC 44-4 

gas-impregnated paper or synthetic film 10 x 10""^^ C 

NOTE No separate values are given for current transformers since the designs commonly utilized in gas 
insulated switchgear do not contain solid primary insulation other than the cast resin insulated bushings 



The above values apply to individual components as well as to the sub-assemblies in 
which they are contained Any sub-assembly containing components with a permitted 

partial discharge intensity greater than 10 x 10"^^ C shall be considered acceptable if the 
discharge level does not exceed that of the component having the highest permitted 
discharge intensity 

6 110 Dielectric tests on auxiliary circuits 

Refer to 6 1 10 of lEC 694 which is applicable to all low voltage auxiliary circuits 



Current transformer secondaries shall be short circuited and disconnected from earth 
Voltage transformer secondaries shall be disconnected 



27 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

6.2 Radio interference voitage (RIV) tests 

Refer to 6.2 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following supplement: 

This test is made only if an external bushing exists, and shall be performed by special 
agreement between manufacturer and user. 

6.3 Temperature-hse tests 

Refer to 6.3 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following supplement: 

Where the design provides alternative components or arrangements, the test shall be 
performed with those components or arrangements for which the most severe conditions 
are obtained. 

The assembly or sub-assembly shall be mounted approximately as in normal service, 
including all normal enclosures and shall be protected against undue external heating or 
cooling. 

Except in the case when each phase is incased individually in a metallic enclosure, the 
tests shall be made with the rated number of phases and the rated normal current flowing 
from one end of the busbars to the terminals provided for the connection of cables. 



When a single-phase test is permitted and carried out, the current in the enclosure shall 
represent the most severe condition. 

When testing individual sub-assemblies, the neighbouring sub-assemblies should carry the 
currents which produce the power loss corresponding to the rated conditions. It is admis- 
sible to simulate equivalent conditions by means of heaters or heat insulation, if the test 
cannot be made under actual conditions. 

The temperature rises of the different components shall be referred to the ambient air 
temperature. They shall not exceed the values specified for them in the relevant 
standards. 



6.4 Measurement of ttie resistance of the main circuit 

Refer to 6.4 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following supplement: 

The requirements of lEC 694 apply only to the switching devices of gas-insulated metal- 
enclosed switchgear before and after the temperature-rise test. 

In addition, overall measurements are made on transport units in the factory as type test. 



28 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

6 5 Short-time and peak withstand current tests 
Refer to 6 5 of lEC 694 

6 5 1 Arrangement of the switchgear and of the test Circuit 
Subclause 6 5 1 of lEC 694 is not applicable 

Gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear with three-phase enclosures shall be tested 
three-phase Switchgear with single-phase enclosures shall be tested single-phase with 
the full return current in the enclosure 

NOTE Careful attention should be given to the design of enclosures as the arrangement selected vneLy 
lead to more severe conditions if the enclosure section is not electrically connected to the rest of the 
switchgear a three phase test should be carried out 

6 5 2 Test current and duration 
Refer to 6 5 2 of lEC 694 

6 5 3 Behaviour of the switchgear during test 
Subclause 6 5 3 of lEC 694 is not applicable 

6 5 4 Conditions of the switchgear after test 
Subclause 6 5 4 of lEC 694 is not applicable 

6 5 101 Tests on the mam circuits 

Mam circuits of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear shall be tested to verify their 
capability to withstand the rated short-time and peak withstand current under the intended 
conditions of installation and use. i e they shall be tested as installed in the switchgear 
with all associated components influencing the performance or modifying the short-circuit 
current and according to the standards for the principal switching devices included in the 
circuits 



During these tests, it is necessary to ensure that no overcurrent protection device 
operates 

After the tests, no deformation or damage to components or conductors within the 
enclosure which may impair good operation shall have been sustained 

Short connections to voltage transformers are not considered as parts of the mam circuit 
in this respect 

6 5 1 02 Tests on earthing circuits 

Earthing circuits of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear which are factory assembled 
and comprise earthing conductors, earthing connections and earthing devices shall be 
tested to venfy their capability to withstand the rated short-time and peak withstand 
current under the neutral earthing condition of the system, i e they shall be tested as 
installed in the switchgear with all associated components which may influence the per 
iormance or modify the short-circuit current 

29 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 



After the test, no deformation or damage to the components or conductors within the 
enclosure which may impair good operation of the main circuit shall have been sustained. 
Some deformation and degradation of the earthing conductor, earthing connections 
or earthing devices is permissible, but the continuity of the earthing circuit shall be 
preserved. 



6. 1 01 Verification of making and breaking capacities 

Switching devices forming part of the main circuit of gas-msulated metal-enclosed switch- 
gear shall be tested to verify their rated making and breaking capacities according to the 
relevant standards and under the proper conditions of installation and use, i.e. they shall 
be tested as normally installed in the switchgear with all associated components the 
arrangement of which may influence the performance, such as connections, supports, etc. 

NOTE - In determining which associated components are likely to influence the performance, special 
attention should t>e given to mechanical forces due to the short-circuit, to the possibility of disruptive 
discharges, etc It is recognized that, in some cases, such influences may be quite negligible 



For unit tests, see clauses 6 and 7 of lEC 56. 

NOTE - Capacitance of the components existing between the terminals of the parts tested and the 
external connections should be taken into account only for breaking tests 

For circuit-breakers using compressed gas, the pressures to be adopted for tests shall be 
those specified by lEC 56. 



6. 1 02 Mectianical operation tests 

Switching devices of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear shall be submitted to 
mechanical endurance tests in accordance with their relevant standards, unless previously 
tested separately. 

In addition, all switching devices fitted with interlocks shall be submitted to 50 operating 
cycles in order to check the operation of the associated interlocks. Before each operation 
the interlocks shall be set in the position intended to prevent the operation of the switching 
devices and one attempt shall then be made to operate each switching device. During 
these tests only normal operating forces shall be employed and no adjustment shall be 
made to the switching devices or interlocks. 



The tests are considered satisfactory if the switching devices and the interlocks are in 
proper working order and if the forces required to operate the switching devices are practi- 
cally the same before and after the tests. 



The interlocks are considered satisfactory if the switching devices cannot be operated. 



30 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

6. 1 03 Verification of ttie degree of protection for auxiiiary circuits and moving parts 

The tests shall be performed in accordance with the requirements specified in clause 7 of 
lEC 529 for the appropriate first characteristic numeral. 

In the case of IP5X no dust shall accumulate in a quantity or in a location such as to 
interfere with the correct operation of the equipment and no dust shall deposit on the 
insulations affecting its safe operation. 

The tests shall, however, be made only if there are doubts on the compliance with these 
requirements. 

6. 1 04 Proof tests for enciosures 

Proof tests are made when the strength of the enclosure or parts thereof is not calculated 
They are performed on individual enclosures before the internal parts are added witn 
testing conditions based on the design pressure stresses. 

Proof tests may be either a bursting pressure test or a non-destructive pressure test, as 
appropriate to the material employed. 

6. 1 04. 1 Bursting pressure test 

In the case of a bursting pressure test, the pressure rise should not be faster than 
400 kPa/min. The bursting pressure test requirements should be based on 3,5 times 
the design pre$sure for cast enclosures and 2,3 times the design pressure for welded 
enclosures. These factors are based on the minimum certified properties of the material 
used. 

Additional factors may be required taking into account the methods of construction 

Any enclosure remaining intact after these pressures have been reached shall be discarded 

6. 1 04.2 Non-destructive pressure test 

In the case of a non-destructive pressure test using a strain indication technique, the 
following procedure should be applied: 

Before the test, strain gauges capable of indicating strains to 0,00005 mm per millimetre 
shall be affixed to the surface of the enclosure. The number of gauges, their position and 
their direction shall be chosen so that principal strains and stresses can be determined at 
all points of importance to the integrity of the enclosure. 



Hydrostatic pressure shall be applied gradually in steps of approximately 10 % until the 
standard test pressure for the expected design pressure (see 7.102) is reached or signi 
ficant yielding of any part of the enclosure occurs. 



When either of these points is reached, the pressure shall not be increased further. 

31 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

Strain readings shall be taken during the increase of pressure and repeated during 

unloading 

Indication of localized permanent set may be disregarded provided there is no evidence of 
general distortion of the enclosure. 

Should the curve of the strain/pressure relationship show a non-linearity, the pressure 
may be re-applied not more than five times until the loading and unloading curves corre- 
sponding to two successive cycles substantially coincide. Should coincidence not be 
attained, the design pressure and the test pressure shall be taken from the pressure range 
corresponding to the linear portion of the curve obtained during the final unloading. 



It the standard test pressure is reached within the linear portion of the strain/pressure 
relationship, the expected design pressure shall be considered to be confirmed. 



If the final test pressure or the pressure range corresponding to the linear portion of the 
btram/pressure relationship (see above) is less than the standard test pressure, the design 
pressure shall be calculated from the following equation 

^ 1.1 /c ^^y f ^ 

wh«rfl 

p IS the design pressure 

p IS the pressure at which significant yielding occurs or the pressure range corresponding to the linear 
portion of the strairVpressure relationship of the most highly strained part of the enclosure during final un 
loading {see above) 

k IS the standard test pressure factor (see 7 102) 

f. 1^ the permissible design stress at test temperature 

f IS the permissible design stress at design temperature 

Alternative procedures for non-destructive pressure tests may be agreed 

6 1 05 Weatherproofing test 

When agreed between manufacturer and user a weatherproofing test shall be made on 
gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear for outdoor use. A recommended method is 
given in annex AA. This test also takes into account the effects of wind-driven snow. 



If an examination of the design shows the test to be unnecessary, it may be omitted. 



6 1 06 Test under conditions of arcing due to an internal fault 

if such a test is agreed, the procedure shall be in accordance with the methods described 
in annex BB 

The short-circuit current applied during the arcing test is to be stated by the manufacturer. 

32 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

Its values should correspond to the rated short-time withstand current or, in some appli- 
cations of the switchgear in isolated neutral systems. It may be the earth fault current oc- 
curring in such a system. 



Two assessments are made: the first concerns the performance of the equipment during 
the operation of the first stage (main) protection and the second concerns the case when 
the fault is cleared by the operation of the second stage (back-up) protection. 



The switchgear should be considered adequate if. during the test, no external effect other 
than the operation of suitable pressure relief devices occurs within the times specified in 
5.103.2 and no fragmentation of the enclosure results from a fault cleared in 0,3 s for 
currents of 40 kA and above and in 0,5 s for lower currents unless otherwise agreed upon 
between manufacturer and user. 



NOTE - Por information, the fault clearing time for the first stage protection is about 0.1 s for currents ot 
40 kA and above and 0,2 s for lower currents The time for the second stage protection normally does not 
exc^v^d 0,3 s tor currents ot 40 kA and above and 0.5 s for lower currents. 

By agreement, tests on a particular arrangement may be used to predict the performance 
of other arrangements either by calculation or inference or a combination of both. 



6. 1 07 Thermal stability test 

This test is only applicable to parts (such as bushings) of gas-insulated metal-enclosed 
switchgear. the major insulation of which consists of organic material, having a rated 
voltage of 145 kV and above and is intended for components filled with a liquid cooling 
medium the operating temperature of which is between 60 "^C and 100 ''C. 



This test need not be carried out where the electric field in gas or liquid accounts for the 
major part of the difference in potential between conducting parts. 



The test procedure shall be that specified for bushings In lEC 137. 

6.108 Operation tests at limit temperatures 

6. 1 08. 1 Operation test at tiigh temperature 

The switchgear or component tested shall be in the open or in the closed position (this 
position being stated by agreement between manufacturer and user) in a climatic housing, 
the temperature of which shall be +40 ^'C for a duration of five days (120 h). 



For two full days, the switching devices shall not be operated. 



33 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

During one of the last three days, 10 operating cycles are carried out with a frequency of 
one operating cycle every 4 min. 

Towards the end of the test, the following shall be noted: 

- the operating times; 

- the pressure of the gases contained in the enclosure; 

- the gas leakage over a period of 24 h. 

It shall be verified that these values remain within the ranges for which the manufacturer 
guarantees the performance of the switchgear. 

During the test, the operation of thermostats, if any, shall also be verified. 

6. 1 08.2 Operation test at low temperature 

This test is identical with the operation test at high temperature, the temperature of the 
climatic housing being the minimum ambient air temperature specified for normal indoor or 
outdoor service conditions respectively (see clause 2). 

6. 1 09 Gas tightness tests 
Refer to annex DD. 

The measurement of gas tightness shall be performed together with the tests of 6.102 and 
6.108 with each type of compartment comprising characteristic sealings of gas-insulated 
metal-enclosed switchgear as a type test to show that the leakage rate will not be changed 
by influences caused by the mechanical and limit temperature type tests. 



7 Routine tests 

The routine tests shall be made with each transport unit and, whenever practicable, at the 
manufacturer's works to ensure that the product is In accordance with the equipment on 
which the type test has been carried out. 

Refer to clause 7 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following routine tests: 

Subclause 

d) Partial discharge measurement: 7.101 

e) Pressure tests of enclosures: 7.102 

f) Gas tightness tests: 7.1 03 

g) Mechanical operation tests: 7.104 
h) Tests of auxiliary electrical, pneumatic and hydraulic devices: 7.105 
I) Verification of correct wiring: 7.106 

NOTE - It may be necessary to verify the interchangeabillty of components of the same rating and 
construction (see clause 5). 



34 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

7. 1 PoweMrequency voltage tests on the mam circuit 

Refer to 7.1 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following supplement: 

The power-frequency voltage test on the main circuit of gas-insulated metal-enclosed 
switchgear shall be performed according to the requirements in 6.1.7 to earth, between 
phases (if applicable) and across the open switching devices. The withstand voltages for 
routine tests shall be those specified in lEC 694, table I, column 6, table III, column 4. and 
table IV, column 7, for the respective rated voltages 

The tests shall be performed at minimum gas density of the insulating gas 

7.2 Dielectric tests on auxiliary and control circuits 
Refer to 7,2 of lEC 694. 

7 3 Measurement of ttie resistance of ttie mam circuit 
Refer to 7.3 of lEC 694 with the addition of the following supplement- 
Overall measurements are made on transport units in the factory 

The overall resistance measured with the switching devices in the closed position shall not 
exceed 1,2 f?^, where f?^ is the sum of the corresponding resistances measured during the 
type tests. 

7.101 Partial disctiarge measurement 

The measurement of partial discharges is recommended as a routine test to detect pos- 
sible material and manufacturing deiects. It may also be used as an acceptance test but 
only if agreed between manufacturer and user 

The test may be carried out in accordance with 6.1.9 but only on transport units or 
components 

7. 1 02 Pressure tests of enclosures 

Pressure tests shall be made on all enclosures after manufacture 

The standard test pressure shall be k times the design pressure, where the factor k is. 

1 ,3 for welded enclosures, 
1,5 for cast enclosures. 

No pressure tests are prescribed after erection on site 

7 1 03 Gas tightness tests 
Refer to annex DD. 



35 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

A gas tightness test as agreed between manufacturer and user shall be made to prove 
compliance of the switchgear with the value of the permissible gas leakage rate prescribed 
by the manufacturer. If requested, gas tightness tests may be made also across the parti- 
tions (see 5.103.3). 

NOTE For testing the tightness of a partition, one compartment may be evacuated while the adjacent 
compartment is filled with gas at the rated density (see 4 101). measuring the pressure rise in the 
evacuated compartment over a period of 24 h 

7. 1 04 Mechanical operation tests 

Operation tests are made to ensure that the switching devices comply with the prescribed 
operating conditions and that the mechanical interlocks work properly. 



Switching devices of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear shall be submitted to a 
mechanical routine test in accordance with their relevant standards, unless previously 
tested separately 

In addition, all switching devices fitted with interlocks shall be submitted to five operating 
cycles in order to check the operation of the associated interlocks Before each operation 
one attempt shall be made to operate each switching device as specified in 6.102 



During these tests, which are performed without voltage on or current in the main circuits, 
it shall be venfied in particular that the switching devices open and close correctly within 
the specified limits of the supply voltage and pressure of their operating devices. 



7 1 05 Tests of auxiliary electrical, pneumatic and hydraulic devices 

The electrical, pneumatic and other interlocks together with control devices having a 
predetermined sequence of operations shall be tested five times in succession in the 
intended conditions of use and operation and with the most unfavourable limit values of 
auxiliary supply During the test no adjustment shall be made. 

The tests are considered to be satisfactory, if the auxiliary devices have operated 
properly, if they are in good operating condition after the tests and if the force to operate 
the switching device is practically the same before and after the tests. 



7. 1 06 Verification of the correct wiring 

It shall be verified that the wiring conforms with the diagram and the prescribed requirements. 

7 1 07 Tests after erection on site 

After erection, before putting into service, the gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear 
shall be tested to check the correct operation and the dielectric strength of the equipment. 



36 



IS1EC 517(1990) 
These tests and verifications comprise 

Subclause 

a) Voltage tests on the mam circuits 7 1 07 1 

b) Dielectnc tests on auxiliary circuits 7 2 

c) Measurement of the resistance of the mam circuit 7 1 07 4 

d) Gas tightness tests 7 1 03 

e) Checks and verifications 7 1 07 2 

f) Measurement of gas condition 7 107 3 

For reasons given in 5 103 1 and to ensure minimum disturbance, and to reduce the risk 
of moisture and dust entenng enclosures so preventing correct operation of the switch 
gear, no obligatory periodic inspections or pressure tests are specified or recommended 
when the gas-insulated substation is in service 



A test should be made to prove the absence of dangerous circulating currents in the 
enclosure and other metallic parts, such as pipes and supporting structures, if these are 
not intended for such currents 

7 1 07 1 Voltage tests on the mam circuits 

7 107 1 1 General 

Since It IS exceptionally important for this kind of switchgear, the dielectric strength shall 
be checked in order to eliminate fortuitous causes (wrong fastening, damage during 
handling, transportation, storage and erection, presence of foreign bodies etc ) which 
might in the future give rise to an internal fault 

Because of their different purpose, these tests shall not replace the type tests or the 
routine tests earned out on the transport units and, as far as possible, in the factory They 
are supplementary to the dielectnc routine tests with the aim of checking the dielectnc 
integrity of the completed installation and of detecting irregularities as mentioned above 
Normally the dielectnc test shall be made after the switchgear has been fully erected and 
gas-filted at the rated density preferably at the end of all site tests, when newly installed 
Such a dielectric test is recommended to be performed also after major dismantling for 
maintenance or reconditioning of compartments These tests are to be distinguished from 
the progressive voltage increase performed in order to achieve a kind of electncal condi- 
tioning of the equipment before commissioning 



The execution of such site tests is not always practicable and deviations from the 
standards may be accepted The aim of these tests being a final check before energizing 
It IS very important that the chosen test procedure does not jeopardize sound parts of the 
switchgear 

In choosing an appropriate test method for each individual case a special agreement 
may be necessary in the interest of practicability and economy, e g the electrical power 
requirements, and the dimensions and weight of the test equipment may need to be 
considered 

37 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

A detailed test programme for the dielectric tests on site shall be agreed between menu* 
facturer and user. 

7.107.1.2 Test procedure 

The switchgear shall be erected completely and gas-filled at Its rated density. 

Some parts may be disconnected for the test, either because of their high charging current 
or because of their effect on voltage limitation, such as: 

- high voltage cables and overhead lines; 

- power transformers and most voltage transformers; 

- surge arresters and protective spark gaps. 

NOTES 

1 In determining the parts which could be disconnected attention is drawn to the fact that the reconnec- 
tion may introduce faults after the tests are finished 

2 In order to test as much as possible of the switchgear. a removable link may be included in the design 
in each of the above-mentioned cases Here a "link" is understood to be a part of the conductor which can 
easily be removed in order to Isolate two parts of the switchgear from each other This type of separation is 
preferable rather than dismantling 

Every newly erected part of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear shall be subjected to 
a dielectric test on site. 

In the case of extensions, in general, the adjacent existing part of the switchgear should 
be de-energized and earthed during the dielectric test, unless special measures are taken 
to prevent disruptive discharges in the extension affecting the energized part of the 
existing switchgear. 

Application of the test voltage may be necessary after repair or maintenance of major 
parts or after erection of extensions. The test voltage may then have to be applied to 
existing parts in order to test all sections involved. In those cases the same procedure 
should be followed as for newly erected switchgear. 



7. 1 07. 1 .3 Voltage waveforms 

For the choice of an appropriate voltage waveform. ICC 60-2 should be taken into 
consideration, however, similar waveforms are also permissible. An ideal voltage 
waveform covering all requirements does not exist. Permissible deviations are indicated 
below. Information concerning the generation of test voltages is given in clause CC1 
of annex CC. 

1) A.C. voltage tests 

A.C. voltage tests are especially sensitive in detecting contaminations (e.g. conducting 
particles), and are in most cases also sufficient in detecting abnormal field configurations. 



The existing experience refers to test frequencies of 50 Hz and 60 Hz. The test frequency 
should be limited to the range of 10 Hz to 300 Hz. 

NOTE - Attention should be given to the fact that for voltage tests with frequencies other than the rated 
frequencies of 50 Hz and 60 Hz further experience with such tests has to be taken into account 

38 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

2) Impulse voltage tests 

a) Tests with lightning impulse voltages are especially sensitive in detecting abnormal 
field configurations (e.g. damaged electrodes). 

Based on the existing experience, lightning impulse voltages with a front time extended 
up to 8 ^s are acceptable. When using oscillating lightning impulse voltages the front 
time may be extended to approximately 15 jis. 

NOTE - Reflections due to steep front waves in large installations should be taken into account 

b) Tests with switching impulse voltages are useful especially for higher rated voltages 
to detect the presence of contaminations as welt as abnormal field configurations with 
relatively simple test equipment. 

Based on existing experience, switching impulses with either aperiodic or oscillating 
waveforms and with a time to crest in the range of 150 fis to 10 ms are suitable. 

3) D.C, voltage tests 

A d.c. voltage test cannot be recommended. The existing test specifications for cables are 
not applicable to gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear (refer to 5,109). 



7.107.1.4 Tesf voltages 
Considering that: 

- transport units have normally been subjected to routine tests; 

- the probability of disruptive discharges is higher for the complete Installation than 
for individual functional units; 

- disruptive discharges in correctly erected equipment shall be avoided; 

• the test voltage for dielectric tests on site shall be: 

- 80 % of the a.c. voltage applied for the routine test; 

- 80% of the voltage applied for lightning and switching impulse tests. 

Where no switching impulse voltage is specified, the value of the switching impulse 
voltage for dielectric tests on site shall be 80 % of the lightning impulse test voltage 
on site. 

NOTE - Special attention should be given to the relative severity of non-standardized waveforms the test 
voltage value of which should be adjusted accordingly. 

In certain circumstances, for technical or practical reasons, dielectric tests on site may be 
carried out with reduced voltage values. Details are given In clause CC3 of annex CC. 



39 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

7.107.1.5 Dielectric test procedures 

The test procedure should be agreed between manufacturer and user and be chosen from: 

Procedure A 

A.C. voltage test for a duration of 1 min at the specified value. 

In special cases this test may be complemented by an impulse voltage test consisting of 
three impulses of each polarity at the specified value. 

Procedure B 

A.C. voltage test for a minimum duration of 5 min at a value not lower than LZ/VsT for 
earthed neutral or U for isolated neutral or resonant earthed systems. This test is followed 
by an impulse voltage test consisting of three impulses of each polarity at the specified 
value. 

Other tests may be acceptable based on service experience and the results of further 
development (see clause CC3 of annex CC). 

7 . 1 07 . 1 . 6 Voltage application 

The specified test voltage shall be applied between each phase conductor, one at a time, 
and the enclosure, the other phase conductors being connected to the earthed enclosure. 
The insulation between phase conductors shall not be subjected to any other separate 
dielectric test on site. 

The test voltage source may be connected to any convenient point of the phase conductor 
under test. 

It is often convenient to divide the whole installation of gas-insulated metal-enclosed 
switchgear into sections by opening circuit-breakers and disconnectors for at least one of 
the following reasons: 

- to facilitate the location of disruptive discharges; 

- to limit the discharged energy if a disruptive discharge occurs; 

- to limit the capacitive load on the test voltage source. 

The sections which in such cases are not being tested and which are isolated by a circuit- 
breaker or a disconnector from the section under test shall be earthed. Unless dismantled 
after routine test, no dielectric test across the open switching devices need be carried out 
on site. 

7. 1 07.1 .7 Assessment of the test 

The switchgear shall be considered to have passed the test, if each section has withstood 
the specified test voltage without any disruptive discharge. 



40 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

In the event of a disruptive discharge occurring during dielectric tests on site, steps shall 
be taken to ensure the dielectric strength of the equipment. This may be achieved either 
by the inspection of the solid insulation, If practicable and if the location of the disruptive 
discharge is known (see clause CC2 of annex CC), or it may be done by performing 
additional dielectric tests according to an agreement between manufacturer and user 
established before the site tests have started. 

Guidelines on repetition tests are given in clause CC6 of annex CC. 

7. 1 07.2 Checks and verifications 
The following shall be verified: 

a) conformity of the assembly with the manufacturer's drawings and instructions; 

b) sealing of all pipe junctions, and the tightness of bolts and connections; 

c) conformity of the wiring with the diagrams; 

d) proper function of the electrical, pneumatic and other interlocks; 

e) proper function of the control, measuring, protective and regulating equipment 
including heating and lighting. 

NOTE - If for whatever reasons one or more routine tests are not performed at the manufacturer's works, 
they should be carried out on site combined with the tests after erection. 

7. 1 07.3 Measurement of gas condition 

The moisture content of the insulating gas shall be determined. The content shall not 
exceed the maximum limit permitted by the manufacturer. 

If the switchgear is filled with sulphur hexafluoride, for checking the condition of the gas 
during service, reference is made to lEC 480. 

7. 1 07.4 Measurement of ttie resistance of the main circuit 

Overall measurements shall be made on the complete installation, under conditions as si- 
milar as possible to those of the routine test on transport units. 



The resistances measured shall not exceed the maximum values permitted for the routine 
tests on transport units (see 7.3), taking into account the differences of the two test 
arrangements (number of devices, contacts and connections, length of conductors, etc.). 



8 Guide to the selection of the switchgear for service 

For a given duty in service, gas*insulated metal-enclosed switchgear is selected by 
considering the individual rated values of Its components required under normal load 
conditions and in case of fault conditions. 



41 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

The rated values should be chosen as suggested in this standard regarding the charac- 
teristics of the system as well as its expected future development. The complete list of 
rating is given in clause 4. 

For external insulation only, other parameters such as local atmospheric and climatic 
conditions and the use at altitudes exceeding 1 000 m are to be considered (see clause 2). 



The duty imposed by fault conditions should be determined by calculating the fault 
currents at the place where the switchgear is to be located in the system. 



9 Information to be given with enquiries, tenders and orders 



9. 1 01 Information with enquiries and orders 

When enquiring for or ordering an installation of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear 
the following information should be supplied by the enquirer: 



1 ) Particulars of the system 

Nominal and highest voltage, frequency, type of system neutral earthing. 

2) Service conditions 

Minimum and maximum ambient air temperature; any condition deviating from the normal 
service conditions or affecting the satisfactory operation of the equipment, for example, 
unusual exposure to vapour, moisture, fumes, explosive gases, excessive dust or salt, the 
risic of earth tremors or other vibrations due to causes external to the equipment to be 
delivered, as well as possible movements of foundations. 

3) Particulars of the Installation and Its components 

a) indoor or outdoor installation; 

b) number of phases (individually encased or in a common enclosure); 

c) number of busbars; 

d) rated voltage; 

e) rated insulation level; 

f) rated normal currents of busbars and feeder circuits; 

g) rated short- time withstand current (/^^); 

h) rated duration of short-circuit (if different from 1 s); 

i) rated peak withstand current (if different from 2,5 /^^); 

j) rated values of components; 

k) degree of protection for auxiliary circuits and moving parts; 

I) circuit diagrams; 

m) details of high-voltage cable connections. 

42 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

4) Particulars of the operating devices 

a) type of operating devices; 

b) rated supply voltage (if any); 

c) rated supply frequency (if any); 

d) rated supply pressure (if any); 

e) special interlocking requirements. 

In addition to these items, the enquirer should indicate every condition which might 
influence the tender or the order, as. for example, special mounting or erection conditions, 
the locating of the external high-voltage connections or the rules for pressure vessels. 

Information should be supplied if special type tests are required. 

9. 1 02 Information with tenders 

The following information, if applicable, should be given by the manufacturer with 
descriptive matters and drawings: 

1 ) Rated values and characteristics 

Particulars of the installation are enumerated in section 3) of 9.101 . 

2) Further particulars of the switchgear and its components 

a) design pressure of enclosures; 

b) design temperature of enclosures; 

c) type and rated density of gas for insulation; 

d) minimum gas density; 

e) volume of gas for the different compartments; 

f) limit values of moisture content and gas leakage; 

g) details of appropriate measures for fault location. 

3) Type test certificates or reports 

When certificates are requested, in general the first pages containing the results may be 
sufficient. 

4) Constructional features 

a) mass of the heaviest transport unit; 

b) overall dimensions of the switchgear; 

c) arrangement of the external connections; 

d) provisions for transport to be taken by the user; 

e) provisions for mounting to be taken by the user. 



43 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

5) Particulars of the operating devices 

a) types and rated values as enumerated in section 4) of 9.101 ; 

b) current or power for operation; 

c) operating times; 

d) quantity of free gas for operation. 



6) Information about all matters to be subject to prior agreement between manufacturer 
and user 



7) List of recommended spare parts 
Spare parts should be procured by the user. 

8) Instructions for operation and maintenance. 

10 Rules for transport, storage, erection and maintenance 
Refer to clause 10 of lEC 694. 

10.1 Conditions during transport, storage and erection 
Refer to 10.1 of lEC 694. 

10.2 Erection 

Refer to 10.2 of lEC 694. 

10.3 Maintenance 
Refer to 10.3 of lEC 694. 



44 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 



Annex AA 

(normative) 

Recommended method for the weatherproofing test for 
outdoor gas-insulated metaUenclosed switchgear 



The gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear to be tested shall be fully equipped and 
complete with all top covers, screens, bushings, etc . and placed in the area to be 
supplied with artificial precipitation 

The artificial precipitation shall be supplied by a sufficient number of nozzles to produce a 
uniform spray over the surfaces under test The various parts of the equipment may be 
tested separately, provided that a uniform spray is simultaneously applied also to both of 
the following 

a) the top surfaces from nozzles located at a suitable height, 

b) the floor for a distance of 1 m m front of the parts under test with the equipment 
located at the minimum height above the floor level specified by the manufacturer 

Where the width of the equipment exceeds 3 m, the spray may be applied to 3 m wide 
sections in turn Pressunzed enclosures need not be submitted to artificial precipitation 



Each nozzle used for this test shall deliver a square-shaped spray pattern with uniform 
spray distnbution and shall have a capacity of 30 l/min ± 10 % at a pressure of 4,6 bar 
± 10 % and a spray angle of 60"" to 80'' The centre lines of the nozzles shall be inclined 
downwards so that the top of the spray is honzontal if It is directed towards the surfaces 
being tested It is convenient to arrange the nozzles on a vertical stand-pipe and space 
them about 2 m apart (see test arrangement in figure AA1 ) 

The pressure in the feedpipe of the nozzles shall be 4,6 bar ± 10 % under flow conditions 
The rate at which water is applied to each surface under test shall be about 5 mm/min, 
and each surface so tested shall receive this rate of artificial precipitation for a duration of 
5 mm The spray nozzles shall be at a distance between 2,5 m and 3 m from the nearest 
vertical surface under test 

NOTE - When a nozzle in accordance with figure AA2 is used the quantity off water is considered to be in 
accordance with this standard when the pressure is 4 6 bar ± 10 % 

After the test is completed, the equipment shall be inspected promptly to determine 
whether the following requirements have been met 

a) no water shall be visible on the insulation of the auxihary circuits, 

b) no water shall be visible on electrical components or mechanisms of the equipment 
except for bushings, 

c) no significant accumulation of water shall be retained by the structure or other non 
insulating part (to minimize corrosion) 



45 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 



r 

D 

4 




-yy-'-y/'/Ld 






/ 



Enclosure 



nTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT 






''<'''>;^/ 



yv//// 

' / f I I I 
/ / I .' I 

/ / / 1 1 
/ / / / 

/ / / 



/ / 



777: 



y Nozzles 



TTTj-nTrrJTi 



A 


About 2 m 


B 


About 1 m 


C 


2,5 m to 3 m 



Figure AA1 - Arrangement for the weatherproofing test 



46 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 



Body 



27.8 




Matenal brass 




^ 19 k7 




\1arenuf brass 







Scale 1 1 



G3 



OinHnuons in null mid re \ 



Figure AA 2 ~ Example of a nozzle meeting the requirements of the weatherproofing test 

47 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 



Annex BB 

(normative) 

Methods for testing gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear 
under conditions of arcing due to an internal fault 



BB1 Introduction 

The occurrence of an arc inside gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear due to an inter- 
nal fault Is accompanied by various physical phenomena. 

For example, the energy resulting from an arc developing in the enclosure will cause inter- 
nal overpressure and local overheating, which will result in mechanical and thermal 
stressing of the switchgear. Moreover, the materials involved may produce hot decompo- 
sition products which may be discharged into the atmosphere. 

This annex takes into account the internal overpressure acting on the enclosure and the 
thermal effects of the arc or its root on the enclosure. It does not cover all the effects 
which may constitute a risk, such as toxic gases. 

BB2 Short-circuit current arcing test 

BB2. 1 Test arrangements 

When choosing the object to be tested, reference should be made to the design 
documents for the switchgear. The compartments which appear to have the least 
likelihood of withstanding the pressure and temperature rise in the event of arcing should 
be selected. 

In any case, the following points should be observed: 

a) Each test may be carried out on a test object not previously subjected to arcing 
tests. Test objects that have already undergone arcing tests should be restored so that 
the conditions for further arcing tests are neither aggravated nor eased. 

b) The test object shall be fully equipped and arranged to include any protection 
device, such as pressure reliefs, short-circuiting devices, etc., provided by the 
manufacturer for the limitation of the effects of the arc. 

"Mock-ups" are permitted provided they have the same volume and external material 
and would react in the same way as the original parts with respect to withstanding 
arcing. 

c) The test object should be filled with normal insulating gas at rated density. 



BB2.2 Current and voltage applied 

Single-pole enclosures should be tested single-phase, and three-pole enclosures should 
be tested three-phase. 



48 



BB2.2 1 Voltage 

The test can be made with an applied voltage lower than the rated voltage of the test ob- 
ject if the following conditions are met 

a) the arc current shall be practically sinusoidal. 

b) the arc shall not extinguish prematurely 

BB2 2 2 Current 

1) AC component 

The a c component at the beginning of the test should lie within a -flO % and % tolerance 
Within the duration of the first stage protection, the tolerance should be ±10 % and within 
the duration of the second stage protection the current should not fall below 80 % of the 
specified value provided that the average a c component is not less than the stated short- 
circuit current 

NOTE If the test plant does not permit this the test duration may be extended by not more than 20% 
with an appropriate adjustment to the times at which assessments are made 

2) D C component 

The instant of short-circuit making should be chosen to ensure that the first loop of the 
arc-current has a peak value of at least 1 .7 times the r m s value of the stated short- 
circuit current a c component For three-phase tests, this applies to the current in at least 
one phase 

BB2 2 3 Frequency 

For 50 Hz or 60 Hz rated frequency, the frequency at the beginning of the test should he 
within the limits of 48 Hz and 62 Hz 

For 16 2/3 Hz or 25 Hz rated frequency, it is permissible to make tests with 25 Hz with a 
tolerance of ±10 % The frequency at the beginning of the test may also he within the 
limits of 48 Hz and 62 Hz. if the test duration is at least 0.1 s 

BB 2 2 4 Duration of the test 

The current duration shall be such as to cover the second stage protection chosen on the 
basis of the expected duration as determined by the protection devices 

BB2 3 Test procedure 

BB2 3 1 Test connections 

The point of current infeed to be chosen is the one likely to result in the most onerous 
condition 

Care should be taken in order that the connections do not ease the test conditions 
Generally, the enclosure is earthed on the same side of the test object Into which the 
current is fed 

BB2. 3. 2 A re Initiation 

The arc should be initiated by means of a metal wire of suitable diameter 

The point of initiation to be chosen is where the arc is likely to set up the highest 
stresses m the test object Generally, this will be achieved when the arc is initiated in 

49 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

the vicinity of a barrier furthest from the point of infeed and the pressure relief device, 
if fitted. 

NOTE - The arc should not be initiated by perforating the solid Insulation 

BB2.3.3 Measurement and recording of the test performance 

The following parameters should be plotted and recorded: 

- the current and its duration; 

- the arc voltage; 

- the pressure on one or more points of the test object; in each compartment, if the 
test object comprises more than one, 

and. when applicable. 

- the instant of pressure relief (either by operation of the pressure relief device or 
perforation of the enclosure). 

Phenomena such as pressure relief, enclosure perforation and external effects should be 
observed and recorded by appropriate means, e.g. cameras, luminosity detectors. 

BB1^4 Assessment of the test 

The switchgear is considered adequate if, during the test, no external effect other than the 
operation of suitable pressure relief devices occurs within the times specified in 5.103.2 
and if gases or vapours escaping under pressure are directed so as to minimize the 
danger to an operator performing his normal operating duties. 

No fragmentation of the enclosure shall result from a fault cleared in 0.3 s for currents 
of 40 kA and above and in 0.5 s for lower currents. 

BB2.5 Test report 

The following information should be given in the test report: 

- rating and description of the test object, the materials of the enclosure and the 
conductors, together with a drawing showing the main dimensions and the arrangement 
of pressure relief devices; 

- arrangement of the test connections, the point of initiation of the arc and the 
position of the transducers for pressure measurements; 

- currents, voltages, energies, pressures and times derived from the oscillograms; 

- precise description of the test results and observations; 

- other relevant remarks; 

- photographs of the conditions before and after the test. 

BB2.6 Extension of the test results 

To extend the test results to other enclosures of similar design but of different size and 
shape and/or to other test parameters, calculation methods may be agreed between 
manufacturer and user. 

BBS Composite verification by calculation and separate tests 

Under consideration. 

50 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 



Annex CC 

(informative) 

Technical and practical considerations of site testing 



CC1 Test voltage generators 

Load capacitances of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear installations are relatively 
high, this means that: 

a.c. voltage tests especially at higher rated voltages require a high reactive power; 

" impulse testing with standardized double exponential waveforms may be inefficient 
due to the poor voltage utilization of the impulse generator. 

The following voltage generating equipment may be used: 

1) A.C. voltage sources 

The a.c, voltage may be produced by: 

- test sets with a test transformer; 

- test sets with a variable resonant reactor for constant frequency; 

- test sets with a constant resonant reactor for variable frequency; 

- energizing power or voltage transformers from the low-voltage side which entails no 
dismantling after testing. 

NOTE • The thermal stresses of the voltage source should be taken into account especially when using 
voltage transformers 

2) Impulse voltage sources 

For large installations and especially for high rated voltages, impulse generators for 
double exponential waves are unwieldy. Oscillating impulses may be produced with an 
impulse generator and a high-voltage coil connected to the switchgear to be tested to form 
a damped series resonant circuit. Oscillating switching impulses may be produced by 
discharging a capacitor into the low-voltage side of a power, voltage or test transformer 



GC2 Locating discharges 

There are different phenomena caused by discharges which may be helpful in locating 
them. Some of the possible means which may bp tried are as follows: 

- detection of light emission; 

- measurement of audible noise and vibrations; 

- recording and evaluation of electromagnetic transients following discharge, 

- chemical analysis of decomposition products of the gas. 

51 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 



CC3 Special test procedures 



In general, It is recommended that all testing should be performed at the specified test 
voltage and rated gas density. However, in certain circumstances special test procedures 
have been established which are not in general use but are worth mentioning for technical 
and/or practical reasons. 



CC3.1 Testing at reduced voltage 

CC3. 1 . 1 Simplified method for units transported without dismantling 

In accordance with the practice in some countries gas-insulated metal-enclosed switch* 
gear, or at least one bay or an equivalent part of the switchgear installation, may be 
assembled completely at the factory and tested there at its full rated withstand voltages. If 
the tested units are transported without dismantling or if dismantling is limited to very 
simple connections, and subject to agreement between manufacturer and user, the site 
test may be reduced to the following: 

- a.c. voltage test with 1,1 l//>/3 for earthed neutral systems or 1.9 U/>l3 for isolated 
neutral or resonant earthed systems; the time of voltage application shall be 10 min. 



CC3.1 .2 Deviations due to practical needs 

In certain circumstances due to technical or practical reasons, an a.c. voltage test may be 
performed at reduced voltage and for an extended duration, subject to agreement between 
manufacturer and user. 



CC3 . 1 . 3 Application of service voltage 

In some cases, it is impracticable to perform a dielectric test on site. Then special care 
should be taken for shipment, transportation and storage and particular attention should 
be given to the workmanship on site. The switchgear to be tested should be energized by 
the service voltage through the largest possible impedance in order to reduce damage 
caused by a possible disruptive discharge. The test period should be at least 30 min. 



CC3.2 Testing at reduced gas density 

Tests with reduced gas density are not generally advisable. 

CC4 Partial discharge measurements 

Partial discharge measurements may be helpful in detecting certain kinds of faults during 
site tests and in determining the need for maintenance of the equipment after a period in 
service. They are therefore a useful complement to dielectric tests on site but are often 
difficult to perform because of ambient disturbances. 



52 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

If such a test is possible and agreed the requirements given in 6 1 9 should be applied as 

far as possible The measurements should be made at 1 . 1 LZ/Vs after the power-frequency 

voltage test, and at L//V3 for comparison with future measurements in service when 
suitable systems have been developed The particulars of partial discharge measurements 
on site are under consideration 



CCS Electrical conditioning 

The term "electrical conditioning" means a progressive application of an a c voltage either 
by steps or continuously It may be performed by the manufacturer as part of the gas- 
fillmg process on site in order to move possible particles towards areas with a low field 
strength, where they become harmless 

Electrical conditioning is not a requirement and does not replace the a c voltage test 
unless the test voltage is increased up to the specified value Nevertheless, a disruptive 
discharge should be reported to the user as it may result in a weakening of the insulation 



CC6 Repetition tests 

CC6 1 General 

The procedure to be implemented following a disruptive discharge during dielectric tests 
on site may depend on several factors which include 

- kind of disruptive discharge (breakdown in self-restoring or non-self-restoring insula- 
tion) It It can be identified (see clause CC2) 

- magnitude of the arc energy dissipated during the discharge, 

- shape and matenal of the solid insulation 

- strategic importance of the installation 

Consideration of these and any other relevant factors should allow a procedure to be 
established and agreed between manufacturer and user A recommended procedure is 
given below but should be treated only as a guide and variations may be acceptable 
depending on the significance of the factors involved 

CC6 2 Recommended procedurf' 

a) If the disruptive discharge occurs along the surface of a solid insulation it is recom- 
mended that wherever practicable the compartment should be opened and the 
insulation carefully inspected for impairments After taking any necessary remedial 
action the compartment should then be subjected to the specified dielectric test once 
more 

b) A disruptive discharge in the gas may be due to contamination or a surface imper 
fection which may be burned away dunng the discharge It may be acceptable therefore 
that the test may be repeated at the specified test voltage Another test voltage may be 
agreed between manufacturer and user before the site tests have been started 

NOTE It IS assumed that the manufacturer can satisfy the user that the gaseous insulation may be 
regarded as self rwstormg for the arc energy dissipated m the discharge 

If the repetition test fails again XUb procedure of item a) should be followed 

S3 



•S/IEC 517(1990) 



Annex DD 

(normative) 

Gas tightness specifications and tests 



introduction 

This annex DD is derived from a corresponding Appendix EE of iEC 56 (1987). At the 
TC 1 7 meeting In Helsinl<i (October 1 987) It was decided to transfer gas tightness speci- 
fications and tests as a common clause to IEC 694 on the occasion of a future revision. 
Meanwhile the annexes shall be retained or introduced in the relevant standards (IEC 56; 
IEC 517; IEC 298). 

The annex DD has been adapted to the conditions of gas-insulated metal-enclosed switch- 
gear as far as necessary. Other modifications, e.g. to delete definitions which are not 
relevant to this standard or to transfer definitions from the annex to the standard itself, 
have not been implemented In order to preserve the common character of the annex and 
thus to facilitate a later transfer to IEC 694. 



DD1 Scope and object 

This annex applies to gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear which uses gas, other than 
air at atmospheric pressure, as insulating or combined insulating and interrupting medium. 
Its purpose is to define characteristics and test procedures relative to gas tightness. 



DD2 Definitions 

DD2. 1 Controlled pressure system 

An assembly which is automatically refilled from an external or internal gas source. 

DD2.2 Closed pressure system 

An assembly which is refilled only periodically by manual connection to an external gas 
source. 

DD2.3 Sealed pressure system 

An assembly for which no further gas processing is required during its expected operating 
life. 

NOTE - Sealed pressure systems are completely assembled and tested in the factory. 



54 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 



DD2.4 Rated filling pressure, P^ (or density DJ 



The pressure in bars (gauge) referred to the standard atmospheric air conditions of 20 °C 
and 1 013 hPa (or density) to which the assembly is filled before being put into service or 
automatically refilled 



DD2.5 Minimum functional pressure, P^ (or density D^) 

The gas pressure in bars (gauge) referred to the standard atmospheric air conditions of 
20 ''C and 1 013 hPa (or density) at and above which the rated values of the switchgear 
are maintained and at which refilling becomes necessary 



DD2.6 Absolute leakage rate, F 

The amount of gas escaped by time unit, expressed in bar cm^/s at atmospheric pressure 
1 013 hPa 



DD2 7 Permissible leakage rate, F 

The maximum permissible leakage rate specified by the manufacturer for a part, or a 
component, or a sub-assembly, or, by using the tightness coordination chart TC, for an 
arrangement of parts, components or sub-assemblies connected together in one pressure 
system 



DD2.8 Relative leakage rate, F 



re! 



The absolute leakage rate related to the total amount of gas m nie system at rated filling 
pressure (or density) 

It is expressed in percentage per year or per day 



DD2.9 Time between refillmgs, T 

The time elapsed between two refillings performed either manually or automatically to 
compensate the leakage rate F. 



DD2. 1 Number of refillmgs per day, N 

The number of refillings to compensate the leakage rate F. 

This value is applicable to controlled pressure systems 



55 



IS/IEC 517 (1990) 

DD2. 1 1 Pressure drop, AP 

The drop of pressure in a given time caused by the leakage rate F, without refilling. 



DD2.12 Tightness coordination chart, TC 

A survey document supplied by the manufacturer, used when testing parts, or compo- 
nents, or sub-assemblies, to demonstrate the relationship between the tightness of a 
complete gas system and that of parts, components and/or sub-assemblies. 



DD2.1 3 Cumulative leakage measurement 

A measurement which takes into account all the leaks from a given assembly to determine 
the leakage rate. 



DD2.14 Sniffing 

The action of slowly moving a leakmeter sensing probe around an assembly to locate a leak. 

DD3 Specifications for gas tightness 

DD3. 1 Controlled pressure systems 

The tightness of controlled pressure systems is specified by the number of refillings per 
day (A/) or by the pressure drop per day (AP). The permissible values shall be given by the 
manufacturer. 

DD3.2 Closed pressure systems 

The tightness of closed pressure systems is specified by two quantities: 

- relative leakage rate F^^,; 

preferred values are 1 % and 3 % per year; 

- time between refillings 7; 

preferred values are 3 years and 10 years. 

DD3.3 Sealed pressure systems 

The tightness of sealed pressure systems is specified by their expected operating life. 
Preferred values are 10 years, 20 years and 30 years. 



56 



IS/IFC 517 ;1990) 
DD4 Tests 

The purpose of tightness tests is to demonstrate that the total system leakage rate F does 
not exceed the specified value F 

If possible, the tests should be performed on a complete installation at P^ (or D^) If this is 
not practical, the tests may be performed on parts, components or sub-assemblies In 
such cases, the leakage rate of the total system shall be determined by summation of the 
component leakage rates using the tightness coordination chart TC (see figure DD1) 

The tightness test of the enclosure containing a mechanical switching device shall be 
measured both m the closed and open positions of this device, unless the leakage rate is 
independent of the position of the mam contacts 

By agreement between the manufacturer and the user the leakage between compartments 
may also be determined 

In general, only cumulative leakage measurements allow calculation of leakage rates 

The type test report should include such information as 

- a description of object under test including its internal volume and the nature of the 
filling gas, 

- whether the object under test is in the closed or open position (if applicable) 

- the pressures and temperatures recorded at the beginning and end of the test and 
the number of refillings, 

- the cut in and cut off pressure settings of the pressure (or density) control or mom 
toring device, 

" an indication of the calibration of the meters, 

- the results of the measurements 

~ If applicable, the test gas and the conversion factor to assess the results 

DD4 1 Type tests of pressure systems 

The tightness test shall be performed before and after the mechanical operation test and 
during the operation tests at limit temperatures (see 6 102 and 6 108) 



An increased leakage rate at extreme temperatures (if such tests are required in the 
relevant standards) and/or dunng operations is acceptable, provided that this rate resets 
to the Initial value after the temperature is returned to normal ambient air temperature 
and/or after the operations are performed The increased temporary leakage rate shall not 
exceed three times the specified permissible value F^ 

a) Controlled pressure systems 

The relative leakage rate F^^, shall be checked by measuring the pressure drop AP over a 
time period t that is of sufficient length to permit a determination of the pressure drop 
(within the filling and refilling pressure range) A correction should be made to take into 
account the variation of ambient air temperature Dunng this period the refilling device 
shall be inoperative 

57 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 



'"rei = -^ ""^ '^ 100 (% per day) 

t = test duration (hours) 

Alternatively, the number of refilling operations per day may be measured directly. 

b) Closed pressure systems and sealed pressure systems 

Due to comparatively small leakage rates of these systems, pressure drop measurements 
are not applicable. Other methods (examples are given in Figure DD2) may be used to 
measure the leakage rate F. which is used in combination with the tightness coordination 
chart to calculate: 

- the relative leakage rate F^^, and the time between refillings T for closed pressure 
systems; 

- the expected operating life for sealed pressure systems. 

If the test object is filled with a test gas different to the gas used in service and/or at a test 
pressure different to the normal operating pressure, corrective factors defined by the ma- 
nufacturer shall be used for calculations. 

NOTE • Leakage rate measurements in practice may have an inaccuracy of ±50 %. 

DD4.2 Routme tests of pressure systems 

Routine tests shall be performed at normal ambient air temperature with the assembly 
filled at the pressure (or density) corresponding to the manufacturer's test practice. 
Sniffing may be used under controlled conditions: 

a) Controlled pressure systems 

The test procedure corresponds to item a) of DD4.1. 

b) Closed pressure systems and sealed pressure systems 

The test procedure corresponds to item b) of DD4.1 . 

For closed pressure systems, the test may be performed at several stages of the manu- 
facturing process or of assembling on site, on parts, components and sub-assemblies, 
according to the tightness coordination chart TC. 



58 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

Gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear, single-phase encapsulated, circuit-breaker 
compartments of the three phases connected to the same gas system. 




Leakage rate of the system 
Compartment A 
Compartment B 
Compartment C 



190 X 10'^ barx cm^/s 
190 X 10"^ barx cm^/s 



190 X 10 barx cm^/s 



-6 



Control box D (includmg valves, gauges, monitoring devices) 23 x 10" bar x ctnVs 



Piping e 
Piping / 
Piping g 

Complete system 



2 X 1 0~ bar x cm^/s 



2x10"* bar x cm^/s 



2 X 10*^ bar x cm^/s 



599 X 10 barx cmVs 



Filling pressure 

Minimum functional pressure 

Total internal volume 



P^: 6.0 bar (gauge) 
P^. 5,4 bar (gauge) 
270 dm3 



rel 



599 x 10""^ X 60 x 60 X 24 X 365 
(6+ 1)x270x 103 



X 100 = 1,0 % per year 



(6 - 5,4) X 270 X 103 
599 X 10""^ X 60 X 60 X 24 X 365 



8,5 years 



Figure DD1 - Example for a tightness coordination chart TC 

59 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 




> 

z 



JO 

c 

CO 





i3 



(0 

<D 

E 
o 






it 



CO 

"D 
O 

JO 

% 

E 

c 
o 

o 
a> 

TJ 

J( 

(0 



c 
o 

CO 

*C 
CO 

o. 

E 
o 
O 

O 
G 
0) 

k. 

3 
O) 
UL 



o 



c 



^1 







.-,. 



5: c «> 

o 

Z *- CM CO 



60 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 



lEC 
517 

AMENDMENT 1 



Page 14 

Replace the title and the text of subclause 5 101 1 by the following 

5 1011 Protection of persons against access to hazardous parts and protection of 
the equipment against solid foreign objects 

Refer to lEC 694 

Page 1 5 

Replace the title the text and table 1 of subclause 5 101 2 by the following 

5 101 2 Protection against ingress of water 

Refer to lEC 694 

Page 18 

5 1 03 3 Gas tightness 

Add the following sentence 

Refer to I EC 694 

Replace the text of the first paragraph by the following 

Because compressed gas is used for insulation, a fiigh degree of tightness is required for 
the enclosure The permissible annual or daily escape of gas and the time between replen 
ishments for each type of compartment and for the complete installation should be stated 
by the manufacturer 



61 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 

Add the following sentence to the second paragraph 

In these conditions, the time between replenishments shall be not less than one month 

Page 21 

6 Type tests 

Replace, on page 22 , in the list of normal type tests, item f) by the following 



f) Tests to venfy the protection of persons against access to hazardous Subclause 

parts and the protection of the equipment against solid foreign objects 6 103 



Page 31 

Replace the title and the text of subclause 6 103 by the following 

6 1 03 Verification of the IP-coding 

Refer to I EC 694 

Page 32 

6 1 05 Weatherproofing test 

Replace the text of this subclause by the following 

When agreed between manufacturer and user, a weatherproofing test shall be made on 
gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear for outdoor use A recommended method is 
given in lEC 694 

This test also takes into account the effects or wind-driven snow 

If an examination of the design show^ the test to be unnecessary, it may be omitted 

Page 34 

6 109 Gas tightness tests 

Replace the text of the first paragraph by the following 

Refer to I EC 694 



62 



IS/IEC 517(1990) 
Page 35 

7 103 Gas tightness tests 

Replace the text of the first paragraph by the followmg 
Refer to I EC 694 

Replace, or) page 36, the second sentence of the first paragraph by the following 

If requested, gas tightness tests may be made also on partitions if these are sealed off 
between both adjacent gas compartments by gaskets 

Pages 54 to 60 

Delete the text of Annex DD 



63 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1 986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed: if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and Standards : Monthly Additions. 

This Indian Standard has been dc\ eloped from Doc No hT()X( '<X57 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 Telegrams; Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 0131, 323 94 02, 323 33 75 ( Common to 

all offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 110002 1 323 38 41 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P Road, Maniktola f 337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 I 337 86 26, 337 86 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34.A, CHANDIGARH 160022 f 60 38 43 

1 60 20 25 

Southern : C I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

1 235 15 19,235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andhcri (East) f 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400093 1 832 78 91, 832 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATl. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. 
KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khuga, India 



