IS : 3642 (Part VIII) - 1976

Indian Standard
PART VIII VOLTAGE RELAYS

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

APPLICATION GUIDE FOR ELECTRICAL RELAYS FOR AC SYSTEMS

( Fourth Rcpint MARCH 1Wo )

UDC 621.316.925.42

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 6

April 1977

Is t 3842 (Part Vlll)

- 1976

Indian Standard
APPLICATION GUIDE FOR ELECTRICAL RELAYS FOR AC SYSTEMS
PART VIII VOLTAGE RELAYS

Composition
Chainnan DR T. S. M. RAO

of Relays Sectional

Committee,
Raprsssnti~

ETDC 35

University of Roorkee,

Roorkee

MGnrbnS
Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras Sum T. V. SUBRM(ANIAM (Al&mm) hIaharashtra State Electricity Board, Bombay SHRIM. M. BANDRE ' Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals SHRIG. R. BHAT~A (Inspection Wing), New Delhi DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS (TI) , Railway Board (Ministry of Railways) RDSO, LUCXNOW A~~~~TANT Dmacro~ STANDARDS (RELAYS) (Altrmotr) Central Electricib .\u&nrity. New Delhi DlREcroR(CIP) Universal Electrics Linlited, 24 Parganas' SHRI A. K. GHOSE hk!r Srmr S. GOVINDAPPA SHRI 33.R. GIJFTA SHRI J. C. JUNEJA (Altemate)

N.

s. s. tiRORIASWAMY

SHRI C. GHOSE (AItmula) SHRKB. P. Griosri

National Test House, Calcutta Karnataka Electricity Board, Bangalore Haryana State Electricity Board, Chandigarh Larsen &. Toubro Limited, Bombay Bombay Electric Supply & Transport Undertaking, Bombay

SHRXI. C. JOSEPH SHRI A. D. LIMAYE

SHRI A. M. K&AR (Al&ma&) U. P. State Electricity Board, Lucknow SHRI MATAF'RASAD English Electric Co of India Ltd, Madras Smr N. NATH SHRI S. NEOX Jyoti Limited, Vadodara d* HRIV. B. DEW (Altmalc) ASEA Electric India Pvt Ltd, Bombay Smu S. T. PATEL &iRI v. kMWtJPATl (aihYl&) Bharat Heavy Electric& Ltd, Bhopal SHRIV. FCAD~HNAN SHRI M. R. NANDEI(HWAR (Altcmuu) Dire~e~me.~~l of Technical Development, SHRI K. N. RAL~MWM~Y
SHRI R. K. GWTA (Altmafe)

(Continued on page 2)

BUREAU This publication is protected

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. _ f I

under the Zna7un Copyright Act (XIV

Is : 3842 (Part

VIII)

- 1976

(Continuedfrom page 1) Mem hers
SHRI P. RAXGASWAMY

Rqrunting

Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi Swu T. C. RAJAOOPALAN(Altcmate) SHRI V. BALAWEIRAMANIAN (Alternate) Tata Merlin & Gerin Ltd. Bombay DR B. RAMESHR4o SHRI c. P. RAMA RAO (Aflafiab) Hinduatan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay SHRI U. V. RAO Tata Hydra-Electric Power Supply Co Ltd, Bombay SIIRIA. M. SMNl SHRI V. S. DORN (Alternab) National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), New Delhi DR Y. V. SOMAYAJULU SRRI P. SURAYANARAYANA (AI&ma*) Engineers India Limited, New Delhi SHR.S G. N. TH~DANI SHRl H. K. KAUL (Akrok) Director General, IS1 (Ex-o@ Membsi) SHRI S. P. SACHDEV, Director (l&c Techj smclmv SHRI VIJAI Director (Elec tech),

Deputy

ISI

IS : 3842 (Part VIII) - 1976

Indian Standard
APPLICATION GUIDE FOR ELECTRICAL RELAYS FOR AC SYSTEMS
PART VIII VOLTAGE 0. RELAYS

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part VIII) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 19 October 1976, after the draft finalized by the Relays Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electmtechnical Division Council. 0.2 *Modern ower systems are designed to provide uninterrupted electrical supply, yet t Ke possibility of failure cannot be ruled out. The protective relays stand watch and in the event of failures, short-circuits or abnormal operating conditions help de-energize the unhealthy section of the power system and restrain interference with the remainder of it and thus limit damage to equipment and ensure safety of personnel. They are also used to indicate the type and location of failure so as to assess the effectivcncss ot the protective schemes. 0.3 The features which the protective relays should possess are:

that is, to ensure correct action even after long periods => reliability, of inactivity and also to offer repeated operations uncler scvcre conditions;

b) 4 4

selectivity, that is, to ensure system is disconnected; sensitivity, conditions that is, detection ;

that

only

the unhealthy or abnormal and

part

oi` the

of short-circuit damage

operating of

speed to prevent or minimize rotating plant; and

risk of instability

C>stability,

that is, the ability to operate only under those conditions that call for its operation and to remain either passive CY biased against operation under all other conditions.

0.4 Voltage relays have been used as protective devices for detection of In a faulty system the voltage bccomcs faulty conditions in an ac system. An overvoltage causes abnormal or unbalanced as a direct consequence. electrical ovcrstrcss on the imulation of the apparatus while: undervoltag: may result in overload and thermal stress on insulation. These effects are

'

IS:

3642(PartVII.I)-1976

cumulative in nature, hence time delayed induction type voltage relays have been frequently and successfully employed. 0.5 Voltage relays have been most widely used as auxiliary control function relays. They are mostly attracted armature instantaneous or short time delay relays. Their field of application is vexy diverse but technique is simple. Hence this guide is limited to the voltage relays for protective purposes only. 0.6 This guide is intended to assist the protection engineers in the a plicaCon of voltage relays for protective use. However, it is emphasized tR at the object is neither to specify the relay to be used nor to suggest any particular protective system. The actual circuit conditions in an application may in all probability be different from those given in this guide. Hence the examples cited are to be regarded as mere illustrations to explain one or the other point pertinent to the conditions given in this-guide. 0.7 In the preparation of this guide considerable assistance has been derived from several published books and technical papexs and from manufacturers' trade literature. 0.8 This guide is one of the series of application guides for electrical relays for ac systems.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This guide (Part VIII) covered by IS : 3231-1965*. deals with the application of voltage reIays

1.2 It does not cover application of voltage relays which are used as auxiliary relays for control or similar other purposes. It also does not cover the principles of system design and system protection. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this guide the definitions given in IS : 1885 (Part IX)1966i and IS : 1885 (Part X)-1966$, shall apply. 3. GENERAL FEATURES

3.1 The energizing quantity for a voltage rekey is the rated frequency, alternating voltage (rms) of a magnitude approprktte to the relay setting and the
*Scarification for electrical relays for power system protection. tElcctrotechnical vocabulary: Part IX Electrical relays. ~Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part X Electrical power system protection.

4

IS : 3842 (Part VIlI) - 1976 intended application. Mostly, a single phase voltage input to a relay with single coil element is adequate. 3.1.1 There arc however instances, when more than one voltage magnitudcs differing in phase relationship derived from a tlircc-phase ac system are supplied to a relay with polyphase elements. Esamples arc voltage relays for checking phase sequence hetwcen two systems and those employed for detecting single phasing conditions of a three-phase system. 3.2 Movement 3.2.1 Induction disc type relays arc the most common forms ofvoltage These are used as either overvoltage or undcrrelays used for protection. voltage relays and are provided with adjustable tin?? delay settings 3.2.2 The attracted armature movement is frequently used for instan:aneous overvoltage/undervoItagc relays, which arc used either with or without additional time-delay relays. 3.3 Classification 3.3.1 In protective applications, a) Overvoltage relays, b) Undervoltage relays, and c) Combined (over and under) voltage relays. 3.3.2 An overvoltage relay is designed to perform its protcctivc function when the rated frequency voltage applied to it increases to the operating value (an rms magnifudej. 3.3.3 An undcrvoltagc relay is designed to perform its protective function when the rated frequency voltage applied to it decreases to the operating value (an rms mqni/ude). 3.3.4 A combined (over and under) voltage relay develops its opcr;Lting torque in a counter-clockwise or clockwix sense when the rated licqucncy voltage applied to it increases or decreases to the operating voltngc of the It is calibrated on increasing voltages to close `NO' relay respectively. contacts at tap settings and on decreasing voltages to close `NO' contacts at lower percentages of the setting. The pcrccn!agc may be fixed at 30 pcrccrtt or higher ox may be adjustable in the range of 30 to GOor 60 to 90 lxrccnr. 4. CHARACTERISTICS 4.1 The voltage-time characteristics of induction time dclny voltage rela)-s arc of inverse form. Typical characteristics are given in Fig. 1, 2 and 3. 4.2 Induction disc type voltage relays arc grncrally provided \vith a n~m~bcr of taps and the range of tap settings is dcpcndcnt on relevant application. 5 voltage relays arc classified as follo~~-~*

IS : 3842 (Part VIII) - 1976 . AILI-acted mnature type voltage relays setting\ in 1,l.p seftings or conlinuouslv rrq~lir~r;ic:ltinpplication. arc provided with either fixed variable bcttings depending on

0vcivoltage relays are normally continuously rated for the rciay tap voltage or the rated voltage at the respcctivc taps. Undervoltage relays arc- n&n~ally des'gned to withstand at least 110 percent ofrelay ratcdvoltage continuously at any tap setting. 4.3 Low Pick-Up Overvoltage Relays ---. A sensitive pick.?lp Joltage characteristic with an operating range of 8 to 32 percent of rated voltage, usually lxrilh 4 taps in the range is available for overvoltage relays. At rated volrage of the relay the operating coil magnet is highly satiuated to increase thcx impedance of the relay and to limit the current in the c.z?il to a safe value. As tin. sensitive pick-up type overvoltage relays are likely to maioperate with any ?;ma!l input of third harmonic voltage likely to be present in power system, the relay coil circuit is series-tuned with a co `denser to accept only the fllndamental rated frequency voltage and to Peject mostly any third harmonic voltage input. 4.4 Low Pick-Up Frequency Tuned Overvoltage Relays - A sensitive relay having a low pick-up value is normally used for detecting earthfaults As such a relay is likely to maloperate due to the presence of in generators. third 1- irmonic voltage, the relay coil circuit is series-tuned and tuned shading coils nre used so that tire relay is sensitive to fundamental rated frequency vo!tagc and the pick-up voltage on third harmonic is considerably high. 4.5 Frequency Compensated Relays - For overvoltage protection of generator, it is essemial to ensure that the sensitivity does not change with lrcquency and it is necessary to employ frequacy compensated relays. In induction disc type voltage relays frequency compensation is usually provided by selecting correct combination of coil reactance and resistance. In order to get a uniform voltage-time characteristics over the compcnsated band of frequency, the relay is so designed that there is always a constant inductance to resistance ratio on each voltage setting tap. In case of instantaneous overvoltage relays, rectified ac operated relays having fairly uniform voltage-frequency characteristics are normally used.
NOTE In certain applications, MmCly, Capacitor control, OVeCVOkIge and underboltage relays used in conjunction with separate time delay relays, etc, call for high resetting ratio so that the relay resets on recovery of voltage to normal limits.

5. CAUSES 5.1

AND EFFECTS

OF OhVOLTAGES causes:

Overyoltages b) Sudden

occur due to the following rejection

a) An earth fault on system in which system neutral is not solidly earthed, of load by a fully loaded generator, 6

Is : 3842(PartVIII)-1976

W g 25

e

s
g

lx

15

10

S

0 110

120

130

IL0

150 OF TAP

160

170

180

190

200

PERCENT
l`rc. I A
I`TFIC:AL.

VALUE
OF OVERVOI.T.\GE RI:LIY

TIME-VOLTAGE 7

CVRVE

Is : 3842 (Part VllI)

- 1976

c) Switching inductive or capacitive circuits, d) Re-striking fj of arc in circuit-breakers, exposed installations, motor due to e) Induction in adjacent circuits caused by heavy current in a circuit, Atmospheric disturbances on electrically g) Long unloadzd lines due to Ferranti effect, and h) Supply disconnection of lightly loaded synchronous open circuit regulation.

5.1.1 Voltage relays may be used for protection against sustained overvoltages as are caused by 5.1 (a) and 5.1 (b). Overvoltages by the remaining causes are controlled and protected against, by techniques of equipment design, insulation co-ordination and application of protective devices, such as surge diverters and lightning arresters.
180

160

-loo

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

PERCENT

OF TAP VALUE

Fx.

2

A TYPICAL TIME-VOLTAGE CURVE OF UNDERVOLTAGE
RELAY

8

IS : 3842
RIGHT CONTAC (IN *ia OF LEFT 1 CLOSURE CONTACT PICK-UP)

(Part VIII) - 1976

in 0 14 B z: 12 U-J z 10 $3
26 F 24 ii! 02 RtGHT CONTACT CLOSURE (IN%OF LEFT :"o 79 CONTACT :o" PICK-UP I 0 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 110 160 180 2:

0

PERCENT OF TAP VALUE

FIG. 3

A TYPICAL TIME-VOLTAGE
UNDERVOLTAGE

CL-RYE OF COMBINED

OVER

AI'D

RELAY

5.1.2 Overvoltagcs cause high electric stress on the insulation of cquipment whiclf, if sustained for a long time, may lead to failure of insulation. In service, msulation may be subjected to abuse by overload, failure of cooling systcnu, growth of surface encrustation by external deposits which impede cooling, etc. One or more of thew causes may aid insulation failure.
6. CAUSES AND EFFECTS OF UNDERVOLTAGE

6.1 Undervoltagc
Shortage load, Physical

occurs due to tnc ftillo\\ing

cauhcs:

Faulr on systems, of reactive disconncrtion capacity in relation manners, and distribution of t? excitation need, s>f the

in varying

Inordinately large voltage network, and Yoltage drops caused b! motors, arc furnaces, etc.

drops in the transmission large starting

cur~eiltrequirements

9

I6 t 364!2(PartWII). 1976 6.1.1 The effect of undervoltage on induction motor drives is to overload the motor, to cause higher temperature-rise and occasional burnt-out, to increase the slip of the motor, and to considerably reduce the starting and pull out torques.
6.1.1.1 If supply is momentarily interrupted to a synchronous motor, the motor is required to be first switched out, otherwise supply could reappear at the motor terminal when the motor induced emf is not in opposition. 7. APPLICATIONS 7.1 ov-ge ReI8ys 7.1.1 Orervoltage olt' Water Wheel Gerwator 7.1.1.1 When the load on a water wheel generator is suddenly rejected due to tripping of a breaker feeding the load bus or a loaded transmission line, the generator would overspeed and may attain about 160 percent rated speed in about 5 to 10 seconds and it would take additional 60 seconds or more for the speed governor action to return the generator to its rated speed, The automatic voltage regulator will quickly respond and reduce the generator excitation normally but, by chance the automatic voltage regulator ma be defective and fail to function correctly or may be on hand contra r, Damaging overvoltage may then occur in the stator windings was induced ac voltage in the field windings is likely to cause faihue of field insulation. 7.1.1.2 If the generator auxiliary motors are supplied from the generator terminals by suitable arrangements, with the overspeeding of the generator the motor pull out torque will decrease inversely with the square of the supply frequency. At the same time the load toquy, namely, of the circulating.pumps and cooling fans! etc, will increase wrth the square of the speed. During this critical period the auxiliary motors must not stop. Motors of auxiliary drives for hydroelectric generators are usually rated 10 percent over the driven loads to give satisfactory performance under f10 percent variation in the terminal voltage. Yet it could be seen from Fig. 4 that the motors wouldget -loaded almost by 90 percent when the generator speed reaches 133 percent rated speed and the motors would pull out. Protective action must therefore be completed before the generator speed rises to 133 percent. 7.1.13 Water wheel generators are designed to withstand speed up to 2.0 times rated speed. Auxiliary motors can withstand some overvoltage without damage but the generator bus and the connected switchgear apparatus would not tolerate more than 10 percent voltage rise. The protective overvoltage relay mustlimit the overvoltage to 10 percent. 7.1.1.4 A simple overvoltage relay is cmpbyedwhich operates to drop a field reducing dc contactor thus introducing a resistance in the exciter or 10

IS : 3842 (Part VIII) - 1976

Ii .P. PUMP AND FAN Vs SPEEO

0

123

133

# MOTOR RATED FREQUENCY % FAN OR PUMP RATED SPEED Fta. 4

TYPICAL MOTOR CHARACTERISTICS

field circuit and to project an alarm br operator to take nercssary manual action (see Fig. 5). 7.1.1.5 To avoid conse uent fGlurrs resulting from over-speed awornpa&d by oven&ages in a x ydro-generator, frequency compensated ovcrvoltage! relays are used to trip the assoriated breakers. Generally a time 11

IS : 3842 (Part `Vrn) - 1976 iihy overvoltage relay together with an instantaneous overvoltage relay is uxd. This time delay relay is usually set at 110 percent and the instantaneous rc!ay at I30 t3 140 percent. Typical trip circuit is shown in Fiy;. 6. 7.1.2.1 Operatron of generators with isolated neutral is advantageous IX-GLR G!`continuity of supply it provides on single earth faults and because it, greatly limits the: fIo;voOf line to earth fault currents, but is disadvantageous al: G bccausc of overvoltages which result on the system and the difficulty of !ocat.ing the earth faults. A balance is struck by earthing the generator neutral through a suitable cclrrent limiting impedance which may be a re&tance, a reactance, a distribution transformer with resistance load or a potential transformer. With all earthing methods, the damage to the machine at the point of fault shai: be weighed. 7.12.2 Reacw twthiq - Generator installation which directly feeds a-wire system should have reactor earthing to prevent overvoltage during line-to-earth faults which would damage loads connected from healthy phases to neutral wire. This method is desirable where generator installation directly. feeds a cable network, particularly whereold cables continue in service. The earth fault current is limited in this method to 25 to 100 percent of three-phase fault current.

RESISTOR

GENER4TOR FfELcl

VOLTAGE 1RANSFORMER

DC CONTACTO~

cc

SUPPLY I

RELAY OVER-VOLTAGE TO GENERATCR @REAKER RELAY

FIG. 5

GENERATOR OVERVOLTAGE PROTECTION
12

1976
AC BUS
I

52 59 SI Tta

-

Power circuit breaker Overvoltage relay Seal-in unit, with target Auxiliary switch, closed when circuit breaker is closed Trip coil

FIG. 6

TYPICALEXTERNAL CONNECTION USED I;OR OVERVOLTAGE PROTECTION

7.1.2.3 Neutral resistor earthing usually does not permit use of earthed neutral arresters and hence installations most favourable to neutral resistance earthing are those having no direct lightning exposure but which require sufficient current for selective earth protection. The current range is 100 to 2 OCOA.
7.1.2.4 Dkribution transformer with secondary resistor (see Fig. `7) which in effect is very high resistance earthing and where earth fault currents are limited to 5 to 15 A only are used in most cases with unit system installation. Appreciable earth fault currznt is not required because the voltage between the neutral and the earth can be comfortably used for rclayingr. ho dangerous transient overvoltages are encountered if earthing equipment Machine lightning arrcstcrs should be 01` the ratings are properly selected. unearthed neutral type. Arresters should be used on the high voltage side of transformer to limit surges on the high voltage system. 7.1.2.5 The application of a potential transformer in a gcncrator neutral The earth fault current is ~er!~ produces a high reactance earthed system. kw but high transient overvoltages are produced in switching at the gencratot Lincvoltage or from line-to-earth faults \vhich result in arcing grounds. to-neutral rated potential transformer frotn the point of core saturation : hould be used between the neutral of the generator and the earth to mininnze a possibility of ferro-resonance oscillations between the capacitance to earth of the generator windings and the potential transformer reactance. 13

IS

: 3842 (Ba.~t WX)

- 1976

I_in+?o-neutral rated and line-to-earth connected potentiai transformer a! the three-phase terminals of a generator is another variant of the method. In both cases.. the generator and transformer must be connected directly It is also necessary to ensure that together without interposing a breaker. &rro-resonance will not occur. The method is similar to 7.1.2.4 but does not have iis rr+tance damping characteristic which is desirable. If, however: the generator is connected to the bus through a breaker at the gencra;or voitaze, the secondary side of thevoltage transformer is loaded wit!: a rtsisrn!- To prevent transient. overvoltages appearing due to restrikes In the brcak<*r (see Fig. 8). 7.1.2.6 Earth fault in a generator stator occurs in the armature slots. The damage caused by such an earth fau!t is the burning cf the winding msulaticn zrnd bur:ling of the stator iron, the extent of which depends on :he The burning of magnitude oi` :he cault current aml the duration it sustains. i~lsulatiori can bc repaired by replacing the coil(s) in the faulted armature On the 5%t WhCh :-deeds a short outage of the generator for a few days. czntr?ry b-!::niqq of the stator iron caused by heavy fault ccrrents or over This involves c~~t~:iidcr.!rime vvo!ild rquirc replacement of the burnt iron. toi-::gie:.i rc-sta.cking of the iron and insertion and ccnnection of the windBesides, the loss of revenue ings and (i?c jdJ ma;; extend over several weeks. The necessity of limitins earth fault to very low \*alues 7;:;juld he criornzus. 3 ,I& c-ovichng ;: <i:lective earth fa:a:jlt protection is thus important and very nrc;h lil:krr!:~I::IFEI~system of generator neutral earthing. -

TRIP

OR

4t.ARM

=_

!-

OISTR:BUTION TRANSFORMER

5';

.-

Qw~rvc~leage relay

SI -.

SE&iT: !onit, wirh target

IS : 3842 (Pact VIII) - lW6

TRANSFORMER

RELC, "`-C.`RCUlT BRELKER

52 59 SI a
TC I'IC. 8

----

Power Seal-in

circuit

breaker relay closed when circuit breaker is closed

Overvoltage Auxiliary Trip coil hTT;KSI\L OF \

unit, with target switc:.,

`I'YPICAL

~GNNIXTIOS

U?IXJ

1 UR

E:ART;i-FAULT

1'1101 FCTI(JS

?`IIRI:I--PIlASE

~SCROl'IWI~.D

SYSTEM

7.1.2.7 If` the cart!1 fault currerlt in a gcncrator \vinding i,; sufticicnt to opcratc the generator differential protection, no other cart11 fBult protection is required. in nctttral reactor or intcrctar earthing transformer type systems, sufikient earth fault currrnt would bc availal)lr. When the neutral ol` a generator is carthcd through high impedanw IO limit the wrth fault wrr~nt to low value (5 to 15 A), the differential protection would not adrEarth fault protection, in such cases, is quately protect the generator. providrd by voltage relays. 7.1.2.8 The following
aj methods ol' voltage tncasuw:ncnt.s arc available: Mcasuremcnt of voltage Ixtwcn the generator neutral and the carth is made by a voltage rrlay il'thc generator neutral is grounded through a single phase voltage or distribution transfbrrncr, the secondarv 01 which is loaded with a suiial,le resistor (JPC Fig. 71. `l'he rating of' the resistor may he selected as given in Appendix .ri.

I,) hlcasuremcnt of zero scqucncc voltage appearing across open delta connected secondary of a three-phase voltage tran&rmer, the primaries of which arc connected star and to thz terminals ol` the generator and the neutral (primary) is tied to the earth (see Fig. 8~.

I[$ : 3842 (Part VIII) - 1976 7.1.2.9 Each phase of the generator windings generates a small magnitude of third harmonic voltage despite the distribution and chording which appears at the neutral. The magnitude depends on the generator design and increases from no load to full load. This voltage appears at the relay terminals from almost a negligible value to 2 to 3 V in normal service. The relay is series tuned to reject third harmonic voltage with a high factor (say In 8) to the fundamental so that the lowest tap value could be selected. practice the voltage tap selected should be about 2 V higher than the magnitude of the third harmonic voltage across the relay terminal!. 7.1.2.10 In a unit type generator transformer system, a voltage may appear at the generatcr neutral when an earth fault occurs on the high voltage side of the transformer because of capacitive coupling between the The magnitude high and low tension windings of the power transformer. of this displacement voltage depends 013 the transformer inter-winding capacitance and the tctal zero sequence capacitance to earth of the generator side system. For the displacement voltage to be low, the generator side zero sequence capacitance to earth should have a low value. Secondly, if the high voltage side neutral of the power transformer is earthed solidly, the neutral displacement voltage on the generator side will be low. If the high voltage side neutral of the iower transformer is earthed through high impedance the displacement voltage on the generator side will be large. The factors involved are varied and an easy assessment is not possible. Hence it is recommended that the t. me setting of the overvoltage relay should be appropriately chosen to avoid unwanted operation due to inter-winding capacitance effect. 7.1.2.11 An earth fault on the generator terminal produces a displacement voltage at, the neutral equal to line to ground voltage availab!e prior to the fault.03 the faulted phase. A fault in the generator winding would produce reduced displacement voltage until at neutral the displacement would be zero. The amount of winding towards the generator terminals protected by the voltage relay will therefore be, Relaytapvoltage x N percent V where V = line to line voltage, and N = voltage transformer ratio. 7.1.2.12 If a sir.gle-phase voltage transformer is used in place of the distribution transformer, the voltage relay is connected to project visual Sometimes tripping is arranged through an auxiliary and audible alarm. time delay relay. NOTE - In some cases the neutral displacement voltage may be present for quite some
time (for example, when the relay is used for alarm functions only) and its may exceed the continuous withstand capability of the relay. Proper measure taken in such cases to avoid damage to the relay. This can be achieved by hand reset normally closed contact of the relay in series with the relay coil coil is disconnected from the voltage circuit after operation of the relay.

(1~

_

1/3x

magnitude should be connecting so that the

16

Is : 3642 (Pm
7.13 Protectwn of ParaUeL 2 ramformer Feea%

VlU)-1976

7.1.3.1 When parallel transformer feeders are connected to unearthed star or delta winding of transformers, an earthfault occurring on the feeders will not be cleared even with the operation of the feeder breaker because of infeed from the low voltage side. Such condition of earthfault remaining in otherwise insulated system will cause overstressing of the system and may precipitate further breakdown. This condition is detected by connecting an overvoltage relay connected to the tertiary winding of a voltage transformer, positioned at the terminals of the delta or unearthed star winding of the transformer as shown in Fig. 9. The relay so connected will operate for external as well as internal feeder fault. As such to provide discrimination the relay shall be time delayed. 7.1.4 Protection of Shunt Capacitors 7.1.4.1 Shunt capacitors are subjected to overvoltages due to either system voltage fluctuations or if the capacitors are used under light load As such overvoltages may exceed the withstand value of the conditions. capacitors, protection against such overvoltage condition is provided usually by an induction disc type overvoltage relay. 7.1.4.2 For large capacitor banks, detection of out of balance condition due to blown fuse in one or more number of units is done by a sensitive overvoltage relay similar to the one used 1or generator earthfault protection utilizing distribution transformer earthing. The relay connections for such protection are shown in Fig. 1OA and IOB. 7.1.5 Protection of Unloaded Lines - In long transmission line, considerable overvoltage may occur under light load condition due to excess capacitive megavars on the system. Overvoltage may also occur at one end of the long line when the other end is open due to capacitance effect. An overvoltage relay is used to monitor such a condition so that necessary corrective action, such as switching-in of shunt reactors or inter-tripping of other'end can be taken. 7.1.6 Protection of Qnchronous Motors - When a synchronous motor connected to bus with nc other appreciable load is running on very light load or no load, a failure of supply will result in instantaneous overvoltage of the order of 20 to 30 percent due to t.he open circuit regulation of the machine. Instantaneous overvoltarre relay is employed to provide protection during such conditions. 7.1.7 Proirction of Power Transformers 7.1.7.1 Presence of sustained power frequency overvoltage is detrimental to the life of terminal equipment, the most important of them is po-wer transformer. 17

IS : 3642 (Part VIII) - 1976
3 PHASE VOLTAGE TRANSFORMER I I I I I 3 PHASE VOLTAGE TRANSFORMER OPEN DELTA

@Aapow &
TRANSFORMER

-I-

FIG.

9

PROTECTIONOF PARALLEL TRANSFORMER FEEDER

7.1.7.2 Overvoltage causes a proportional increase in the working flux and disproportionately great increase in magnetizing currents. Under conditions of over-excitation a large compohe'nt of flux is diverted to the steel structural parts from the highly saturated laminated core parts. This results in excessive heating of the core bolts, etc, and subsequently leads to failure, of core bolt insulation and ultimately the failure of the transformer.
7.1.7.3 Reduction of frequency has an effect with regard to flux density similar to the overvoltage. 7.1.7.4 Hence operation of transformers on overvoltage beyond permissible limit and particularly under system low fre uency condition must not be continued. Suitable relays which measure % e ratio of voltage to frequency should be used to monitor such ovcrfhtxing condition and to initiate Such relays should prefwably be provided with time corrcrlive action. delay to avoid unwanted operation on momentary system disturbances. 7.2 Uandervoltage Relays 72.1 UndervoltageProtectionof A4otcr Circuit; 7.2.2.1 Effects ofundervoltage on motor loads are asfollows: aj Svnchronous motors fully loaded at unity power factor may pull out step below 75 percent rated voltage; 1,) Induction motors loaded fuIIy may stall if the supply voltage falls below 70 percent; C) AC contactors msy drop out and disconnect loads below 65 percent of the rated voltage;

of

18

Synchronous motors loaded at 0.8 power factor may pull out when voltage drops below 60 percent, however, lightly loaded motors may continue to remain in service; Momentary failure of supply is a particular case of undervoltage 4 which may be serious to synchronous motors driving loads. As the supply reappears after, faA.tre, the motor internal emf may not be in phase opposition to the terminal voltage in which case the motor may fail to pull in step, it may oscillate and pull out; and f > Single-phase supply is another particular case of undervoltage on three-phase supply systems, which causes overload on supply cables and thermal damage to insulation of windings or conductor burnt-out in the windings of motors driving loads. 7.2.1.2 To prevent starting and running at abnormally low voltages, synchronous motors should be provided with undervoltage protection

4

A Star Connected Bank

TRANSFORMER

B

Delta

Connected Bank

FIG.

10 SHUNTCAPACITOR OUTOFBALANCEPROTWTAOIU 19

Is : 3942(PartVIll)-1976
preferably of inverse time characteristics. Similarly, induction motors may be provided with undervoltage protection against a three-phase drop in volta . To prevent tripping during transient voltage dip, such relays are genera$ ly suitably time delayed and are connected either between phase to earth or between phase to phase. 7.23 Undcroolage ReIays jii Auto Changeowr Circuiti 7.2.2.1 When two independent supply sources are available and auto-

changeover to healthy source f?om defective source is desired, undervoltage relavs are used to monitor defective conditions, such as failure of supply, and sustiined undervoltage. If the bus is connected with motor load, care is taken to effect the autochangeover only when the bus voltage due to the combination of induced emf of the motoi subsides considerably, namely, 20 to 30 percent of rated voltage to anid possible restoration of supply out of phase with the induced emf. In such case an additional undervoltage relay having an effective setting of 20 +a 30 percent is employed. 7.2.3 Undervoltage Prot&m of Shunt Ca~acitors/Sjwhronous Condensers Undervoltage protection is provided to disconnect the capacitor banks under This would prevent re-energizing the bus-bars to IOW voltage conditions. which partially discharged capacitors are connected, the capacitor voltage being unsynchr+ized with the supply system.. .The necessity for this depends on the time in which the capacitors discharge relative to the `Dead Time' before the supply is restordd. For this application a relay having high drop-out/pick-up ratio is used together with suitable time delay relay. 7.2.4 L/se qf Undervoltage Relay as Phase Selectors in Distant2 Protection - In switched distance relays, undervoltage relays are at times .used as a phase selector to detect earthfaults and to switch-in appropriate quantities to the measuring units. Such undervoltage units usually having a setting of 80 to 85 percent nominal phase to neutral voltage are particularly suitable on resistance earthed systems where the earthfault current may be less than the load current. 7.3 Combined Overvoltage and Undwvoltage Relays 7.3.1 Combined overvoltage and undervoltage switch-in or switch-out a shunt reactor `connected to voltage, the respective unit operates a@ switches-in of undervoltages, the undervoltage unit operates reactof. relays can be used to a line. In case of overthe reactor and in case and switches-out the

7.3.2 When shunt capacitors are used to control the voltage, combined overvoltage and undervoltage relays can be used to monitor the condition and to perform capacitor control function. 7.3.3 Combined overvoltage and undervoltage relays can be used as a voltage regulating relay for tap changer control of transformers. 20

I6:

3842(PutVIII)-1976

APPENDIX A [Clause 7.1.2.8 (a)J
SELRCTION OF SRCONDARY RESISTOR

resistor is selected such that its kW loss during a lineto-earth fault is equal to the capacitative kVA to earth or the effective resistance in the machine neutral is one-third the zero sequence capacitative In calculating the capacitance to earth, important contribution reactance. is from machine winding capacitance, the surge protective capacitance and the low voltage cable connected to the voltage relay. The contribution of ca acitance to earth *of bus duct, lightning arresters and transformer low vo Ptage winding is unimportant and is neglected. With a total three-phase canacitance to earth of generator, as stated above, 2TfCX vi The charging kVA = d/3 x 10s C = capacitance to earth VI = line to line voltage. in rF, and

A-l. The secondary

A-2. The distribution transformer primary voltage is normally selected from one af the standard ratings close to the generator line-to-line voltage. `I'hc secondary rating of 231 V is recommended to give good sensitivity for a 64 V rated voltage relay. The secondary where .NI= the turns ratio of the distribution c = canacitancc to earth in hF. The current rating of the resistor = v, transformer,
JV.2WfCA 43

resistance

= NP x 2nfC

I

ohms and

The distribution rating

transformer

continuous

= `,P

;;afc

kVA

A low pick-up overvoltage 8 to 32 percent and operating employed.

relay rated 64 V? with pick-up voltage taps time characteristrc as given in Fig. 11 may be

21

1 0' 0

,

c

0

200

400

600 600 1000 1200 PERCENT OF TAP VALUE

uoa 9600

FIG. 11 A TYPICAL TIME-VOLTAGEC'ITRVE OF Low PICK-UP OVERVOLTAGE RELAY

22

BUREAU
Headquarters

OF : : 331 01 31
331 13 75
:

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones
Regional

Telegrams

: Manaksansthe
Telephone 331 01 31 I \ 331 1375

(Common to all Off ices)

Offices

Central
l

: Manak Bhavan, 9, Bahadur Shah Zafar May.
NEW DELHI 110002 : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M. V.I.P. Road, Maniktola. CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. Marol. Andheri (East), BOMBAY 400093
Offices :

Eastern

37 86 62 21843 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

Northern Southern t Western
Branch

`Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD t Peenya Industrial Area, 1 st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar. BHOPAL 462003

380001

26340 39 49 55 55 40 21 53627 2 67 05 8-71 19 96 3 31 77 231083 6 34 71 21 68 76 5 55 07 6 23 05

Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 Kalai Kathir Burlding, 6/48-A Avanasi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Quality Marking Centre, N.H. IV, N.I.T., FARIDABAD 121001 Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 5315 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th BY-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-560 L. N. Gupta Marg. ( Nampally Station Road ) HYDERABAD 500001 R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, J,AlPUR 302005 * 1171418 B Sarvodaya Nagar. KANPUR 208005 Plot No. A-9, House No. 561163, Sindhu Nagar, Kanpur Roao LUCKNOW 226005 Patliputra lndustrjal Estate, PATNA 800013 District industries Centre Complex. SRINAGAR 190011 Bagh-e-Ati Maidan,

T. C. No. 14/1421, University P. 0.. Palayam. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034 Inspection Offices (With Sale Point) : Pushpanjali. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road. Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 lnstitutron of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar. PUNE 411005 `Sales Office Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee P. 0. Princep Street, CALCUTTA t $ Sales- Office isat BANGALORE Unity Building, Approach,

6 21 04

52 51 71 5 24 35

27 68 00 89 65 28 22 39 71

Sates Office is.at Novalty Chambers, Grant Road, BOMBAY Narasimharaja Square,

Reprography

Unit,

BIS,

New D&hi,

India

