Is 9439:2002

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN WATER-WELLDRILLING TECHNOLOGY

(First Revision )

Ics 01.140.73; 73.100.30

O BIS 2002

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

August 2002

Price Group 4

Diamond Core and Water-Wel\ Drilling Sectional Committee, ME 21

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, afler the drafi finalized by the Diamond Core and Water-Well Drilling Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. This standard was first published in 1980. The experience gained m the industry has necessitated revision of the standard. In the present revision not only some of the definitions of terms are modified but also new terms added. The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A,

Is 9439:2002

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN WATER-WELL DRILLING TECHNOLOGY

(First Revision)
1 SCOPE

2.9 Antifoam
An agent added to acid to prevent or retard foaming

This standard covers definition of the terms generally used in water-well drilling technology. 2 TERMINOLOGY
A

during the acid reaction. 2.10 API (American
Designation Petroieum Institute) --

2.1 Acidizing The process of introducing acid into the pore spaces of acid soluble formations to enlarge the pore space by dissolving the surrounding formation. Acidizing also refers to the removal of encrustation from well screens and gravel pack, and dissolving cementitious materials. 2.2 Additive An auxiliary agent added for conditioning of drilling fluid to obtain desired physical properties. 2.3 Air Drilling The drilling process in which air or gas is used as a medium for removal of cuttings. 2.4 Air Line The small diameter vertical pipe inserted in the tube wells with or without the ejector for cleaning and developing tube wells by airlift method. 2,5 Air Line Lubricator (In-Line Oiler) An apparatus that feeds a small controllable quantity of lubricating oil into the air stream to provide lubrication for pneumatic componentdaccessories of machines, 2.6 Air Rotary Drilling A process similar to direct circulation rotary drilling except that compressed air is used as a drilling fluid instead of drilling mud.
2.7 Annular Space

The designation given to equipment or parts of equipment standardized by the American Petroleum Institute, such as driii pipe threads.
2.11 Aquifer

An aquifer is a formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that contains sufficient saturated permeable materiai to yield significant quantities of water to wells and springs. 2.12 Artesian Artesian is synonymous with confined artesian water and artesian water bodies are equivalent respectively to confined ground water and confined water body. An artesian weii is a weli deriving its water from an artesian or confined water body. The water level in an artesian well stands above the top of the artesian water body it taps. 2.13 Artesian Weii A Well tapping contined or artesian aquifer in which the static water ievel stands above the water table, in which GZW those welis with water ievel above the water table are said to have positive artesian head (pressure) and those with water level below the water tabie, negative artesian head. 2.14 Auxiliary Brake A revolution retarder, used in conjunction with mechanical or air brakes -- generaliy ifistalied on the draworks drum shafl.
B

The space between: a) Drill pipe and wall of the hole, or b) Casing and wall of the hole, or c) Drill pipe and casing. 2.8 Annular Velocity The up-hole return velocity of fluid or air in the annulus, usually expressed in m/min. 1

2.15 Baiier A tube fitted with a valve at its base, which is iowered into a bore hole to remove cuttings and water. 2.16 Barrei Unit of measurement consisting of 42 US gallons.

IS 9439:2002

2.17 Barite Barium sulphate, the commercial product contains small amounts of iron oxide, siiica, and other minerals. It is used to make mud heavier. 2.18 Barytes Natural barium sulphates, used as a basic material for
weighing agents. 2.19 Bentonite

2.28 Bridge
An obstruction to circulation in the annular space of the well. A bridge is usualiy formed by caving of the wall of the well bore or by the intrusion of a large boulder

c
2.29 Cabie Tool Percussion Driiiing
A spudding process in which drilling is carried out by

A finely powdered, highly plastic, colloidal material used in preparing drilling mud. 2.20 Bit The cutting element attached to the bottom of the drill stem. Can be of various types -- for example, Rock roller, Drag, Diamond, Tungsten carbide tipped, etc. 2.21 Bit Breaker
A heavy plate, which tits in the rotary table and holds

lifling and dropping a heavy string of drilling tools at regular intervals, resulting in crushing or loosening rock formations. The reciprocating action of the tools mixes the crushed or loosened particles with water to form a slurry or sludge. Necessary water is put into the borehole if no water is present in the formation being penetrated. The slurry is removed at intervals from the borehole by means of a sand pump or a bailer. 2.30 Casing Pipe
Piping used to support the sides of borehole.

the bit while it is being unscrewed from the drill stem. 2.31 Casing Shoe 2.22 Bit Nozzle
A fluid port in the bit.

A heavy-walled steel coupling or band at the lower extremity of the casing. It clears the way for casing. 2.32 Cathead An auxiliary hoisting device used for handling light loads and for alternately lifting and dropping tools such as drive block or bumper. Its use requires a line of manila/wire rope carried on a separate sheave at the top of the derrick. It is also used for making and breaidng the joints. 2.33 Catline
A hoisting or pulling line used in conjunction with

2.23 Blocks, Crown and Traveling An assembly of a pulley(s) mounted to rotate on an axis, with a hook or eye for anchoring or attaching to load. Pulley(s) are grooved for the wire rope. It is used to raise or lower the drill string. 2.24 Blowout A sudden escape of violent escape of gas, oil or water from a drilling well when high pressures are encountered and efforts to prevent or control the escape are unsuccessful, 2.25 Bore Hole Any hole bored/drilled in the ground for prospecting of oil, minerals or ground water. 2.26 Blowout Preventor A device attached immediately above the casing to control pressures and prevent escape of fluids from the annular space between the drill pipe and casing or to shutoff the hole if no drill pipe is in the hole, should a kick or blowout occur.
2.27 Breakout

the cathead to lifi heavy equipment or tools. 2.34 Catwalk
A ramp on the side of the drilling rig, fitted to the

derrick floor, where the pipes are laid using the catline. 2.35 Cementing
The proceds of placing the cement slurry to provide a

seal against subsurface water. 2.36 Cement Plug
The hardened cement slurry left in the lower portion

of the casing and later drilled out atler the cement has set. 2.37 Cement Slurry
A pumpable mixture of cement and water.

The act or process of unscrewing a threaded joint � especially in case of drill pipes while it is being withdrawn from the well bore.

2"

1s 9439:2002
2.38 Circulate (Normal)

To pump drilling fluid from the pit, through the drill pipe and back to the surface through the annulus. The term generally applies to the operation carried out when drilling is temporarily suspended, to obtain samples from the bottom or to keep the hole in condition while awaiting other operations.
2.39 Circulation, Direct (Drilling)

of a rotating bit and removing the cuttings by continuous circulation of drilling fluid as the bit penetrates the formation materials. The drilling tluid flows from the mud pit, through the pump, stand pipe, hose, drill pipe, annular space in the hole, and settling pit, back to the mud pit. 2.49 Directional Drilling An operation in which a hole is purposely deviated in a controlled direction and angle. 2.50 Down-the-Hole
Drilling

The drilling fluid movement from the mud pit to the annular space in the hole, drill pipe, kelly water swivel, suction hose, centrifugal or jet pump, settling pit and back to mud pit.
2.40 Control Console

A method of drilling using down-the-hole hammers.
2.51 Down-the-Hole Hammer

A horizontal or vertical panel on which the entire operator's controls tire located.
2.41 Coring

A percussive air operated tool attached to the end of the drill string used in down-the-hole drilling. Tungsten carbide tipped bits are normally used with down-the-hole hammers. 2.52 Drag Bit A rotary bit, which has two or more cutting blades, or wings with hard faced cutting edges. 2.53 Drawdown Lowering of water level caused by pumping. It is a measure for a given quantity of water pumped during a specified period, or after the pumping level has stabilized.
2.54 Draw-Works

The act of procuring a sample of the formation being drilled for geological investigation. Coring is done using a core barrel.
2.42 Crown Block

An assembly of wire line sheaves mounted on the uppermost portion o~ the derricklmast.
2.43 Cuttings

Particles of formations obtained from the well during drilling operations. These can be brought to the surface by the circulating fluid'or air in rotary drilling or bailed out in case of cable tool drilling.
D 2.44 Derrick -- See Mast. 2.45 Deadline

A power-driven winch or winches, usually equipped with clutch and brake for hoisting or lowering a drilling string. 2.55 l)riH Bit Drilling tool deployed in drilling operations and attached at the end of the drill string. 2.56 Drill Collar A heavy drill pipe used immediately above the drill bits to put weight on the drill bit and minimize deviation of the hole. 2.57 Driller A person who operates the drilling machines or rigs. 2.58 Drill Pipe Special pipe, with threaded tool joints at both ends, used to transmit rotation from the rotating mechanism, thrust and weight to the bit and convey fluid, which removes cuttings from the hole and cools the bit.

Refers to the end of the drilling line, which is not reeled on the drum. This end is usually anchored to the mast substructure and does not move as the block moves up or down during various operations. 2.46 Die Overshot A long tapered die of heat-treated steel designed to fit over the top of the lost drill pipe and cuts thread when rotated. The tool is fluted to permit the escape of metal cuttings and fluids.
2.47 Dilution

The use of more water in the cement slurry than is necessary to produce a pumpable slurry. 2.48 Direct Circulation Rotary Drilling This process consists of drilling a borehole by means 3

Is 9439:2002 2.59 Drill String Compon&nts including subs, adaptors, drill pipe, drill collar, bit etc, joined together to form a drill string depending upon the type of rig used for drilling the hole. 2.60 Drive Bushing Device used to transmit torque from the rotary table/ drill head to the kelly but allow vertical movement of the kelly while drilling. 2,61 Drive Head A SLIIJ fastened to the top of pipe or casing to take the blow of drive weight. 2.62 Drive Pipe A pipe or casing driven through over-burden. 2.63 Drive Weight Normally used in percussion drilling to give blows on top of casing to drive it. Also called drive hammer or drive block. 2.64 Dry Hole or Duster A well drilled, which produces neither oil nor gas nor water of significant quantity. 2.65 Dust Collector Used to control the dust and/or collect the cuttings which are discharged from the hole being drilled by air drilling. 2.66 Dust Diverter Collar and hose used to divert dust and cuttings away from the operator and the machinery.
E

2.70 Fish Debris in the hole such as broken bits, drill pipe, casing tools, etc, which may have broken off and lodged in the hole, 2.71 Fishing The act of attempting to recover a fish. 2.72 Fishing Magnet
A special powerful magnet attached to a rope or drill

string to fish out magnetic material. 2.73 Fishing Tap A tap of heat-treated steel designed to tit to the top of the lost drill pipe and cuts thread when rotated. The tap is fluted to permit the escape of the metal cuttings and fluids. 2.74 Fishing Tools Special tools used to retrieve fish from the hole. 2.75 Fluid, Drilling The medium, liquid or gas used for flushing cuttings from the hole being drilled for cooling the bit and for lubricating the bit. 2.76 Foam Flushing A liquid chemical added to the flushing water to stabilize the hole walls and to remove the drill cuttings effectively. G 2.77 Gel Strength
A measure of the effect of the forces between the

particles while the mud is at rest.
H

2.67 Elevators Devices which latch around the drill pipe/casings; attached by links to the traveling block that raises or lowers the pipe/casing from the hole. 2.68 Expansion Reamer A device or tool having cutters that can be expanded or contracted by hydraulic or mechanical means and used to enlarge or ream bore hole below the casing or drive pipe. Also known as adjustable or under reamer.
F

2.78 Hoisting Line Wire rope used on the draw-works to hoist and lower the drill string. 2.79 Hole Usually refers to the well bore. 2.80 Hook Load The load, which may be applied to the hook, attached to the traveling block on a drill rig. 2.81 Hydraulics That branch of engineering that deals with liquids in motion. It is the know-how about the effects of fluid velocities and pressures and the power involved.

2.69 Feed The process of applying required pressure on the cutting tool to achieve the downward movement,

4

IS 9439:2002

2.82 Hydraulic Percussion Drilling This is also known as hollow-rod drilling method. It employs a chisel shaped bit. A ball check valve is provided between the bit and lower end of the drill pipe string. Drilling is done by lifting and dropping the drill rods/ bit with quick short strokes. The drilling fluid is supplied at the surface in the annular space. It enters the ball check valve during downward stroke of drill pipe. When the bit is picked up, the ball check valve closes and traps the fluid inside the drill pipe. Continuous reciprocating motion produces a pumping action to lift the fluid to the top of the string of drill pipe where it discharges into a settling tank. 1 2.83 Idler In machinery an idler pulley or sprocket is used in connection with belt drive and chain drive respectively to maintain desired tension in the belt or chain. 2.841 repression Block This block has many forms and designs and often used to obtain an impression of the top of the fish before attempting fishing operations. 2.85 1.S.0. -- Abbreviation for International Organization for Standardization
J

transmits it to the drill pipe and consequently to the rotary bit.
L

2.89 Loss of Circulation The loss of drilling fluid into formation pores or crevices.
M

2.90 Making a Joint/Connection The act of screwing a joint of the drill pipe on to the drill stem suspended above the well bore. 2.91 Making Hole Drilling ahead. 2.92 Mast A structure on the rig used to support the crown block, top drive, pull down chains, hoisting lines, etc. It is also called Derrick or Tower. 2.93 Marsh Funnel
A calibrated funnel commonly used in field tests to determine the viscosity of drilling mud.

2.94 Master Bushing
Adaptor used to reduce the size of the rotary table

2.86 Jet A directed, rapid flow of fluid from a nozzle. 2.87 Jet Percussion Drilling In this method, a chisel-shaped bit is attached to the lower end of string of pipe. Holes on each side of the blades of the bit serve as nozzles that help in loosening the material being drilled and keep the bit clean. The drill rods are rotated by hand to make the drill cut a round hole. The drilling fluid flows from the mud pit through the pump, stand pipe, hose, drill pipe and comes out through nozzles in the bit. It then flows through the annular space to settling pit and back to mud pit. With fluid circulation maintained, the drill rods are lifted and dropped in a manner similar to cable tool drilling but with shorter strokes. The bore hole is thus drilled by chopping action of the bit co]mbined with washing action of water jets.
K

opening to accommodate various sizes of bushings, slips, etc. 2.95 Mud Balance An instrument consisting of a cup and a graduated arm with a sliding weight and resting on a fulcrum used to measure weight of the mud. 2.96 Mud Gun A pipe that shoots a jet of drilling mud under high pressure into the mud pit to mix the additives and to stir the mud for other reasons. 2.97 Mud Mixing Preparation of drilling fluid from a mixture of water or other fluids and one or more of various dry mud making materials such as clay, weighing materials, chemicals, etc. 2.98 Mud (Slush) Pump

2.88 Kelly A formed or machined section of hollow drill steel which is joined directly to the swivel at the top and to the dril 1pipe below. The flats or flutes of the kelly engage the rotary table so that the rotation of the rotary table is transmitted to the kelly, which, in turn, 5

A large single acting triplex or double acting duplex pump used to circulate mud down the drill pipe and up the annulus, under normal operations.

N 2.99 Nozzle A small spout to direct the flow of fluid efficiently.

IS 9439:2002
P 2.100 Penetration, Rate of 2.110 Rotary Table, Rotation Drive ` Power Swivel, and/or the

The rate at which the bit proceeds in the deepening of the well bore. 2.101 Pipe Handling Equipment The equipment for storing, adding and removing lengths of drill pipe. 2.102 Power-Take-Off The means of transmitting power from the engine of the power package, or a truck or tractor, to the other components of a drilling rig. This is usually accomplished by a separate shifting amangement in the transmission, 2.103 Pull Down a) Thrust or weight applied to the bit through the drill string, and b) The mechanism, which provides either, the hoisting or pulling power.
R

The means of transmitting rotation to the drill string and bit.

s
2.111 Safety Hook A hoisting hook with a spring-loaded latch that prevents the load from accidentally slipping off the hook.

2.112 Sand Content The percentage bulk volume of sand in a drilling fluid.
2.113 Shale Shaker

A vibrating screen that removes coarser cuttings from the circulating fluid before it flows into the return pit.
2.114 Sheaves

Disc type or wheel type parts of the traveling blocks or crown block with the circumference grooved for a selected diameter of drilling lines. These can be mounted on bushings or bearings. 2.115 S1ipS Wedge or wedges used to prevent the drill pipe or casing pipe from slipping through the opening in the rotary table when the bit is off the bottom during trip or when adding or taking off a section of drill pipe. These may be hand or power-actuated. 2.116 Slurry A mixture of cement and water that is pumped into the well to cement casing. 2.117 Slush (Mud) Pit Pit used for mixing the drilling fluids and to act as a storage/settling tank for the return cuttings.
2.118 Stabilizer

2.104 Reamer Cutting tool used to enlarge a bore hole.
2.105 Reaming

The operation of smoothening the well bore, enlarging the hole to the desired size. 2.106 Reverse Circulation Rotary Drilling In this drilling process, a string of drill pipes with a drill bit at the bottom is rotated by mechanical means. Plain water or a fluid of gelling quality is circulated to prevent the hole from caving in and for sucking up the drill cuttings through drill pipes. The flow of drilling fluid takes place from the mud pit to the annular space then through the opening in the bit to the dril Ipipe, a centrifugal pump or jet ejector, settling pit and back to mud pit. 2.107 Rig A drilling machine used for drilling a borehole.
2.108 Rotary Drive

Fixed to the drill string to provide stability to the drill string -- can be spaced out over the entire length of the string. 2.119 Stand Pipe
A vertical pipe or hose carrying either air or mud to

Use of a power shaft to transmit driving power to the rutaling element. 2.109 Rotary Hose

approximately the middle of the mast where it is connected to the mud, rotary or swivel hose. 2.120 Sub

The air or mud hose that leads from the stand pipe to the swivel, also known as the `fluid (air) or swivel hose",

A substitute, or adaptor, which is used to connect from one type or size of threaded connection to another.

6

Is 9439:2002 2.121 Swivel 2.127 Transfer Case

The mechanism, which permits the passage of mud or air from a stationary hose into a rotating member, such as the kelly, or dnill pipe.
T 2.122 Thinner

A transmission to distribute power from the engine to other rig components.

w
2.128 Wall Hook

A substance that reduces the apparent viscosity and get development of mud without lowering the density. The addition of thinner affects the colloidal clay fraction of mud.
2.123 Thread Protector

A simple tool that can be made from steel casing, shaped with a cutting torch.. A reducing sub connects the top end of the tool to the drill stem. Also used to straighten the lost drill pipe in the hole in preparation for removal by the tap or overshot tools.
2.129 Water Injection System

A coupling type device which is screwed onto or into both ends of a pipe to protect the threads from damage during transportation, storage or moving around the drill site.
2.124 Tongs

Used for adding water to the down-hole air stream, thereby increasing the eftlciency of the cleaning action. Also used for controlling dust in the hole.
2.130 Water Table

That underground level at which water is found.
2.131 Wetting Agent

The tools used in-making or breaking a joint of pipe during a drilling operation. Their action is much the same as that of a pipe wrench.
2.125 Tool Joint

An additive that reduces surface tension,
2.132 Water-Well

Threaded portions of the drill string, which may be either box or pin type.
2.126 Tower

Term used for any type of ground water structure providing space for accommodating water lifting device for drawal of ground water.

See Mast.

7

Is 9439:2002

ANNEX A (Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION

Diamond Core and Water-Well Drilling Sectional Committee, ME21
Organization Representative(s) SHIUR. SUNOARARAAAN (Chairman) SHRIV. K. KANSAL (Alternate)

Gcolugical Survey ofhrdia;Kolkata

Atlas Copco (India) Ltd, Pune Atomic Mmemls Directorate For Exploration and Researeh, Hydernbad

SHRI S. DAmA MAAUMDAR
SHRIO. P. SAHU SHRI A.B. ANAND(A/terrrafe)

Central Ground Water Board, Faridabad

SHRtS. S. CHAUHAN SHRtB. K. MENDIRATTA (Alfernate)

lndian Pump Manufacturers Association, Mumbai

SHRIHARSHAD M. JOSHI SHRIS. L. ABHYANKAR (Alternate)

Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad Ingersoll-Rand (India) Ltd, Bangalore

SHRIC. K. JAIN SHSU P. SURSSH RJ40 SHRIH. K. RAMPRASAD (Ahernaff)

Johnsons Filtration Systems(India) Ltd, Ahmedabad Kishore Vadilal Private Limited, Ahmedabad

SHRIDHARMSSH MAS+IRU SHRIS. K. PARtKH SHRtK. V. PARIKH (Aliernafe)

Kores (India) Ltd. New Delhi

SHRIV. GIFTA SHRtP. R. AGAL(Afferrrszre)

Laxmi Udyog, Jodhpur Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd, Nagpur

SHRJ BHAGWAN SINGH SHRININAN00MMEN SHWS. DHAR(Alrernafe)

Public Health Engineering Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal Rockdrill (india), Jodhpur

SHRIRAMAKANT DUBE SHRISACHIOANAND MISHRA(Ahernafe) SHRIM. K. GUITA SHRIK. K. GUPTA(,41/erna/e)

The Singareni Collieries Co Ltd, Kothagudem

SHRIY. NARAY+ANA MURTHY SHRtV. NAGESWARA RAO (Alternate)

The Southern India Engineering Manufacturers' Association, Coimbatore

SHRIG. RAIENDRAN SriFU R. R. JAGANNATHAN (Alternate)

United Nations Children's Fund, New Delhi

SHRIVISHWAS JOSHI SHRIARONK. MUDGIL(Affernate)

Widia (India) Ltd, Bangalore

SHRtR. B. WATSON SHroS. V. PRASANT (Alternate)

BIS Directorate General

SHSU M. L. CHOPRA, Direetor&

Head (MED) [Representing Director General (Ex-oflcio)]

Member-Secretary SHIUP. %NKATESWARA ~0

Joint Director (MED)

8

Bureau of Indian Standards

.,, ,

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of hzdian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises cm the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffiied when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edhion by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. ME 21 (0635).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF lNDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Mrmak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional OffIces: Central Eastern : Manak Bhavao, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 3233841 { 3378499,3378561 3378626,3379120 { 603843 { 602025 2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315
8329295,8327858 8327891,8327892 {

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalay% E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)
MUM13AI 400093

Branches : AHMEDABAD.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI, HYDEIWBAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA, PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

