anda HAF IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


CARIL CIR GIRS IE IESG 
r 2 jain att watea amA 


Data Privacy Assurance 


Part 2 Engineering and Management Guidelines 


ICS 35.030 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 10 


Information Systems Security and Privacy Sectional committee, LITD 17 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
Information Systems Security and Privacy Sectional committee had been approved by the Electronics and 
Information Technology Divisional council. 


Other parts in this series are: 


Part 1 Engineering and management requirements 


It is imperative for any organization processing personal information as part of its in-house business function, 
or its customer solution offering, to provide privacy assurance to those whose data it processes. The trigger for 
this is not only from data privacy regulations but also for consumer delight, market differentiation and employee 
satisfaction. This Indian standard is intended to serve as a privacy assurance framework for such organizations. 
Implementation of Part 1 of this standard will help organizations to provide privacy assurance to customers, 
employees, and also to achieve and sustain privacy compliance to regulatory and contractual requirements. 


Implementing Part 1 of this standard and guidelines of this standard is not a substitute for regulatory compliance. 
Depending on applicable jurisdiction, nature of business and type of personal information processed, various 
data protection related laws may apply to an organization, which needs to be determined and complied to, by the 
organization. Besides providing certain level of assurance to consumers on data privacy, this standard will also 
help the organizations in developing better understanding of such privacy requirements, embedding them into 
design and sustaining privacy assurance. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex C. 


ANNEX A LEGAL PROVISIONS IN INDIA ON DATA PRIVACY 


A 


CONTENTS 


SCOPE 
REFERENCES 
DEFINITIONS 


PRIVACY ENGINEERING 


4.1 Development of Privacy Requirements 
4.2 Privacy Principles Based Design Considerations 
4.3 Verification and Testing 


PRIVACY MANAGEMENT 


5.1 Privacy Objectives 
5.2 Data Privacy Function 
5.3 Data Privacy Management System (DPMS) 
5.4 Policies and Processes 
5.5 Records and Document Management 
5.6 Privacy Impact Assessments 
5.7 Data Processor Management 
5.8 Privacy Risk Management 
5.9 Privacy Incident Management 
5.10 Data Subject’s Request Management 
5.11 Grievance Redress 
5.12 Staff Competency and Accountability 
5.13 Ongoing Regulatory Compliance 
5.14 Periodic Audits 
5.15 Measurement and Continuous Improvement 


GENERAL LAWS 


A-1 INDIAN CONSTITUTION 


A-2 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2008 


A-3 IT RULES (REASONABLE SECURITY PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES 
AND SENSITIVE PERSONAL INFORMATION OR INFORMATION): 


A-4 SECTORAL LAWS 


A-4.1 Banking 

A-4.2 E-governance and Identity 
A-4.3 Consumer 

A-4.4 Freedom of Expression 
A-4.5 Law Enforcement 


Page No. 


A-4.6 Internet and Communications 
A-4.7 Health & Medical 
A-4.8 Transparency & Other Regulations 


ANNEX B SECURITY AND PRIVACY CONSIDERATIONS FOR 


CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURE 


B-1 SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS 


B-2 PRIVACY CONSIDERATIONS 


B-2.1 
B-2.2 
B-2.3 
B-2.4 
B-2.5 
B-2.6 
B-2.7 
B-2.8 
B-2.9 


Compliance to Applicable Regulations 
Data Transfer Restrictions 

Data Deletion 

Neighbor Subpoena Risk 

Data Breach Reporting 

Logs and Audit Trails 

Data Custody 

Data Privacy Clauses 

Data Subject Access 


ANNEX C COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


FIGURES 
Fic. 1 


Fic. 2 
Fia. 3 


TABLES 
Table 1 


FLOW OF PERSONAL INFORMATION AMONG STAKEHOLDERS AND TRIGGERS 


FOR DATA PRIVACY 


INTEGRATION OF PRIVACY ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT ASPECTS 


TYPICAL “Privacy Impact ASSESSMENT” PROCESS 


Determining Right Privacy Control 


24 
24 
25 
25 
25 
25 
25 
25 
25 


24 
24 
24 
24 


24 


24 


26 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


Indian Standard 


DATA PRIVACY ASSURANCE 
PART 2 ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 2) provides only guidelines for 
implementation of IS 17428 (Part 1). The guidelines 
are optional and intended to serve as good practices 
for deploying various data privacy controls and also 
illustrates the significance of each control element 
which further helps in choosing the right control. 


1.2 These guidelines shall not be construed as 
prescriptive, to comply with any particular data 
privacy regulation in a particular industry sector and 
they are not exhaustive. While establishing the DPMS 
(Data Privacy Management System), the organization 
should choose the adequate methods, processes and tools 
depending on factors such as the environment, culture, 
technology, geography (both where organization is 
located and location of individuals), industry domain, 
and data volume in terms of number of data subjects 
involved. 


2. REFERENCES 


The standard given below contains provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreement based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed as follows: 


IS No. Title 

Data privacy assurance: Part 1 
17428 Enøi ; d i 
Part 1:2020 Engineering an managemen 

requirements 
IS/ISO/TEC Information technologies — 
27001 Security techniques — Information 
security management systems — 

Requirements 

3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 17428 (Part 1) shall apply. 


4 PRIVACY ENGINEERING 


Any product, solution or service offered that requires 
processing of personal information need to take into 
account data privacy considerations during the entire 


life cycle of solution development, and should cover 
various stages of personal data life cycle including data 
collection, processing operations, decommissioning, 
archival stages, etc. Right from requirements 
development, designing through testing, data privacy 
becomes inherent part of development life cycle. 
Depending on the development methodology used, the 
exact stages may be further broken down, as applicable. 
An illustration showing flow of personal information 
among stakeholders and triggers for data privacy is 
given in Fig. 1. 


4.1 Development of Privacy Requirements 


Prior to designing for privacy, the requirements on 
data privacy should be determined by the organization. 
In doing so, it is recommended that the organization 
should: 

a) Ascertain applicable jurisdiction, both territorial 
and sectoral, 

b) Evaluate the applicability of regulations, which 
could be omnibus or sectoral laws, 

c) Identify contractual requirements pertaining to 
data privacy, as applicable, 

d) Obtain inputs from Market and Consumer 
Expectations on data privacy, 

e) Factor for Design-induced requirements, 

f) Consider data classification criteria for the 
personal data that the organization is likely to 
process, 

g) Derive privacy and security controls from 
organization’s own business needs, privacy and 
security policies and processes, and 

h) Evaluate if there is any requirement originating 
from data localization regulations. 


Detailed guidance on the above, follows: 


4.1.1 Regulatory 


Data Privacy regulations typically fall under one of 
the following broad categories — Omnibus, sectoral or 
territorial. Applicability of all these should be taken 
into account. 


4.1.1.1 Types of regulations 


There are various laws, rules and other legal provisions 
that deal with data privacy. In India, there is no omnibus 
law on data privacy at the time of drafting of this 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


Market & Consumer Expectations 


ORGANIZATION 


Personal 
Data / 
Metadata 


Data Privacy Requirements 
(Regulatory/Contractual) 


7 
„= Ex: GDPR, HIPAA, etc. 


— a 


Fic 1. FLow oF PERSONAL INFORMATION AMONG STAKEHOLDERS AND TRIGGERS FOR DATA PRIVACY 


standard, but some of those that are directly or indirectly 
related to data privacy and protection are listed for 
illustration purpose, in Annex A. Also, privacy related 
regulatory requirements are provided with the license 
guidelines and other regulatory frameworks published 
by the sector specific regulator in India. List of some of 
the sectoral laws in India that deal with data privacy in 
that particular sector is also given in Annex A. 


4.1.1.2 Determination of jurisdiction 


With increase in online activities, and most of the 
personal information based solutions being online; 
the issue of determination of jurisdiction, in case 
of a privacy incident or while lodging a complaint 
is increasingly becoming an important point for 
consideration. Even when data collection is not 
online, this becomes important when the data subjects, 
the organization and the location of processing all 
fall under different geographical territories. This is 
particularly due to increasing number of disputes around 
data privacy with the parent organization being in one 
country and operations being held in local jurisdiction 
of another country. Hence, organizations that collect 
and process personal information should carefully 
determine their jurisdiction before determining the 
privacy requirements. In the event of a dispute, it is the 
applicable courts that have the authority to decide to 
take up a case and determine whether it has: 


a) ‘personal jurisdiction’ over the parties, 
b) ‘territorial jurisdiction’, and 
c) ‘subject matter’ based jurisdiction. 


Due to its nature, Internet and cyberspace have 
disrupted traditional notions of applicability of law 
and jurisdiction, as Internet based transactions often 
involve data transfer across national boundaries. Due 
to this, individuals and organizations can now become 
subject to the law of a foreign country even without a 
physical presence in that country. 


Determination of jurisdiction will depend primarily on 
following factors: 


1) Nature of the personal information, 


2) Sector (for example telecommunication, 
banking, etc), 

3) The country where data processing takes place, 
and; 


4) The country to which the data subject belongs 
to. 


In various jurisdictions, the enforcement of the law 
will often depend on the presence of legal entity in 
the country from where data subjects originate. The 
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) enacted in 
Europe however, is an example where the law applies 
to organization processing personal information of EU 
(European Union) residents regardless of where the 
organization is located. 


4.1.2 Contractual 


Extent of applicability of laws on an organization 
processing personal information will depend on 
whether the organization is a data controller or a data 
processor. Data Privacy laws and regulations primarily 


apply to data controllers, although increasingly the 
scope of some of the privacy regulations extend to data 
processors also, for example HIPAA, GDPR. However, 
as a data processor, organizations are bound to adhere 
to obligations agreed as part of contract/master services 
agreement. As a data processor, companies are required 
to follow client’s instructions and process personal 
information on their behalf. 


All the regulations and requirements applicable to an 
organization as a data processor should be clearly listed 
down in the contract. Before entering into an agreement 
with the client, an organization should do a thorough 
review of the contractual clauses and should ensure they 
understand all such requirements clearly. Once agreed, 
the organization should deploy adequate measures to 
comply with those requirements. Non-compliance 
to any such contractual requirements agreed as part 
of contract may lead to penalties as prescribed in the 
contract in form of a clause or as per the contract laws 
applicable in the jurisdiction. 


During contract review, if the data processor comes 
across any client requirement which according to them 
conflicts with any of the requirements of the applicable 
laws and regulations in jurisdiction of data processor, it 
should be immediately flagged and brought to client’s 
notice. Few examples of contractual requirements 
include personal data breach notification, records of 
processing, disclosure of appropriate security and 
organizational measures, etc. 


In India, as of now, the issue of data protection is 
generally governed by the contractual relationship 
between the parties, and the parties are free to enter 
into contracts to determine their relationship defining 
the terms, cross-border data transfer restrictions, and 
mode of handling of the same. 


4.1.3 Market and Consumer Expectations 


Data privacy is becoming a pressing concern due to 
consumer’s increased reliance and involvement in 
digital world. For any organization processing personal 
information of consumers, it is imperative that they 
determine privacy expectations before designing the 
solution or product. Such expectations may be obtained 
from various sources few of which are listed below: 


a) Consumer feedback from their use of the existing 
solution, 


b) Consumer Survey reports obtained from external 
parties, 

c) Analysis of customer complaints and grievances, 

d) Privacy choices exercised by existing consumers, 
and 

e) Benchmarking study with similar products in the 
market. 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


4.1.4 Data Classification Criteria 


a) It is important to establish a framework in the 
organization for classifying personal information 
based on its level of sensitivity, value and 
criticality, which will aid in determining baseline 
data privacy and security controls for the 
protection of data. 


b) Classifying data is the process of categorizing 
data assets based on their sensitivity, which is 
determined by the likely impact and harm caused 
to an individual in the event of a data breach or 
misuse. Since the interpretation of sensitivity 
may be subjective and may vary depending on 
culture, business priorities etc. Therefore, it is 
the applicable regulation which determines the 
sensitivity of particular data. Personal information 
is broadly classified as sensitive or non-sensitive. 
Usually data such as date of birth, telephone 
number etc. are treated as non-sensitive whereas 
health, financial information, sexual orientation, 
biometrics, religious beliefs etc. are often 
considered sensitive. The exact classification 
should be based on applicable jurisdiction and the 
nature of processing involved. 


c) Classification will apply both for data and 
metadata 


d) If an organization already has information 
classification guidelines defined for various 
types of data, which includes both personal 
and non-personal information, the organization 
may choose to include the personal information 
under the overall classification. for example if 
an organization has three levels of classification 
‘Restricted’, ‘Confidential’, ‘Public’, it may 
choose to put ‘personal information’ as part of 
‘Confidential’ and ‘sensitive personal information’ 
as part of ‘Restricted’ category. Furthermore, when 
dealing with non- personal information, the risk 
of combining non-personal information to infer 
or derive an identity or profile of a unique user 
or at least small enough subset of users should be 
understood and evaluated. 


The primary purpose of classifying data is to decide on 
downstream data privacy controls that an organization 
needs to deploy. In general, stricter controls are required 
for protecting sensitive data due to the potential harm 
they could cause to the individual. 


4.1.5 Design-Induced Requirements 


The design itself may introduce additional privacy 
risks and in this case organizations may need to revisit 
design considerations for data privacy. Organizations 
may decide to implement certain processes in order 
to meet data privacy requirements which are then 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


likely to bring in newer privacy challenges. In such 
cases, organizations need to do a detailed assessment 
on what challenges can arise and how it needs to alter 
upstream design to prevent the risks. For example, 
an organization may decide to monitor emails, 
both official and personal, of its staff, in order to 
prevent/detect unauthorized leakage of its consumer 
data. In this process, employee’s personal emails may 
also be monitored which may intrude into their privacy 
and cause distress especially if an email consists of 
sensitive personal information and found to be a false 
positive. 


4.1.6 Data localization 


Data localization laws are typically intended to prevent 
or restrict transfer of personal data to countries that do 
not offer similar protection and to help law enforcement 
agencies have access to data when there is compelling 
need. Such regulations, for certain types of data, may 
require companies to process and store data locally first 
and only then, if required, transfer the data to other 
secondary locations, while certain other types of data 
may not be permitted to be stored outside at all. Before 
transferring any data across borders, companies are 
expected to assess the impact and required to adhere to 
local data privacy regulations. 


4.2 Privacy Principles Based Design Considerations 


4.2.1 Personal Data Collection Limitation 


Personal data may be required by organizations for 
various purposes, such as to fulfill a contractual 
requirement with the data subject, to comply with 
specific regulation, to provide an optional feature 
for those data subjects who choose such option, for 
business and commercial purposes. It may be collected 
by an organization either directly or indirectly. Direct 
collection happens when active involvement from 
individual is required for an organization to collect 
data from an individual for example when data is 
entered into a screen or a form by the individual. 
Indirect collection on the other hand are scenarios 
where no action is required from an individual when 
data is collected by an organization, for example, IP 
address during web browsing, placement of cookie in 
individual’s end point device, CCTV surveillance, etc. 
Additionally, such indirect data collection can happen 
when the data is purchased from or collected through 
an external party. 


Organizations should process data only when it is 
necessary and not excessive. Before collecting the data, 
organization should define the purpose of collecting the 
information. The organization then, should collect the 
minimum information which is required for the defined 
purpose. It may be tempting for organizations to collect 
more data even without adequate justification, with 
the presumption that it may need such data at a later 
stage. Such a practice may not only violate data privacy 


laws, but it will also put unnecessary burden on the 
organization in terms of the need to deploy additional 
measures to protect such data and justification why 
such data was collected. Any information collected 
more than minimum, and which is in interest of an 
individual, could be collected based on choice and not 
forced. 


4.2.1.1 Proportionality 


Every personal information collected should be 
proportional to the intended use and not more than 
minimum. It should have a valid purpose and only that 
information which is required to fulfill a business need 
should be collected and processed by organizations. For 
example, employer may need birth dates of employees 
to wish them on their birthdays, in this case collection 
of birth date should be in dd-mm format as year of 
birth will be considered excessive and not relevant to 
the purpose stated above. Similarly, B2C (business to 
consumer) organizations may collect address for billing 
or delivery purposes however collecting date of birth 
and making it mandatory for registration purposes 
maybe considered excessive. The organizations before 
collecting personal information should determine, 


a) Need to collect the data; 
b) Data collected is adequate and relevant; and 


c) Data collected is not excessive and has a valid 
purpose. 
Tools and processes should be designed in such a way 
that data collected and stored on systems is minimal 
and not excessive. This would also put less burden 
on organizations towards maintaining such personal 
information. 


4.2.1.2 Lawful basis 


Personal information collected and processed by 
organizations should be legitimate. The lawful basis 
for collection of personal information may vary 
from country to country depending on applicable 
regulations. Collection and processing of Biometrics 
for authentication purpose, for instance is considered 
legitimate in certain jurisdictions, whereas it is not 
permitted in some other jurisdiction, unless the security 
requirements are extremely critical and justify such 
processing. 


Organizations should be aware of such regulations 
and should perform a proper assessment to ensure that 
data collected is legitimate. Illegitimate data collection 
and processing by an organization may result in fines, 
lawsuits, customer grievances etc., and therefore it is 
imperative for organizations to determine if there are 
any regulations applicable that prohibit collection 
of certain types of data that may be required by the 
organization. Certain checks and controls may need 
to be put in place so that the system flags illegitimate 
collection of personal information. 


When sensitive personal information is collected 
solely for complying with a regulatory requirement, 
the endeavor should be to collect it anonymously. 
For example, when information about caste or race is 
collected from a new employee in an organization, to 
comply to diversity obligations, especially in private 
sector, separate forms may be made available to collect 
the information either in an anonymous manner or in a 
manner that they cannot be linked with other personal 
information of the employee. This way it helps prevent 
any scope for discrimination during employment. This 
example however may not be valid for government 
organizations, which collect and use caste data due to 
applicable mandatory reservation rules of recruitment 
and career progression. 


For each type of data collection, the organization should 
determine the appropriate lawful basis for collection 
and processing of personal data and document the 
same. Such lawful basis will typically be one of the 
following: 


a) To fulfill a service or contract with the individual; 

b) For legitimate business interest of organization, 
balanced with potential privacy harms for the 
individual; 

c) To fulfill a legal obligation; 

d) To protect vital interests of the individual; and 


e) For public interest. 


4.2.1.3 Collection at the right stage 


Organizations should design their processes and 
systems in such a way that personal information is 
collected at the right stage at the right time when the 
need for collection of data arises. Organizations should 
collect and process personal information only when a 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


valid business need for data collection exists at that 
point of time. 


While providing personal information in a web based 
screen, design should ensure that individuals should 
not face a situation whereby some of their data is 
captured by the organization and retained before 
the individual reads and agrees to privacy policy 
or before the individual chooses to discontinue the 
transaction any further. For example, situation should 
not arise whereby an individual may find that he is 
not comfortable providing one or more of the data 
elements being sought mandatorily in the second 
screen during registration process, based on which he 
decides to abandon registration, but the system does 
not allow to revoke data submitted in the first screen. 
This type of elusive practice of layering data collection 
with progressively decreasing privacy is not only 
privacy unfriendly but also may be treated as a privacy 
violation. 


Similarly, data required at the time of joining an 
organization should not be collected from candidates 
at the time of recruitment, providing the reason that 
organization may anyway collect it at the time of 
joining. This may be considered as unlawful and will 
violate privacy regulations. 


4.2.2 Privacy Notice 


Organizations should give prior notices to individuals 
before processing any personal information. Use of 
‘privacy notice’ or ‘privacy notice with consent’ will 
often depend on lawful basis determined for each type 
of data processing. In the absence of any regulation, 
table 1 may be referred to, while determining the right 
privacy control. 


Table 1 Determining Right Privacy Control 


Is data necessary PII or Basis for data collection to be used Data Privacy notice Example 
to provide service/ SPI minimization or consent 
product or to enter required? 
into a contract? 
Mandatory Does not Use one of the following: Yes Fair Collection Address, telephone number, 
matter a) Contractual Requirement Notice bank a/c number in an 
. e-commerce platform. 
b) Legally required : ; 
Blood group, age, ailment in 
c) To protect vital interest of data a hospital 
bject : 
iia Photo and education 
d) Legitimate business interest certificates, during 
e) Public interest employment 
Optional Does not Consent No, unless Explicit Marriage anniversary date, 
matter required by Consent and annual salary in e-commerce 
applicable Choice for site 
legislation each non- Geo location for an app that 
mandatory tests students’ IQ 


data element 
when 


and 


Telephone number 
purchasing vegetables 
grocery in retail store. 


NOTE — Even in cases when data minimization is not required, all privacy principles like proportionality, fairness, lawfulness, and other data 
protection measures should be applied. Also certain jurisdictions may require consent for sensitive personal data, even if such data collection is 


mandatory, and care should be exercised in such cases to ensure fairness. 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


4.2.2.1 Contents 


Organizations should design the privacy notices in such 
a way that it clearly provides purpose of data attributes 
that it intends to collect. Organizations should be 
open and transparent about their personal information 
collection practices and processes. Whenever there is a 
personal information processing, individuals should be 
clearly informed with a privacy notice about the data 
controller’s policies, procedures and practices with 
respect to the processing of the personal information 
before commencing such processing. The organization 
should determine the contents of notice depending 
on the applicable jurisdiction and business reasons. 
Typical details provided in the notice are as follows: 


a) The fact that specific personal information will be 
collected. 


b) Purpose of data collection. 


c) Name and address of entity collecting the personal 
data (Data Controller). 


d) Name and address of entity retaining the data, 
if different from above. 


e) The identity of the data controller including 
information on how to contact the data controller. 


f) Intended data recipients. 


g) Data Retention including the reasons to retain data 
beyond use and policies on data deletion. 


h) Security measures organization will adopt. 


j) Whether the data will be shared with external 
parties. 


k) The name and contact number of the relevant data 
privacy officer. 


m) Method to withdraw consent. 


The contents of notice may vary depending on 
applicable jurisdiction. However, the basic elements 
as mentioned above should be captured in order to be 
transparent to the individuals. 


The privacy notice should neither be too detailed nor 
too abstract. It should cover the necessary details and 
should be simple to read and understand for example, if 
an organization is collecting data from a consumer for 
delivering services, then it is not sufficient to mention 
‘registration and service delivery purpose’. It should 
mention purposes for various categories of information 
such as address for delivering a product, demographic 
details to send targeted advertising, etc. Although 
organizations may be tempted to use privacy notices 
which are too abstract, but this makes it less transparent 
and in the process may violate the regulations. On 
the other hand, if it is too detailed, every time an 
organization makes minor internal changes on data 
processing which does not impact the broad purpose 
of collection, they may be unnecessarily required to go 
back to individuals for obtaining fresh consent which 
makes it cumbersome for organizations and as well as 
for the individuals. 


4.2.2.2 Mode of communication 


Organizations may adopt various means to deploy 
privacy notices. An assessment should be done to 
determine which mode would be the most suitable and 
effective for the organization and business: 


a) Electronic privacy notices 


This mode is usually effective when personal 
information is being collected through a web 
application or through a mobile app, some 
common examples being ecommerce mobile 
apps collecting data from consumers. When the 
user logs into an application, a notice should be 
displayed before the data is captured/saved in 
organization’s systems. 


b) Hard copy privacy notices 


Hard copy notices/consents may be deployed 
where data elements are collected through hard 
copy forms, for example, feedback forms in hotels 
usually ask date of birth, anniversary date, email 
ID, phone number. Notices should be provided 
along with these forms. 


c) Posters 


Notices can be displayed where it is not feasible to 
give a separate notice to each individual. One such 
example is CCTV surveillance at entry/exit points. 
Notices with proper messages should be displayed 
in such areas and should be clearly visible to the 
individuals. 


d) Website privacy policy 
Organizations may publish a privacy policy on 
their website broadly for two reasons: 


1) for website visitors, for information collected 
during website browsing. Users should also be 
informed about indirect data collection such as 
cookie information, IP address. 


2) to make all data subjects aware about 
organization’s privacy policies and practices 
for all data collected & processed by the 
organization, and not confined to data collected 
on the website. 


4.2.2.3 Timing of providing notice 


Organizations should ensure that notices are provided 
to individuals at the right time during the personal data 
collection stage, ideally, just before the collection, 
regardless of whether such data is collected directly 
or indirectly. Providing a notice too early may lead to 
an individual not remembering the contents of a notice 
and therefore inability to take informed decision. 
On the other hand, providing a notice subsequent to 
data collection defeats the very purpose of a privacy 
notice and hence will lead to violation of data privacy 
principles. 


Organization may have provided notice to employees 
few years prior to collection of data, but privacy 


practices and processes may change over a period of 
time and therefore in such cases privacy notices also 
require changes. 


4.2.2.4 Accessibility and comprehensibility 


The accessibility options for people with special needs 
(such as braille, special fonts, auditory versions, etc.) 
may be considered, as appropriate. Systems should 
be designed in such a way so that these privacy 
notices designed for people with special needs can be 
seamlessly embedded. 


The organization may make privacy notices available 
in vernacular language depending on the product or 
solution offering caters to, the population segment. 
Individuals should be able to read and understand these 
privacy policies/notices without difficulty. For example 
individuals can be given an option to choose the 
preferred language and upon selection, privacy notice 
can be displayed in the language user has selected. 


4.2.2.5 Ease of readability 


Privacy Policies/Notices should be device friendly, 
for instance, the look and design of notice may be 
different for a mobile phone and a desktop computer. 
They should be easily readable by individuals using 
any type of device. Language used in the privacy notice 
should be simple and easy to understand. Appropriate 
font type and display size should be selected to make 
it readable and complex fonts and representation which 
are difficult to read should be avoided. 


4.2.2.6 Acknowledgement of privacy notices 


The organization should, as much as practicable, 
provide notice in a manner that requires an individual 
to affirmatively acknowledge that he has read and 
understood the contents of the notice. This helps in 
demonstrating evidence and prevents situations when 
an individual denies having read a privacy notice, for 
example, a notice simply sent by an email which one 
would not have read due to various reasons including 
its movement to junk folder. Organization should 
ensure that right versions of notices are maintained. 


There may be situations where it is not feasible 
to record an acknowledgment receipt of privacy 
notices for example, hard copy notices displayed for 
CCTV recording, whereas for employees and staff, 
organizations may consider including it in their annual 
code of conduct or employee joining contract or its 
website. 


4.2.3 Choice and Consent 


When consent is the lawful basis for data collection 
and processing, the organizations should ensure the 
following: 


a) That the consent given is a valid consent, being 
given freely and not under any compulsion /undue 
influence. 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


b) That the consent is taken only after displaying the 
privacy notice to individual as in 4.2.2. 


c) That the consent is an informed consent. 


d) Incase ofa minor, the consent is given by the legal 
guardian. 


Organizations should give enough choices to individuals 
through various mechanisms. Personal information of 
individuals should not be processed, if they opt out for 
such processing. 


Privacy-by-default should be the norm and opt-in 
consent should be the preferred approach. 


4.2.3.1 Opt-in and opt-out considerations 


It is imperative for organizations to understand opt 
in and opt out options especially when dealing with 
activities related to marketing purposes. 


If organizations need to use opt in mechanism for 
marketing activities, they need to take customer’s 
permission before sending newsletters, updates on 
emails etc. Organizations may decide on best methods 
to deploy such practices, for example enabling 
checkboxes on websites for permissions, email 
confirmation or an explicit action from individual like 
clicking on a link to provide opt in. Only those who 
opt in, should receive messages and calls from the 
organization for example, many countries in Europe 
require organizations to use opt in mechanism, as per 
e-privacy directive for electronic marketing. 


Opt out is a method by which recipients may choose 
to unsubscribe unsolicited calls/mails and messages. 
Organizations should provide opt out facility before 
making direct marketing calls to prospects/clients. 
Organizations should be cautious and respect privacy 
preferences before adding any prospect to their 
marketing database. Once opted out, organizations 
should ensure they adhere and respect such decisions 
of individual and stop making calls/sending messages 
to these individuals immediately. An opt-out option, 
preferably in the first transaction itself, may be provided 
through one or more of the following ways: 


a) Calling a phone number provided and opting out. 

b) Email address to which individuals can send, in 

order to opt out. 

c) Link — Clicking a link to opt out. 

d) Customer Acquisition Forms — pre-checked box. 
Organizations should use opt-out method only when 
risk of privacy intrusion is least and when permitted 
by law. In general, the decision on the right method to 
choose would be based on following parameters: 

a) Applicable regulations in the jurisdiction. 


b) Harm or distress caused to the individual and to 
the extent it is irreversible. 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


4.2.3.2 Fairness of discretion 


When consent is the lawful basis for collection of data, 
such choice needs to be fair and transparent. Following 
scenarios illustrate the concept of fairness: 


a) Ane-commerce portal should not force a consumer 
to provide information that is not essential, for 
completing a transaction, and to offer a service. 
Such collection does not give a fair choice to 
consumer because by then, consumer would have 
already provided some personal information and 
entered into a transaction, and cannot reverse the 
collection. 


b) If an app asks consent for sharing data with a 
third party on which it relies for fulfilling the 
service to the individual, such consent will not 
be appropriate. The app owner which will be the 
data controller, should take accountability for 
data transfer and need to ensure that the third 
party, most likely a data processor, is made liable 
contractually for data protection measures. 


c) Where consent is the lawful basis for collection 
and processing of personal data, then organizations 
should present consent in such a way that it is 
vivid and not combined with other ‘declarations’ 
or ‘Terms and Conditions’. To ensure fairness, 
consent for mandatory and optional personal data 
collection should not be combined into one. 


d) Timing of obtaining consent - see 4.2.2.3 


4.2.3.3 Revocation of consent 


An individual’s preferences on data collection and 
processing may change over a period of time due to 
their personal choice, nature of processing by the 
organization etc. so individuals may have in general 
a reasonable expectation to have their preferences 
changed subsequently. Hence the organization should 
provide an option to individuals to revoke consents 
provided by them earlier for data collection and 
processing. In due course of time, whenever individual 
feels that he/she needs to revoke his/her consent due to 
any reason, he should be able to do that. Organizations 
should be transparent on consequences of revoking 
consent by an individual. Many countries, including 
India have a legal requirement to provide this. 


An individual may be deprived of corresponding 
benefits and services if he/she wishes to withdraw 
consent on data processing. There might be times 
when it may be difficult to permit to revoke consent 
for example, certain laws may require few personal 
information elements to be retained for certain period 
of time, in this case, individuals may not be permitted 
to revoke consent before the retention period required 
by law. 


4.2.3.4 Preservation of evidence for consents 


The organization should maintain records of consents 
obtained from the individuals from time to time. 
Appropriate record and document management controls 
should be implemented in line with the individual’s 
right to access, correct or erase the personal information 
pertaining to them. 


Preservation of evidence of consent is to ensure and 
demonstrate the following: 


a) Individual’s active participation in the decision- 
making process regarding the processing of their 
personal information. 


b) the stored consent information is related to the 
right version of privacy policy and is for the same 
intended purpose. 


c) legal basis for processing the relevant personal 
information. 


4.2.4 Use Limitation 


4.2.4.1 Restrict to original purpose 


The organization should use personal information only 
for the purpose for which it was originally collected. 


As mentioned in 4.2.2.1, if an organization specifies 
purposes superficially to keep the flexibility to use data 
as it wishes at a later stage, such processing may lead to 
a privacy violation. In the event that the data is required 
to be used for a different purpose, it should obtain fresh 
consent or provide notice to individuals as applicable 
before processing. If the organization intends to use 
such data for statistical analysis purpose, it should use 
aggregated data after de-identifying the same. 


The restriction on use applies not only for the 
organization but also to any other entity to whom 
processing has been outsourced. 


4.2.4.2 De-identification 


In scenarios where organizations may need to use 
data for a secondary purpose or to transfer data to an 
external party, (for example to carry out a questionnaire 
based survey or to an external party to use it for larger 
good of the society) and the purpose can be achieved 
without identifying the individual, they should do so 
only after de-identifying data. 


The objective is to prevent an individual to be 
identifiable from the data set. Organizations should 
make use of de-identification techniques wherever 
possible, to minimize potential privacy harms. 


4.2.4.2.1 Anonymization 


Anonymization is a de-identification technique. In this 
technique, identity of an individual remains completely 


anonymous and individual can never be identified, 
even by referring to other sources of information. Such 
technique may be used when data is shared with a third 
party or put in public domain after deriving meaningful 
insights for the larger good of society for example, 
illness patterns in a geographic region, traffic data, 
diversity related statistics etc. 


4.2.4.2.2 Pseudonymization 


Pseudonymity is another de-identification technique 
that involves replacing the identifiable part of the 
data with ‘pseudonym’, which is a dummy attribute 
used instead of a real one so that it is not possible to 
decipher the identity of an individual from the modified 
data without accessing additional information that 
links pseudonym to real identifier. Pseudonymization 
does not rule out the possibility that there might be 
(a restricted set of) organizations which are able to 
determine the individual’s identity based on the alias 
and data linked to it. Pseudonymization is a reversible 
process i.e. data may be re-identified if the key is made 
available. It should be used when possible to minimize 
privacy harms, for example, when an organization 
engages with external parties to conduct surveys, 
pseudonymization is recommended, so that the external 
party could not establish identity, while organization/ 
owner of the data should be able to re-identify the data 
set by tracing back to the original data. If organizations 
specifically mention that surveys conducted by them 
will be anonymous, they should adhere to the same. 


4.2.5 Data Accuracy 


The organization should ensure that personal 
information remains accurate, complete, up-to-date 
(unless there is a legitimate basis for keeping outdated 
data), adequate, relevant and reliable for the purpose 
of use. 


Inaccurate information can lead to inappropriate 
decisions and processing which may harm the 
individual. Appropriate tools, such as digital signatures, 
may be used to ensure data integrity. In order to prevent 
inadvertent modification of data while stored in servers 
and databases, by admin teams, dual authentication 
may be introduced and logs for any modification, 
deletion etc. from backend, should be maintained for 
audit trail purpose. 


Accuracy is also about keeping data up to date, to 
prevent it getting obsolete, for which the individual 
should be provided access to make changes, where 
appropriate and required. 


4.2.6 Security 


Personal information should be secured by use of 
appropriate controls to ensure their confidentiality, 
integrity, availability and to prevent unauthorized 
access or disclosure. Organizations should deploy 
appropriate security measures commensurate to the 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


likely harm caused to individuals’ rights and freedom 
from a potential breach. 


The organization should implement an information 
security program, commensurate to the need and size of 
the organization and relevantto the privacy risk involved. 
The organization should implement the Standard 
IS/ISO/ITEC 27001 or the codes of best practices for 
data protection as per Rule 8 of Information Technology 
(Reasonable security practices and procedures 
and sensitive personal information or information) 
Rules, 2011 to demonstrate its commitment towards 
security of personal information. Additionally, other 
appropriate established best practices, guidelines such 
as NIST Cybersecurity Framework and DSCI Security 
Framework, etc. may also be implemented. It may also 
be stipulated as per the agreement between the parties 
or as per the laws such as medical code of ethics, legal 
code of ethics, Indian evidence act, etc. 


The scope of such program should cover all types of 
personal information collected or processed by the 
organization. The legal and regulatory requirements 
should be identified and covered in the scope of security 
program. Compliance to all security requirements 
should be documented. 


Security control measures will typically fall under two 
categories — security of data at source and securing the 
environment. Other categories may be relevant to the 
nature of business based on the applicable legislation 
and the risk appetite of the organization. 


4.2.6.1 Security of data at source 


Regardless of how well the environment is secured, 
security measures need to be also deployed on data 
at source. This will at the outset, require data to be 
classified as stated in 5.3.1, into appropriate category, 
based on which suitable control measures should be 
planned and deployed. The controls will depend on 
whether data is at rest or in motion both of which need 
to be taken care of. 


4.2.6.1.1 Data at rest 


Data which is stored should be protected by appropriate 
techniques from unauthorized access, modification or 
destruction. The methods used such as encryption, 
password protection, and digital rights management, 
multi-factor authentication etc. should be determined 
based on potential threat scenarios for various 
categories of data. 


4.2.6.1.2 Data in motion 


Data that is in transit is subjected to different set of 
risks when compared to those at rest, and hence needs 
separate control measures. The organizations should 
ensure the following: 


a) Documented encryption policy for protection of 
personal information during transmission and rest. 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


b) All documents and records containing sensitive 
personal information and where, applicable 
personal information, should be encrypted before 
transmitting them by mail or other means. 

c) All personal information to external networks 

should be transmitted through secure channels. 

Any remote access to computer systems containing 

personal information should be restricted, or 

should be controlled, logged and monitored. 


4.2.6.2 Security of environment 


Securing the environment in which personal information 
is stored or processed will typically require logical 
security, physical security, network security, end-point 
security, cloud security, background check of people 
involved in processing personal information, etc. 


Security considerations for cloud are provided in 
Annex B. 


4.2.6.3 Retention of access logs 


The organization should ensure that only authorized 
users access the personal information and prevent 
unauthorized access to the personal information. 
Organization should define the access logs that need 
to be retained in order to demonstrate compliance to 
data privacy regulations. Such retention plans should 
include the following: 


a) Different types of access logs (such as read, write, 
update, delete), exceptions, faults and security. 


b) Types of storage repositories such as database, 
servers, cloud etc. 


c) Types of data based on sensitivity. 


Organization should retain and maintain the logs of user 
access for a defined period, depending on regulations. 


As retention of logs require significant hardware 
space, an organization needs to weigh the retention 
requirements versus the operational constraints 
while defining policy. Apart from retaining the logs, 
organization should regularly review the logs. 


4.2.7 Disclosure and Transfer 


During the life cycle of personal information, transfer 
or disclosure to external parties is often inevitable. 
Transfer often involves outsourcing part of processing 
to a data processor which will only process data as 
instructed by the data controller. Disclosure on the 
other hand involves providing data to an external body 
such as regulators, government bodies, law firms in the 
event of a subpoena, audits etc. not part of life cycle 
process. 


4.2.7.1 Disclosure to external agencies (including 
mandated requirements of data disclosure) 


Whenever personal information is disclosed to an 
external agency, it should be only on individual’s 
consent, unless required/permitted by applicable law. 


10 


In certain rare situations, where informing individual 
about disclosure may impede the very purpose of 
disclosure, consent or notice may be waived but 
only when legally permitted. Regardless of whether 
individual is aware or not, the organization should ensure 
that the data privacy obligations are communicated to 
the external party and such party is obliged to comply 
with all such provisions. 


4.2.7.2 Transfer for processing by data processors and 
cloud providers 


When personal information is transferred to a data 
processor for part of processing during data life 
cycle, the individual should be informed and consent 
should be obtained where appropriate. Data Privacy 
contractual clauses should form part of the contract 
with the data processor and the data processor should 
be contractually obliged to comply with all such stated 
and applicable contractual and regulatory requirements. 
The purpose for which data is transferred to the data 
processor should be clearly specified and the data 
processor should not use the data for any other purpose 
other than that stated in the contract. 


In certain situations, a data processor may be authorized 
by the data controller to collect personal information 
from an individual, in which case the organization 
should specify what data may be collected, how it 
should be collected and ensure that privacy safeguards 
are communicated to the data processor including 
deployment of privacy notice as applicable. 


When personal information is transferred to an external 
party cloud, additional safeguards should be considered 
depending on whether the cloud is private, public or 
hybrid. A detailed privacy impact assessment should 
be conducted by the organization before transferring 
data to a cloud. Some of the privacy considerations are 
given in Annex B. 


4.2.8 Personal data storage limitation 


Personal information should not be retained indefinitely 
and should be kept only as long as it is required by 
the law or when there is a business requirement. 
Requirements for retention of personal data should be 
determined at the time of acquisition of data. 


Requirements of data deletion may also originate from 
‘right to be forgotten’. Individuals may at times request 
for deletion of their data due to various reasons. In these 
cases, unless there are overriding legitimate grounds for 
the processing or other applicable regulations do not 
permit deletion, the organization should have provision 
to remove individual’s personal data promptly. Such 
requests are more common in the internet domain 
such as social media, where not deleting information 
may cause distress to the individual due to rapid 
dissemination of unwanted information. 


The retention period varies based on type of data and 
purpose for which they were collected and hence it 


requires an organization to study and evolve a data 
retention strategy based on which a data retention 
policy should be defined, best suited for its business. 
The exact period for which data needs to be kept should 
be documented in data retention policy and should be 
based on applicable sectoral regulatory and contractual 
requirements. 


Suitable and secure methods should be used for 
deletion of personal information. Such methods should 
be considered while decommissioning assets, media, 
and mobile devices. 


If the organizations require data to be retained for 
statistical purposes beyond retention period, appropriate 
de-identification techniques should be adopted as an 
alternative but in such cases it should be ensured that 
data cannot be re-identified. 


4.2.9 Other Design Considerations to fulfill data 
subjects rights 


In order to fulfil rights of individuals, additional privacy 
features may need to be considered during design and 
taken for implementation. These could come from 
regulations or may be part of consumer expectations. 
In either case, there would be significant impact on 
both technology and process, dependency on external 
parties and hence it is prudent to factor such aspects in 
the upstream stage. 


Examples of such considerations are: 
a) Data portability 
This requires provision to port personal data of an 


individual to a different data controller at the discretion 
of the individual. The benefit for individual would be: 


1) to facilitate transfer of already provided 
data and privacy preferences to the new data 
controller 


2) to get data deleted from previous data controller 


Such feature should not put burden on individual and 
should not be requiring effort and skill from individual. 
Since technologies adopted by various organizations 
(competing data controllers) may be different and 
not compatible, use of different or same tools may be 
required to ease the porting of data. 


b) Object to profiling and automated decision making 


Profiling involves creation ofa database and maintaining 
data against each individual to evaluate certain 
personal aspects, in particular to analyse or predict 
aspects concerning that individual’s performance at 
work, economic situation, health, personal preferences, 
interests, reliability, behaviour, location or movements, 
and is often considered sensitive. Examples where this 
may be used (not necessarily legitimate) are: 


a) Credit rating. 


b) Premium determination Insurance 


companies. 


by 


c) User and entity behaviour analytics. 


11 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


When organizations use profiling, provision should 
be provided to individuals to let them know about 
existence of such profiling, the logic involved and 
when individual could object to such profiling and 
consequences. 


Likewise, in today’s world, more and more processes are 
being automated with least human intervention. When 
organizations focus on technology driven decision 
making, it can result in unfavorable consequences 
to individuals in the event of incorrect decision. 
Organizations should ensure that as a consequence of 
any decision about an individual, that can cause distress 
or harm to an individual is not solely taken based on 
automated processing, but should be supplemented 
with manual intervention. Extent of potential harm to 
individuals from data privacy perspective needs to be 
evaluated based on nature of transaction involved, for 
example, financial impact, health related condition, 
reputation loss due to public disclosure of private 
matters, suspension of employment, identity theft, 
discrimination, etc. 


For example, some banks use verification services 
from external parties before issuing cards to customers, 
whereby they may scan prospective customers’ digital 
footprints on the web and social media activity using 
algorithms. In such cases if the bank solely uses the 
recommendations from external parties in deciding 
issuance of credit card or downgrading credit card, it 
will be considered as an automated decision making 
and in such cases, individuals may have right to 
know and question the rationale for the decision, and 
seek human intervention. Outcomes from automated 
decision making often cause significant level of 
distress among customers and hence to mitigate the risk 
involved, banks should establish facts with the affected 
individuals before taking such actions. 


4.3 Verification and Testing 


The data privacy requirements incorporated in design 
should be verified and tested prior to deployment 
of solution or product. This will reduce the risk of 
penalties and data breach notification requirements for 
the organization. 


4.3.1 Privacy Test Scenarios 


For each design aspect, privacy test scenarios and test 
cases should be created, taking into account boundary 
conditions. While designing, all aspects of potential 
violations and breaches in each stage of processing 
should be taken into consideration. 


4.3.2 Independent Testing 


Prior to deployment, the solution should be tested by an 
independent team. Whenever the solution is reworked 
to fix identified bugs, it should be retested prior to 
deployment. Care should be taken to identify and fix 
new privacy bugs that may get introduced during bug 
fixing. 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


In situations when a solution enhancement needs to 
be released due to emergency fixes, where risk of data 
privacy is relatively low, the solution may be permitted 
to be deployed but only with a call-back procedure (in 
the event when subsequent testing yields a failure). 


4.3.3 Periodic Compliance Check 


In addition to testing as part of life cycle of solution 
development, periodic compliance checks should be 
done to ensure that the solutions continue to comply 
with applicable privacy requirements. This is necessary 
due to changing regulations, technology, platforms, 
business model on outsourcing etc. Such compliance 
checks may involve performing remote privacy 
vulnerability scans or actual on-line testing of an 
application. The method adopted should depend on the 
criticality of application. 


5 PRIVACY MANAGEMENT 


5.1 Privacy Objectives 


Privacy objectives, along with privacy policy constitutes 
one of the key inputs while an organization embarks 
on data privacy program. It sets the directions for 
planning activities, and is influenced by organization’s 
perspective on data privacy. One organization may 
consider data privacy as a compliance requirement, 
while another may want to use it as opportunity to 
create differentiation in the market, while for a third 
organization personal data may be the key raw material 
that drives the business. Each type of organization 
will therefore set different privacy objectives. While 
compliance to regulations is given as a necessity, there 
is always flexibility for organizations to choose the 
degree of privacy controls they may introduce while 
being compliant. 


The objectives could differ for the same organization 
in case of its role as a data controller and as a data 
processor, since in the latter, the objectives are a lot 
driven by contractual terms from data controller. The 
privacy objectives in such cases should be documented 
separately for controller and processor roles clearly 
defining the data subjects and type of personal 
information it collects and processes for each of the 
roles. 


5.2 Data Privacy Function 


5.2.1 Organization Structure 


The organization should clearly identify and define the 
Data Privacy organization structure within its overall 
organization structure. The scope of the function/role 
should be clearly defined, allocated and communicated 
to the relevant stakeholders. A member of the top 
management should have the overall responsibility of 
the privacy program and need to be clearly defined 
and documented. While defining responsibilities 
care should be taken to ensure that there is adequate 


12 


independence for the data privacy function from the 
Operations, Sales, Marketing and IT organization, and 
where applicable, Security function to avoid any scope 
for conflict of interest. 


5.2.2 Responsibility and Accountability 


The top management should appoint management 
representative(s) who irrespective of the other 
responsibilities, should have defined roles, 
responsibilities and authority for: 


a) Ensuring that the privacy program is established, 
implemented and maintained in accordance with 
the organization’s privacy policy; 

b) Reporting on the performance of the privacy 
program to the top management; 


c) Promoting awareness of the privacy program 
across the organization; 


d) Ensuring effectiveness of procedures developed 
for incident response and privacy impact 
assessment 


Individuals with allocated privacy responsibilities 
may delegate tasks to others, however they remain 
accountable and should determine that any delegated 
tasks have been correctly performed. 


5.2.3 Cross-Functional Participation 


Data Privacy in an organization needs participation of 
several internal functions that process personal data 
which require such functions to work very closely with 
the data privacy office. Hence, a cross functional data 
privacy committee should be constituted, particularly 
in large organizations, in which representatives from 
each function or location of the organization should be 
identified to assist in the implementation of the privacy 
program. Such committee should convene periodically 
and discuss data privacy issues and performance. The 
roles, responsibilities and authorities of the committee 
members should be defined and integrated into job 
descriptions and skill sets which may be reinforced by 
including them in the organization’s appraisal, reward 
and recognition policy. 


Security and privacy functions have a significant 
overlap, and hence there should be good coordination 
between personnel handling security and privacy during 
the entire data life cycle and during the engineering of 
privacy. 


5.2.4 Governance and Senior Management Oversight 


The organization should ensure that policies and 
processes are defined to provide direction and oversight 
to the privacy program related activities. 


The organization may appoint other bodies, such as 
a steering committee, to oversee the implementation 
of the privacy program. The governing body should 
put in a process to evaluate, direct, monitor, assure 
and communicate the process to govern privacy. The 


governance of privacy program should be an integral 
part of the overall organization governance. 


Where possible, performance on privacy compliance 
should be reported and monitored using metrics 
and quantifiable data on periodic basis. The metrics 
should be reviewed for improvement trends and for 
performance against benchmark targets. 


The program should be subject to audit periodically. 
5.3 Data Privacy Management System (DPMS) 
5.3.1 Data Classification 


Organizations should classify all personal information 
in its possession according to defined and documented 
criteria (as per 4.1.4). Possible data classification 
categories include, but are not limited to, general 
ones such as sensitive and non-sensitive personal 
information. A classification scheme could also include 
more specific categories such as personal health 
information (PHI), personal financial information (PFI) 
and so on. The actual categories used will depend upon 
the requirements defined in relevant data protection 
legislation and regulation, other legal (for example 
contractual) obligations, the nature and sensitivity of 
the information, and the risk of harm that might arise in 
the event of a breach. 


Some personal information that may be classified 
non-sensitive in one country may be treated as sensitive 
elsewhere, depending on the applicable data protection 
laws. 


The classification for an element of personal 
information could need re-evaluation and modification 
when associated with one or more additional attributes. 
Appropriate guidelines and procedures should be put 
in place. 


All types of personal information need not require 
equal degree of protection. Data classification helps in 
channelizing right degree of protection depending on 
sensitivity of information which in turn may depend on 
applicable regulations and harm caused to individuals 
in the event of misuse or unauthorized disclosure. 


Appropriate labelling may be used to identify records 
with various classification to facilitate deployment of 
right data protection controls. 


5.3.2 Inventory of Personal Information 


The organization should ensure that all the personal 
information the organization owns and holds as a 
custodian, is identified and an inventory of personal 
information is created, maintained and periodically 
updated. The inventory should contain all the relevant 
information about personal information which will be 
helpful in ensuring effective management of personal 
information and in ensuring compliance to data privacy 
regulations. The inventory of personal information 
should have the below mentioned details with respect 
to the personal information identified: 


13 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


Business Process Name. 
Data owner. 

Type of data. 
Applications/Systems. 
Data attribute. 
Individual. 

Purpose of processing. 
Lawful basis of processing. 
Form of data. 
Recipients. 

Country of processing. 
Whether outsourced. 


p) Retention period. 


Such inventory of personal information may be 
combined with inventory of other types of information 
that already exists in the organization for the sake of 
convenience, but such act of combining should not 
have any adverse impact in fulfilling any requirement 
of IS 17428 (Part 1). 


5.3.3 Process Depicting Flow of Personal Information 


Organizations should have documented processes in 
place, clearly depicting the personal information flow 
for each process and function. A separate documentation 
need not be maintained only to fulfil conformance to 
IS 17428 (Part 1), if respective functions already have 
process documentation in place, focusing on processing 
of personal information. Process Flows should be able 
to depict data flows within systems internally within 
organization, between organization and its various 
entities, subsidiaries and service providers, level of 
access to the data recipients, form of storage etc. 
Personal information inventory together with process 
flow documents should form the basis of defining and 
implementing privacy controls in an organization. 


5.3.4 Change in Processing or data inventory 


The process for any change in processing of a particular 
personal information, including but not limited to, 
collection of new data, new kind of data disclosure, 
access by an additional stakeholder, cross-border data 
transfer, addition of a process stage etc., should be 
defined and workflow should be built as part of internal 
organizational systems. 


This is required to ensure that processing of personal 
information in the organization and by external parties 
happens only as agreed and base lined in the personal 
information inventory. 


Appropriate approval process by data privacy 
function for any change, introduction of new personal 
information or processing purpose should happen 
before such personal information is processed. 


Changes in personal information inventory may also 
be triggered by regulatory developments or change in 
technology. 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


5.3.5 Triggers for Updating DPMS 


DPMS needs to be updated by the organization on a 
regular basis, and such need may arise due to various 
triggers including but not limited to: 


a) Regulatory developments and updates; 
b) Change in the processing; 

c) New locations; 

d) Merger and acquisition; 

e) Data transfers to external parties. 


5.4 Policies and Processes 


5.4.1 Privacy Policy 


The organization should define, approve, and publish 
a privacy policy that applies to all units and locations 
of the organization and should be authorized by the 
senior management representative or Board member 
overseeing the data privacy function. This policy 
should be communicated to all stakeholders setting out 
the approach to manage the privacy objectives. 


The privacy policy 
concerning: 


should contain statements 


a) Definition, objectives and principles to guide 
activities related to privacy. 


b) Responsibility and Accountability for 
implementing the policy. 
c) Processes to handle deviation and exceptions. 


The privacy policy should address the requirements 
from: 


1) Organization business strategy. 
2) Regulation, legislations and contracts. 


3) The current and projected privacy threat 
environment. 


The structure of policy may defer between organizations 
and best designed depending on how it fits in overall 
quality system documentation and process repository. 
It is recommended to keep policy at sufficiently high 
level and more detailed privacy aspects may be covered 
in procedures and guidelines. 


The objective of privacy policy is to state company’s 
commitment towards data privacy, which will largely 
depend on the organization culture, diversity, and 
strategic business aspects, most of which do not change 
over long periods of time such as, 


i) Whether it is a consumer-oriented or 
business to business company, 


ii) Whether the company uses personal data 
for commercial benefit, 


ii) Geographic distribution of the processing 
and market it caters to, 


iv) Nature of data processing involved, etc. 


Hence to avoid regular updates to privacy policy, it is 
recommended not to include in the privacy policy, those 


14 


aspects that change more often - such as data privacy 
procedures, controls deployed, processes, templates, 
etc. 


5.4.2 Processes & Guidelines 


The organization should define, document and deploy 
processes that are needed to implement the privacy 
policy across the organization. Such process should 
cover the following: 


a) Determine the inputs required and the output 
expected from these processes. 


b) Determine the sequence and interaction of the 
processes. 


c) Determine and apply the criteria and methods 
(including monitoring, measurements and related 
performance indicators) needed to ensure the 
effective operation and control of these processes. 


Determine the guidelines required to ensure the 
processes are followed uniformly across the 
organization producing consistent and repeatable 
results. 

e) Determine the responsibilities and accountability 
for each activity. 

Determine the steps to be taken in case these 
processes and guidelines are deviated and how 
such exceptions should be handled. 

The process definition and deployment should take 
into account the need to integrate engineering and 
management aspects of DPMS as illustrated in Fig. 2. 


5.5 Records and Document Management 


Organization should maintain records of all processing 
activities that demonstrate accountability towards data 
privacy compliance. 


While the list of records depends on the organization, 
below is an illustrative list of records that organization 
may need to keep in order to demonstrate accountability: 


a) 


Evidence of acknowledgment for privacy notice 
and choice for consent. Records of various 
versions of privacy notice. 


Logs of Data subjects request to their personal 
information. 


Logs to demonstrate accountability of staff 
handling personal data. 


Personal data inventory and personal data flows. 
List of sub processors. 


Logs to demonstrate fulfilment of data subject 
rights. 


Privacy Incidents and personal data breach 
analysis — Root cause analysis reports. 


Privacy impact assessment reports. 


Records of deployment of various data privacy 
and security controls. 


Periodic Risk Assessment Reports. 


Legitimate 


Proportionate 


Minimum Necessary 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


Disclosure Restriction 


Use Restriction 


F Access Anonymization 
Security = 
g ; 4 
A *. a Data è 
A = Disposal 
AM —_ / 
a No madeline Secure deletion 
Retention 
4 “ss 
oo = oo 
vein, ho 
Ongoing Regulatory sg 


Compliance 


Fic 2. INTEGRATION OF PRIVACY ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT ASPECTS 


5.6 Privacy Impact Assessments 


Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) is a set of activities 
which is conducted by an organization to identify and 
analyze the impact on data privacy due to a change 
either in regulation, business process or a technology 
platform, and to recommend data privacy controls 
and measures to minimize the impact of such change 
on data privacy of applicable stakeholders including 
data subjects. Such assessment should be conducted 
according to documented process, and records of the 
same should be retained for verifications and audit 
purpose. A typical PIA process is shown in Fig. 3. 


Following are minimum recommended steps for PIA: 


a) Develop thorough understanding of data 
processing involved, the data flow (both internal 
and external to the organization), various actors 
involved, applicable jurisdictions, type of 
information, purpose, etc. 


15 


b) Analyze the applicability of privacy principles 
depending on jurisdiction, organization’s own 
privacy policy and contractual requirements. 

c) Determine if the data collected is appropriate, 
legitimate, proportionate, not excessive and has a 
clear defined purpose. 


d) Identify areas of potential non-compliance, or 
gaps and identify alternative solutions. Emphasis 
should be privacy by-design and use of technology 
to minimize possibility of breach. 


e) Recommend the solution based on privacy 
principles and regulatory requirements. 


f) Verify compliance once recommendations are 
implemented. 


The organization should ensure effectiveness of privacy 
impact assessment process for identifying, analyzing, 
evaluating, consulting, communicating and planning 
the treatment of potential privacy impacts with regard 
to the processing of personal information. 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


Triggers for PIA 


Change in 
Regulations 


PII Process Flow 
PII Inventory 


Information Gathering 


Change in existing 
Process or 
Technology 


Analyze and Identify 


Data Privacy Gaps 


Propose Privacy- 
friendly & Compliant 


Any Challenges in 
implementation?, 


Yes 


Are there alternaté 
solutions for the 
show-stoppers? 


Provide Alternate Less 
Privacy-Intrusive 
Recommendations 


Solution Is Privacy risk 
acceptable and no 
regulatory non- 


compliance? 


Finalize Solution 


Privacy by Privacy Enhancing 
Design (PbD) Technology (PET) 
Verify Compliance 


Fic. 3 TYPICAL “Privacy Impact ASSESSMENT” PROCESS 


5.6.1 Triggers for Conducting PIA 


A review of different components of the PIA process 
may be triggered by the following considerations: 


a) 
b) 


Technology change. 

Periodic review. 

Change in business or data ownership. 
Change in business strategy. 

Product or service change. 

Regulatory change. 

Customer and/or contractual change. 


Operational change, including new/change 
application, supply chain (insourcing/ 
outsourcing), and site/facility resources. 
Structural change. 


Privacy incident or personal data breach. 


5.6.2 Assessment Templates and Tools 


The organization should use standardized assessment 
templates and tools across the organization to ensure 
uniform, reliable, accurate and repeatable privacy 
impact assessment. Records of privacy impact 
assessment should be retained for future reference. 


5.7 Data Processor Management 


5.7.1 Data Processor Evaluation and Shortlisting 


The organization should have an effective process to 
evaluate and shortlist its data processors from a data 
privacy perspective to ensure that its controls are 
effective throughout the life-cycle of products and 
services. 


Data processor evaluation allows an organization 
to understand and assess the capability of the data 
processor and its suitability for processing the personal 
information with minimal privacy risks. It helps in 


16 


understanding the risk, the data processor brings with 
it into the organization. The evaluation and shortlisting 
approach should be consistent, however, the depth of 
analysis of any given data processor needs to reflect 
their criticality to the organization’s activities and the 
level of risk to which they are exposed. 


The approach used for data processor evaluation will 
depend on the sensitivity of data. An organization may 
adopt the following broad structure for evaluation and 
shortlisting of data processors: 


a) Organize relevant documentation currently 
available within the organization, for example, 
privacy impact analysis, business impact analysis, 
risk assessments, etc. 

b) Define and document the approach, including 

defining parameters which will be used to assess 

the data processor criticality, privacy requirements 
etc. 


Undertake the privacy impact analysis and privacy 
risk assessment with each data processor 


Assess the overall level of privacy risk from each 
data processor 


Review the results of data processors’ own analysis 
of its compliance to data privacy laws and data 
privacy contractual terms with the organization on 
periodic basis 


Produce an overall analysis of the data 
processor capability against their criticality and 
organizations’ needs 


5.7.2 Transfer of Obligations 


The organization should ensure that proper contracts 
(clearly mentioning the data processor obligations) with 
the data processors are executed. Organizations should 
ensure the obligations are documented, understood, 
agreed by the data processor, and they are enforceable 


at the instance of the organization or the data controller 
as permissible by law. 


The organization is expected to take responsibility 
for its data processors. Individual has the option to 
hold the organization (rather than its data processors) 
responsible for failure to protect their personal 
information and hence accountability in the event of a 
data breach should be agreed between the parties and 
clearly documented as part of contract. Therefore, an 
organization’s brand is also at risk of damage in the 
event of a privacy incident by its data processor. 


The organization may deploy suitable mechanisms to 
ensure that the data privacy function is made aware 
whenever a data processing is outsourced, so that 
proactively the privacy aspects are addressed. 


5.7.3 Periodic Reports and Compliance Checks 


The organization should ensure a process to report 
the privacy health of a data processor periodically. 
The nature of reporting can be defined based on the 
criticality of the data processor and the organization 
policies. The privacy key performance indicator’s 
(KPI) of critical data processor should be reported to 
the top management as per the governance defined. The 
privacy KPI’s should be reviewed with respective data 
processors periodically and accordingly actions should 
be prioritized. 


The organization should ensure privacy compliance 
checks are done periodically to determine the privacy 
health of a data processor. These can be part of the 
organization internal audit program. The organization 
can consider doing a second party audit or a third party 
audit on the data processor depending on the criticality 
of the data processor to the organization. The summary 
of the results of these compliance audits and checks 
should be presented to the top management as part of 
the organization’s governance and management review 
and actions should be formulated for the issues crossing 
the organization’s risk thresholds. 


5.8 Privacy Risk Management 


Data Privacy as a need for individuals often conflicts 
with business interests and innovation in organizations 
that collect personal information from such individuals. 
Any enterprise needs to make profit to survive and 
in the digital era, personal information is often not 
only an information asset that needs to be protected 
but also leveraged for business benefit within legally 
permissible limits. Hence, there is a delicate balance 
which organizations need to maintain by taking 
into account the privacy risk exposure vis-a-vis 
business interests. Privacy risk management involves 
identifying, analyzing and evaluating privacy related 
risks, responding to them by building or modifying 
controls to reduce their likelihood or consequences in 
order to maintain the residual risks within acceptable 
limits, before a solution or product is rolled out. 


17 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


5.8.1 Triggers and Periodicity for Privacy Risk 
Assessments 


The organization should define, document and 
implement a process for assessing the level of risk 
to individuals associated with the processing of their 
personal information. Such risks should be conducted 
periodically for various entities such as data processing 
functions, units, locations, products or solutions. Such 
assessment should be done separately for privacy and 
should not be combined with security since there are 
areas where there could be conflict between the two. 


The risk assessment process should define the method 
of risk evaluation adopted which could include a risk 
outcome metric derived as a factor of parameters such 
as estimation of probability of occurrence of event, 
impact the risk is likely to have on individuals and 
organization, detectability of risk before it materializes, 
etc. 


Risk assessment is quite similar to privacy impact 
assessment, except that the former is a periodic exercise, 
whereas the latter is triggered based on certain events, 
as mentioned in 5.6. The periodicity of risk assessment 
should be determined based on risk exposure and how 
dynamic the organization environment is. Organizations 
typically follow periodicity of one year, although in 
rapidly changing environment, half-yearly frequency 
or even more often, may be desirable. 


5.8.2 Criteria for Risk Evaluation 


Organizations should define privacy risk evaluation 
criteria and the same should be used consistently while 
assessing privacy risks. Such criteria should take into 
various factors such as: 


a) 
b) 


Sensitivity of personal data. 


Potential harm to data subjects in the event of a 


personal data breach. 
c) The volume of data. 
d) 


e) 


The extent of data use by various recipients. 
The degree of data 
implemented, such 
pseudonymization, etc. 


protection 
as 


measures 
encryption, 


f) 
g) 


Involvement of external party in processing data. 


Data transfer to a country outside organization’s 
jurisdiction. 

h) Organization’s risk exposure in the event of a 
privacy incident. 


5.8.3 Privacy Risk Response Strategy 


The organization should define the strategy for 
reducing privacy risks to acceptable levels. Based on 
the outcome of the risk evaluation, privacy risks are 
typically classified into relevant severity levels. The 
risk response strategies would define how risks will 
be treated based on evaluation. Privacy risk response 
options may include the following: 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


a) Mitigating the risk by reducing the likelihood. 
b) Mitigating the risk by reducing the consequences. 


c) Building contingencies to manage the risk at a 
later date. 


d) Transferring the risk to external party. 
e) Terminating the process that leads to the risk. 
f) Accepting the risk. 


Risks with low probability may not be ignored and care 
should be taken to focus on those risks the probability 
of which is very low but impact is extremely high. 
Compensating controls may need to be planned when 
a risk needs to be accepted. The appetite for risk may 
vary from organization to organization. It is also 
important to implement a program to periodically 
exercise the contingencies planned, if this is the chosen 
risk response. 


5.9 Privacy Incident Management 


Despite adoption of best practices and processes, no 
organization can be completely immune from data 
privacy incidents, including personal data breaches, and 
hence they should be always prepared to handle such 
incidents effectively, in case they happen. Organizations 
should put in place a data privacy incident handling 
process that includes awareness of incident occurrence, 
management, reporting obligations to regulators and 
affected individuals, corrective and preventive action 
planning and implementation. 


Organizations should put in place mechanisms on how 
individuals (whether affected party or not) can report 
data privacy incidents to the data privacy function 
within the organization. The organization should 
communicate these incident reporting channels to 
all individuals through various means including the 
company website. 


5.9.1 Incident Handling 
Any incident reported, should be promptly attended to 
and tracked to closure. Incident handling may typically 
involve following stages: 
a) Incident reported and logged. 
b) Acknowledgement to the person or organization 
who reported incident. 
c) Immediate corrective action to contain data 
privacy violation. 
d) Root cause analysis, including determination of 
involvement of any data processor /external party. 
e) Data Breach reporting to affected individuals and 
regulators (if applicable as per regulations). 
f) Preventive action. 
Functions within the organization and any external 
agencies that need to support incident management, 


should be promptly involved during various stages 
of incident handling based on the need. In the event 


18 


that external party is responsible for having caused 
the breach and there are penalties levied or individual 
claims, the incident management should also involve 
determination of accountability for the incident and 
sharing of any financial impact between the parties 
involved. Often personal data breaches occur due to a 
security lapse, in which case the information security 
function should also be part of incident handling. 


5.9.2 Personal Data Breach Reporting 


Personal data breaches often impact individuals, and 
hence, organizations should determine the need for 
reporting the breach to affected individuals, if they have 
reasonable grounds to believe that individual’s privacy 
has been compromised. Such notifications should have 
a clear purpose such that the individuals who have 
been affected can take steps to protect themselves. 
Not all personal data breaches impact individuals, 
for example when a file consisting of personal 
information is inadvertently sent by an employee of 
an organization to his personal email address, if the 
organization ensures that the same is promptly deleted, 
and if it was not forwarded or distributed further, 
reporting to individuals may not be required. But if 
personal information is exposed in a website to public 
inadvertently or accidentally, the same may have been 
viewed by public, and hence may need reporting. It also 
depends on the nature of personal data involved and 
likely harm the disclosure can cause to individuals. 


Organizations may also be required to report to 
regulators and appropriate government bodies, about a 
data breach, if required by the applicable laws. Timeline 
within which data breach needs to be reported should 
be as per the timelines specified in applicable law. The 
need for this should be established by the organization 
and relevant procedures should be promptly followed. 
Personal data breach reporting may depend on various 
factors such as: 


a) Legal requirement from applicable regulations to 
notify. 

b) Contractual obligations, 
organization is a processor. 


in the event the 
c) Sensitivity of personal information. 
d) Notification of such breaches will help the 
individual protect themselves. 
e) Number of data subjects affected. 
When organization is a data processor, it should not 
decide on breach reporting to Data Privacy Authorities 
and instead act as directed by data controller 
organization. 
The notification may include the following: 
1) Description of data breach. 


2) Number of individuals, type of data subjects, 
nature of data. 


3) Action taken to contain the consequences of 
breach. 


4) Root cause. 


5) Measures being undertaken by the organization 
to prevent recurrence. 


The organization may also consider notifying external 
agencies such as law enforcement agencies, insurers, 
industry bodies, bank or credit card companies which 
can assist in containing the damage or help in reducing 
the risks of financial loss caused by the data breach. 


5.9.3 Preventive Actions 


Privacy incidents including personal data breaches 
may invoke penalties not only from regulators and 
customers (if the organization is a data processor for 
that customer) but sometimes victims may also claim 
compensation, depending on applicable laws. More 
importantly instances of non-compliance and data 
breach lead to negative brand impact. 


The penalties can be significantly lower or can be 
avoided if the organization can establish that the 
breach is not caused due to absence of process, control 
measures and that the due diligence was exercised. 
Hence, organizations that process personal information 
should take appropriate measures to minimize 
possibility of data breaches. 


Organizations should define, document and implement 
process to conduct detailed investigation for root 
causes of privacy incidents with help of all stakeholders 
including any external parties involved in data life cycle 
and determine a preventive action plan to minimize 
probability of recurrence of incidents. Records of 
preventive action should be maintained. 


5.10 Data Subject’s Request Management 


5.10.1 Access to View Data 


Organizations should be able to provide access to 
individuals to view their own data available with the 
organization. An individual may typically like to know 
what data is held about him/her, how long it is kept, 
how to access his/her data and may request such data 
to be provided. In certain jurisdictions, organizations 
may levy a small fee for providing data, particularly 
to prevent frivolous requests from individuals. Most 
of the data privacy regulations require organizations to 
have a mechanism in place to receive individual access 
requests and handle them to respond within reasonable 
amount of time. 


Organizations may face penalties and fines if they 
are unable to do so in timely manner. However, 
organizations need not provide data when the retention 
period for the data has lapsed and data is deleted as per 
defined policy on periodic basis. 


It is extremely important for organizations to establish 
the identity of an individual before providing data, to 
avoid unauthorized disclosure. 


19 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


5.10.2 Ability to Update Data 


Organizations should provide means for individuals to 
update their data. Personal information often changes 
with time, for example photograph, marital status, etc. 
and it is individual’s right to ensure that these changes 
are correctly reflected in organization’s database. 
If online access cannot be provided then organizations 
may have an email address to which individuals can 
write to, and organizations should, within a reasonable 
time, update the data, and also once updated a 
notification should be sent to individual to check the 
correctness of data. 


5.10.3 Access to Privacy Notices 


Privacy notices which an individual would have read 
and agreed to, should be always available for them to 
access. This helps an individual to know what terms 
they agreed to for processing. 


The organization should therefore retain evidence of 
consent provided and options chosen. 


This may be made available online to the extent possible, 
but only after establishing identity. Alternatively, they 
may be provided on request. 


5.10.4 Requesting Mechanism 


For any access request from individual to be valid, it 
should be made in writing. Although organizations can 
provide a standard format for individuals to include 
all the details the organization might need to locate 
the information they want, such formats should not be 
deemed mandatory. 


Data requests may be valid in some jurisdictions even 
if the individual has not sent it directly to the person or 
function which normally deals with such requests and 
hence organizations should put in place procedures that 
make it easy for anyone in the organization to recognize 
such requests and route it appropriately. 


Organizations should seek enough information, as 
appropriate to establish identity of the person making 
the request. This is to avoid personal information about 
one individual being sent to another, accidentally 
or as a result of deception. The level of checks to be 
made depends on the possible harm and distress which 
inappropriate disclosure of the information could cause 
to the concerned individual. 


5.10.5 Service Level Agreements 


The organization should ensure that they respond 
to an individual’s access request promptly or as 
communicated in the privacy policies. If regulation or 
contracts specify time for servicing access requests, the 
same should take precedence. 


If a longer duration is required to retrieve information 
being sought, the individual should be informed about 
the possible delay. 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


5.10.6 Considerations for Fee 


Organizations should be allowed, if they so require, 
to charge a fee to service individual’s access requests. 
Such fees should not be charged for access requests to 
health records. Even though, organizations need not 
comply with a request until the fee has been received, 
they should not ignore a request simply because the 
individual has not sent a fee. If a fee is payable but has 
not been sent with the request, the organization should 
contact the individual promptly and inform them about 
the same. 


5.11 Grievance Redress 


The organization should implement an efficient and 
effective grievance redress mechanism. Depending on 
jurisdiction, certain regulations may specify timelines 
within which a grievance should be resolved, as in case 
of individual access requests. Such mechanism should 
also take into account the possibility of the cause for the 
grievance originating from the processing undertaken 
by a different entity, external or internal. 


5.11.1 Identification and Publication of Identity of the 
Grievance Officer 


Depending on applicable laws and regulations, there 
may be a requirement where an organization should 
appoint an Officer, who should be in charge of the 
grievance redress process. Once appointed, the name 
and contact details of the Officer should be published 
at the various public and internal touch points that the 
organization has. 


The organization, may chose the Data Privacy officer to 
play the role of a Grievance officer or keep these roles 
different. 


5.11.2 Channels for Receiving Complaints 


Apart from providing contact details 
(as mentioned in 5.11.1), the organization should also 
provide alternate mechanisms to the individuals so 
that they are able to direct their grievances regarding 
the data privacy to the appropriate department in the 
organization. These mechanisms or channels may take 
various forms including, but not limited to: 


a) Online forms. 

b) Telephone contact centers. 
c) Kiosks/help desks. 

d) Email addresses. 


5.12 Staff Competency and Accountability 


In any organization, staff and employees have a key 
role in protecting personal information held by the 
organization, since they will often have access to the 
data, during processing operations, Any mishandling 
of data, whether due to ignorance or negligence can 
lead to personal data breach, financial and reputational 
damage to the organization. 


20 


It is therefore important for the organization to establish 
accountability for staff responsible in ensuring data 
privacy, and create regular awareness. 


5.12.1 Traceability to Employee's Actions 


The organization should establish mechanism for 
maintaining traceability, logs and audit trails to 
employee’s actions on data processing. This is 
extremely important to, 


a) 


Comply with the ‘due diligence’ requirements of 
applicable laws. 


Identify root causes in the event of a personal data 
breach. 


Defend the organization from a litigation. 


Bring ownership to data processing activities from 
employee’s actions. 


Reduce incidence of personal data breaches. 


5.12.2 Training and awareness 


The organization should define and document process to 
create awareness, and train staff involved in processing 
personal information. Appropriate interventions 
should be introduced to ensure that such training and 
awareness programs are conducted periodically, cover 
entire staff involved in data processing, in any of its 
functions, departments and business units. 


Training modes should take into account the varying 
needs and capabilities of participants from different 
functions, countries, cultural group, and educational 
background. 


The mode of delivery could be class-room based, 
web based, live meetings, e-learning, emails, video 
conference, etc. Awareness and training content should 
be regularly updated to reflect regulatory developments, 
process changes, etc. 


Attending such programs should be mandatory for 
entire staff, failing which appropriate disciplinary 
action may have to be taken. 


5.12.3 Employee Declaration 


In any organization, staff from certain functions have 
relatively higher access to personal information by 
nature of their work responsibility. Such employees 
should be signing a privacy declaration stating that 
they will exercise due diligence and they are aware 
of impact due to a privacy incident including personal 
data breach. Such declaration could be in hard copy 
form or electronic. 


Signing of such declaration by employees acts as a 
deterrent and not a substitute to make them aware of 
new developments on regulations, technologies, threats 
ete. 


5.12.4 Disciplinary Actions 


If any staff who is responsible for data privacy is proven 
to be negligent or ignorant, and leads to causing a 


privacy incident, that individual should be subjected to 
disciplinary actions. The action could be ranging from 
an email warning to termination depending on severity 
and applicable employment laws. 


Such actions not only help in conveying a serious 
message to entire staff that the organization takes data 
privacy very seriously, but also helps to set an example 
to regulators and customers. 


5.13 Ongoing Regulatory Compliance 


Ongoing compliance with all applicable regulations 
and contracts is a hallmark of a good Privacy Program. 
Privacy and related regulations evolve and get updated 
regularly, which may impact the effectiveness of data 
privacy controls deployed by the organization. 


The organization should put in place policies and 
procedures that allow data privacy function to 
continually assess whether the Data Privacy 
Management Systems will be able to demonstrate 
compliance with the applicable data protection 
legislations and regulations, and any changes to 
regulations are incorporated in timely manner. 


Some of these day-to-day responsibilities should 
include: 


a) Ensuring the organization has access to legislative 
updates and appropriate guidance related to data 
protection legislation. 


b) Conducting management reviews of the privacy 
policies and processes. 


c) Continuously checking that the DPMS reflects 
changes in legislation, practice and technology. 


d) Assist in the interpretation and application of the 
various regulatory exemptions applicable to the 
processing of personal information. 


The organization should incorporate policies and 
procedures that allow it to identify when amendments 
to contracts or regulatory changes occur and trigger 
alerts so that changes are undertaken on data processing 
and privacy controls in solutions and products. In the 
event that the amendments require a revision of the 
organization’s privacy procedures related to these 
contracts, such changes will need to be assessed prior 
to implementation to ensure that the requirements of 
the privacy policy and regulations are met. 


5.14 Periodic Audits 


Like in case of any other compliance and risk function, 
conducting periodic audits is a very important activity 
for data privacy program. In order to make audits 
effective, the audit function should be independent 
from the function responsible to implement data 
privacy controls. The audits should be conducted at 
a periodicity appropriate for the organization, at least 
once in a year. 


21 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


5.14.1 Compliance to DPMS and Effectiveness of 
DPMS 


Privacy Audits may be broadly classified into following 
two types: 


a) Adequacy Audits 
These are intended to verify whether the 
planned arrangements in the organization, 
when implemented will lead to compliance to 
data privacy regulations and intended privacy 
objectives. 


b) Compliance Audits 


These audit activities are focused on verifying 
the actual deployment of privacy controls with 
reference to the planned arrangements such as 
privacy policy, privacy processes, guidelines etc. 


Since an organization can never be sure that all kinds 
of privacy threats are known and take mitigation action 
on them, it is important for audits to not restrict itself 
to verification against plans and processes, but examine 
if the mechanisms to identify privacy risks are being 
effectively implemented. 


5.14.2 Audits Reporting 


Audit findings may pertain to non-conformance to 
established data privacy policies and processes or 
may be related to planned policies and processes 
not being effective to meet regulatory requirements. 
While the former category of non-conformances are 
attributed to business enabling and support functions 
within the organizations, the latter ones are normally 
in the purview of the data privacy function. Hence, 
the reporting of audit findings should be done to the 
senior management function to which the data privacy 
functions reports, in order to avoid conflict of interest 
and should be tracked for timely closure. 


5.14.3 Auditor Skills 


Since detecting non-compliances in data privacy 
requires thorough understanding of data privacy laws, 
data processing activities, data processing technologies, 
information security domains, it should be ensured that 
the audit team possesses all these skills and experience. 


5.15 Measurement and Continuous Improvement 


Measurement is key to demonstrate improvement 
hence appropriate metrics should be developed to 
track various aspects of DPMS. The metrics could 
be qualitative or quantitative, and need to be chosen 
among other factors, based on the current maturity of 
the organization. Examples of metrics are: 


a) Lead time to mitigate privacy risks. 
b) Number of critical privacy incidents. 


c) Service Level Agreement to address and close 
privacy incidents/breaches. 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


d) Number of changes that were not subjected to 
PIA. 


e) Percentage of staff trained on data privacy. 


Continuous improvement requires sustained 
improvement in specific aspects of the DPMS without 
adversely impacting other aspect of DPMS. The triggers 
for improvement initiatives could be from unfavorable 
performance as reflected by the measurement program. 


Improvement can be demonstrated broadly in two 
forms: 


22 


1) Consistent trend in improvement. 


2) Exceeding set target based on industry 
standard. 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 4.1.1 ) 
LEGAL PROVISIONS IN INDIA ON DATA PRIVACY 


The list given below is not exhaustive and the latest 
applicable version with any Amendment (if any) should 
be referred to: 


A GENERAL LAWS 


A-1 INDIAN CONSTITUTION 


‘State’ as defined in Article 12 of Indian constitution 
is obliged to protect Right to life defined in Article 
21 of Indian Constitution. In August 2017, in a 
landmark judgement, the Indian supreme court declared 
“The right to privacy is protected as an intrinsic part of 
the right to life and personal liberty under article 21 and 
as a part of the freedoms guaranteed by Part HI of the 
constitution.” 


A-2 INFORMATION 
(AMENDMENT) ACT, 2008 


a) Section 43 and 43 A: Deals with the issues 
relating to payment of compensation (Civil) 
and punishment (Criminal) in case of wrongful 
disclosure and misuse of personal data and 
violation of contractual terms in respect of 
personal data. 


Section 72 A: Deals with disclosure of 
information, knowingly and intentionally, without 
the consent of the person concerned and in breach 
of the lawful contract. The offence has been also 
made punishable with imprisonment and fine as 
prescribed. 


TECHNOLOGY 


b 


wm 


c 


ma 


Section 85: Imposes corporate criminal liability 
and liability upon the officers of the company for 
offences related to privacy breach committed in a 
company. 


A-3 IT RULES (REASONABLE SECURITY 


PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES AND 
SENSITIVE PERSONAL INFORMATION OR 
INFORMATION): 


The most comprehensive regulation as on date that is 
applicable to data privacy in India is IT Rules notified 
in 2011 under Sec 43A of IT (Amendment) Act 2008, 
which applies to body corporate processing Personal 
information. 


A-4 SECTORAL LAWS 


A-4.1 Banking 
a) The Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 
b) The Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 
c) The Bankers Book Evidence Act, 1891 


23 


d) Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 
2005 


e) The Insurance Act, 1999 


f) Public Financial Institutions (Obligation as to 
Fidelity and Secrecy) Act, 1983 


g) Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 
h) The Banking Regulation Act, 1949 
j) Indian Income Tax Act, 1961 
k) Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 
m) Foreign Contribution Regulation Act, 2010 


n) Fair Practice Code for Credit Card Operations, 
2010 


p) RBI regulations with reference to 
Gopalakrishna Working Group report, 2011 


q) Goods & Services Tax (GST) Act, 2017 


the 


A-4.2 E-governance and Identity 
a) The Passport Act, 1967 
b) The Representation of People Act, 1950 
c) The Indian Penal Code, 1860 
d) The Census Act, 1948 
e) The Citizenship Act, 1955 
f) The Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 
g) The Collection of Statistics Act, 2008 
h) The AADHAAR (Targeted Delivery of Financial 
And Other Subsidies, Benefits And Services) Act 
2016 
A-4.3 Consumer 
a) The Indian Contract Act, 1872 
b) The Consumer Protection Act, 2019 


A-4.4 Freedom of Expression 


a) The Press Council Act, 1978. Cable Television 
Networks Regulations Act, 1995 


b) Content Certification Rules, 2008 


c) Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 
2000 


d) Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 
e) Indian Penal Code 18607. 
f) The Indian Copyright Act, 1957 


A-4.5 Law Enforcement 
a) The National Security Act, 1980 


b) The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
c) National Investigation Agency Act, 2008 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


d) Intelligences Organizations (Restrictions of 


Rights) Act, 1985 
e) Central Bureaus of Investigations Bill, 2010 


A-4.6 Internet and Communications 
a) The Information Technology Act 2000 
b) The Telegraph Act 1885 
c) The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 2002 
d) Internet Service Provider (ISP) License 
e) Unified Access Service License (UASL) License 
f) TRAI Regulations on Unsolicited Marketing Calls 


A-4.7 Health & Medical 


a) Medical Council of India’s Code of Ethics 
Regulations, 2002 


b) Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 


c) Mental Health Act, 1987 
d) The Persons with Disabilities Act, 1955 
e) Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques Act, 1994 
f) Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 
g) Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research on 
Human Subjects 
A-4.8 Transparency & Other Regulations 
a) The Right to Information Act, 2005 
b) The Official Secrets Act, 1923 
c) The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 


d) The Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 
1992 


e) The Competition Act of 2002 
f) The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 
g) Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 2011 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 4.2.6, 4.2.7.2 ) 
SECURITY AND PRIVACY CONSIDERATIONS FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURE 


B-1 SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS 


B-1.1 The organization should consider extending 
organization security policies to the public cloud 
infrastructure and assets. 


B-1.2 Perform security architecture review to assess 
that cloud service provider’s electronic discovery 
capabilities does not compromise privacy or security of 
data and applications. 


B-1.3 The organization should establish clear and 
exclusive right to data ownership. This control should 
be documented in the contract with the cloud service 
provider. 


B-1.4 The organization should perform a risk 
assessment for virtualization and other logical isolation 
techniques that the cloud service provider employs in a 
multi-tenant architecture. 


B-1.5 Define and document cryptographic key 
management with the facilities and processes of cloud 
service provider in the organization encryption policy. 


B-1.6 Evaluate data security policies including security 
of data at rest, transmission and during disposal and 
deletion. 


B-1.7 The organization should regularly analyze, 
monitor, and perform system audits for indication of 
inappropriate activity affecting personal information or 
to investigate suspicious activity. 


24 


B-1.8 The organization should ensure that incident 
management processes of the cloud service provider 
is aligned with organizations’ requirement to prevent, 
detect, and report personal data breaches in compliance 
to applicable regulations. 


B-2 PRIVACY CONSIDERATIONS 


B-2.1 Compliance to Applicable Regulations 


Organizations should be aware that despite outsourcing 
the processing activities to the cloud provider, it 
continues to be a data controller. Data Controller should 
comply with data protection laws which vary from 
country to country. Data Processor/Cloud provider is 
also required to adhere to laws and regulations to the 
extent applicable and stated as part of the contract. 


B-2.2 Data Transfer Restrictions 


In public cloud, organizations may not have control on 
which employee’s data is located in which jurisdiction at 
different points of time. There are restrictions imposed 
by Privacy laws on data transfer between countries, 
for example, GDPR and other member nation laws put 
certain restrictions on data transfers outside Europe. 
Organizations should determine if such restrictions 
apply to them and if applicable implement appropriate 
controls to ensure data transfer is as per the applicable 
regulations. 


B-2.3 Data Deletion 


Data deletion may not be effective due to following 
reasons: 
a) Data is not strictly wiped. 


b) Timely data deletion may not be always possible, 
either because extra copies of data are stored 
elsewhere, or because the storage media also 
stores data from other clients. 


Cc 


wm 


In scenarios where organizations use less space 
than estimated, the part of storage media which 
usually stores their data could be used for another 
organization by the cloud provider. 


d 


wa 


Organizations should ensure that relevant clauses 
on deletion are added to the contract and cloud 
provider effectively deletes the data as per the 
requirements agreed. 


B-2.4 Neighbor Subpoena Risk 


In the event of a subpoena on another customer of the 
cloud provider, if physical hardware of cloud provider 
is confiscated by law-enforcement agencies as part 
of e-discovery, due to the centralized storage as well 
as shared tenancy of physical hardware, there is a 
risk of disclosure of organization’s data to unwanted 
parties. The organization may be required under 
various regulations to inform their customers about the 
circumstances of the transfer of personal information 
to the cloud provider and the purposes of the transfer. 
Cloud provider should promptly inform the co-tenant of 
the cloud in case of subpoena and organizations should 
ensure the same is also added as part of the contract. 


25 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


B-2.5 Data Breach Reporting 


In the event of a data breach, regulations in certain 
countries require disclosure to the individuals and 
regulators. Cloud providers are expected to promptly 
inform the organizations about the breach and same 
should also be added in the contract. The cloud provider 
need to deploy mechanisms to proactively monitor and 
carry out timely reporting in the event of a data breach. 


B-2.6 Logs and Audit Trails 


Logs and audit trails should be maintained by the 
cloud provider and made available to organization for 
processing of data in the cloud. 


B-2.7 Data Custody 


Organization should clearly determine the following 
and take appropriate steps to have this documented in 
the contract as well: 


a) Who actually owns the data on cloud? 


b) What happens to the data if the contract gets 
terminated by either parties? 


B-2.8 Data Privacy Clauses 


Appropriate Data privacy clauses should be agreed and 
added to the contract between organization and cloud 
provider. 


B-2.9 Data Subject Access 


Data Privacy regulations may require organizations to 
provide timely access to personal information when 
requested by employee. Cloud provider should ensure 
that data retrieval and recovery is in line with customer 
expectations. 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Information Systems Security and Privacy Sectional Committee, LITD 17 


Organization 


Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, 
New Delhi 

Bharat Electronics Ltd (BEL), Bengaluru 

Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 

Centre for Internet & Society 

Data Security Council of India (DSCI) 


Department of Science and Technology 


HCL 
Indian Cellular & Electronics Association (ICEA) 


Infosys Technologies Limited 


In Personal Capacity 


Indian Statistical Institute 
KCPIL 
Larsen & Toubro Limited 


Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Defence (DRDO) 
National Accreditation Board for Certification Bodies 


Narnix Technolabs Pvt Ltd 
NEC India Pvt Ltd 


Oxygen Consulting Services Pvt Ltd 


Patanjali Associates Pvt Ltd 
Qualcomm India Pvt Ltd 
ReBIT 


26 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ARVIND Kumar (Chairman) 


SHRIMATI SANGEETHA MANGAL 
SHRI DEVESH KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr M. SASIKUMAR 


SHRIMATI P. R. LAKsHM! Eswari (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL ABRAHAM 
SHRI AMBER SINHA (Alternate I) 
SHRI GURSHABHAD GROVER (Alternate II) 


SHRI ADITYA 


SHRI SUJIT BANERJEE 
DR RAJEEV SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV CHHABRA 


SHRI BUESH KUMAR ROUL 
SHRI RAJESH SHARMA (Alternate) 


MR SRINIVAS POOSARLA 
Suri RAJEEV THYKATT (Alternate I) 
Ms Asuwatuy Asok (Alternate II) 


Dr GARGI KEENI 
Ms AMuTHA ARUNACHALAM 


Pror BIMAL K. Roy 
Dr V. K. KANHERE 


Suri N. SATHYAN 
SHRI TIRUMALA Rao K. (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH MAHESHWARI 
SHRI TARUN PANDEY (Alternate I) 
SHRI SANTOSH Son! (Alternate II) 
Dr SomnatH CHANDRA (Alternate III) 
Suri S. K. Nera (Alternate IV) 


Ms NOOPUR SHROTRIYA 
Suri G ANIL (Alternate) 


SHRI A. S. BHATNAGAR 
Ms Anana JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI NARANG N. KISHORE 


Ms Jipnya SHAH 
SHRI ABHAY PIMPLIKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIV KUMAR AGARWALA 
SHRI SACHIN JADHAV (Alternate) 


Suri KANTI MOHAN RUSTOGI 
SHRI VINOSH BABU JAMES 


SHRI PRASHANT LOTLIKAR 
SHRI DEEPNARAYAN TIWARI (Alternate) 


Organization 


Smart Chip Private Limited 


Standardisation, Testing & Quality Certification 
(STQC) 


Tata Communications Pvt Ltd 


Tata Consultancy Services 


Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC), DOT 


THE PERSPECTIVE 
Unique Identification Authority of India 


WYSE Biometrics Systems Pvt Ltd 
BIS Directorate General 


IS 17428 (Part 2) : 2020 


Representative(s) 


Mr DivAnsHu GUPTA 
MR Ankit Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. SHARMA 
Suri A. K. Upapnayay (Alternate I) 
SHRI NAKUL AGGRWAL (Alternate II) 


SHRI MAHESH KALYANARAMAN 


SHRI SATEESH SRINIWSAIAH 
SHRI NATARAJAN SWAMINATHAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI ABHIK CHAUDHURI (Alternate II) 
SHRI ANUPAM AGRAWAL (Alternate UD, 


SHRI ARVIND CHAWLA 
SHRI S. SRIDHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAHUL SHARMA 


SHRI Y ASHWANT SINGH 
SHRI ANUP Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri Y. D. WADASKAR 


SHRIMATI REENA GARG, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (LITD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Suri Ksuitiy BATHLA 
Scientist ‘C’, BIS 


Panel 3 “Privacy Information Management System” LITD 17/P-3 


Organization 
Infosys Technologies Limited 
Reliance Jio 
Centre for Internet & Society 
Data Security Council of India (DSCI) 
Genpact 
HCL 


Infosys Technologies Limited 


In Personal Capacity 


KPMG 


Larsen & Toubro Limited 


Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Tata Consultancy Services 
THE PERSPECTIVE 
Unique Identification Authority of India 


27 


Representative(s) 
SHRI SRINIVAS PoosaRLa (Convener) 
Suri Mouit MALIK 
SHRI GURSHABAD GROVER 
SHRI ADITYA 
SHRI SRINJOY BANERJEE 
SHRI SANJEEV CHHABRA 


SHRI RAJEEV THYKATT 
Ms Nena AcraAwat (Alternate) 


Ms AMUTHA ARUNACHALAM 
Ms DIMPLE SANTWAN 


SHRI SRINIVAS POTHARAJU 
SHRI MERRIL CHERIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMALA Rao K. 


SHRI RAKESH MAHESHWARI 
SHRI PRAFUL Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAYANAND BANAHATTI 
SHRI RAHUL SHARMA 


SHRI Y ASHWANT KUMAR 
SHRI ANUP Kumar (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 17 (12163). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


