IS 5054 (Part l/Set 2) : 1995 IEC Pub 169-l -1 : 1987

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard

RADIO FREQUENCY CONNECTORS
PART 1 GENERAL REQWREMENTS AND MEASURtNG METHODS Section 2 Electrical Tests and Measuring Procedutes - Reflection Factor

( Second Revision )

UDC

621.315.683.029.5 : 621.317.3 : 6X38/39.038

0 BIS 1`995

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002
Price Group 7

April 1995

Connectors for Electronic Equipment actional

Committee, LTD 16

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part l/%x 2) which is identical with IEC 169-l-1(1987) `Radio frequency connectors: Part 1 General requirements and measuring methods, Section 1 Electrical tests and measuring procedures - Reflection factor' issued by the Internat~ional Electrotechnical Commission was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Connectors for Electronic Equipment Sectional~committee (LTD 16) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council (LTDC). This Indian Standard wasoriginally published in 1969. It was subsequently revised in 1980. The present revision has been taken up to adop_t the present international practice in this field. Hence the latest IEC Pub 169-1-1 (1987) has been adopted as Indian Standard under dual number procedure. The series of standards on Radio frequency connectors: P.art 1 General requirements methods comprise of following sections : Section 1 Section 2 Section 3 General Electrical tests and measuring procedures - Reflection factor Electrical tests and measuring procedures - Screening effectiveness and measuring

This Indian Standard shall be read in conjunction with IS 5054 (Part l/Set 1) `Radio frequency connectors : Part 1 General requirements and measuring methods, Section 1 General'. This standard describes as 14.1 of IS 5054 Electrical tests and measuring procedures for reflection factor of R.F. connectors (Part l/See 1). CROSS REFERENCES In this Indian Standard, the following International following :
Isttemntionnl Smtiard

Standard

is referred

to. Read in its place the
Degree of Equivalence

Corresponding Indinn Stnndmd

IEC 169- 1: 1987 Radio frequency connectars : Part 1 General requirements and measuring methods

IS 50.54 (Part l/Set 1) : 1995 Radio frequency connectors : Part 1 General requirements and measuring methods, Section 1 General

Identical

IS 5054 ( Part l/Set 2 ) : 1995
IEC Pub 169-l-l: 1987

Indian Standard

RADIOFREQUENCYCONNECTORS
PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MEASURING METHODS Section 2 Electrical Tests and Measuring Procedures - Reflection Factor

( Second Revision )
14.1 14.1.1 Reflection factor General considerations

The reflection factor of r.f. connectors shall be measured with the test specimen mated with a standard test connector. Adaptors shall be mated with standard test connectors on both sides. The relevant specification for a particular connector shall also specify the pertinent standard test connector (connector of Grade 0). Mated pairs of standard test connectors shall exhibit closest uniformity of characteristic impedance throughout the pair inclusive ~of the transitions to precision lines or cables. Cable connectors shall be attached to an appropriate cable in accordance with the instructions supplied by the connector manufacturer. The cable to be used shall preferably be of the close tolerance type. Alternatively the use of a cable simulator is permitted. Time-domain reflectometry (TDR) shall be used to check the homogeneity of the measuring set-up, to localize imperfections and to examine the accuracy of the characteristic L impedance of the sections of coaxial lines used. The reflection factor shall be expressed as a function of frequency. Measurements shall usually be made in the frequency domain, preferably by using a swept-frequency generator. Measuring in the time domain and converting to frequency domain may be suitable up to frequencies of approximately 1 GHz and has the particular advantage of permitting the separation of reflections arising from the connector under test from other reflections in the system. This is more difficult to achieve, in particular at low frequencies, when measuring in the frequency domain. If spot frequency, as distinguished from sweep-frequency, techniques are used, appropriately small frequency increments shall be employed. Spot-frequency techniques are not satisfactory for error recognition methods, unless the generator (normally ~automatically controlled) permits very small increments of frequency. Examples of appropriate equipment for measuring the reflection factor as a function of frequency include radio-frequency bridges, directional couplers and slotted lines. Measuring set-ups using this equipment without special provisions for recognition of errors originating from different defects are, in general, only satisfactory for reflection factors greater than 0.05 (considering that the measuring uncertainty should not be greater than 10% of the quantity measured). For testing connectors with specified reflection factor limits lower than 0.05 the use of a set-up permitting the recognition of error contributions, and thus permitting the evaluation of the relevant reflection, will in general be necessary. There are some computer controlled automated measurement systems having enhancement routines with~error correction models that reduce the measurement uncertainty in reflection factor to the point where further recognition methods are not required.

1

IS 5054 ( Pat-t l/Set 2 ) : 1995 IEC Pub 169-1-1 : 1987

14.1.2 14.1.2.1

Normal measuring methods Ordinary measuring set-up

Figure 1 shows a simple set-up, using either a bridge, a directional coupler or a slotted line, with wh:l h the recognition of errors from different sources isnot normally possible. In this figure, the principle locations where reflections may occur are marked with B, C and D, together with the associated reflection factors rb, Y, and rd. The reflection factor due to the connector under test is Y,. measuring port error Yb represents not only the reflection porates also bridge, coupler or slotted line residual errors.
The

at that location but incor-

Since the phases-of the several reflected waves depend on the electrical lengths between the locations and, therefore, on the frequency, their contributions to the apparent total reflection factor are random. The root mean square value obtained, therefore, is:

ytotai

=

d

rX*

+

(rb*

+

rc2 +

rd2)

As an example, typical values may be: Q, = 0.018, Y, = Yd = 0.01. Assuming r, = 0.05 this leads to: `total = 1.1
rX

This represen; an inaccuracy of 10%. Single values at individual frequencies be affected b) much greater or smaller errors.

may, of course,

Although a swept-frequency generator is indicated in Figure 1 this is not intended to preclude the use of spot-frequency techniques, taking into due account the warning expressed in Sub-clause 141.1.

Bridge or dlrectlonal or slotted he V \ I Calibrated attenuator I

coupler

vanable G *

rb

rc

rd

t

3

TX

6

Bridge test port connector

FIG. 1.

-

Bridge, coupler or slotted line method without error recognition.

2

IS 5054(PartuSec2):1995 IEC Pub 169-l-1:1987 14.1.2.2 Two

connector procedure

A special procedure, called the two connector procedure, uses as test set-up two, as far as possible identical, test specimens interconnected back to back by a section of_cablepreviously selected for accuracy and uniformity of characteristic impedance. While not permitting the recognition of errors, this procedure allows identification with good probability whether appreciable disturbances are present. The procedure is illustrated by Figure 2. It makes use of the phenomena that for two identical test specimens, which have also equal reflection factors as a function of frequency, the reflections from the two connectors cancel each other each time the distance p between them corresponds to an odd number of quarter wavelengths, and they add numerically to double their individual value if p equals an even number of quarter wavelengths of the wave in the interconnecting section p. Complete cancellation is a fairly reliable criterion for both the exact equality of the reflections from the two connectors and the absence of spurious reflections in the system. In practical applications, the loss in the cable section p prevents the backward waves, resulting from equal refleCtion factors, from producing complete cancellation at the nodes. Unequal reflections manifest themselves as unequal minima when the connector assembly is reversed. In general, low maximum values (low reflection factor) with minimum values that do not change with reversal of the assembly, are acceptable. However, maximum values corresponding to reflection factors in excess of specified data, or considerable change in minimum values when the assembly is reversed should result in both connectors and cable I being inspected before further tests are resumed.
.

The interconnecting cable of the connectors shall consist either of a prescribed cable of verified performance or an adequate cable simulator. The cable shall be no longer than is necessary with regard to the lowest frequency at which the reflection factor is to be measured. Several lengths p may be advisable for a wide frequency range and also if results are required at frequencies not covered by the series of anti-nodes. As a check of the accuracy of the system, it is recommended to repeat the measurements with the connector assembly reversed between the standard test connectors. The two connector procedure may be used in conjunction with bridge, directional coupler or slotted-line measuring methods. In the following, the latter method is described in some detail.
Connectors Precision termination

Note. -

Instead of using standard test adaptors, standard test connectors may be directly used on the generator port and the precision termination.

FIG. 2. -

Measuring set-up for two connector procedure:

Figure 3 shows the x-y-plot of the voltage on the slotted line, preferably using a logarithmic scale graded in decibels, as a function of frequency with the probe position as a parameter (the probe is simply moved by an appropriate amount after each frequency sweep). The display of

3

I!3 5054( Part lBec 2 ) : 1995 IEC Pub -169-l-l : 1987

the curves permits the envelopes to be drawn. Thus, the minimum widths of the display may be judged. The maximum widths of the envelope correspond to the voltage standing wave ratio (VSWR) from which the reflection factor at the particular frequency is derived. The numerical value of the reflection factor r corresponding formula: IVSWR-1 for a single connector: r = 2VSWR+ to the maximum is given by the

1

I

Voltage on slotted line loganthmlc scale fdB/diviston)

I

I

-1

Maxlmum widths = VSWR fdB) max. relevant for calculation of r

Linear frequency

scale

I

I

c = wave propagation FIG. 3. Voltage on slotted parameter.

speed in section p of frequency with probe position as

line as a function

IEC Pub 169-l-l 14.1.3
14.1.3.1 Measuring methods providing error recognition Usinga bridge

IS 5054 ( Part l/Set 2 ) : 1995 : 1987

In order to achieve the possibility of error recognition, two modifications are applied to the normal measuring set-up in Figure 1, page 9. These include providing adequate lengths of the lines from the bridge port B to the test assembly at C, and from the test assembly to the matched load at D. Furthermore, the termination at the reference port A of the bridge is given a value such that, assuming the test port is terminated by the exact nominal characteristic impedance, a known reflection factor rb of, for example, 0.1 (return loss 20 dB) would result. The set-up is shown in Figure 4. The length 12should be made at least five times Il.

Sweep generator

@ Logarlthmlc amplifier or network analyzer 0 @
1 f

Bridge test port connector Line 1 Standard Connector Line 2 Bridge reference connector test connector under test

0 Oscilloscope or x-y recorder 0

I
FIG. 4. -

I

@

Bridge method with error recognition.

This method produces a plot of the total (resulting) reflection factor as a function of frequency illustrated in Figure 5. At point B, the summation of the three complexors (phasors), representing the reflection factors, is given by: rb + _ rc + rd rtot = where: rb is due to the intentional and known mismatch of the bridge at the port B and is more or less constant in amplitude. Slight deviations are caused by internal bridge errors and by the influence of non-zero linelengths between the bridge-elements and the test and reference ports B and A 1C includes the reflection factor 1x of the connector under test and that of the standard test connector. By its rotation relative to the complexor rb it causes the ripple E, as shown in Figures 5 and 6b, pages 17 and 19 rd is the reflection of the termination at the end-of line 2 and is responsible for the ripple F which is five times faster than the ripple E if the electrical lengths correspond exactly to 1, - 5 Z,

5

IS 5054 ( Part l/See 2 ) : 1995 IEC Pub 169&l-1 : 1987
*Reflection factor

0

fl

fz

f

FIG. 5. -

Complexor

(phasor) chart according to the set-up in Figure 4, page 15.

When using logarithmic detection, the display of the curve on an x-y-plotter will show the resulting return loss in decibels as ordinate, frequency as abscissa. An example is represented in Figure 6a. The conversion into reflection factor may be carried out by using an overlay scale as shown on the right of Figure 6a, or by other suitable means. The extraction of r, (rx) is done by calculation, for which Figures 6b and 6c, page 19, are given as guidance. The offset reflection factor rb must be greater than the sum r, -t rd to prevent ambiguity the total reflection curve. of

The swept-frequency range and the electrical lengths of both lines should be chosen such that there is a sufficient number of ripples to determine the reflection factor curve. With a 200 mm air line It between bridge test port at B and the standard test connector at C, one r,-ripple (E) period corresponds to a 750 MHz variation in the frequency axis ofthe display.

[dBI 17 18 19 20 21 22

Return loss t 0.14 0.13 012 0.11 0.10 0.09 0.08

8

10

Frequency

IGHzl

FIG. 6a. -

Return loss measurement,

example according to the set-up in Figure 4

IS 5054 ,( Pati l/See2 ) : 1993. IEC Pub 169-l-l : 1987

t!b++c++.d)

1

Reflection

factor

Frequency

iGHz1

FIG;6b.

-

Detail A, converted to reflection factor. Elimination of rd by averaging out F. Ordinate values ofshaded area correspond to the sum (3 + ~~1.

/ [h

+

k

1

ReflectIon

factor

012

i
011

0.10

i
FIG. 6c. -

Frequency

IGHzl

Extraction of r, (ripple E) by dividing the difference rmax - rmin by 2. r, is the reflection factor of the connector under test (including the reflection of the standard test connector at C in Figure 4, page 15).

14.1.3.2

Using a directional coupker to C) shall be reflection and with low loss B: r,ffset w 0.1

When using a directional coupler instead of a bridge, the line II (from B replaced by a broadband impedance discontinuity acting as a low loss partial transmission element. This takes the form of a coaxial line partially filled diefeetric foam as shown in Figure 7, page 21, with a sharp discontinuity at (- 20 dB return loss), matched to Z, at its output.

The measuring process is similar to that described under Sub-clause 14.1.3.1 for the bridge! method with error recognition.

7

IS SO!U(Part l/See2 ) : 1995 IEC Pub 169-lil : 1987
w
`offse1

t
Length

I

(at least one wavelength lowest frequency)

at the

Coupler side -

Connector

under test

Low loss dielectric Er = 1.5

foam

FIG.~.

-

Broadband impedance~discontinuity mission element.

acting as a low loss partial reflection

and trans-

14.1.3.3 Alternative set-up for specialpurposes

If the connector at the end of line I1 at C is the test specimen to be measured, line 12can be replaced by an absorptive sliding termination. Periodic variation of the load element position (at least by one-half wavelength) during the slow sweep action simulates the long line effect of the line 12and results in an equivalent ripple F as in Figure 6a, page 17.
Note. Resonance reflections can be detected when using any of the three procedures described above. Such reflections create sharp irregularities in the reflection sum curve.

14.1.3.4 Remarks on remaining errors

There are a few remaining errors not eliminated by the procedure described:
-

error caused by deviations of characteristic impedance of coaxial lines. This error can be minimized by selecting the correct impedance using time-domain reflectometry; error of calibration attenuator G., shown in Figures 1 and 4, pages 9 and 15; the standard test

-

standard test connector error. This may be minimized by making connector a part of a precision air line having the same diameter;

-

influence of air line I1 attenuation between B and C on the reflection factor value r, measured. If this attenuation is not negligible, twice its value (in decibels) has to be subtracted from the return loss before computing the true reflection factor ic

IS 5054 ( Part l/Set 2 ) : 1995 IEC Pub 169-1-1: 1987

14.1.4

Typicalprocedure for the measurement

of reflection factor

Graphical symbols:

1
@,+

r

=

time-domain

reflectometer

equipment

= = =

mated male and female connectors
not necessarily connectors

Ipiri and socket) matched

= =

frequency-domain equipment mated precision connectors

reflectometer hermaphroditic

__<+ w

exactly

precision

termination

14.1.4.1

Setting-up and verification of equipment, during subsequent measurements

selection of suitable elements and lines for use

Purpose

Test method

Notes

election and verification of reference line by comparison with standard air-line

Reference lane

Termlnatlon

i-----iMW
Standard al,-IKE

8election and verification of transmission line for use during subsequent measurements by comparison with reference line Verification of performante of standard test adaptors

Transmlsston Reference line II Adaptor

he

,,
\\

under

test

Adaptor need be neither precision nor calibrated

-fil

rn _I =

Reference

he

~~~~~:d

test

~~~sm'ss'o"

Termlnatlon

-+-$--4Connector under test

Routine equipment check
Precwon termlnatlon

Verification of equipmen and termination errors

%--I-

4dditional equipment
check
Standard al,-line or reference he Preclslon termlnahon

Verification of overall error

Verification of performante of standard test adaptors (1,2,3 snd 4)

Preclslon

ternxnat~on

%-IA/_2
Standard test adaptors (1st pair)

Standard test adaptors may also be checked cross-coupled and reversed

Precision 3 %e Standard (-test adaptors (2nd patri 4

termlnatlon

9

Is 5054 ( Part l/See 2 ) : 1995 IEC PUP, 169-l-l : 1987 14.1.4.2

Methods without error recognition according to Sub-clause 14.1.2

PUlpOSC

Test method

Notes Alter attenuator G setting from 0 dB by convenient steps and plot corresponding return loss curves

Zalibration for generating a grid of constant return loss curves

a-+-----<-]
From port of measwng dewce (budge, dvectlonal coupler or slotted l~nel

Short

l ] Open

Measuring of the reflection factor of a single connector according to Sub-clause 14.1.2
" . . I

Transmission

ltne lcablel

c+ Standard

Connector test adaptor

under

test.

Measurements are carried out on connectors fitted to selected and verified transmission line in accordance with manufacturer's assembly instructions. Alternatively, a cable simulator may be used

10

IS JO54 (Part l/Set 2) : 1995 IIX Pub 169-1-l : 1987 14. I .4.3

Methods witherror recognition according to Sub-clause 14.1.3

Purpose 3eneration of a grid of decibel return loss calibration curves

Test method

Notes Terminate reference port with matched load. Draw the average trace between open and short for 0 dB and plot the return loss grid by

0 Open
fleasming the reflection factor sum according to Figures 6a to 6c, pages 17 and 19, and deduction of reflection factor r, Initial position of attenuator G at 0 dB. Introduce 20 dB offset at reference port of bridge
Line I*

~

;;Gdge

;:;;;

""der;i

Measuring the reflectian factor sum according to Figures 6a to 6c and deduction of reflection factor r,

Initial position of attenuator G at 0 dB. Introduce line reflector with impedance step at directional coupler side

Correction of measured return loss. if necessary

Check air line attenuation

Real return loss: measured return loss minus two times line II loss

11

IS 5054 ( Part l/Set 2 ) : 1995 IEC Pub 169-l-l : 1987

14.1.5 14.1.5.1

Method oftime-domain

reflectometry (TDR)

Theoretical considerations

Assuming the incident signal has the ideal form of a step function the reflected s(t) = r(t) is converted to the complex reflection factor as a function of frequency by: f(u) = jco where 0 to T is the time interval comprising from the connector under test. Restricting the upper frequency expression to be simplified to:
r(0) 3 27tf

signal

s
0

s(t). e-jordt

the portion of s(t) due to the reflection

arising the

limit to values such that wT& 1, e-jar =

1, allows

s0

s(t). dt = A

-f

A = 27~ s0 reflectometer retarding.

s(t) - dt

Figure 8 shows an example of a time-domain
Note. -

As only the magnitude of the reflection factor is of importance the sign of the reflected signal integral is omitted. A positive sign results from an inductive series, a negative sign from a capacitive parallel disturbing element.

I

I

1

0
-1-

100
-I-

T

1

flPS1

Impedance level of reference he

Reflechons from connector under test

Impedance level of transmission line

FIG. 8. -

Example of a time-domain

reflectometer

measurement

recording.

In the example the surface under the curve from 0 to Tis: f Therefore at 100 MHz: r = 0.011.
0 s(t) -

dt = 17.5 ps

12

IS 5tW( P&t l/See 2 ) : 1995 IEC Plb ,169-l-l : 1987' 14.152 Measuringprocedure

The verification of the equipment and the elements used is carried out as shown in the first three boxes of the table in Sub-clause ,14.1.4.1. The set-up for carrying out the measurement is illustrated by Figure 9. For reflection factor calculation, a permanent record of the reflected waveform made (reading from the screen is usually not accurate enough).
Reference he Adaptor Transmlsslon line Termlnatlon

shall be

HP---G,
Connector

"m

under test

FIG.~. -

Equipment

set-up for the measurement

of reflection in time domain.

Both the time and the reflection factor scales of the TDR equipment shall be calibrated by independent references. For the time scale, this can be done by using air lines of known length, sliding short-circuits or by time standards. The reflection factor scale is calibrated by using known impedance mismatches or input signals of known amplitude. For routine calibration between measurements, open or short-circuiting is also satisfactory.
In addition to the calibration, following sources of error:

the measuring

equipment

should

be checked

for the

The step form shall be adjusted for minimum bration.

ripple and irregularities

before the cali-

Losses in air lines and equipment cables distort the in-cident step. Excessive lengths should' be avoided. Multiple reflections in, the measuring system added to the reflection from the connector under test, especially if the system includes unmatched components. Their effect can be minimized by selecting the lengths of air lines and cables so that the reflections from different sources are separated in time. Leaky connections measuring system. or unshielded terminations may cause interference signals in the

Errors are often due to an uncertainty in defining the line corresponding This is particularly important if the reflected signals are small.
Frequency range

to zero reflection.

Assuming a maximum.length of the connector under test of 50 mm and a step signal with a rise time of-not more than 2OQps, the TDRmethod usually permits adequate accuracy up to 200 MHz, using the appropriate formula For the conversion into the frequency domain.
N&e. A gradual increase instead of a sudden step of the ,input signal has, besides the restriction of frequency range, the effect of flattening the reflected signal and thus of lowering its amplitude, which in turn diminishes the accuracy.

13

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of/n&an Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot No. LTD 16 ( 1763 ). Amendments Amend No. Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31,331 13 7.5 Regional Offices : Central
:

Telegram : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 3310131

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002

Eastern

:

l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054

378499, 37 86 26,

378561 37 86 62

Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH

160036

533843, 53 23 84 23502 16, 235 15 19,

53 1640

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

2350442 235 23 15

Western

:

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) ~BOMBAY 400093

632 92 95, 6327891,

632 78 58 6327892

Branches:

AHMADABAD. BANGALORE BHOPAL BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

