( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS:1888

- 1982

Indian Standard
METHOD OF LOAD TEST ON SOILS

( Second Revision )
Soil Engineering
Chairman

and Rock

Mechanics

Sectional

Committee,

BDC

23

Representing

DR JAGDISH NARAIN
Members

University

of Roorkee,

Roorkee

SFiRI P. D. AoARWAI,

Da B. L. DHAWAN ( Afternaie ) University of Jodhpur, Jodhpur Da ALAM SINQH ( RCD ) Irrigation Department, Government l&arEE~n CHlEB Chandigarh ( IPRI ) SHKI P. S. GOSAL ( Alternate ) Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI M. C. DAN~AVATE SRRI N. C. DUC+~AL( Alternate ) In personal capacity ( 5 Hungerford SHRIA. G. DMTIIMR
DR G. S. DHILL~N DIRBXIYOIL DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( Alternate DIRECTOR 11~1 SHRI A. I-1. DIVANJI SHIEI A. N JANCLP, ( Alternate Dn GOPAL R.YJ.*N )

Public Works Department, Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow

Government

of

of

Punjab,

Court,

12/l,

Indian Geotechnical and Central Soil New Delhi

Hungerford

Street,

Calcutta

Society, New Delhi Material Research

)

Station,

Government Department, of Irrigation Uttar Pradesh, Roorkee \ Asia Foundations and Construction (P) Ltd, Bombay
) a.ld

SHILI S. GUPT~ Scar N. V. De-Sousa SHRI ASHOK I(. JOIN SHRI VIJAY IL JOIN ( illterrzate DIXACTOR REsEAxif JOIFT

Institution of Engineers ( India), Calcutta; University of Roorkee, Roorkee Cemindia Company Limited, Bombay ( &ernnle ) G. S. Jain & Associates, Roorkee Ministry
)

( G.E.-I

JOINT DIRXCTOR RESEARC'H ( G. E.- II ) ( ;llternnle )

), RDSO

of Railways

@

Copyright

1983 INSTITUTION

INDIAN

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Coprright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

( Continued j?om page 1 ) Members LT-COL V. K. KANITKAR SHRI 0. P. MALHOTRA Representing

Ministry of Defence ( Engineer-in-Chief's Branch ) Public Works Department, Chandigarh Administration, Chandigarh SHRI D. R. NARAHARI Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), Rnorkee SHRI V. S. AoARWAL ( Alternate ) SHRI T. K. NATRAJAN Institute ( CSIR 1, Central Road Research New Delhi SHRI RdNJIT SINoH Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI V. B. GHORPADE ( Alternate ) DR G. V. RAO Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi DR K. K. GUPTA ( Alternate ) RESEARCH OFFICER ( B & RRL ) Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh SHRI K. R. SAXEN. Engineering Research Laboratories, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad SECRETARY Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi DEPUTY SECRETARY ( Alternate ) SHRI N. SIVACURU Roads Wing ( Ministry of Shipping and Transport ) SHRI P. R. KALRA ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRJ K. S. SRINIVASAN SHRI SUNIL BERRY ( Alternate ) Karnataka Engineering Research Station, GovernSHRI N. SUBRAMANYAM ment of Karnataka, Krishnarajasagar SUPERTNTENDINCE N a I N E E R Public Works Department, Government Of Tamil Nadu, Madras (P&D) EXECUTIVE ENGINEER ( SMRD ) ( Alternate ) SHRI H. C. VERM_~ All India Manufacturers & Dealers Association, Bombav SHRI H. K. GUHA ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 (Ex-o&o Member ) SHHI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Sfxretary SHRJ K. M. MATHUR Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

Site Exploration
Members
SHRI SHRI

& Investigation BDC

for Foundations 23 : 2

Subcommittee,

P. D. ACoARWAL V. S. AooARWAL SHRI M. P. JAIN ( Alternate )

Department, Public Works Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow Central Building Research Roorkee

Government Institute ( CSIR

of ),

( Continued on page l2 )

2

IS : 1888- 1982

Indian Standard
METHOD OF LOAD TEST ON SOILS (

Second Revision)
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian

Standard (Second Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 November 1982, after the draft finalized by the Soil Engineering and Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Visual examination of the soil exposed in suitably located trial pits at the site, combined with the already established data for different types of soils is commonly used for deciding on the safe bearing capacity. While this procedure may be adequate for light or less important structures under normal conditions, relevant laboratory tests or field tests are essential in the case of unusual soil types and for all heavy and important structures. This standard covers plate load test method for determination of ultimate bearing capacity of soil in place which assumes that soil strata is reasonably uniform. The load test included in the standard is also used to find modulus subgrade reaction useful in the design of raft foundation -and in the design of pavements. 0.3 Plate load test, though useful in obtaining the necessary information about the soil with particular reference to design of foundation has some The test results reflect only the character of the soil located limitations. within a depth of less than twice the width of the bearing plate. Since the foundations are generally larger than the test plates, the settlement and shear resistance will depend on the properties of a much thicker stratum. Moreover this method does not give the ultimate settlements particularly in case of cohesive soils. Thus the results of the test are likely to be misleading, if the character of the soil changes at shallow depths, which A satisfactory load test should, therefore, include is not uncommon. ) with ~due attention being adequate soil exploration ( see IS : 1892-1979* paid to any weaker stratum below the level of the footing. 0.4 Another~limitationsis the concerning of the effect of size of foundation. For clayey soils the bearing capacity ( from shear consideration ) for a larger foundation is almost the same as that for the smaller test plate. -__-__ *Code of practice for sub-surface investigation for foundations ( jrsl revision ). 3

IS a88

- 1982

But in dense sandy soils the bearing capacity increases with the size of Thus tests with smaller size plate tend to give conserthe foundation. vative values in dense sandy soils. Tt may, therefore, be necessary to test with plates of at least three sizes and the bearing capacity results extrapolated for the size of the actual foundation ( minimum dimensions in the case of rectangular footings ). 0.5 This standard was first published in lC62 and subsequently revised in 1971. In the present revision, the use of apparatus has been generalized and also specific sizes of plates have been mentioned for the different types of soils, besides incorporating zero correction which was present in 1971 version and prescribing log log scale for cohesionless and partially cohesive soils. 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether standard is complied with, the final expressing the result of a test or analysis, ante with IS : 2-1960*. The ~number of rounded off value should be the same this standard. a particular requirement of this value, observed or calculated, shall be rounded off in actordsignificant places retained in the as that of the specified value in

1. SCOPE

i.1-This standard lays down estimation of bearing capacity
2. TERMINOLOGY

the method for conducting of soils and its settlement.

load

test

for

2.1 For
1972t

the purpose of this standard, and IS : 6403-1981$ shall apply.

the definitions

given

in 18

: 280%

3. APPARATU

3.1 Loading platform truss of sufficient size and properly designed members so'as to estimate load reaction Tor conducting the test shall be used. The typical set up used for gravity loading is given in Fig. 1, for ieaction loading in Fig. 2 and for loading truss in Fig. 3.
3.2 Hydraulic jack of required capacity with properly calibrated load measuring device, such as pressure gauge, electronic load cell, or proving ,ring shall be used. 3.3 Bearing Plates - Circular not less than 25 mm in thickness or square bearing plates of mild steel, and varying'in size from 300 to 750 mm

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). $Glossary of terms and symbols relating to soil engineering ( jirst revision ). $Code of practice for determintaion of allowable bearing pressure on foundations ( first reuision ) .

shallow

4

WOODEN JOISTS SUITABLE SIZE

OF WOODEN PLANKS

WOODEN JOISTS 0F SUITABLE SIZE 15 cm # LOADING COLUMN (WITH PLUM BOB ARRAN

LE IRON STAKES ODEN GUIDE JOISTS TEST PLATE

NOTE FIG.

Ctamp

could

also be at 2ower level.

1

TYPICAL SET UP FOR GRAVITY LOADING PLATFORM

6ALL

AND SOCK ARRANGEMEN
HEAD ROOM FOR PERSON TO -SIT AND OBSERVE

IF NECESSARY NOTEDial gauge fixturemay be on the form clamp also. TYPICAL SET UP I;OR REACTION LOADING PLATFORM

FIG. 2

CROSS BAR CHANNEL

SPIKE H.,,,RSf

I-J

FIG. 3

TYPICAL SET UP FOR LOADING TRUSS

IS : 1888- 1982 with chequered or grooved bottom ( see Fig. 4 ), provided with handles for convenient setting and centre marked. As an alternative, cast in-situ or precast concrete blocks may be used with depths not less than twothird the width.

All dimensions in millimetres.

FIG. 4

DETAILS OF CHEQUERS OR GROOVES

3.4 Settlement Recording Device - Dial gauges with 25 mm travel, capable of measuring settlement to an accuracy of 0.01 mm. 3.5 Datum Beam or Rod - Beam or rod of sufficient strength of maintaining straightness when fitted on two independent fitted with arms or magnetic bases for holding dial gauges. capable supports

- A ball and socket arrangement, 3.6 Miscellaneous Apparatus loading columns, steel shims, wooden blocks, collar, reaction girder with cradles for independent fitting to the reaction platform as necessary to the particular set up. 4. PROCEDURE 4.1 Selection of Location - The locations for load test shall be based on exploratory borings, and unless otherwise desired, shall be conducted at an elevation of the proposed fouridation level under the worst estimated conditions. In case the water table is within the depth equal to the width of the test plate, the test shall be conducted at water table level. In case water table is higher than the test level, it shall be lowered to the test level and maintained by pumping through a sump, away from the test plate, however, for the soils like cohesionless silt and fine sand which cannot be drained by pumping from the sump, the test level shall also be water table level. at the foundation level, having in 4.2 Test Pit - The pits, usually general normally of width equal to five times the test plate or block, shall have a carefully levelled and cleaned bottom at the foundation level; protected against clisturbance or changes in natural formation. 4.3 Dead Load - The dead load of all equipment used, such as ball and socket, steel plate, loading column, jack, etc, shall be recorded prior to application of load increment. 7

IS : 188'8 - 1982 4.4 Size and Shape of Plate - Except in case of road problems and circular footing;, square plates may be adopted. For clayey and silty soils and for loose to medium dense sandy soils with N < 15, a 450 mm square plate or concrete blocks shall be used. In the case of dense sandy or gravelly soils ( 15 < N < 30 ) three plates of sizes 300 mm to 750 mm shall be used depending upon practical considerations of reaction loading and maximum grain size. The side of the plate shall be at least four times the maximum size of the soil particles present at the test location.
NOTE - N is the standard with IS : 2131-l%l*. penetration resistance value determined in accordance

4.5

Test

Arrangement

4.5.1 The loading platform shall be supported by suitable means at least 2.5 m from the test area with a height of 1 m or more above the bottom of the pit to provide sufficient working space. No support of loading platform should be located within a distance of 3.5 times size of test plate from its centre. 4.5.2 The test plate shall be placed over a fine sand layer of maximum thickness 5 mm, so that the centre of plate coincides with the centre of reaction girder/beam, with the help of a plumb and bob and horizontally levelled by a spirit level to avoid eccentric loading. The hydraulic jack should be centrally placed over the plate with the loading column in between the jack and reaction beam so as to transfer load to the plate. A ball and socket arrangement shall be inserted to keep the direction of the load vertical throughout the test. A minimum seating pressure of 70 g/cm2 shall be applied and removed before starting the load test. 4.5.3 The two supports of the reference beam or datum rod shall be placed over firm ground, fixed with minimum two dial gauges resting at diametrically opposite ends of the plates. The dial gauges shall be so arranged that settlement is measured continuously without any resetting in between. - Apply the load to soil in cumulative equal 4.6 Load Increments increments up to 1 kg/cm2 or one-fifth of the estimated ultimate bearing whichever is less. The load is applied without impact, capacity, fluctuation or eccentricity and in case of hydraulic jack load is measured over the pressure gauge, attached to the pumping unit kept over the pit, away from the testing plate through extending pressure pipes. 4.7 Settlement and Observation - Settlements should. be observed for each increment of load after an interval of 1, 2.25, 4, 6.25, 9, 16 and
*Method for standard penetration test for soils (.first revision ). 8

IS : 1888 - 1982 25 min and thereafter at hourly intervals to the nearest 0.02 mm. In case of clayey soils the `time settlement' curve shall be plotted at each load stage and load shall be increased to the next stage either when the curve indicates that the settlement has exceeded 70 to 80 percent of the probable ultimate settlement at that stage or at the end of 24 hour period. For soils other than clayey soils each load increment shall be kept for not less than one hour or up to a time when the rate of settlement gets The next increment of appreciably reduced to a value of 0.02 mm/min. The test shall load shall then be applied and the observations repeated. be continued till, a settlement of 25 mm under normal circumstances or 50 mm in special cases such as dense gravel, gravel and sand mixture, is obtained or till failure occurs, whichever is earlier. Alternatively where settlement does not reach 25 mm, the test should be continued to at least If needed, rebound observatwo times the estimated design pressure. tions may be taken while releasing the load. 5. DETERMINATION SAFE BEARING OF ULTIMATE BEARING PRESSURE/SETTLEMENT CAPACITY/

5.1 Shape of the Load/Settlement Curve - A load settlement curve shall be plotted out to arithmetic scale. From this load settlement curve the zero correction which is given by the inter-section of the early straight lines or the nearly straightline part of the curves with zero deadline shall be determined and subtracted from the settlement readings to allow for the perfect seating of the bearing plate and other causes. 5.1.1 Four typical curves are shown in Fig. 5. Curve A is typical for loose to medium cohesionless soil; it is a straightline in the earlier stages but flattens out after some time, but there is no clear point of failure Curve B is for cohesive soil; it may not be quite straight in the early part and leans towards settlemCnt axis as the settlement increases. For partially cohesive soils curve C possessing the characteristics of both the curves il and B is obtained while curve D is purely for dense cohesionless soils. 5.2 From the corre~cted load settlement curves no difficulty should be experienced in arriving at the ultimate bearing capacity in case of dense cohesionless soils or cohesive soils ( see Fig. 5, curves D and B ) as the failure is well defined. But in the case of Curves A and C where yield point is not well defined settlements shall be plotted as abcissa against corresponding load intensities as ordinate, both to logarithmic scales ( see Fig. 6 ), which give two straightlines, the inter-section of which shall be considered as yield value of soil. 5.3 From Fig. 5 the safe bearing pressure for medium and dense sands could be read, corresponding to a settlement ( S, ), which shall be 9

IS:1888-1982
ULTIMATE BEARING CAPACITY

,

L(A) SOIL

N
LOAD

LOOSE TO MEDIUM COHESIONLESS SOIL

FIG. 5

SETTLEMENTCURVES settlement of footing ( see 2

calculated as under ( St taken as permissible IS : 1904-1978' ): Sr = s, where

1

B(Bp

+ 0.3)

BP ( B + 0.3 > I

B = the size of footing in m, BP = size of test plate in m, S, = settlement of test plate in m, and St = settlement of footing in m. From this formula total settlement of footing taking Sp as observed total settlement of plate. 6. REPORT

( Sr ) is calculated

6.1 The continuous listing of all time, load and settlement data, for each test shall be recorded with details of test elevation, natural water table, profile of test pit, size of bearing pIate and irregularity, if any, in routine procedure. 6.2 It is necessary to excavate soil below the test plate to a depth equal to twice the dimension of the plate so as to examine and record the subsoil profile. ..____ *Code of practice for structural safety of buildings : Shallow foundations ( second
revision ) .

10

D

a

SETTLEMENT

o-5

1 Settlement in mm

5

10

50

FIG. 6 LOAD SETTLEMENTCURVE ( Lot-LOG SCALE )

IS : 1888 - 1982
( Continued from page 2 ) Members
DRALAM SUCH*

Representing

University of Jodhpur, Jodhpur Central Soil & Material Research Station, DIRECTOR New Delhi DIWUTY Drn~~~ox ( CSMRS ) ( Alternate ) E x E c u T I v E E N c I N E E n Central Public Works Department, New Delhi ( DESIGNS ) V Works Government of E x E c TJ T I v E E N a I N R E n Public Department, Tamil Nadu, Madras (SM&RD) EXECUTIVE ENGINEER ( CD ) ( Alternate ) TOINT DIREC~COR RESEAILCH Ministry of Railways ( G.E.-II ) RDSO DEPUTY DJRECT~R ( G.E.-II ) RDSO ( Altermzle ) Associated Instruments Manufacturers (I) Pvt Ltd, SHRI M. D. Nara New Delhi PROF T. S. N.~GARAJ ( Alternate ) Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI T. K. NATIEJAN Engineer-in-Chief's Branch ( Ministry of Dt,fence ) LT-COL I(. M. S. SAnASI SHRI A. K. ClI_4TURVEDI ( ~h%Ut~ ) Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SHRI S. K. SHOM~ SHRI P. N. M~XTA ( Alternate) Roads Wing ( Ministry of Shipping and Transport ) SHRI N. SIVAoUaU SHKI P. K. THOMAS ( Alternate ) SUPERINT~NIJINO EN~INREIL ( IC ), Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, Bombay NAUPUR
"

*Acted

as Convener.

12

