IS 1828( Part 2 ) :2002 ISO 7500-2:1996

wP12Fl=l=T fmwbl@kPJTd3-3nimi

W'?mwvnw

Indian Standard

METALLIC MATERIALS -- VERIFICATION OF STATIC UNIAXIAL TESTING MACHINES
PART 2 TENSION CREEP TESTING MACHINES -- VERIFICATION OF THE APPLIED LOAD

Ics

77.140.10

@ BIS 2002

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG 110002 Price Group 5

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI March 2002

Mechanical

Testing

of Metals

Sectional

Committee,

MTD 3

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) which is identical with ISO 7500-2:1996 `Metallic materials -- Verification of static uniaxial testing machines -- Part 2: Tension creep testing machines -- Verification of the applied load' issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Mechanical Testing of Metals Sectional Committee ( MTD 3 ) and approval of the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. The creep is a property indicating the continuous flow of a metal or alloy when stressed below its yield point or proportional limit. It is more marked at elevated temperatures and is, therefore, important in connection with metals and alloys for service at high temperature. Creep behaviour of metals and alloys for relevant applications are required to be determined accurately assuch materials may be put to critical uses consisting of constant loading and elevated temperatures. In order to obtain the results accurately, it is necessary that the machine is calibrated on regular basis. This will also be necessary for the realizability of the machine towards the reproducibility and repeatability of the results obtained. In this adopted standard, used in Indian Standards. a) some terminology and conventions are, however, Attention is especially drawn to the following: Standard' appear referring not identical to those

Wherever the words `International as read as `Indian Standard'.

to this standard,

they should be

b)

Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker.

the current

practice

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: International ISO 204:1961 Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence

IS 3407 ( Part 1 and Part 2 ) :1983 Method for creep testing of steel at elevated temperatures : Part 1 Tensile creep testing ( first revision) and Part 2 Tensile creep stress rupture testing ( first revision ) IS 4169:1988 Method for calibration of force proving instruments used for the verification of uniaxial testing machines ( first revision ) :1986 IS 1828 ( Part 1 ) :1991 Metallic materials -- Verification of static uniaxial testing machines : Part 1 Tensile testing machines ( second revision )

Technically equivalent

ISO 376:1987

do

ISO 7500-1

Identical

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2: 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'.

IS ISO

1828

( Par? 2 ) :2002

7500-2:1996

Indian Standard
`i

METALLIC MATERIALS -- VERIFICATION OF STATIC UNIAXIAL TESTING MACHINES
PART 2 TENSION CREEP TESTING MACHINES -- VERIFICATION OF THE APPLIED LOAD

1

Scope
of in

This part of ISO 7500 specifies the verification testing machines used for uniaxial creep testing tension in accordance with ISO 204. The verification -- -- consists of of the testing machine;

ISO 376:1987, Metallic materials -- Calibration force proving instruments used for the verification uniaxial testing machines.

bf of

ISO 7500-1:1986, Metallic materials -- Verification of static uniaxial resting machines -- Part 1; Tens~le testing machines.

a general inspection a verification machine.

3 Symbols and their meanings
For the purposes of this part of ISO 7500, the symbols given in table 1 shall apply. For the purposes of this part of ISO 7500 the following types of creep testing machines are recognized: -- -- -- -- deadweight machines, (see figures 1 and 2); overslung or underslung figures 3,4 and 5); with or without machines guides (see or

of the load applied

by the testing

This type load ante

part of ISO 7500 applies to dead weight and lever creep testing machines. The machines with a measuring systemlj shall be verified in accordwith ISO 7500-1.

2 Normative references
The followirm standards contain movisions which. through refer&ce in this text, cons~tute provisions of this part of ISO 7500. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this part of ISO 7500 are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below. Members of IEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. ISC 204:-- z), Metallic testing in tension. materials -- Uniaxial creep

lever

jockey weight machines, either with overslung underslung lever (see figures 6 and 7); any combination of the types of machines tioned above (see figure 8).

men-

4 General inspection of the testing machine
The verification of the testing machine shall only be carried out if the machine is in good working order. For this purpose, a general inspection of the machine shall be carried out before verification of the load applied by the machine (see annex A).

1) For the purposes of this part of ISO 7500, a force measuring system comprises load cell plus conditioning plus indicator. 2) To be published. (RevisionoflSO/R204:1961 and lSO/R 206:1961 )

IS ISO

1828 ( Part 2 ) :2002 7500-2:1996

.

Table 1 -- Symbols and their meanings Symbol FN Fi Unit N N Meaning Maximum capacity of the load range of the testing machine Load applied by the testing machine to be verified -- for deadweight machines: F, = mg 1) -- for lever-type machines: ~ = mgR 1j -- for jockey weight machines, the value of Fi is indicated on the scale of the machine True load indicated by the force-proving instrument Arithmetic mean of several measurements of F for the same discrete load Highest or lowest value of F for the same discrete load Force exerted by the masses on the scale pan of the machine Lower limit of the verified load range Lever ratio used for the verification Relative repeatability error of the testing machine Discrimination threshold Discrimination threshold corresponding to 20 Relative discrimination threshold Relative accuracy error of the testing machine
`%.

F F Fmm Frnin FM Fv R b d d, a q

N N
N

N N -- % N N %
Yo

of the maximum force range (FN)

1) g = local accelerationdue to gravity, in metres per second squared.

Self alignment joint

Self

alignment

joint

Specimen

Specimen

Figure 1 -- Schematic representation of the operating principle of a deadweight tensile creep testing machine (example)

Figure 2 -- Schematic representation of the operating principle of a deadweight tensile creep testing machine with guides (example)

2

IS ISO

1828

( Part 2 ) :2002

7500-2:1996

Self alignment joint

Specimen

Figure 3 -- Schematic representation of the operating principle of an overslung lever tensile creep testing machine (example)

L

l'-

Self alignment joint

Specimen

Hgure 4 -- Schematic representation of the operating principle of an underslung lever tensile creep testing machine (example)

3

IS ISO

1828 ( Part 2 ) :2002 7500-2:1996

-

Self alignment joint

=

Specimen

Figure 5 -- Schematic representation of the operating principle of an overslung double lever tensile creep testing machine (example)

~"'''ignmen'
".

Figure 6 -- Schematic representation of the operating principle of an overslung lever tensile creep testing machine with jockey weight (example)

4

IS ISO

1828 (Part 2):2002 7500-2:1996

Seif alignment joint

Specimen

Figure 7 -- Schematic representation of the operating principie of an underslung doubie iever tensiie creep testing machine with jockey weight (example)

1
9

A

1
Self a(ignment joint

Specimen

I

u I

Figure 8 -- Schematic representation of the operating principie of a tensiie creep testing machine using a combinaticmof different ioading systems (example)

5

IS ISO

1828

( Part 2 ) :2002

7500-2:1996

5 Verification of the load applied by the testing machine
5.1 General

d a=-- Xloo F and shall remain within the limits given in table 2 for the class of machine considered. The discrimination newtons threshold d shall be expressed in

This verification shall be carried out for each of the load ranges used. if the testing machine has several load ranges, each ranges), shall be regarded as a separate testing machine. This verification shall be carried out using tension force-proving instruments. These instruments shall be in accordance with ISO 376. The class of the forceproving instrument shall be equal to or superior to the class determined for the creep testing machine.

5.4 Determination of the lowerlimitof verification The lower limit of verification cording to table 2. Fv shall be specified ac-

5.2

Masses

Table 2 -- Lower limit of verification Claaa 0,5 1 2
NOTE -- 20
`Y.

The masses used to apply the forces during verification shall be the masses normally used during testing, which can be either: a) known masses with an accuracy equal to or better than t 0,1 `34.; verified at least every 10 years, or; masses dedicated for use with a given creep testing machine applied in the same sequence as during the test.

Fv 400d1 200d1 10Odl

d, is the discrimination threshold corresponding to

of the force measuring range.

b)

Determination of the discrimination threshold
5.3 The discrimination threshold d of the machine is defined as the smallest increment of force that can be applied and detected during the verification procedure. The discrimination threshold d shall be determined at 20 Yo, 60 Y. and 100 Y. of the maximum load FN of the force measuring range. If loads of a magnitude less than 0,2F~ are to be tested (see 5.2), the discrimination threshold must additionally be determined at the lower limit of the provided testing range. The discrimination threshold d k measured as the magnitude of the force resulting from the smallest mass added to, or removed from, the scale pan of the machine or the load which corresponds to the smallest recordable movement of the jockey weight which causes a detectable change at the indicator of the force-proving instrument. The relative discrimination threshold a is calculated for each value of load specified according to the following formula:

NOTE 1 The lower limit of verification of the machine may be less than the permissible operating range of the equivalent grade force-proving instrument used to determine the discrimination threshold at the 60 Y. and maximum load conditions. Consequently, if one wishes to accurately verify the testing machine load at the lower end of the range as well, it will be necessaty to employ two measuring instruments, one for the upper range and a second one having appropriate capacity for the extreme lower measuring range.

5.5

Testprocedure

Verification shall be carried out for each load range for which a grade is sought. Verification shall not be performed limit Fv for any load range. below the lower

5.5.1 Alignment The force-proving device shall be mounted in the machine with the self-alignment devices normally used included at each end of the loading train.

3) In the case of a deadweight machine, load range means the range over which the machine is to be used; in the case of a lever-type machine it is the load range for each separate lever ratio.

6

IS ISO

1828

( Part 2 ) :2002

7500-2:1996

5.5.2

8alancing the lever

It is necessary to balance the loading train to achieve a zero loading reading on the force-proving device when it is mounted in the loading train in place of the test piece. The precise method of balancing is dependent upon the design of machine, however in general the procedures given in 5.5.2.1 and 5.5.2.2 will be applicable. In some machines, it is not possible to fully balance the lever, in which case the minimum force that is applied to the test piece with no masses on the scale pan shall be recorded on the verification report and taken into account when calculating the load applied to the test piece when undertaking a creep test, 5.5.2.1 Overslung lever

device three times between zero force and the maximum load to be measured. Then, the force-proving device shall be reset to the zero force position.

5.5.5

Selection of test forces

A series of at least five approximately equispaced loads starting at 20 YO of the force range or the lower limit of verification, whichever is greater, shall be applied. When required, additional loads below 20 % of the load range down to the lower limit of verification (see 5.4) may be applied. One load is to be applied for each increment of 5 Yo, or portion thereof, of the scale to be verified below 20 % of the load range.

The load verification device shall be hung in the loading train in place of the test specimen, with the lower loading bar disconnected immediately below the proving device. The lever shall then be balanced by movement of the adjustment weight normally attached to the machine, or by the addition of an extra balancing weight. The load indicator of the verification device shall be set to zero before connecting the lower loading bar. NOTE 2 It must be remembered that the lever will need to be rebalanced before commencing creep testing. 5.5.2.2 Underslung lever

5.5.6

Application of test loads

For each range, the series of loads shall be applied in ascending order and each series shall be repeated to give three series of such loads. After each series of applications the load shall be completely removed. All three series of loads shall be applied with the loading system at the mid point of the normal operating range (zero position). The measurements shall be conducted after the system has been stabilized especially for machines with a damping device. NOTE 3 On an overslung lever or a single underslung lever creep testing machine, this requirement implies that the three series of loads are applied with the lever in the horizontal position. Further, it has to be ensured that: -- each test load applied will vibration, so that the load ceed its nominal value by mum permissible error for question; be free of shock and will therefore not exmore than the maxithe machine grade in

Because of the geometrical design of underslung lever machines it is seldom possible to balance the mass of the lower loading bars, lever and scale pan. It is therefore necessary to zero the force-proving device with the Iqwer loading bar disconnected, and then merely to note the load applied when the loading train is reconnected and the system adjusted to bring the lever to the normal operating position with no masses placed on the scale pan. If this load is greater than that calculated in 5.4 then it shall become the lower limit of verification 5.5.3 Temperature compensation

-- Sufficient time shall be allowed for the verification equipment to attain a stable temperature. The temperature shall be noted at the beginning and end of the application of each series of loads. Where necessary, temperature corrections shall be applied to the deflections of proving devices using the equations given in ISO 376. 5.5.4 Conditioning

In order to condition the system, it is necessary to exercise the creep testing machine and force-proving

in case of lever type machines it has to be verified that the permissible deviation of the lever from its horizontal position is exactly marked. In the range between these marked inclinations of the lever, it shall be checked to ensure that the load is within the permitted limits. This check shall be carried out for the lowest and highest load of the range at the lower position of the lever. This procedure shall ensure that the deviation of the test load from its nominal value during the total duration of the creep test is kept within the limits of the maximum permissible error for the machine grade in question.

7

IS ISO

1828 ( Part 2 ) :2002 7500-2:1996

5.6 Assessment machine

of the force applied bythe

6.2 Deadweightcreeptestingmachines
Normaiiy the grading will be determined by the accuracies of the masses used to apply the verification forces and of the mass of the ioad suspension system beiow the test piece. However, for machines with guides below the test piece which could introduce friction effects, it is necessary to calibrate the machine using a proving device. The calibration authority shall be satisfied that the axis of loading is through the longitudinal axis to the test piece.

5.6.1 Relative accuracyerror The relative accuracy error, q, expressed the equation as a percent-

age of the mean value of the true load ~, is given by

7 Verification report
5.6.2 Relative repeatability error The verification ing information: report shall contain at least the foiiowThe repeatability error, b, is, for each discrete force, the difference between the highest and lowest values measured with respect to the mean value of true load. It is given by the equation Fm.. - `rein
F x ,0.

a) Gneral information: 1) 2) 3) reference to this part of ISO 7500; identification of the testing make, serial number); location of the machine; method of verification used (see 5.1) and the identity, class and date of the last calibration certificate of the verification equipment used; the average temperature of the verification equipment at the time of verification; date of verification; name of mark of the verifying performed the verification. se~ice which machine (type,

b=

6 Class of the testing machine
.Table 3 gives the maximum permissible values for the relative errors of accuracy and repeatability which characterizes a testing machine in accordance with the appropriate class. Table 3 -- Characteristics machine of the classes of b)

4)

5) 6) 7)

Maximm permissible values(%) Relative Classof Relative errorof machine discrimination threshold repeatability accuracy a b 4 0,5 1 2 0,25 0,5 1 0,5 1,0 2.0 * 0,5 *lto * 2.0

Results of verification: 1) for each force-measuring system used, the class of each range verified and, if requested, the discrete values of relative errors of accuracy, repeatability; the lever ratio R used for each load range, where applicable; when discrete forces have been verified, the actual forces, the class(es) obtained and, if requested, the discrete vaiues of relative errors of repeatability; any anomaly spection. found during the general in-

2) 3)

6.1

Levercreeptestingmachines
4)

The grading shall cease to apply below the minimum load that complies with these requirements. It is possible for a range to be given several classes but each class shall satisfy the requirements defined in 5.5.5. It is permissible to classify a machine for one or several discrete forces, for each discrete force three measurements shall be conducted. The classification obtained is valid only for the discrete forces verified.

8 Intervals between verifications
The machine shall be verified at intervals not exceeding 5 years. However, if the predicted test iife exceeds the date of the expiry of the verification certificate, then the machine shall be reverified prior to commencement of the creep test. Any machine shail also be reverified if it has been dismantled for moving or subject to major repair or adjustment

8

IS ISO

1828 ( Part 2 ) :2002 7500-2:1996

Annex A
(normative)

General inspection of the testing machine

The general inspection of the testing machine, which shall be carried out before the verification of the machine (see clause 5), shall comprise the following.

b)

that the lever system is free to swing over its operating range;

smoothly

c)

A.1 Visual examination
The visual examination a) shall verify: d)

that the machine is not affected by environmental conditions (vibration, effect of corrosion, local temperature variations, etc.); that the line of action of force. as far as ~ossible. runs through the centres of the knife edges or ball seatings of the loading train.

that the machine is in good working order and not adversely affected by certain aspects of its general condition, such as: -- significant wear of the knife edges, supporting points, bearings, grips or any defect in the guiding elements of the pull rods, looseness in mounting crossheads; of columns and fixed

A.2 Inspection of the structure of the machine
A check shall be made to ensure that the structure and gripping systems will permit the force to be applied axially.

--

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. NOpart of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from DOC: No. MTD 3 ( 4330 ).
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No,

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional Offices: Central: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern: 1/14 C. 1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 { 3233841 3378499,3378561 { 3378626,3379120 603843 602025 { 2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315 8329295,8327858 { 8327891,8327892

Northern: SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. QUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR, KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM<
Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India

