**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



^^Eti^^tt^n i im^VN^ ^^Ts^^ii ra^g^^uiKS a raaa^ 



IS 5945 (1970) 
Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



Barograph, Aneroid [PGD 21: Meteorological 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 5945 -1970 

REAFrlRMfcD 

Indian Standard 2 qo3 

.SPECIFICATION FOR 
BAROGRAPH, ANEROID 



UDC 55 1508-43 




© Copyright 1971 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 



Price Rs 3-50 ^^mmmi^ r% © August 1971 



■EISSGr 3 



IS i 5945«1970 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
BAROGRAPH, ANEROID 

Meteorological Instruments Sectional Committee, EDG 69 

Chairman Representing 

Miss A. Mani India Meteorological Department, New Delhi 

Members 

Shri N. R. Chakraborty The National Instruments Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi N. R. Das Gupta ( Alternate ) 

Deputy Director ( Mbtroro- Indian Navy 
logy) 

Staff Officer ( Meteoro- 
logy ) ( Alternate ) 

Joint Director, Research Research, Designs & Standards Organization ( Minis- 
( B & F ) try of Railways ), Lucknow 

Deputy Director, Research 
(B&F) (Alternate) 

Dr R. N. Mathur Central Scientific Instruments Organization ( GSIR ), 

Chandigarh 

Shri D. D. Puri ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. H. Mbndonsa Lawrence & Mayo ( India ) Private Limited, Calcutta 

Shri S. Varadarajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri Prbm Prakasb National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri Om Praxabh ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Rohatgi Government Precision Instruments Factory, Calcutta 

Gp Capt S. Das Sarma Indian Air Force 

Wo Cdr P. Srinivasan ( Alternate) 
Shri M. V. Patankar, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Mech Bngg ) 

Secretary 
Shri S. M. Razvi 
Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ), ISI 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BfiAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 MAY 1994 

TO 

IS 5945 : 1970 SPECIFICATION FOR BAROGRAPH, 

ANEROID 

(Page 3, clause 3.1, line 2) — Substitute 'Aluminium alloy' for 
'aluminium'. 

(Page 3, clause 3.1.1, line 2) — Substitute 'Aluminium alloy' for 
'aluminium'. 

(Page 3, clause 3.2) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

'The material used for the remaining components of the instrument shall be 
non-magnetic, non-corrosive and non-rusting material like stainless steel, brass 
or similar material with suitable anticorrosive paint. The material used shall be 
such that it is capable of being finished to the specified dimensions and is not 
affected by exposure to widely varying climatic conditions both at inland and 
coastal stations.' 

(Page 6, clause 5.4.4) — Add the following at the end of the clause: 

'Suitable fibre tipped disposable pen can also be used.' 

(Page 7, clause 5.4.6) — Substitute 'IS 5924 : 1988 (first revision)'/^ 'IS 
5924 : 1970'. 



(LMD21) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



ISi5945-1970 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
BAROGRAPH, ANEROID 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 4 September 1970, after the draft finalized by the Meteorological 
Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 Mercury and aneroid barometers are generally used for the measure- 
ment of ambient atmospheric pressure. Permanent records of the 
atmospheric pressure at meteorological and other observing stations are 
made with barographs. 

0.3 Specifications for barographs in use at meteorological stations in the 
country as well as on board ships have been prepared by the India 
Meteorological Department, but no Indian Standard specifications for 
these exist. With the increasing manufacture of these instruments in the 
country, the formulation of an Indian Standard for barographs and their 
certification by ISI has become necessary. 

0*4 This standard has been prepared in the interest of standardization of 
barographs in use in the country and of accuracy in the measurement of 
atmospheric pressure. Th$ testing of all barographs made in the country 
and their initial certification after manufacture will in future be the sole 
responsibility of ISI. 

0.5 In the formulation of this standard, due consideration has been given 
to the requirements laid down by the World Meteorological Organization, 
Geneva, in addition to the special circumstances obtaining in thp country. 

0«6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS: 2-1960* The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rtvistd ). 

2 



IS:5945-1970 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the requirements for open-scale aneroid 
barographs suitable for use at land stations up to a height of 3000 metres 
above mean sea level and on board ships. 

2. DESCRIPTION 

2*1 The instrument consists of a pressure sensitive element, either an 
array of aneroid capsules or one or more flexible bellows suitably sealed 
after evacuation, connected by a system of magnifying linkages to a 
recording pen moving on a chart which is wrapped on a drum driven by 
clock mechanism. The movement of the recording pen is controlled by 
the vertical expansion or contraction of the aneroid element, resulting 
from variations in atmospheric pressure. A means of fine adjustment is 
provided so that the zero of the instrument may be set when required. 
It is also provided with an arrangement for changing the scale value by 
adjustment of the relative lengths of the levers of the linkage system. 
The complete recording mechanism is mounted on a base and has a 
hinged cover provided with a wide viewing window. 

2.1.1 For instruments used on board ships, the system shall be suitably 
damped to absorb all but the gradual variations of the atmospheric 
pressure, or the entire instrument shall be mounted on an anti-vibration 
mount which will absorb shocks and vibrations. 

3. MATERIAL 

3.1 The material used for the fabrication of the base and cover shall be 
either a light and durable metal like aluminium or any other material 
having the following properties: 

a) Rigidity and strength with no distortion or other deterioration 
when exposed to widely varying climatic conditions, while at the 
same time being light in weight; 

b) Freedom from attack by animal, insect or fungoid life; 

c) Smooth and permanent surface finish; and 

d) Low thermal conductivity so as to minimize alterations of the frame 
due to temperature changes. 

3tl*l While a$fy material satisfying the above requirements may be used, 
aluminium or glass reinforced polyester is considered as a suitable material 
for moulding the base and cover. 

3.2 The material used for the remaining components of the instruments 
shall be brass, aluminium or similar material unless otherwise specified. 
The material used shall be such that it is capable of being finished to the 
specified dimensions and is not affected by exposure to widely varying 
climatic conditions both at inland and coastal stations as well as on board 
ships. 



IS.5M5-1970 

4. DIMENSIONS 

4*1 The general arrangement and dimensions of the barograph shall be 
as shown in Fig. 1. 

4.1.1 The aneroid element may be anchored either at the top as in Fig. 1 
or at the bottom. Any suitable arrangement of magnifying levers is 
acceptable provided the finished product conforms to all the requirements 
of this specification. 

4.1.2 The design of the arrangement for zero adjustment and change of 
scale value is left to the manufacturer who may also suitably modify the 
system of linkages to suit his design. The adjustments shall, however, be 
simple, readily accessible and easy to operate without the necessity of 
dismantling the instrument. 

5. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 Aneroid Assembly 

5.1.1 The aneroid element used in the instrument shall be made of 
either steel or beryllium copper. A suitable material having minimum 
temperature coefficient is ideal. The complete element shall be fully 
compensated for temperature variations over a range of 40°C. 

5.1.1.1 The aneroid bellows shall be provided with helical internal 
springs of iso-elastic material. 

5.1.2 While instruments having exposed bellows assembly are acceptable, 
they shall preferably be housed within a protecting chamber to avoid risk 
of damage. 

5.1.3 The spindles shall be turned from stainless steel or similar rust 
proof material and shall be straight and well polished. 

5.1.4 The spindles shall be held in suitable bearings so that they rotate 
smoothly and freely with minimum friction and withstand normal wear 
and tear. 

5*1*5 A fine adjustment arrangement shall be incorporated in the 
instrument to enable the zero position of the pen to^be adjusted with a 
precision of 0*1 mbar on the chart over the full working range of the 
instrument. 

5.2 Pen Arm Assembly 

5*2.1 The pen arm shall be made of hard drawn German stiver sheet 
or similar material. It shall be rigid and ribbed for strength, if required. 
It shall be fixed to the pen arm spindle by a screw to enable the position 
of the pen on the chart to be adjusted independent of other linkages. 



ISi5945-1970 




SECTION AA 
All dimensions in millimetret. 

Fio. 1 General Arrangement and Dimensions o* Aneroid Barograph 



IS 1 5945 -1970 

5.2.2 The pen arm shall be mounted in such a way that there is no 
play of the arm in the suspension and the pen shall rest on the chart by 
gravity. The design shall be such that there is always a tendency for the 
pen arm to fall towards the chart on the drum shell. 

5.2.3 The pen arm shall carry to, pen at one end and a suitable 
counterweight at the other. The position of the counterweight shall be 
adjustable. 

5.2.4 The length of the pen arm with the pen shall be exactly 190 a 5 mm 
so that the pen follows precisely the time grid arcs on the chart. 

5.3 Cover and Base 

5.3.1 The cover shall be provided with a cut-away window to enable 
the record on the chart to be seen without opening the cover. The window 
shall be covered with a transparent sheet of glass or acrylic plastic which 
may be slid in grooves framing the window and fixed in position. 
Alternatively, the cover shall be such as to provide a panoramic view of 
the inside. In either case the cover shall be attached to the base with a 
strong rustproof hinge. 

5.3.2 A suitable rustproof locking device of good quality shall be 
provided to enable the cover to be locked to the base. 

5.3.3 A suitable handle shall be fixed securely on top of the cover. 

5.4 Recording Mechanism 

5.4.1 The recording mechanism shall be such that the movement of the 
pen on the chart is linear in the pressure range of 700 to 1 050 mbar and the 
pen travels a vertical distance of 161 mm for a pressure range of 85 mbar. 

5.4.2 The recording mechanism shall be free enough to denote clearly 
on the chart minute changes in pressure of the order of 0*1 mbar. 

5.4.3 The friction in the instrument should be kept to the minimum so 
that the record obtained on the chart is continuous without steps, that is, 
when there is a gradual change in pressure, the record does not show 
abrupt changes of pressure with traces showing^ periods of constant 
pressure interposed in between. 

5.4.4 The recording pen shall have the dimensions as given in Fig. 2 
and yield a clear trace on the chart at all times. 

5.4.5 The system of linkages shall be such as to enable the adjustment 
of the various levers in the system to be horizontal and parallel to one 
another when the pen arm is also horizontal and occupying a position 
approximately in the middle of the chart. 



1 



it5945-1970 



-2*5 



2.5— 


»e-ji 


H-6- 


— I** 


5 


1 ■ 

6 

♦ 








i 




\ » 


1 


m « ^ 


3 

-1 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 2 Dimensions for Recording Pen 

5.4.6 The instrument shall be provided with a clock mechanism and 
drum conforming to IS: 5924-1970*. 

5.4.7 The chart (see IS:5947-1970t) shall be daily or weekly for use 
with either daily or weekly clock mechanisms and drums. 

5.5 Antivibration and Damping Devices — For barographs for use on 
board ships, either a special damping device or an antivibration mounting 
shall be provided to enable the instrument to avoid the wide traces likely 
to be produced by rapid pressure variations caused by gusty winds and 
excessive movement of the ship as well as the vibration caused by the 
ship's engines, 

6. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

6.1 The external surfaces of the barograph shall have a smooth and 
permanent finish. 

6.2 The instrument shall be painted in any light colour, but light blue is 
preferred. 

6.3 The aneroid element shall be suitably protected from rusting and other 
deterioration in all types of climate. 

6.4 All metal parts shall be suitably treated so as to protect them from 
rusting and other deterioration. 

♦Specification for clock mechanisms and drums for meteorological instruments. 
fCnartf for recording meteorological instruments ( under print ), 

7 



IS: 5945- 1970 

6*5 The movement of the pen up and down the chart shall be exactly 
parallel to the time grid marked on the chart. 

7. TESTS AND CALIBRATION 

7.1 The barograph f when tested in a properly designed and operated 
vacuum chamber, shall indicate any change in pressure correct to within 
=fc a 2 mbar throughout its working range. This test shall be carried out 
with the aid of a suitable laboratory reference mercury manometer. 

7.2 The barograph shall be so compensated for variations in temperature 
that the reading does not change by more than 1 mbar for a change of 
temperature of 20°C. 

7.3 The scale error (the error of the instrument from the true scale value) 
of the barograph shall not exceed 2 mbar at any point throughout its 
working range. 

7.4 Hysteresis in the instrument shall be sufficiently small to ensure that 
the difference in reading before a change of pressure of 50 mbar and after 
return to the original value does not exceed 1 mbar. 

7.5 When finally assembled, the movement of the pen on the chart shall 
have minimum friction so that the pen returns to its original position when 
gently moved manually up or down through a distance equal to one small 
division on the chart. The instrument shall pass this test at all positions 
of the pen on the chart. 

8. MARKING 

8*1 Each barograph shall have the following inscription engraved legibly 
and neatly on a name plate which shall be cemented firmly on the base 
of the instrument : 

a) Name of the instrument — 'Barograph 9 ; 

b) Word 'Daily* or 'Weekly' corresponding to the clock mechanism; 

c) Designation of the chart to be used with the instrument; 

d) Manufacturer's name or recognized trade-mark; and 

e) Serial number and year of manufacture, for example. 
No. 123/1969. 

8.1.1 The barograph may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark it governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, and the Rules and Regula- 
tions made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with die 
requirements of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control during production. This system, which is devised and supervised by 
ISI and operated by the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as 

8 



IS:5945-1970 

actually marketed are continuously checked by ISI for conformity to the standard. 
Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark 
may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian 
Standards Institution. 

9. PACKING 

9*1 Each barograph, without the clock mechanism and drum, shall be 
wrapped in dust-proof paper and placed in a corrugated cardboard carton 
with suitable cushioning, after lightly tying the pen arm to the pen lifter 
to prevent excessive oscillations of the pen arm during transit. The clock 
mechanism with drum shall be packed separately in another cardboard 
carton to avoid any risk of damage or deformation during transit. Both 
the cartons shall then be packed in a strong wooden box using suitable 
packing material. Alternatively, the instrument shall be packed as agreed 
to between the supplier and the purchaser. 

10. TESTING AND INSPECTION 

10.1 Each barograph shall be tested individually for conformity to all 
the requirements of this specification. 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 
Meteorological Instruments 



IS: 

4849-1968 Rain measures 

5225-1969 Raingauge, non-recording 

5235-1969 Raingauge, recording ... 

•5793-1970 Aneroid barometer! 

5798-1970 Mercury barometers ... 

5799-1970 Windvane ... 

5900-1970 Hair hygrograph 

5901-1970 Thermograph, bimetallic 

5912-1970 Anemometer, cup counter 

5924-1970 Clock mechanisms and drums for meteorological instruments 

5945-1970 Barograph, aneroid 

•5946-1970 Whirling psychrometers 

5947-1970 Charts for recording meteorological instruments 

5948-1970 Thermometer screens ... 

•5973*1970 Pan evaporimeter 



Rs 

3*50 
3-50 
6-50 

3-50 
2-50 
3-50 
250 
2-50 
3-50 
3-50 

5-50 
250 



•Under print 



PUBLICATIONS OF INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

INDIAN STANDARDS 

About 6500 Indian Standards, broadly classified under the following 
main heads, have been issued so far: 

Agriculture & Food 

Chemical 

Civil Engineering 

Consumer Products and Medical 

Instruments 
Electrotechnical 



Marine, Cargo Movement and 

Packaging 
Mechanical Engineering 
Structural & Metals 
Textile 



Of these, the standards belonging to the Mechanical Engineering 
Group fall under the following categories: 



Basic Engineering Standards 

Abrasives 

Bearings 

Bicycle Components 

Chemical Engineering 

Engineering Metrology 

Gas Cylinders and Fittings 

Gaskets and Packings 

Gears 

Hand Tools 

IC Engines and Automotive 

Vehicles 
Instruments (Drawing, Optical 

and Surveying) 
Machine Tools and Small Tools 



Marine Engineering and Ship- 
building 

Material Handling, Lifting Gear 

Mining 

Pumps 

Refrigeration and Air- 
Conditioning 

Sewing Machines 

Steam Tables 

Threaded Fasteners and Rivets 

Transmission Devices, Pulleys 
and Belts 

Weights and Measures 

Wire Ropes and Wire Products 

Unclassified 



OTHER PUBLICATIONS 



ISI Bulletin ( Published Every Month ) 

Single Copy ... 

Annual Subscription 
Annual Reports (from 1948-49 Onwards ) 



Rs 

3*oo 
25-qo 
2-op to 5-oo each 



Handbook of ISI Publications, 1970 ( Pages viil + 629, Price Rs 12 00) 

incorporating annotations on all Indian Standards, and also listing 

ISO Recommendations and Publications of IEC 



Aval fable from 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 



Head(juarter$ 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Mara. New Delhi 1 
Telephone 27 01 31 ( 20 lines ) Telegrams Manaksanstha 

Branch O f flc a s 
Telegrams Manaksanstha 
Syndicate Bank Building. Gandhlnagar Bangalore 9 Telephone 2 76 49 

S34 Sardar Vallabhbhal Patel Road Bombay 7 ., 35 69 44 

5 Chowrlnghee Approach Calcutta 13 „ 23-0802 

1-9-201/2 Chlrag All Lane Hyderabad 1 „ S 34 35 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar Kanpur 5 „ 82 72 

54 General Patters Road Madras 2 „ 8 72 78 



Printed at Arcoo Press, New Delhi, India 



