( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF SUCTION MACHINE FOR CLEANING SEWERS, MANHOLES AND ANCILLARY STRUCTURES PROVIDED ON SEWER LINE AND CLOSED STORM WATER DRAINS

UDC

628.28

Q BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK.

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG 110002

November 1992

Price Gmp

1

Fublic Health Engineering Equipment Sectional Committee,

CED 40

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Public Health Engineering Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. Keeping the sewers clean is an important obligation of the civic authorities. If this is not done or . . ..a ..rr+ ,..I.. ,,,+h,,+:,.,ll., -__A . ..a11 Is- . . .."..h+l.. A......(l,...... ,.E . ..a.*.",.^ ..,I.:,.l. :- ^_^_^.. 1.. ""UG, A,...... &LA..,3 LUG;1G Will UC; uLIsIg;I*LIy "YSI11"WD CII acwap w111\111 CUG 1I"L "My acoLuGLllrQIIy lll"SL Ullyl "ycl ,y repulsive, but also a source of danger to the health of the community. The suction machine is used to syphon the mud, sand and other debris along with the sewage from deep sewerlines, manholes, gulley sewer trap and other such ancillary structures through negative pressure. This standard is intended to cover essential features of the machine to serve as a guidance to the manufacturers and the users.

IS 13496 : 1992

Indian Standard

GENERALREQUIREMENTSOFSUCTION MACHINEFORCLEANING SEWERS, \~AAhTUnI CO li,lUY Ahl'n A\lf-'1TT AD'VCTDIlpT1IDCC lvlfilYL-luLG3 liLYLlLLrlL\I ~11\uLlul\li# PROVIDEDONSEWERLINEANDCLOSED STORMWATERDRALNS
1 SCOPE This standard covers the general requirements of suction machine used for cleaning deep sewer lines, stagnant manholes, gulley sewer trap, .. . cess pools, septic tanks and other such ancillary structures provided in the sewer and storm water system. i REFERENCE The Indian Standard IS 10002 : 1981 `Performance requirements for constant speed ignition ( diesel ) engines for compression general purposes ( above 20 kW )' is a necessary adjunct to this standard. 3 DIMENSIONS loading should be provided. All pipes will have quick-coupling devices. Hose pipe shall be so designed and the material used shall be such that it can withstand 90 percent vacuum, and corrosion and abrasion resistant. Shut off valve is SO designed and manufactured that it shall be quick acting, corrosion and abrasion resistant and shall be able to pass sewage containing grit ., floating hbre material up to _50mm dia. 4.4 Loading Arm The gulley arm shall be fully counter balanced and shall be easy to manipulate by hand. It should be easy to rotate it by hand around the pivot by 270". The lowering and lifting operation of the gulley arm into and out of the pit can be performed manually or hydrauhcally.

The overall dimensions of the machineslequip-_ ___L_ ..L-..,A ,,=rn%l;n I CIIIUI,L it &ould llx"Lh S,L"UILl La "L ".x-h DUtiLl that within the requirements of Mu/or Vehicles Act 4.5 Tank and should not unduly obstruct traffic and movement on the road, while the equipment is The tanks shall be built from steel. It shall be operating. designed at a safety factor of 4 times the operating pressure. 4 CONSTRUCTION 4.1 Prime

Mover

The prime mover shall be a standard commercial overloading chassis with at least 25 percent capacity and shall conform to IS 10002 : 1981. 4.2 VnC.lllm . YVY"n.'
Pnmn L "a..=

The pump shall be of a simple design and shall be easy to maintain, Vacuum pump shall be run through arrangements. Rotary Vane type pumps are recommended to be used, Tt should be able to develop sufficient vacuum to suck slurry which consist of grit and other solid materials from a depth of 8 m up to depth of 12 m with deep SLICrion device. 4.3 Suction Pipe The minimum dia

Two-thirds volume of the tank at the rear will' carry solid contents. This portion again shall be divided into one-third and two-thirds by a sludge screen. The sludge screen will separate water from solids. Water can be drained back into the manhole. The bottom portion of the sludge screen shall be tilting while doing tipping operation In vacuum and the tank should be provided with a back door which can bc opened and closed manually or hydraulically for tipping or transporting as the case may be. The door should be clamped to the rear portion of the tank through reliable clamping system. 4.6 Tipping Gear There should be a Front End Tipping Gear provided in the front portion of the tank. The l,.?,Jr.x.,l;,f-,r wp;,, 1.1" t;nn;"CT "yy...b a-"' .lJLl, UUIIY n.,n-n yu,r,y 1\11 r,npre,t;,,Cr ",`C" . ..I. b 11,p shall draw power from the vehicle drive onl) _ Control valves shall be provided to tip, hold and lower the tank. The operating lcvcrs shall bc provided in the driv,cr's cab at convenient place-

suction pipe shall bc 100 mm . ..I. c, ..c-..:,~-,, f`,.. and a Quic'k Acting Valve .W,,l UC;.tJ'"Y,LICU ,"I loading. This valve and pipe should be so designed as not to allow tank contents to leak. A replaceable wear plate should be provided abo\,e the top end ol`thc suction pipe. Proper hoses for

of

1

IS 134% : 1992

4.7 Discharge Pipe A discharge pipe of 100 mm minimum diameter with a quick-acting valve of sufficient bore should be provided on the rear side or rear door of the tank for pressure discharge of the liquid. Proper hoses for discharge at a point away from the vehicle should be provided. All pipes will have quick coupling devices. 4.8 Accessories it should be fitted with necessary accessories such as Full Bore Quick Acting Valves in the sewage paths so that the bores do not offer any resistance or blockage to the flow 2 Nos. Prcssure Relief Valves, one at the Air Pump to safeguard the pump from overload and another on the sewage portion of the tank to safeguard the tank from excessive pressure due to effervescence of gases, 1 No. Vacuum Relief Valve on the Air Pump Suction line to limit the vacuum level, a compound valve pressure/vacuum gauge to be provided on the tank in an easy to see position. A sludge trap shall be provided between the air pump and the tank to trap solid particles and prevent them from entering the pump. A Aoat cut-out valve to be provided on the tank so that the pump suction line is sealed off once the liquid level crosses the specified limit. This will work as a safeguard against liquid entering the air pump. A lubricating system for the air

pump to be provided losses in the pump.

in order to reduce friction

A rotary control valve to be provided between the Air Pump and the Tank so that the tank can be pressurised while discharging screened water to Gulley pits. Level gauges transparent pipe shouid be provided so that the levels of contents of the tank can be visually noted in the fresh water tank and also in the sludge compartment. An overhead filling, suction filling, hydrant :illing or a combination of two or more methods fe>r filling the fresh water tank shall be provided. An inter-connecting vnlvc to be provided between the front and rear compartment fog hushing the left overs after. completion t,I` 1he pressure/tipping discharge. 5 PAINTING AND FINISHING fc>l!u)wrng

5.1 As the contents arc corrosive, treatments are recommended.

5.1.1 The interior of the tank shall hc cleaned by sand blasting and treated with epoxy,hitu;-,lestic paint. 5.1.2 Finish paint on the external side may be done as per the choice of the buyer. 5.2 Side racks shall be provided on both hides ,$ the sludge tank to store hose pipes.

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Buteuu OJ Indian Standards Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bareau of Indian Stmdards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
copyright

No part of these publications may be reproduced in any BIS has the copyright of all its publications. form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards if any, are Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the fo llowing reference: Dot : No. CED 40 ( 4690 )
w

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of lssue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquartersl Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi Telephones t 3310131,331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002

STANDARDS

110002

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 1 331 13 75 37 84 99, t 37 86 26, 37 85 61 37 86 62

Eastern : 1 14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola c!ALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 160036 600113

53 38 43, 53 16 40 I 53 23 84 235 02 16, 235 04 42 235 15 19, 235 23 15 I 632 92 95, i 632 78 91, 632 78 58 632 78 92

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

BHOPAL. BANGALORE. Branches : AHMADABAD. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at New lndia Rintint Prera. Khum. Lodla

