(Reaffirmed 2012)

IS : 7314 - 1974

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO PORT AND HARBOUR ENGINEERING
Ports
Chairman BRIG 0. P. NARULA Members SHRI M. BALASUBRAMANIAM Mormugao Port Trust, Mormugao Madras Port Trust, Madras SHRI U. R. BALASUBRAMANIAM SHRI V. V. SESHADRI ( Alternate ) Pre-investment Survey of Fishing Harbour, Bangalore SHKI N. P. BHAKTA SHRI H. V. RA~~ASWAMY ( Alternate ) DR S. K. BHATTACHARJEE DR S. K. NAG ( Alternate ) Hydraulic Study Department ( Ports Commissioners ), Calcutta Government of Gujarat Calcutta and Hazarat & Co,

and

Harbours

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

BDC

66

Ministry of Shipping & Transport, New Delhi

Public Works Department, SHRI R. K. BUDHBHATTI SHRI B. P. KUKADIA ( A/term& ) SHRI I. G. CHACKO SHRI R. C. GHOSE~ (Alternate ) SHRI A. H. DIVANJI SIIRI A. N. JANCLE ( Alternate ) SHRI K. K. FRAMJI SHRI S. GHOSH (Alternate ) SIIRI S. R. GAITONDE SHRI A. GHOSIIAL SHRI C. V. GOLE DR 2. S. TARAPORE (Alternate )

Calcutta Port Commissioners, Rodio Foundation Bombay

Engineering;

Consulting Engineering Services India'Pvt Delhi Bombay Port Trust, Bombay

Ltd, New

Braithwaite Burn & Jessop Construction Ltd, Calcutta Central Water New Delhi & Power Commission (CWPRS ),

REAR-ADM V. M. KATDARE Indian Navy ( Ministry of Defence ) LT-COL I'. S. SETHEE( Alternate ) SHRI B. L. MITAL CAPT P. N. BATRA ( Alternate ) Marine Department ( Port Commissioners ), Calcutta ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright STANDARDS 1975 INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall Abe deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 7314- 1974
( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Representing Members Engineers India Limited, New Delhi SHRI T. K. D. MUNSI SHRI H. S. &EEMA ( Alterxate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army BRIG P. H. NARURKAR New-Delhi LT-COL OMBIR SINGH ( Alternate ) SHRI HASMUXH P. OZA
SHRI B. K. PANTHAKY SHRI G. S. RAMUH

Headquarters,

School of Planning, Ahmedabad Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay Port Trust, Visakhapatnam Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Member)

Visakhapatnam SHRI H. R. LAXMINARAYAN ( Alternate ) Howe ( India)

SHRI S. R. ROESSLER SHRI H. NANDI ( Alternate )

SHRI D. AJITHA SIMHA, Director ( Civ Engg )

Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Secretary SHRI G. RAMAN Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

IS : 7314 - 1974

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO PORT AND HARBOUR ENGINEERING
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 March 1974, after the draft finalized by the Ports and Harbours Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineeing Division Council. 0.2 A series of Indian Standards covering various aspects of port and harbour engineering have either been published or under preparation. These include a large number of terms relating to ports and harbour engiThe extensive use of these terms has necessitated the preparation neering. of this glossary. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard due wightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard engineering. 2. DEFINITIONS 2.1 Accretion ( also Aggradation ) - May be either natural or artificial. Natural accretion is the build up of land solely by the action of forces of nature, on a beach by deposition of water borne or airborne materials. Artificral accretion is a similar build up of land by reason of an act of man, such as accretion formed by a groin, break-water, or beach fill deposited by mechanical means. 2.2 Admiralty the Admiralty for predictions or non-harmonic a standard port Tide Tables - The Tide Tables published annually by giving daily tidal predictions for standard ports and data at secondary ports either in the form ofharmonic constants constants, such as time differences and ratio of ranges on in UK and other ports of the world. 3 covers definitions relating to port and harbour

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.3 Advance ( of a Beach ) ( also Progression seaward movement movement of the shoreline ) over a specified time.

a) A continuing b) A net seaward

of the shoreline.

2.4 Aga System of Gas Buoys - The system of illumination of unattended lighting of buoys devised by Gustav Dalen of Stockholm in 1904 in which dissolved acetylene gas purified and contained in cylinders was used, coupled with a mechanism for emitting flashing or occulting lighting. 2.5 Aggradation See Accretion.

2.6 Air Chamber - A hollow watertight chamber provided in caisson in which ballast to the required amount is placed, to have the required floatation of the caisson for its operation. 2.7 Altar Course - Steps provided on the inner faces of the two longitudinal walls of a graving dock to receive the side shores for keeping the vessel in position. In modern dry docks the usefulness of the altar courses is much reduced as the vessel rests on a cradle formed by the keel and bilge-blocks. 2.8 Amplitude ( of a Wave ) ( also Wave Amplitude ) a) The magnitude of the displacement of a wave from a mean value. An ocean wave has an amplitude equal to the vertical distance For a sinusoidal wave, from still water level to wave crest. amplitude is one-half the wave height. b) The semi range of a constituent tide. 2.9 Analogue Model -A model based on the identity of the equations describing two or more systems, and carrying out measurements on that system which appears most convenient for this purpose, interpreting the results of the measurements in terms of one or more of the other systems. 2.10 Anchor - An implement it to the bed of a water course. for retaining or fastening a ship by chaining

For every 2.11 Anchorage - A place or location for anchoring a vessel. port there are some such fixed places where vessels are anchored, waiting for their turn to enter the port or sail out of the port area. 2.12 Angle of Repose - The angle with the horizontal solid granular material stands when freely stacked. plane to which a

2.13 Antidunes -Bed forms that occur in trains, and are in phase and strongly interact with gravity water-surface waves.

with

2.14 Antinode ( also Loop) - The part of a standing wave where the vertical motion is greatest and the horizontal velocities are least. Antinodes are associated with clapotis, and with seiche action resulting from wave reflections. 4

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.15 Approach Channel - The navigational channel where vessels get sufficient draft, to the dock or harbours. 2.16 Apron - It is a surface, surface and the transit space. generally paved, provided from deep water the wharf

between

2.17 Apron Conveyor-A form of slat conveyor consisting of slats mounted on a chain driven by electric motors in which the slats are in wood-boasd or steel-plate form, some 15 to 25 cm wide and so mounted on the side chains as to form a continuous carrying surface without spaces. These are widely May be both mobile and static handling installations. employed for handling both heavy and light miscellaneous packages. 2.18 Armour Stone - The material forming the outer covering preventing the movement and washing away of the core material by wave action or current in a mound type break-water or dyke. May be natural stone blocks or artificial blocks of concrete. 2.19 Artificial Ha&our - Where there is little or no pronounced natural feature to afford any protection to vessels for their refuge and trade, artificial harbours are constructed by providing artificial protection by breakwater, etc. 2.20 Artificial Nourishment material ( usually sand ) obtained 2.21 Astern 2.22 Atoll-A ring enclosing a lagoon. 2.23 Atoll reefs. 2.24 Lagoon shape The coral body The process of replenishing from another location. of a vessel. carrying low by coral sand islands, and reef, often a beach with

In or towards the hind-part

of water

encircled

islands

Attenuation a) A lessening origin. of the amplitude of a wave with distance from the

b) The decrease of water-particle motion with increasing depth. Particle motion resulting from surface oscillatory waves attenuates rapidly with depth and practically disappears at a depth equal to a surface wave length. 2.25 Audible Signals - For safe and rapid navigation in channels audible signals are used as a warning medium when lighting is practically ineffective, such as in dense fog. Th is is effected in various ways, principally by fog horns and explosives on shore or on light ships and also at sea by bellbuoys and whistling buoys. 2.26 Automatic Tide Gauge - The instrument with mechanical/electrical arrangements for continuous recording of the variations of tidal heights above a fixed datum in a tidal course. 5

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.27 Awash -Situated so that the top is intermittently washed by waves or tidal faction. Condition of being exposed or just bare at any stage of the tide between high water and chart datum. 2.29 Backbeach ( Backwash ) ( also Backshore ) - That zone of the shore or beach lying between the foreshore and the coastline and acted upon by waves only during severe storms, especially when combined with exceptionally high water. It comprises the berm or berms. 2.29 Backrush - The seaward return of the water following the uprush For any given tide stage the point of furthest return seaward of the waves. of the backrush is known as the limit of backrush. 2.30 Backshore a) Same See Backbeach.

2.31 Backwash as Backrush. back by an obstruction, such as a ship, b) Water or waves thrown breakwater or cliff.

2.32 Balance Dock - A form of floating dock made of rectangular watertight wooden box with only one compartment, subdivided internally into a series of separate chambers and movable air chambers. 2.33 Ballast - Materials like stone, sand,. concrete blocks, billets, boulders water, etc, which are used to obtain stabrhty in a structure like monolith, Ballasts are used in or to adjust floatation in a floating body like caisson. some chambers of the structures. 2.34 Bank The rising ground bordering a lake, river or sea; of a river or channel, designated as right or left as it would appear facing downstream. An elevation of the sea floor of large area, located on a continental shelf and over which the depth is relatively shallow but sufficient for safe surface navigation; a group of shoals. In its secondary sense, a shallow area consisting of shifting forms of silt, sand, mud and gravel, but in this case it is only used with a qualifying word, such as `Sand bank' or `Gravel bank'. Sandbank )A shallow area consisting of

4 b) c)

2.35 Bank, Sand ( also shifting forms of sand.

2.36 Bar - A submerged or submersible area of sand, gravel, or other unconsolidated material built on the sea floor or river bed in shallow water -by waves, currents, tidal flow, etc. 2.37 Barge -Small floating craft used for aiding loading and unloading, which may be self-propelled 6 the sea-going or dumb. ship in

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.38 Barrier Beach - Offshore Barrier - Barrier Island - A bar essentially parallel to the shore, the crest of which is above normal high water level. 2.39 Barrier Lagoon - A bay roughly parallel ed from the open ocean by barrier islands. to the coast and separat-

2.40 Barrier Reef - A coral reef parallel to and separated from the coast by a lagoon that is too deep for coral growth. Generally, barrier reefs follow the coasts for long distances, and are cut through at irregular intervals by channels or passes. 2.41 Basin - An area of naturally or artificially partially -enclosed water in free communication with the sea. The functions of basins in many cases coincide with those of docks, so that some elasticity of nomenclature is not without justification. 2.42 Basin, Boat - A naturally harbour area for small craft. or artificially enclosed basin or nearly enclosed in and

2.43 Basin, Filling Out - A recirculation draining out water from dock basin.

used for filling

2.44 Basin, Tidal - A non-enclosed basin used for speedy and unrestricted arrival and departure of vessels in an area which is subjected to tidal fluctuations. 2.45 Basin, Turning-An area provided in an impounded dock or harbour for turning and manoeuvring of the ships during berthing and deberthing. The diameter of the turning basin is kept at one and a half times to two times the length of the largest vessel calling at the port. 2.46 Basin, Wet ( also Wet Dock ) - Areas of impounded water within which vessels can remain ~afloat at a uniform level, independent of external tidal action. 2.47 Bathymetry-The measurement of depths of water in oceans, and lakes; also information derived from such measurements. 2.48 Bay -A or headlands, recess in the shore or an inlet not as large as a gulf but larger Bar A bar extending of a sea between than a cave. partly or entirely seas

two capes across the

2.49 Baymouth mouth of a bay.

-2.50 Bayou - A minor sluggish waterway or estuarial creek, tributary to, or connecting other streams or bodies of water. Its course is usually through low lands or swamps. Sometimes called Slough. 2.51 Beach - The zone of unconsolidated material that extends landward from the low water line to the place where there is marked change in 7

IS : 7314- 1974
material or physiographic form, or to the line of permanent vegatation ( usually the effective limit of storm waves ). The seaward limit of a beach L- unless otherwise specified - is the mean low water line. A beach includes foreshore and backshore. 2.52 Beach Berm - A nearly horizontal part of the beach or backshore formed by the deposit of material by wave action. Some beaches have no berms, others have one or several. 2.53 Beach Buildingwave action or artificial Deposition process. of beach materials either by natural of or

2.54 Beach Cusp ( also Cusp) - One ~of a series beach material separated by crescent-shaped troughs less regular intervals along the beach face. 2.55 Beach Erosion-The action, tidal currents, littoral 2.56 Beach Face of the wave uprush. carrying currents, away of beach or wind.

of low mounds spaced at more materials by

wave

The section of beach normally The foreshore of a beach.

exposed

by the action

2.57 Beach Ridge - A nearly continuous mound of beach material that has been shaped up by wave or other action. Ridges may occur singly or In British usage, fulls. as a series of approximately parallel deposits. 2.58 Beach Scarp - An almost vertical slope along the beach caused by erosion by wave action. It may vary in height from a few centimetres to several metres depending on wave action and the nature and composition of the beach. 2.59 Beach, Spending -To break up and disperse heavy seas, preventing them from exerting their destructive influence upon the beach, the waves are sometimes made to run up a long sloping beach, the spending beach, their energy then being absorbed gravitationally in surges and a tumult of broken ~water, by movement of loose beach material and by percolation of water through the material. 2.60 Beacon - Any prominent objects or structures, natural or artificial, on a coastline or river bank, which act as an aid to navigation. 2.61 Beacon, Miscellaneous - Types of navigational aides, as distinct from buoys, luminous beacons and lighthouses, used as a means of alignment or as an indication of change of direction for navigation. May be natural objects, such as lofty isolated trees, tropical features like the edge of a cliff or the summit of a hill or prominent structures of any kind. 2.62 Beaufort Scale - A wind force scale classified by Admiral Beaufort in 1805 for maritime purposes. The intensity of winds is expressed in twelve numbers forming a scale, each number representing a wind strength of a designated range of velocities. 8

IS : 7314 2.63 Bench

- 1974

a) A level or gently sloping erosion plane inclined seaward. b) A nearly horizontal area at about the level of maximum water on the sea side of a dike. 2.64 Berth structure. A ship's station at anchor or at wharf high a

or alongside

2.65 Berth - Cargo from the ship.

A berth for loading and unloading of cargo to and of contain-

2.66 Berth, Container - A berth for loading and unloading erized cargo to and from the ship.

2.67 Berth Occupancy ( also Occupancy Factor of Berth) -The duration over which a ship lies anchored at the berth for loading and unloading operations in a specified period of time. It is usually expressed as a ratio of the actual time of occupation of the berth by ships to the total period specified. 2.68 Bilge Block to the ship's hull. Blocks provided for the purpose of affording a support

2.69 Blocks, KeelFor the purpose of affording a uniform and level base for the ship's keel and in order to give ready access thereto and transferring the ship's load to the foundation in a dry dock, these blocks of hard base of hard wood, cast iron or steel and a capping of soft wood, are placed on the floar of the dry dock. 2.70
Bold Coast -

A prominent land mass that rises steeply from the sea.

Fixed to the quay at cope level, these are employed for securing a vessel in position with rope moorings. These also provide a means of checking vessels entering or leaving the dock. These may be of concrete, cast iron or steel of different sizes and shapes.
2.71 Bollard

2.72 Bore ( Tidal Bore ) ( also Eager ) - A very rapid rise of the tide in which the advancing water presents an abrupt front of considerable height. In shallow estuaries and river sections, where the range of tide is large, the high water is propagated inward faster than the low water because of the greater depth at high water. If the high water overtakes the low water, an abrupt front is presented with the high water crest finally falling forward as the tide continues to advance. 2.73 Bo&-Well Dredger - A type of bucket-ladder dredger in which the ladder and buckets protrude some distance in front of the hull so that the dredger may cut its own floatation for a twentyfour hours dredging in a shallow water where neither the dredger, tug, nor spoil barges can float at low water over the area before dredging. 9

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.74 Box Dock -A continuous floor pontoon carrying two side walls, that is, it is the only form of modern floating dock which cannot be divided into three or more parts for the purpose of self docking. It is of the simplest form and earliest type used mainly for small docks for dealing with relatively light craft, tugs, trawelrs, coasting vessels, patrol and escort vessels and destroyers. 2.75 Breaker-A may be classified wave breaking into four typei: on a shore, over a reef, etc. Breakers

4

Spilling --Bubbles and turbulent water spill down front face of wave. The upper 25 percent of the front face may become vertical before breaking. Breaking generally across over quite a distance.

b) c) 4

Plunging crash.

Crest curls over air pocket; breaking Smooth splash up usually follows.

is usually

with

a

Collapsing -Breaking occurs over lower half of wave. Minimal air pocket and usually no splash up. Bubbles and foam present.

Surging -

Wave peaks up, but bottom rushes forward from under wave, and wave slides up beach face with little or no bubble production. Water surface remains almost plane except where ripples may be produced on the beach face during runback. Depth) The still water depth at down in front of

2.76 Breaker Depth ( also Breaking the point where a wave breaks. 2.77 Breaker an abstruction 2.78 Breaking

Line -The line along which waves break or a shoaling beach. Wave -See Breaker. a shore

2.79 Breakwater-A structure protecting anchorage or basin from wave disturbance.

area,

harbour,

2.80 Breakwater, Composite - A breakwater constructed by combination of a rubble-mound base and vertical wall or other form of superstructure. It is adopted at a location where the depth ofwater is great or there is a wide tidal range so that the quantity of rubble stone required to construct a mound breakwater of the full height would be too large and uneconomical. Of these, there is wide variety of types. 2.81 Breakwater, Floating~( also Bombardon ) - A removable breakwater constructed by caissons or pontoons with valves for trimming whilst afloat and for sinking when in positionand pump connections for refloating, moored to the sea bed. 2.82 Breakwater, Mound ( also Rubble Mound Breakwater ) -- A breakwater constructed by a heterogeneous assemblage of natural rubble,or undressed stone, in pieces of varying size, supplemented in many cases by 10

IS : 7314- 1974
artificial blocks of bulk larger than can be conveniently quarried in the natural state, the whole being deposited pell-me11 without any regard to bond or bedding. The material may, however, be graded as to sizes. pipeline specially designed as to 2.83 Breakwater, Pneumatic -A arrangement of air holes, flexible couplings, floats, and means of controlling the level, to introduce a continuous stream of air under pressure for dispersion of waves in the undulatory stage, located at least 9 m under water These are used in anchorages, temposurface to provide sufficient air lift. rary protection for harbour construction, lifeboat sites, control of erosion and silting, protection for stationary lightships, salvage work and so on. 2.84 Breakwater, Vertical Wall -A breakwater formed by the construction in a regular and systematic manner of a vertical wall of masonry, concrete blocks or mass concrete, with vertical or nearly vertical harbour and seaward faces. 2.85 Bridge, Bascule - A bridge, usually in two leaves, meeting at the centre of the span, revolving round a horizontal axis and provided with a counterpoise in the form of a weighted prolongation of the bridge, whereby the power required for working the bridge is reduced to the minimum. The rolling variety has got the tail-end in the form of a circular segment upon which the bridge rolls in a manner similar to the action of a rocking chair. 2.86 Bridge, Swing-Constitutes a very numerous bridge for dock work. This includes all movable movement of rotation is horizontal. This may be in which the bridge turns upon a centre pivot or which the bridge turns entirely upon rollers. and important class of bridges in which the a `centre bearing' type a `rim bearing' type, in

2.-87 Bridge, Traversing-Bridges of this type are supported by the quay at or about the coping level and are projected forward or withdrawn in a straighthne - in other their motion is rectilinear and words, approximately horizontal, or with just sufficient inclination to enable them to clear the edge of the roadway abutting on their recesses. 2.88 Bucket Ladder Dredger - An endless chain connecting a series of buckets which traverse in succession on inclined orbit, approximately excavating material at the lower elliptical, about two pivots or tumblers, tumbler and discharging it into a chute while passing over the upper tumbler. Bucket dredgers of this type have either one or two ladders ( the central ladder type and the side ladder type respectively ), that is, the flame, This dredger is espewith its roller bearings, on which the buckets travel. cially suitable for steady continuous work in hard material and in very stiff clay. 2.89 Bulk Cargo - Cargoes like foodgrain, coal, ore, fertiliser, oil, minerals, etc, which are imported and exported in bulk quantities and usually handled by mechanical appliances for loading and unloading to and from vessels. 11

IS : 7314- 1974 2.90 Bulk Carriers - Vessels of larger capacity specially designed carrying bulk cargoes in large quantities for economic transportation. for

2.91 Bulk Handling Plants - Mechanical appliances like conveyor, grain elevator, crane, transporter, staiths, trimmer, hoist, power shovel, straddle carriers, etc, which are used in docks for ~quick and efficient handling of bulk cargoes for quick turn-round of vessels.
2.92 Bulk Head-A structure separating designed to resist earth pressures. 2.93 Bunkefing land and water fuel to ship. areas, primarily

The facility for supplying

2.94 Buoy - A float, especially a floating structure of definite size and shape moored to the bottom of waterway for marking a channel, anchor, shoal, rock, etc, for safe navigation. 2.95 Buoy, Anchorage A buoy used for Anchoring of vessels. It may be of

2.96 Buoy, Mowing - A transit buoy for mooring any shape or `colour ( except green ) .

a vessel.

2.97 Buoy, Pillar - Consists of a tall central structure on a broad base and is used to mark special positions on a coast or in harbour approaches. 2.98 Buoy, Radar-Reflecting - Reflects back an echo to the transmitting vessel in order to give warning of its presence, or to afford distinction of a `particular' buoy, in a buoyed channel. 2.99 Buoy, Spar - A buoy with only a mast above water and is generally used to mark special positions, for example, a spit. 2.100 Burtoniqg System -The system of cargo handling, in which both derrick booms of a vessel are used in conjunction, one of them being rigged and fixed so that its head `plumbs' the hold, and the other with its head over the ship's side, the ends of the two falls being joined to one hook so as to make one lifting unit. 2.101 By-passing, Sand - Hydraulic or mechanical movement of sand from the~accreting updrift side to the eroding downdrift side of the inlet or harbour entrance. The -hydraulic movement may include natural as well as movement caused by man. 2.102 Caisson - Meaning a box or chest, but its meaning has been tended, in maritime engineering, to include all hollow structures. ex-

2.103 Caisson Breakwater - Large boxes of steel ~framework encased in concrete or built or reinforced concrete are constructed in a sheltered place, temporarily strutted in the interior, launched and towed out to site of construction, sunk in position by admitting water to the interior, filled with fluid concrete, stone rubble, small blocks or sand so as to form ultimately a solid monolith. 12

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.104 Caisson, Floating - May be either `box' or `ship' type caisson with air chambers, ballast chambers and tidal chambers, and moved entirely by floatation, without guides or rollers. 2.105 Caisson, Pneumatic - Caisson constructed of steel or concrete with working chamber, ballast chamber and vertical shafts for passage of workmen and materials, a continuous amount of air at the required pressure being supplied to the working chamber to balance the hydrostatic pressure at the lower or cutting edge of the chamber. This is used for construction of under water foundations and may be removed after construction or all or part of this may be incorporated in the structure built. 2.106 Caisson, Rolling - A caisson with rectilinear motion achieved by rollers which are attached either to the underside of the caisson or to the pathway on which the caisson travels, whereby abrasion is reduced due to lesser friction than a sliding motion, but may get jammed diagonally due to slight side clearance between the caisson and its sliding ways. 2.107 Caisson, Sliding -A caisson with keels or rubbing plates on its underside by which this is hauled over sliding ways set on the floor of the caisson berth. This method gives rise to a certain amount of friction which may be diminished by suitable floatation adjustment. 2.108 Caisson, SwingingThis is an intermediate class of structure possessing characteristics common to both gates and caissons. Like the gate, it turns or swings upon a vertical axis fixed at one side of a waterway and requires excessive length of side recess for its accommodation when out of use. On the other hand this is built with much broader beam than a gate and this gives it the compensating advantage of a wide roadway at quay level. 2.109 Caisson, Traversing -This includes all those whose motion is rectilinear and, according to the mode of travelling it may be the sliding, rolling or floating type but in any case it occupies a rectangular recess in a side wall at right angle to the axis of the waterway and in direct line with the path along which the caisson travels to close the entrance. It is almost universally of the box type consisting of a floor, side and end plating, and a watertight deck, the whole being divided into compartments. 2.110 Camel Special craft employed for lifting sunken vessels.

2.111 Capillary Wave - A wave whose velocity of propagation is controlled primarily by the surface tension or the liquid in which the wave is travelling. Water waves of length less than about 25 mm are considered capillary waves. Waves longer than 25 mm and shorter than 50 mm are in an intermediate zone between capillary and gravity waves. 2.112 Cap Log-A horizontal timber on a quay or pier, bolted to the vertical timbers or secured to the masonry to receive the impact of vessels lying alongside. 13

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.113 Capstan - A quay side mechanical appliance, consisting primarily of a drum which rotates about a vertical axis, used for shunting and manoeuvring railway wagons alongside ships for the purpose of receiving and discharging cargoes ( and to assist the movement of vessels through entrance locks and passages, together with the warping of vessels-into and out of graving docks and floating docks ). 2.114 Cardinal System of Buoyage - or the ~`compass' system of buoyage to indicate dangers existing in confined coastal waters by true bearing of the navigational mark, from danger, on the charts to the nearest cardinal point of the compass. In order to determine the bearing of a danger from a buoy the four quadrants of the compass are divided into sectional areas and bounded by the bearing N.E., SE., S.W., and N.W., taken from the point of danger. 2.115 Cargo vessel. The goods or, merchandise carried on board a trading

2.116 Cargo, Bulk - Includes materials like foodgrain, coal, oil, fertiliser, ore, gravel, sand and similar other, which are transported in bulk quantities and generally handled by special complete mechanical appliances for quick and efficient loading and unloading. 2.117 Cargo, Container - General cargo consisting of small packages and the like, which are transported in special metallic containers of definite sizes for quick handling, saving manpower and money and with minimum wastage. 2.118 Cargo Density of Ships - The content of the ship per lineal metre. This is used for calculating the storage space and shed capacity at the berth. 2.119 Cargo, General - General merchandise in packages or in quantities, the handling of which cannot be completely mechanised. small

2.120 Cargo Handling Gear - Includes mechanical appliances for loading and unloading cargoes to and from a ship, which includes cranes of all forms, fork lift trucks, piling and stacking machineries, conveyers, elavators, straddle carriers, etc. 2.121 Cargo Mast-A ship's gear for cargo-handling situated on each side of the vessel, and each respectively in such positions as to command These along with derricks or each hatchway. Also called Samson Posts. booms, winches, blocks, runners, and preventers constitute the ship's cargo handling gear. 2.122 Cargo, Palletised - General cargo, preferably of a more or less homogeneous character, is successfully handled in standard packages or The pallet is ` pallets `, also used for handling small or frail packages. strongly constructed of wood in the form of a shallow square or rectangular box usually with two open ends and with the top and bottom formed 14

IS : 7314 - 1974 of open boarding size of the pallet. separated by three or more stringers, according to the

2.123 Cargo Terminal--A place like a berth, quay, etc, with terminal facilities for loading and unloading of cargo to and from vessels. 2.124 Caustic - In refractions of waves, the name given to the curve to which adjacent orthogonals of waves refracted by a bottom whose contour lines are curved, are tangents. The occurrence of a caustic always marks a region of crossed orthogonals and high wave convergence. 2.125 2.126 wave. Cay ( also Celerity Key ) Wave A low insular bank of sand, coral etc. speed, the forward speed of propagation of a

2.127 Central Pressure Index - The estimated minimum barometric This pressure in the eye ( approximate centre ) of a particular hurricane. is considered the most stable index to intensity of hurricane wind velocities in the periphery of the storm; the highest wind speeds are associated with storms having the lowest central pressure index. 2.128 Channel a) A natural or artificial waterway of perceptible extent which either periodically or continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting link between two bodies of water. b) The part of a body of water deep enough to be used for navigation through an area otherwise too shallow for navigation. c) A large strait. d) The deepest part of a stream or stream through volume or current of water flows. which the main

2.129 Charmel Demarcation - Safe and speedy navigation within coastal waters depends - apart from charts - upon the establishment of a number of navigational aids of various types to give the ship master warning of rocks, shoals, sandbanks, etc, to assist in the safe movement of vessels within restricted navigable sea approaches, rivers, channels and entrances to ports and also to indicate the alignment of navigational tracks. This is called channel demarcation. 2.130 Channel, Navigable -The channel, navigational aids, used by ships for navigation. 2.131 Characteristic Wave Height properly demarcated Wave Height. by

See Significant

2.132 Chart Datum - The plane or level tb which soundings ( or elevations ) or tide heights are referenced ( usually low water datum ). The To surface is called a tidal datum when referred to a certain phase of tide. provide a safety factor for navigation, some level lower tha,&nean sea level 15

IS: 7314 - 1974 is generally selected f& hydrographic charts, such as Mean Low Water or Mean Lower Low Water or Lowest Astronomical Tide. 2.133 Chelura - A crustacean resembling a shrimp which undercuts woodwork and causes it to fall away in flakes. This insect manifests a decided partiality for pure sea water and is, consequently, more often found along the open coast than in enclosed harbours. 2.134 Chop ( also Wind Chop ) - The short-crested waves that spring up quickly in a moderate breeze and break easily at the crest. may

2.135 Clapotis - The French equivalent for a type of standing wave. It is usually associated with the standing wave phenomenon caused by the reflection of a non-breaking wave-train from a structure with a face that is Full clapotis is one with 100 percent reflection vertical or nearly vertical. of the incident wave, partial clapotis is one with less than 100 percent reflection. 2.136 Clearance the bed surface vessel.
-

The space allowance between the keel of a vessel and of a navigable channel to prevent agrounding of the

2.137 Cnoidal Wave - A type of wave in shallow water ( depth of water less than 1/8th to 1 /lOth the wave length ). The surface profile is expressed in terms of the Jacobian elliptic function `Cn,`; hence the name Cnoidal. 2.138 Coast - A strip of land of indefinite width ( may be several kms ) that extends from the shoreline inland to the first major change in terrain features. 2.139 Coastal
Area -

The land and sea area bordering the shoreline.

2.140 Coastal Plain -The plain composed of horizontal or gently sloping strata of elastic materials fronting the coast, and generally representing a strip of sea bottom that has emerged from the sea in recent geologic time. 2.141
Coast Line

a) Technically, the line that forms the boundary between the coast and the shore. b) Commonly, the line that forms the boundary between the land and the water. 2.142 Coffer Dam - A temporary dam constructed of timber, either single skin or double skin, parallel-sided with puddled clay or other filling, or interlocking steel sheet-piling, either single skin or double skin, parallelsided with the interior pumped dry and strutted, enclosing the site of structure to be built, for the exclusion ofwater from the site for an underwater construction. 16

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.143 Comber a) A deep water wave whose crest is pushed wind; much larger than a whitecap. b) A long period breaker. 2.144 Combined Service Vessel - Vessels specially designed and equipped for carrying out the various combination of services, comprising surveying, buoyage, salvage work, fire-fighting and general conservancy duties. 2.145 Compound Gate - Lock gates are constructed either of wood, iron or steel. But since wood is not durable above water and iron or steel below water, a compound gate is designed with the lower part under water of wood and the upper part of steel. 2.146 Container Bert&-for handling containerised berth. A berth generally with a large stacking yard cargo, which may also be used as a general cargo forward by a strong

2.147 Containerisation - The process of handling some types of general cargo in small packages or the like, in containers for rapid and economical transport. Full containerisation not only uses such containers for transport of the cargoes, but the containers are transhipped in specially designed vessels and handled at special container berths also for most economical and quick operations. 2.148 Continental Shelf-The zone bordering a continent and extending from the low water line to the depth ( usually about 200 m ) where there is a marked or rather steep descent toward a greater depth. 2.149 Controlling Depth -The least depth in the navigable parts of a waterwhy, generally over a crossing or bar, governing the maximum draft of vessels that can enter. 2.150 Convergence a) In refraction phenomenon, the decreasing of the distance between orthogonals in the direction of wave travel. Denotes an area of increasing wave height and energy concentration. b) In wind set up phenomenon, the increase in set up observed over that which would occur in an equivalent rectangular basin of uniform depth, caused by changes in planform or depth, also the decrease in basin width or depth causing such increase m set up.

2.151 Coping-The top protective covering with hard material like granite, rich concrete, etc, provided at the berthing-side of a dock or wharf wall. The top level of this at the water side is the coping level which is fixed with respect to the design water level in the dock. 17

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.152 Coral

4

Marine coelenterates, solitary or colonial which form a hard exterThe nal covering of calcium compounds, or other materials. corals which form large reefs are limited to warm, shallow waters, while those forming solitary, minute growths may be found in colder water to great depths ( Biology ). The concretion of coral polyps, composed almost wholly of calcium carbonate, forming reefs, and tree-like and globular masses. May also include calcareous algae and other organisms producsuch as bryozoans and hydrozoans ing calcareous secretions, ( Geology ) . at a slipway to draw up a

b)

2.153 Cradle - A travelling frame provided vessel from water by suitable hauling gear.

2;154 Crane, Floating-A crane mounted upon a pontoon, dumb or self-propelled, according to local requirements. These may be of wide range of capacity varying from 5 to 350 tonnes but generally the capacity varies from 50 to 200 tonnes. These are mobile and can be propelled or towed from and to the ship; can travel with the lift from shop to quay and vice-versa; can be employed on other works also besides loading and discharging ships and can be employed for off shore loading and unloading. 2.155 Crane, Level Luffing - A crane, whose jib moves inwards and outwards without raising or lowering the load, this offering a valuable working and low economy in both power and `time, due to economical maintenance coast. Other advantages of this type of crane are that there is a large clearance underneath the jib, which is of particular value when bulky loads are handled; and owing to the small radius of arc covered by the jib when luffing, the crane can be operated more freely In restricted spaces. 2.156 Crane, Portal - A portal structure carrying a travelling trolley with a hook or a portal structure with a cantilever jib to lift and move the load. It is mostly used in quays, wharves, factory sheds, etc. 2.157 Crane, Semi-Portal - A crane with rear legs supported on rails which may be part of the shed structure, if there is one. It has got the advantage of minimizing obstruction of the quay. Trouble, however, is sometimes caused by unequal settlement of the two foundations unless special means are taken to overcome it. 2.158 Crane, Wharf - A crane provided at a quay or wharf for loading and discharging of vessels. Generally, majority of quay cranes of modern origin are electrically operated and of the travelling portal cantilever jib type. All have slewing and luffing motion, and most are fitted with level luffing gear. 18

1s : 7314 - 1974 2.159 Crest Length, Wave Sometimes called crest width. 2.160 Crest of Wave a) The highest b) That 2.161 part The length of a wave along its crest.

of a wave.
See Crest Length, Wave.

part of the wave above still water level. Wave -

Crest Width,

2.162 Crib-A hollow box-shaped structural unit constructed with headers and stretchers of timber, bamboo or reinforced concrete filled up with stone rubble, bricks, and brickbats, lean concrete, or earth. These are Also used extensively used in river training works like spurs, groynes, etc. for retaining tipped materials as in dock walls to be constructed in advance of a shoreline or river bank. 2.163 Crossing - A shallower stretch of a navigable channel over which a vessel navigates from one deeper channel to another deeper channel, generally at the opposite banks of a river or a water course. 2.164 Cunnette -An artificial channel excavated in the bed of a river or water course to channelize and guide the flow and to improve the hydraulic condition. 2.165 Current, Coasta-l - One of the offshore currents flowing generally parallel to the shoreline in the deeper water beyond and near the surf zone. They are not related generally to waves and resulting surf, but may be related to tides, winds, or distribution of mass. 2.166 Current, Drift - A broad, shallow, current. Opposite of Current, Stream. slow-moving ocean or lake

2.167 Current, Ebb - The tidal current away from shore or down a tidal stream. Usually associated with the decrease in the height of the tide. 2.168 Current, Eddy See Eddy. parts of the near shore current system converging and forming the neck of the

2.169 Current, Feeder-The that flow parallel to shore before rip current.

2.170 Current Float -A floating object drifting upon the surface of water to determine the set or direction and velocity of a current. But since the surface is affected by wind and the surface layer of water may flow in a different direction as well as with a different velocity to the lower layers or main body of water, floats should extend some depth into A float, then, the water so as to partake of the influence of bottom layers. generally consists of a floating body submerged to the required depth with an indicator projected above the surface for taking observations. 19

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.171 Current, Flood -The tidal current stream. Usually associated with the increase 2.172 zone. Current, Inshore -Any current toward shore or up a tidal in the height of the tide. of the breaker

in or landward

2.173 Current, Littoral primarily by wave action,

- Any current in the littoral zone caused for example, longshore current, rip current.

2.174 Current, Longshore -The littoral current in the breaker zone moving essentially parallel to the shore, usually generated by waves breaking at an angle to the shoreline. 2.175 Current, Periodic See Current, Tidal.

2.176 Current, Permanent - Current that runs continuously, indepenPermanent currents include the dent of the tides and temporary causes. freshwater discharge of a river and the currents that form the general circulatory system of the oceans. 2.177 Current, Rip ( also Rip Surf) - A strong surface current flowing It usually appears as a visible band of agitated seaward from the shore. water and is the return movement of water piled upon the shore by inWith the seaward movement concentrated in a coming waves and wind. A rip consists of three limited band its velocity is somewhat accentuated. parts : the feeder current flowing parallel to the shore inside the breakers; the neck, where the feeder currents converge and flow through the breakers in a narrow band or `rip'; and the head, where the current widens and slackens outside the breakers line. A rip current is often miscalled a rip tide. 2.178 Current, Stream Opposite of Current, Drift. 2.179 Current marily by wave of four parts. seaward return of the expanding A narrow, deep, and swift ocean current.

System, Nearshore-The current system caused priaction in and near the breaker zone, and which consists The shoreward mass transport of water; longshore currents; flow, including rip currents; and the longshore movement heads of rip currents.

2.180 Current, Tidal (also Current, Periodic ) - The alternating horizontal movement of water associated with the rise and fall of the tide caused by the astronomical tide producing forces. 2.181 Cusp ( also Beach Cusp ) -One of the series of low mounds of beach material separated by crescent shaped troughs spaced at more or less regular intervals along the beach face. 2.182 Cuspate Bar - A crescent shaped bar uniting with the shore at ea:h end. It may be formed by a single spit growing from shore and then turning back to again meet the shore, or by two spits growing from the shore and uniting to form a bar of sharply cuspate form. 20

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.183 Cutter Suction Dredger-A dredger which works on principle of suction with a cutter head fitted at the end of the suction pipe for removing materials like clays, and indurated cohesive materials other than rock. 2.184 Cycloidal Wave - A deep, symmetrical wave whose crest forms an A trochoidal The wave form is that of a cycloid. angle of 120 degrees. wave of maximum steepness ( see also Trochoidal Wave ). 2.185 Cyclones ( Elevating Plant) -A dust chamber attached to a pneumatic grain elevating plant to catch the dust present with the grain which otherwise would be lost through the exhausts after passing through air-pumps. 2.186 Daily Retardation ( of Tides ) -The amount of time by which corresponding tidal phases grow later day by day ( about 50 minutes ). 2.187 Dead Weight Tonnage ( DWT )-It is the weight in tons of 2 240 lb of cargo, stores, fuel, passengers and crew carried by the ship when loaded to her maximum summer load line. 2.188 Debris the landward Line - A line near the limit of storm wave uprush limit of debris deposits. The distance waves travel after marking the

2.189 Decay Distance generating area ( fetch ) .

leaving

2.190 Decay of Waves-The change waves undergo after they leave a generating area ( fetch ) and pass through a calm, or region of lighter winds. In the process of decay, thesignificant wave height decreases and the significant wave length increases. 2.191 Deck - The top working platform have several decks used for accommodation, decks. 2.192 Deck Load A ship may of a structure/ship. storage of cargo and as working

The dead and live load on the deck.

2.193 Deep Water - Water so deep that surface waves are little affected Generally, water deeper than one half the by the bottom configuration. surface wave length is considered deep water. 2.194 Deflation - The removal land surface by wind action. of loose material from a beach or other

2.195 Deflection ( of Wave ) - The change in the direction tion of wave when the wave is interrupted by a barrier.

of propaga-

2.196 Depositing Dock -A floating dock in which one of the sides is suppressed. It is utilized to lift and deposit vessels upon fixed stagings set up on the shore line and also for launching purposes in the case of large hollow reinforced concrete blocks for harbour construction work, though the use is very limited. 21

-Is : 7314 - 1974 2.197 Depression, rise to high velocity Bay --A low pressure zone over sea which winds which may develop into a cyclone. The majr give still water for

2.198 ~Depth of Breaking ( also Breaker Depth ) depth at a point where the waves start.breaking. 2.199 Design Wave the design of a maritime

The wave whose characteristics are considered structure to withstand the wave action.

2.200 Diffraction ( of Water Waves) The phenomenon by which energy is transmitted laterally along a wave crest. When a part of a train of waves is interrupted by a barrier, such as a breakwater the effect of diffraction is manifested by propagation of waves into the sheltered region within the barrier's geometric shadow. 2.201 Dike ( Dyke ) prevent flooding. A wall or mound built around water and a low lying area to one low water in

2.202 Diurnal Tide - A tide with one high a tidal day ( 24 h and 50 min ). 2.203 Divergence In refraction a> orthogonals in decreasing

the increasing of distance between phenomenon, the direction of wave travel. Denotes an area of wave height and energy concentration.

b)

In wind set-up phenomenon, the decrease in set-up observed under that which would occur in an equivalent rectangular basin of uniform depth, caused by changes in planform or depth. Also the increase in basin width or depth causing such decrease in set up. In tidal phenomenon, flood flow at a section the difference in the direction of a river or waterway. either of ebb enclosed and or

c)

2.204 Dock - A basin or area of water for ships partially enclosed or unenclosed and open to the tides. 2.205 Dock Basin See Basin.

2.206 Dock, Dry ( also Graving Dock ) - A dock from which water can be temporarily excluded by natural or artificial means, in order that repairs to the hulls and keels of vessels may be effected. -2.207 Dock Sill - The platform or flooring at the entrance of a dry dock. The timber or foundation against which the gates of a dock or lock shut. 2.208 Dock, Wet - Area of impounded water within remain afloat at a uniform level, independent of external 2.209 Dolphin vessels. An isolated marine structure which vessels can tidal condition. or guiding

for mooring

22

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.210 Dolphin, Mooring - A dolphin with `a head upon a cluster of piles, which may be either vertical or a combination of vertical and rakers, used for offshore mooring of vessels. 2.211 Doodson's Machine ( Tide Prediction) - A machine adopted by Doodson on the principles suggested by Lord Kelvin for the prediction of ~daily times and heights of tides at a location, from the different harmonic constituents of the tide. 2.212 Double Tides - Occurrences of high water in pairs within a period of 24 to 25 h, as against the usual two, separated by a slight interval, that is, the tidal curve shows a double headed high water. 2.213 Down materials. Drift The direction of predominant to which movement of littoral

2.214 Draft ( Draught ) - The depth above the keel in water during navigation.

a vessel is submerged

2.215 Dragline Dredger ( Tension Cable Dredger ) -Developed on the principles of dragline and used primarily for digging sand and gravel out of deep pits. 2.2-16 Dredger - A plant employed for an operation involving the removal of material under water from the bed of a water area whether the mode of action be dragging, sucking or digging. 2.217 2.218 Dredger, Dredger, Bucket Cutter Ladder Suction See Bucket See Cutter Ladder Suction Dredger. Dredger.

2.219 Dredger, Dipper - It consists of a single bucket at the end of a long arm and mounted upon a barge in any suitable position and usually held in position for dredging by means of three or four spuds, without any external mooring. The bucket after being lowered at the required location makes a curved upward cut, the contents being discharged into a hopper through the bottom of the hinged bucket. It has a large degree of mobility and can dig its own floatation through a bank not only below water level but extending a few metres above that level. 2.220 Dredger, Grab ( Grapple or Clam-Shell Dredger ) -This consists of segmental scoops, generally formed of two quadrants which rotate about a central pivot and which on meeting in closed position, forms a semicylindrical receptacle or bucket. May also be constructed with spherical sides in two or three parts, which is adapted to excavation for circular well foundation. 2.221 Dredger, Jet-A dredger operated by agitating the bed at the region of operation by means of a jet of water under high pressure injected from a nozzle, whereby the bed material is brought into suspension which is either carried away by current or removed by a suction dredger according to the site condition. This is suitable for dredging fine grain sandy bed. 23

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.222 Dredger, Suction ( Hydraulic or Sand Pump Dredger ) - Consists essentially of a continuous pipe or tube through which, by means of suitable machinery, sand or other light material is sucked up from the bottom, which may be directly pumped out to the disposal site or delivered into hopper from where the material is disposed of after settling. -The suction dredger is most suitable for operation in deep deposit of sand so that the suction nozzle may obtain a full and continuous feed without much need to traverse the dredger, and also with materials of great fineness and low specific gravity, such as silt and mud. 2.223 Drift a) Sometimes c) Floating d) A deposit 2.224 Drift current. used as a short form for littoral drift. runs. material -A deposited broad, on a beach. ice sheet, as a drumlin. shallow, slow moving moved ocean or lake zone b) The speed at which a current of a continental

Current

2.225 Drift, Littoral - Sedimentary material under the influence of waves and current.

in the littoral

2.226 Drill Boat - A craft in the form of rectangular, flat-bottomed and decked barges, usually without propulsion, and held in position by spuds at each corner. This carries four or five drilling rigs consisting of vertical frames on rails, each with its own power-driven drilling winch for drilling and blasting hard bed rock under water. 2.227 Duration - In wave forecasting, the length of time the wind blows in nearly the same direction over the fetch, that is the generating area. 2.228 Duration, Minimum - The time necessary for steady state wave conditions to develop for a given wind velocity over a given fetch length. 2.229 Eager See Bore. away from shore or down a tidal between high water and the

2.230 Ebb Current - The tidal current stream caused by the falling tide. 2.231 Ebb Tide - The period of succeeding low water; a falling tide. tide

2.232 Echo Sounder -An electronic instrument used to determine the depth of water by measuring the time interval between emission of a sonic or ultrasonic signal and the return of its echo from the bottom. The process of determining the depth by such appliance is known as echo sounding. 2.233 Eddy ( also Eddy Current ) - A circular movement of water formed on the side of a main current. Eddies may be created at points where 24

IS : 7314- 1974
the main stream passes projecting currents flow counter to each other. obstructions or where two adjacent

2.234 Edge Wave - An ocean wave parallel to a coast, with crests normal to the shoreline. An edge wave may be standing or progressive. Its height diminishes rapidly seaward and is negligible at a distance of done wavelength offshore. 2.235 Elevator, Bucket-Belt - A mechanical grain handling elevator consisting of a series of mild steel buckets, rivetted to an endless belt, working round top and bottom drums, the top one being the driving drum and the bottom one tensioning drum. 2.236 Elevator, Floating Grain - Bucket elevator mounted on pontoon or barge for discharging grain from ship to shore at places where there is no fixed shore plant., or for discharging from ship to barge or other vessel. Such floating apphances generally include sacking spouts and weighing machines. 2.237 Elevator, Pneumatic - An elevator for raising the grain from the ship's hold through pipes in which it is entrained in an air current induced by vacuum pumps. The pipes are flexible and terminate in a special form of suction nozzle, which can be placed by hand in any part of the ship's hold. 2.238 Energy Coefficient - The ratio of the energy in a wave per unit crest length transmitted forward with the wave at a point in shallow water to the energy in a wave per unit crest length transmitted forward with the wave in deep water. On refraction diagrams this is equal to the ratio of the distance between a pair of orthogonals at a selected point to the distance between the same pair of orthogonals in deep water. Also the square of the refraction coefficient. 2.239 Energy, Wave - Average energy of a wave over one wave length and is a combination of kinetic and potential energies. 2.240 Entrance-The channel. 2.241 avenue of access or opening to a navigable

Entrance to the dock.

Channel-The

navigation

channel

from deep water

2.242 Entrance Width - The minimum width provided for the entrance channel at the entry to dock either between breakwaters enclosing the dock
or in the lock entrance. 2.243

Erosion - The wearing away of land by the action of natural forces. On a beach, the carrying away of beach material by wave action, tidal currents, littoral currents, or by deflation. 25

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.244 Estuarine Pollution - The contamination of the estuary of arriver causing danger to human and marine life by sewage and industrial byproducts discharged into water in the vicinity. 2.245 Estuary by the tides. The wide stretch of a river near the sea, which is affected

2.246 Estuary, Stratified - An estuary where the fresh water of the river and the saline water of the sea form distinct layers or strata. 2.247 Estuary, Well-Mixed -An estuary where the fresh ;Nater of the river and the saline water of the sea are in a well mixed condition without forming any distinct strata. 2.248 Eye ( of a Hurricane ) - The roughly circular area of comparatively light winds and fair weather found at the centre of a severe tropical cyclone. 2.249 Faggotting -- A type of bank protection work formed of twiggy branches of thorn, willow, hazel, birch, oak or elm, usually 1.2 to 1.5 m long and 0.9 m in circumference, laid normally to the shoreline, usually These are used usually in horizontally or with a slight slope backwards. situations where grass and other plants are unsuitable and where there is little or no wave action or wash and in silt-laden water. 2.250 Fairlead - Small, horizontal, single sheaves appliance fixed on the quay surface on lock sides and at dry docks for altering the lead of ropes to capstans. 2.251 Fairway ed for navigation. thoroughfare. The parts of a waterway that are open and unobstructThe main travelled part of a waterway; a maritime and bank protection works, using and weighted with sods and clay to nourish

2.252 Fascine Work - River training bundles of brushwood placed overboard until they sink.

2.253 Feeder Beach - An artificially widened beach serving downdrift beaches by natural littoral currents or forces.

2.254 Feeling Bottom - The action of a deep water wave on running into shoal water and beginning to be influenced by the bottom. 2.255 Fender - A type of resilient buffer system provided at a berthing face to protect the structure and the ship from damage due to force of impact of berthing vessel. 2.256 Fender, Floating-A floating body, like a timber truss, tied in front of a quay surface and extending quite a distance from the quay surface, so that the impact force of a berthing vessel is first taken up by the floating body without the vessel coming in direct contact with the quay edge. 26

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.257 Fender, Pile - A system of piles, vertical and/or raker, provided in front of a quay surface to take up the direct impact force from a berthing vessel. 2.258 Fender, Suspended - These are fenders making use of gravitational There are a variety of types, the majoforces to oppose the impact blow. rity aiming at complete absorption of the kinetic energy of the berthing vessels. The commonest form is made of ballasted steel tubes of heavy weight suspended by links from the main structure so that the tubes rise vertically during horizontal motion from impact force thus absorbing the kinetic energy of impact. 2.259 Fetch ( also Generating Area ) - The area in which seas are generated by a wind having a rather constant direction and speed. Sometimes used synonymously with fetch length. 2.260 Fetch Length-The horizontal distance ( in the direction wind ) over which a wind generates seas or creates a wind set up. of the

2.261 Flexible Wall-A wall, like a sheet pile wall, which can take considerable deflection with differential movements induced in the active and passive wedges of soil, without failure of the structure. 2.262 2.263 2.264 Floating Floating Floating Breakwater Caisson Crane See Brekwater, Floating. Floating.

See Caisson, See Crane,

Floating.

2.265 Floating Dock - A repairing dock working on hydraulic lift principle. It is a hollow structure of steel or reinforced concrete with air chambers to fill with water to sink the dock to the requisite depth for receiving its charge, the waterbeing pumped out when the vessel is berthed. It has the advantage of mobility and less maintenance cost but requires a large depth of water inside a sheltered area for itso peration. 2.266 Flood Tide-The period of tide succeeding high water; a rising tide. between low water and the

2.267 Flourescent Tracer -A tracer obtained by dyeing materials having the same specific gravity and grain size as the bed materials with fluorescent dye. Used for studying the mode of sediment transport ( bed load) in a river, estuary or coastal area. 2.268 Foam Line it has broken. The front of a wave as it advances shoreward, after

2.269 Following Wind - Generally, same as tailwind; wind blowing in the direction of ocean wave advance.

in wave forecasting,

2.270 Fore Runner - Low, long-period ocean swell which commonly precedes the main swell from a distant storm, especially a tropical cyclone. 27

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.271 Foreshore - The part of the shore lying between the crest of the seaward berm ( or upper limit ofwave wash at high tide) and the ordinary low water mark, that is ordinarily traversed by the uprush and backrush of the waves as the tides rise and fall ( see also Beach Face ).

2.272 Forward
2.273

Speed ( of Hurricane ) - Rate tion ) of the hurricane eye in km/h or knots. Free Board

of movement

( propaga-

a) The additional height of a structure above design high water level Also, at a given time, the vertical distance to prevent overflow. between the water level and the top of the structure. b) On a ship, the distance line. 2.274 Freshet Flow -The end of a river or channel. from the waterline of water to the top of the deck at the upstream

quantity

discharge

2.275 Front of the Fetch - In wave forecasting, area toward which the wind is blowing. 2.276 Gate, Lock enclosed water area. A gate used for maintaining

the end of the generating a constant water level in at a point

2.277 Gate, Mitre - A lock gate with two hinged flaps meeting when the gate is closed.

2.278 Gate, Sector - A lock gate used for canal locks and lock entrances to dock system with reversible water levels on either side of the gate so that the gate has to withstand resultant water pressure from either side. In such a gate the single skin plating resisting the water pressure is struck to an arc of a circle, so that the resultant force passes through the vertical axis on which the gates revolve. 2.279 Gate, Storm - Employed in entrances subjected to periodic f-`,oods and exceptionally high tides accompanied by cyclones and stormy weather. During such periods it is often necessary to exclude part of the tidal water from a dock, and the gates consequently point in the opposite direction to those used for impounding water. 2.280 Gate, Vertical Lift during opening the entrance entrances as in canals, etc. A gate with the leaf lifted vertically upwards as in a sluice. This is suitable for small

2.281 Generating Area ( also Fetch ) - In wave forecasting, the continuous area of water surface over which the wind blows in nearly a constant direction. Sometimes used synonymously with fetch length. 2.282 Generation of Wave of waves by natural 28 or mechanical means. a) The creation

IS : 7314 - 1974 b) The creation and growth of waves caused by wind blowing over a water surface for a certain period of time. The area involved is called the generating area or fetch. 2.283 Geometric Shadow - In wave diffraction theory, the area outlined by drawing straight lines paralleling the direction of wave approach through the extremeties of the protective structure. It differs from the actual protected area to the extent that the diffraction and refraction effects modify the wave pattern. 2.284 Geomorphology - That branch of both physiography and geology which deals with the form of the earth, the general configuration of its surface, and the changes that take place in the evolution of land forms, 2.285
2.286 Grab Dredger See Dredger, Grab.

Graving Dock - Synonymously used with dry dock. Rigorously defined, when the vessel is floated into the dock, and the water removed by natural or artificial means, the term graving dock is appropriate.

2.287 Gravity Wave - A wave whose velocity of propagation is controlled Water waves more than 50 mm long are considered primarily by gravity. gravity waves. Waves longer than 25 mm and shorter than 50 mm are in intermediate zone between capillary and gravity waves. 2.288 Gribbl e - A species of shipworm ( limmoria/terebrans ) much smaller than the teredo navalis, very much destructive to submerged timber. It bores its way to andfro in the wood. 2.289 Gross Registered Tonnage ( GRT ) - The total measured cubic contents of a vessel expressed in units of 2.83 cu.m ( or 100 cft ). 2.290 Grounding-The phenomenon of a vessel getting bottom of a waterway due to shallow depth. struck at the

2.291 Groyne (also Groin ) -A short protection structure of permeable or impermeable type, built usually perpendicular to the shore line or at a small angle from the ~perpendicular to trap littoral drift or retard bank or shore erosion.

2.292 Groyne System - A series of parallel groins constructed at a fixed spacing acting together to protect a section of river bank or sea beach. Commonly called a groyne field. 2.293 Ground Swell - A long high ocean swell; also this swell as it rises to prominent height in shallow water. 2.294 Group Velocity - The velocity of wave group. In deep water it is equal to one half the velocity ofindividual waves within the group. 29

IS : 7314 - 1974

2.295 Gut
a) A narrow passage, such as a strait or inlet. shallower water, generally formed by b) A channel in otherwise water in motion. 2.296 Half Tide Level -

See Mean Tide Level. water area affording a place of safety

2.297 Harbour - Any protected for vessels ( see also Port ).

2.298 Harbour, Artificial - A harbour constructed artificially by protective works at a seaface, estuary or on a navigable river to provide necessary shelter and protection to vessels, where there is little or no pronounced natural feature around the locality to afford any protection. 2.299 Harbour, Commercial -This forms essential feature of ports engaged in foreign and coastal traffic. This constitutes the great terminus of the highways of the sea, providing accommodation for the mercantile marine during the operations of loading and discharging cargoes and for the transaction of trade. 2.396 Harbour, Estuarine the estuary of a river. -A natural or artificial harbour situated at

2.301 Harbour, IslandA harbour situated on an island, which usuahy can accommodate very deep drafted vessels like tankers. Generally it is associated with the handling of oil which is pumped to the main land area ths ough submarine or floating pipelines. 2.392 Harbour, Natural - A harbour formed entirely by an inlet from This may be constituted by headlands or projecting parts of a the sea. coast converging towards each other, with more or less narrow entrance leading to a sheltered expanse of water, also by coral reefs fringing along coast line or series of islands, forming lagoons, with gaps in the reef as This does not require protective or formative works. entrances. 2.303 Harbour of Refuge-The principal duty of such harbour is to provide a refuge for vessels overtaken by sudden stress of weather, or otherThe term is now a little out of date because wise hard pressed or disabled. there are not many such harbours in existence and few are likely to be constructed. Those originally contrived for this purpose are now associated with other port and harbour facilities. ~2.394 Harbour Oscillation ( also Harbour Surging ) - The non-tidal Usually the vertical motions vertical water movement in a harbour or bay. are low, but when oscillations are excited by a tsunami or storm surge, they Variable winds, air oscillations, or surf beat may also may be quite large. cause oscillations. 30

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.305 Harbour, Protected -Formed primarily in bays or such like indentations in the coast line and by the construction of breakwaters or entrance moles, give protection from wave-action to vessels using or entering the harbour. 2.306 Harbour Resonance - Oscillation induced in a harbour from a disturbance like tide storm, tsunami, etc, the oscillation being much amplified to the outside disturbance due to the harbour having the same natural frequency as the outside disturbance due to defective design which leads to great damage to harbour structures and vessels anchored m the harbour. 2.307 Harbour, from the sea.
Riverine A harbour situated inland

on a river away

2.308 Head of Rip-The part of a rip current that has widened out seaward of the breakers ( see also Current, Rip; Current, Feeder; Rip ),
2.309 2.310 Height of Wave See Wave Height. Hexapod - A reinforced concrete structural unit with six projecting legs from a central core.

2.311 Hi-Fix-of vessels. 2.312

An electronic arrangement used for finding out the position ( HW ) The maximum elevation reached

High Tide, High Water

by each rising tide ( see Tide ). 2.313 High Water Line - In strictness, the intersection ~of the plane of mean high water with the shore. For specific occurrences, the highest elevation on the shore reached during a storm or rising tide, including meteorological effects. 2.314

datum based on high water of ordinary spring tides.

High

Water

of

Ordinary

Spring

Tides

( HWOST

) -A

tidal

2.315 Higher High Water ( HHW ) - The higher of the two high waters The single high water occurring daily during periods of any tidal day. when the tide is diurnal is considered to be a higher high water.
2.316

any tidal day.

Higher

Low

Water

(HLW)

-The

higher of two low waters of

2.317 Hind Casting, Wave - The use of historic synoptic wind charts to calculate wave characteristics that probably occurred at some time past. 2.318 Hinterland - The area or part of the influences the commerce through a port.
2.319

country which directly

Hook - A spit or narrow~cape of sand or gravel which turns landward at the outer end.

31

IS : 7314- 1974 2.320 Hopper
material - A hollow structure is discharged. usually with a large capacity to which

2.321 Hopper Barge - A self-propelled or dumb barge of steel or timber of very full midship section employed usually for dredging disposal. 2.322 Hopper Dredger -A dredger provided with one or more for holding the dredged materials prior to final disposal. 2.323 Hull - The body of a vessel exclusive machinery and equipment. hoppers

of masts, yards, sails, rigging,

2.324 Hurricane - An intense tropical cyclone in which winds tend to spiral inward toward a core of low pressure, with maximum surface wind velocities that equal or exceed 120 km/h for several minutes or longer at some points. Tropical storm is the term applied if maximum winds are less than lZOkm/h. 2.325 Hurricane Path or Track - Line of movement the eye of the hurricane through an area. ( propagation ) of

2.326 Hurricane Stage Hydrograph - A continuous graph representing water level stages that would be recorded in a gauge well located at a specified point of interest during the passage of a particular hurricane, assuming that effects of relatively short-period waves are eliminated from the record This includes effects of astronomical by damping features of the gauge well. tides, barometric pressure differences and all other factors that influence water level stages. 2.327 Hurricane Surge Hydrograph - A continuous graph representing the difference between the hurricane stage hydrograph and the water stage hydrograph that would have prevailed at the same point and time if the hurricane had not occurred. 2.328 Hurricane Wind Pattern (~Isovel Pattern ) - An actual or graphical representation of near surface wind velocities covering the entire area of a hurricane at a particular instant. Isovels are lines connecting points of simultaneous equal wind velocities, usually referenced 9m above the surface in km/h; wind direction at various points are indicated by arrows Isovel charts are usually prepared 1 or deflection angles on the isovel charts. at each hour during a hurricane, but for each half-hour during critical periods. 2.329 Iiydrographic SurveySurvey of underwater area including its alignment, bank profile, -etc. 2.338 Hydrography a) A configuration bottom materials, b) The description of an underwater surface coastal structures, etc. including its relief, surface of a water

and study of seas, lakes, rivers and other waters. 32

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.331 Hyperbolic Navigational Aids - Navigational aids which in their operation are based upon measurement of the difference in time taken by a radio signal wave travelling from two fixed stations on shore to a ship, which gives a measurement of the difference in range of the two stations, since points at which the difference is constant lie on a position line which A similar measurement from another pair is in the form of a hyperbola. of stations provides another position line and hence a ` fix `. 2.332 Hypothetical Hurricane ( Hypo-Hurricane ) - A representation of a hurricane, with specified characteristics, that is assumed to occur in a particular study area, following a specified path and timing sequence. a) Transposed - A hype-hurricane based on the storm transposition principle is assumed to have wind patterns and other characteristics basically comparable to a specified hurricane of record, but is transposed to follow a new path to serve as a basis for computing a hurricane surge hydrograph that would be expected at a selected point.

b) Hype-Hurricane Based on Generalised Parameters - Hypo-hurricane estimates based on various logical combinations of hurricane characteristics used in estimating hurricane surge magnitudes corresponding to a range of probabilities and potentialities. c) Standard Project Hurricane ( SPH ) - A hypothetical hurricane intended to represent the most severe combination of hurricane parameters that is reasonably characteristic of a specified region, It is further assumed excluding exrtremely rare combinations. that the SPH would approach a given project site from such direction, and at such rate of movement as to produce the highest considering pertinent hydraulic hurricane surge hydrograph, characteristics of the area. that might result cl) Probable Maximum Hurricane - A hypo-hurricane from the most severe combination of hurricane parameters that is considered reasonably possible in the region involved, if the hurricane should approach the point under study along a critical path and at optimum rate of movement. e) Design Hurricane - A representation of a hurricane with specified characteristics that would produce hurricane surge hydrographs and coincident wave effects at various key locations along a proposed project alignment. It governs the project design after economics and other factors have been duly considered. 2.333 Impact Force on Berthing - The force exerted on a berth or quay face or on the ship by a berthing vessel due to its great momentum. A good quantum of the impact force is generally absorbed by adequate fendering system so that the structure is not damaged. 33

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.334 Impact Work - The work done on the fendering system land berth structure and the consequent energy expended or absorbed due to impact force of a berthing vessel. 2.335 Impermeable cannot pass. Groin A groin through which sand and sediment

2.336 Impounded DockA dock, the entrance to which is closed by structures like lockgates or caissons, to maintain a constant level of water inside the dock irrespective of the outside water level and tidal or wave effects. 2.337 Indian Spring Low Water ( also Indian Tide Plane) approximate level of the mean of lower low waters at spring tides, principally in the Indian Ocean and along the east coast of Asia. 2.338 Indian Tide Plane The datum of Indian Spring Low Water. The used

2.339 Inshore width extending 2.340 Inshore

(Zone) -In beach terminology, the zone of variable from the low water line through the breaker zone. Current See Current, Inshore.

2.341 Insular Shelf-The zone surrounding an island extending from the low water line to the depth ( usually about 180 m ) where there is a marked or rather steep descent toward the great depths. 2.342 Intermediate Port - Port which is intermediate between the big major ports and the small minor ports, as defined by the proper authority in a country. 2.343 Internal Waves - Waves that occur within a fluid whose density changes with depth, either abruptly at a sharp surface of discontinuity ( an interface ) or gradually. Their amplitude is greatest at the density discontinuity or in the case of gradual density change, somewhere in the interior of the fluid and not at the free upper surface where the surface waves have their maximum amplitude. 2.344 Irrotational Wave - A wave with fluid around an axis through their centres, although travel in circular or nearly circular orbits. progressives, standing, oscillatory or translator-y 2.345 Island Harbour -A -See Harbour, particles that do not revolve the particles themselves may L-rotational waves may be ( see Trochoidal Wave ).

Island. points of equal water depths

2.346 Isobath on a chart. 2.347 Isovel

contour -

line connecting

Pattern

See Hurricane Dredger, Jet. 34

Wind

Pattern.

2.348 Jet Dredger

-See

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.349 Jetty a) A structure jutting out from the shore at which vessels are berthed Often used either at the head of the structure or alongside. synonymously with pier. b) On open sea coasts or rivers, ~a structure extending into a body of water and designed to prevent shoaling of a channel by littoral materials or sediment discharge, and to direct and confine the stream or tidal flow ( American usage ). 2.350 2.351 2.352 Keel The bottom of a vessel. Blocks, Keel. etc.

Keel Block -See Key -

A low insular

bank of sand, coral,

2.353 Knoll - A submerged elevation of rounded shape rising less than 1 000 metres from the ocean floor, and of limited extent across the summit ( see Sea Mount ). 2.354 Lagging See Daily Retardation ( of tides ). con-

2.355 Lagoon - A shallow body of water, nected to the sea.

as a pond or lake, usually

2.356 Landing Stage - Used for loading and unloading cargo as well as passenger traffic from a vessel to land and vice versa in tidal water which rises and falls with the tide and is connected to the shore. It provides a landing place at a constant level in respect to the vessel. 2.357 Lash - Lighter aboard ship. A modern design in ship construction in which a large carrier with a deep draft accommodates several small crafts within it: 2.358 Lateral System of Buoyage - The system, decided at the International Conference at Geneva in 1936 of marking buoys with visible and night signals to indicate the lateral limits and axes of navigable channels, natural dangers, wrecks and similar obstructions, and certain other points of importance to mariners within or near a navigation channel. 2.359 Leading in Lights - Lights placed at each side of dock and harbour approach channels to enable pilots to position vessels in channels. 2.360 Leading Jetty ( Warping Jetty )-A structure provided at the entrance of a dock or lock for easy manoeuvring of vessels to and out of the dock. The structure may be a-solid masonry monolith, piled or sheet piled as in a dock wall. This is provided with necessary appliance like capstans, fairleads, etc, for stowage -and with adequate fendering arrangement. 2.361 Length of Wave - The horizontal distance between similar on two successive waves measured perpendicularly to the crest. 35 points

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.362 Levee A dike embankment to protect land from inundation. naviga-

2.363 Light Float - An unmanned light vessel used for marking tional.dangers in disturbed water area. 2.364 Light House - A structure situated in a vantage to a considerable height above water level and provided top of the structure for navigational guidance.

position and rising with a light at the

2.365 Light Orders - For the purpose of classification, the lights of light houses, light beacons and light vessels are divided into a series of orders according to their focal distances. But now it is more usual to identify a These are divided lens merely by stating its focal distance in millimetres. into the categories like hyper-radial, meso-radial, lst, Znd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th order with focal length varying from 140 mm to 1 330 mm. 2.366 Light Vessel - A vessel used for marking certain navigational dangers like sands, shoals, small submerged pinnackle rocks, etc, which are most easily and economically marked by such a floating craft in heavy seas and strong currents where a luminous buoy is inadequate and unsafe. 2.367 Lighter-Small transporting cargoes. self propelled or dummy floating craft used for used from

2.368 Limnoria - A minute crustacean, attacking timber structures in marine works between ` wind and water ' and eating the timber the outside surface. 2.369 2.370 2.371 2.372 Limit of Backrush, Limit of Backwash See Backwash. of the sea.

Littoral Littoral Littoral

Of or pertaining -

to a shore, -especially Littoral. drift.

Current Deposits

See Current, Deposits

of littoral

2.373 Littoral Transport - The movement of littoral drift in the littoral zone by waves and currents. Includes movement parallel (longshore transport ) and perpendicular ( on-offshore transport) to the shore. 2.374 Littoral Transport Rate-Rate of transport of sedimentary material parallel to or perpendicular to the shore in the littoral zone. Usually expressed in cubic metres per year. Commonly used as synonymous with Longshore Transport Rate. 2.375 Littoral Zone-In beach terminology, zone from the shoreline to just beyond the breaker zone. extending seaward

2.376 Load -The quantity of sediment transported by a current. It includes the suspended load of small particles and the bed load of large particles that move along the bottom. 36

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.377 Lock ( also Lock Entrance ) -The structure provided at the entrance of an impounded dock for maintaining the required level of water in the dock for easy and safe berthing of vessels in the dock, by means of gates or caissons. 2.378 Lock Entrance Gate Same as Lock.

2.379 Lock 2.380 2.381

See Gate Lock. Bar A bar running roughly parallel to the shorelines.

Longshore Longshore

Current -

See Current, Longshore.

of transport of sedimentary 2.382 Longshore Transport Rate - Rate Usually expressedin cubic metres per year. material parallel to the shore. Commonly used as synonymous with littoral transport rate. 2.383 Loop L That part of a standing wave where the vertical motion is greatest and the horizontal velocities are least. Loops (sometimes called antinodes) are associated with clapotis and with seiche action resulting from wave reflections. 2.384 Low Water, Low Tide ( LW) by each falling tide ( see Tide ). The minimum elevation reached

2.385 Low Water Datum - An approximation to the plane of mean low water that has been adopted as a standard reference plane ( see also Chart Datum ) . 2.386 LOW Water Linedatum plane with the shore. The intersection of any standard ) -A
low

tide tidal

2.387 Low Water of Ordinary Spring Tides ( LWOST datum based on low water of ordinary spring tides. 2.388 Lower High Water of any tidal day. (LHW )The lower

of the two high

waters

2.389 Lower Low Water ( LLW ) - The lower of the two low waters of any tidal day. The single low water occurring daily during periods when the tide is diurnal is considered to be a lower low water. 2.390 Luffing ( Level Luffing) - A modern and widely accepted operation of a crane, in which the jib of the crane is moved inwards and outwards without raising or lowering the load and thus achieving valuable economy in both power and time. 2.391 Major for a standard a major port. 2.392 PortA port providing almost all the port and declared by the proper authority A graphic record 37 facilities required of the country as

Marigram

of the rise and fall of the tide.

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.393 Marine Borers - Marine organisms which eat up underwater marine structures by boring activity and thus reduce the life of the structure. 2.394 Mass Transport direction of wave travel. The net transfer of water by wave action in the

2.395 Mattress - A cushioning and soling layer usually made of bamboo, soft wood, brush wood, or even concrete, etc, provided at the bottom of a river training or bank protection work. 2.396 Mean High Water ( MHW) - The average height of the high waters over a 19-year period. For shorter periods of observations, corrections are applied to eliminate known variations and reduce the results to the All high water heights are included equivalent of a man 19-year value. in the average where the type of tide is either semidiurnal or mixed. Only the higher high water heights are included in the average where the type of So determined, mean high water in the latter case is the tide is diurnal. same as mean higher high water. 2.397 Mean High Water, Neaps ( MHWN) - The the high water occurring at the time of neap tides. average height of

2.398 Mean High Water, Springs ( MHWS ) - The average height of the high water occurring at the time of spring tides. Frequently abbreviated to high water springs. 2.399 Mean Higher High Water ( MHHW) - The average height of For shorter periods of the higher high waters over a 19-year period. observation, corrections are applied to eliminate known variations and `reduce the result to the equivalent of a mean 19-year value. 2.400 Mean Low Water ( MLW ) - The average height of the low waters over a 19-year period. For shorter periods of observations, corrections are applied to eliminate known variations and reduce the results to the eyuivaAll low water heights are included in the lent of a mean 19-year value. average where the type of tide is either semidiurnal or mixed. Only lower low water heights are included in the average where the type of tide is diurnal. So determined, mean low water in the latter case is the same as mean lower low water. 2.401 Mean Low Water, Neaps ( MLWN) waters occurring at the tinle of neap tides. The average height of low

2.402 Mean Low Water, Springs ( MLWS ) -The average height of It is usually derived low waters occurring at the time of spring tides. by taking a plane depressed below the half tide level by an amount equal to one half the spring range of tide, necessary corrections being applied to This plane is used to a considerable reduce the results to a mean value. extend for hydrographic work. %requently abbreviated as low water springs. 38

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.403 Mean Lower Low Water ( MLLW ) - The average height of the lower low waters over a 1 O-year period. For shorter periods of observations, corrections a'e applied to eliminate known variations and reduce the result to the equivalent of a mean 19-year period, Frequently abbreviated as lower low water. 2.434 Mean Sea Level ( MSL ) - The average height of the sea level for all stages of the tide over a 19-year period, usually determined from hourly height readings. 2.405 Mean Tide LevelA plane midway between and mean low water. Also called half-tidal level. 2.406 Megaripple See Sand Wave. tides in mean high water

2.407 Middle-Ground Shoal - A shoal formed by ebb and flood the middle of the channel of the lagoon or estuary end of an inlet. 2.408 Minimum Duration See Duration, Minimum.

2.409 Minimum Fetch-The least distance in which steady state wave conditions will develop for a wind of given speed blowing for a given duration of time. 2.410 Minor Port -A port providing a very few facilities standard port and mostly owned by local authorities. required for a

2.411 Mixed Tide - A type of tide in which the presence of a diurnal wave is conspicuous by a large inequality in either the high or low water heights with two high waters and two low waters usually occurring each tidal day. In strictness, all tides are mixed, but the name is usually applied without definite limits to the tide intermediate to those predominantly semidiurnal and those predominantly diurnal. 2.412 Mole - In coastal terminology, a massive structure of earth (generally revetted), masonry, serve as a breakwater or pier. land-connected, or large stone. solid fill It may in a

2.413 Monochromatic Waves-A series of waves laboratory, each wave has the same length and period.

generated

2.414 Monolith - A hollow filundation piece of c.oncrete; brickwork, or masonry with a number of open wells passing throught it. It is sunk in a manner similar to the cylindrical caisson, the wells being finally filled with concrete to form a solid foundation, 2.415 Mooring may be moored; 2.416 2.417 Mooring Mooring - The place in a river, harbour or dock in which a vessel also, that to which vessels may be secured. Buoy Dolphin &e Buoy, Mooring. SeeDolphin, 39 Mooring.

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.418 2.419 Mound Natural Breakwaters Harbour See Breakwater, Mound.

See Harbour,

Natural.

2.420 Nautical Almanac - Astronomical ephemeris containing more or less similar data are prepared and published in advance by seven countries As regards stars India, U.K., U.S.A., U.S.S.R., France, Spain and Japan. other than 68 important stars published in Indian Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac, the apparent places of the 1535 stars in the FK 4 are now published by the Astronomisches Rachen Institute of Heidelberg entitled apparent places of Fundamental Stars. 2.421 Navigation -- The science of ascertaining directing their course by astronomical observation the general process involved in operating ships. the position of ships and and other calculations -

2.422 Navigational Aids - For safe and speedy navigation in coastal waters or in restricted channels, various types of aids are necessary, such as lighthouses, beacons, light signals, semaphores, buoys, radar, etc, all of such equipment and accessories constituting navigational aids. 2.423 Navigation Channel - A channel in a river or waterway used by a ship for navigation, having the required depth for the safe movement of the vessel. 2.424 Navigation Tracks waterway along the navigable Paths or tracks marked channel. in a river course or

2.425 Neap ~Tide - A tide occurring near the time of quadrature of the moon with sun. The neap tidal range is usually 10 to 30 percent less than the mean tidal range. 2.426 Nearshore ( Zone ) -In beach terminology an indefinite zone extending seaward from the shoreline well beyond the breaker zone. It defines the area of nearshore currents. 2.427 Nearshore Circulation - One ocean circulation pattern composed .of the nearshore currents and coastal currents. 2.428 Nearshore Current System - The current system caused primarily by wave action in and near the breaker zone, and which consists of four parts. The shoreward mass transport of water, longshore currents, seaward return flow including rip currents, and the longshore movement of the expanding heads or rip currents ( see also Nearshore Circulation ). 2.429 Neck a) The narrow Rip ). b) The narrow an isthmus. band of water flowing seaward strip of land connecting 40 through the surf ( also of land as

two larger bodies

IS : 7314 - 1974

2.430 Net

Tonnage-The carrying capacity of vessels as ascertained according to Government regulations and arrived at by measuring the cubic contents of the space intended for revenue earning. Also called net registered tonnage. Nip The cut made by wave in a shoreline of emergence.

2.431

2.432 Node-That part of a standing wave where the vertical motion is Nodes are associated with least and the horizontal velocities are greatest. clapotis and with seiche action resulting from wave reflection ( see also Loop ). 2.433 Nodal Zone -An area in which the predominant longshore transport changes. 2.434 direction of the

Nose ( of Spur ) - The top end of a spur projecting into water. It may be 2.435 Nourishment-The process of replenishing a beach. brought about naturally, by longshore transport, or artificially by the deposition of dredged materials. 2.436 Occupation Factor ( of Port ) -The probable frequency of full cargoes both inwards and outwards in a port within any specified time, on which depends the planning of berths and ancillaries like transit sheds, It is the ratio of the number of berths, open space, etc, to be provided. jetties and moorings occupied in a port within any specified time to the total number of berths, jetties and moorings. 2.437 Oceanography - The study of the sea, embracing and indicating all knowledge pertaining to the sea's physical boundaries, the chemistry and physics of sea water and marine biology. 2.43% Offshore a) In beach terminology, width, extending from the continental shelf. b) A direction 2.439 2.440 Offshore Offshore a) seaward Barrier Current in the offshore zone. flowing away from the shore. the comparatively flat zone of variable the breaker zone to the seaward edge of

from the shore. See Barrier Beach.

Any current

b) Any current

located away from the shore 2.441 ~Offshore Moaring - A mooring where a vessel awaiting berthing is moored, or from where loading and unloading of cargoes are done by means of lighters, barges, etc. 2.442 Offshore Terminal - A terminal for berthing a vessel located away from the shore, generally for oil tankers with deep drafts, wherefrom the cargo is transported to the main land by means of pipelines or lighters, etc. 2.443 Oil Terminal - A terminal for handling oil, provided with the required pumping machineries and fire fighting equipment and located away from the main dock area. 41

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.444 Openwork and Island Harbour - A harbour formed in deep water out of the range of littoral drift and connected with the shore by means of openwork jetties to avoid the problem of accretion and erosion at solid protective structures provided for a harbour at the shore. 2.445 Opposing direction opposite Wind -In wave forecasting, a wind blowing in a to the ocean wave advance; generally same as headwind.

2.446 Orbit - In water waves, the path of a water particle affected by the wave motion. In deep-water waves, the orbit is nearly circular and in In general, the orbits shallow-water waves the orbit is nearly elliptical. are slightly open in the direction of wave motion giving rise to mass transport. 2.447 Orbital Current -The flow of water accompanying the orbital movement of the water particles in a wave, which is not to be~confused with wave-generated littoral currents. 2.448 Orthogonal - On a wave-refraction dicularly to the wave crests. diagram, a line drawn perpen-

2.449 Oscillatory Wave - A wave in which each individual particle oscillates about a point with little or no permanent change in mean position. The term is commonly applied to progressive oscillatory waves in which only the form advances, the~individual particles moving in closed or nearly closed orbits ( ser also Orbit ). 2.450 Overlapping Tide - A tide which engulfs the previously generated tide before the former's time period is over, which is a sort of superimposing of one tide over the other. 2.451 Overtopping - ~Passing of water result of wave run up or surge action. 2.452 Overwash - That portion of a berm or of a structure. over the top of a structure that carries as a

of the uprush

over the crest

2.453 Pallet - A shallow square or rectangular box strongly constructed of wood, usually with two open ends and with the top and bottom formed of open boarding separated by three or more stringers, according to the This in combination size of the pallet, used for handling general cargo. with forklift trucks is useful in handling cargo of a more or less homogeneous character. 2;454 Perched Beach -A beach or fillet of sand otherwise normal profile level by a submerged dyke. 2.455 2.456 2.457 Periodic Period, Period, Current Tidal See Current, Periodic. retained above the

See Tidal Period. Wave Period. 42

Wave -See

PS t 7314 - 1974 2.458 Permanent Current Set Current, Permanent.

2.459 Permeable Groin -A groin with openings large enough to permit passage of appreciable quantities ~of sediment-laden water or littoral drift. 2.460 Pharology -The science of light house construction, the name derived from the lighthouse or tower built at the island of Pharos in Alexandria by about 270 B.C. 2.461 Phase Velocity - Propagation velocity opposed to the velocity of a wave group. of an individual wave as out into facility,

2.462 Pier - A structure, usually of open construction, extending the water from the shore, to serve as a landing place, a recreational etc, rather than to afford coastal protection. 2.463 Pier Apron The apron or open paved area adjacent

to a pier.

2.454 Pier Head-The termination of a breakwater, mole or training work extending into water from the shore, which is generally wider than the main body of the structure, with a definite geometrical shape, like circular, This part of the structure IS octagonal, hammerhead, etc, as convenient. open on three sides. 2.465 Pilot Vessel ( also Pilot Boat ) - A steam, motor or sailing vessel of small dimensions specially built and equipped for dropping or picking up pilots who serve the large deep-water vessels entering or leaving port. 2.466 Pitching or more layers provided on the ment and above - A method of bank/shore protection work in which one of rubble stone, granite, concrete blocks or brickwork are bank generally in the natural slope of the bank or embanklow water level.

2.467 Pitching ( of Ship ) -The angular motion which a ship makes about a transverse axis through her centre of gravity in a seaway due to wave action, wind, tidal action, etc, for which sufficient clearance must be allowed below its keel in a shallow channel. 2.468 Planform - The outline by the still water line. 2.469 Plunge Point a) For a plunging falls. wave, the point at which the wave curls over they and or shape of a body of water as determined

b) The final breaking the beach. 2.470 2.471 Plunging Pneumatic Breaker -

point of the waves just before Set Breaker. See Breakwater, 43

rush up on

Breakwater

Pneumatic.

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.472 Pneumatic Tide Recorder - An automatic tide recording machine consisting of an airtube of about 6 mm internal diameter connected to a small air chamber fixed below low water level and at the other end to the recording apparatus. Air is supplied by means of a cylinder of compressed air or a small compressor, and slowly escapes from the chamber; the varying pressure in the tube due to the height of water is a measure of the rise and fall of tide which is recorded by pressure-gauge. 2.473 Pocket Beach - A beach, between two littoral barriers. usually small, in a coastal re-entrant or

2.474 Point of Reversal ( Tide ) - The point of time at which the direction of current changes from flood to ebb or vice versa. 2.475 Port - A terminus of great ocean trunk lines of communication; a place where vessels may discharge or receive cargo; may be the commercial part of a harbour where the quays, wharves, jetties facilities for transfer of cargo, docks and repair shops are situated, or may be the entire harbour including its approaches and anchorages. 2.476 Portal Crane See Crane, Portal.

2.477 Port Anchorage - An anchorage often provided in a port for shipping before proceeding to a dock or quay for such purposes as customs and quarantine inspection, the discharge of explosives ( and on the outward voyage for loading such material) and in time of war for defensive purposes. 2.478 2.479 2.480 Port, Major See Major See Minor Port, Port. Port.

Port, Minor Ports,

Intermediate

See Intermediate

2.481 Potential Energy ( of Wave) the energy resulting from the elevation from the undisturbed level.

In a progressive oscillatory wave, or depression of the water surface

2.482 Prediction of Tide - Prediction of tidal time and heights and ranges at a location for the future, depending upon the past observations of the tides for a 1%year period ( a saros ), or if the records be available for a shorter period, by applying required corrections by a system of harmonic analysis generally done by means of tide-predicting machines. 2.483 Prism, Tidal See Tidal Prism.

2.484 Probable Maximum Water LevelA hypothetical water level ( exclusive of wave run up from normal wind generated waves ) that might result from the most severe combination of hydrometeorological, geoseismic and other geophysical factors that is considered reasonably possible in the region involved, with each of these factors considered as affecting the locality 44

IS : 7314 - 1974 in a maximum manner. This level represents the physical response of a body of water to maximum applied phenomena, such as hurricanes, moving squall lines, other cyclonic meteorological events, tsunamis and astronomiIt is cal tide combined with maximum probable hydrological conditions. a water level with virtually no risk of being exceeded. 2.485 Probile, Beach - The intersection of the ground surface with a vertical plane; may extend from the top of the dune line to the seaward limit of sand movement. 2.486 Progression ( of a Beach ) See Advance.
CO-

2.487 Progressive Wave -A wave that moves relative to a fixed ordinate system in a fluid. The direction in which it moves is termed direction of wave propagation. 2.488 Protected Harbour See Harbour, Protected.

the

2.489 Quay - A stretch of paved bank, or a solid artificial landing place parallel to the navigable waterway, for use in loading and unloading vessels. 2.490 Quay Crane Same as Crane, Wharf.

2.491 Radius of Maximum Winds-Distance from the eye of a hurricane where surface and wind velocities are zero to the place where surface wind speeds are maximum. 2.492 Rail and Water Terminal A terminal for loading and unloading of cargoes to and from vessels, where railway terminus also is provided for quick transport of the cargo. 2,493 Rail Road Wharf - A wharf with rail and roadways the wharf structure for quick transport of cargo. provided on high

2.494 Range of Tide - The difference in height between consecutive water and low water ( or higher high and lower low waters ). 2.495 Ray, Wave See Orthogonal. course between the bends of a river.

2.496 Reach - A straight part in a navigable river. 2.497 Recession

A straight

( of a Beach ) ( also Retrogression) landward movement of the shoreline. over a specified time.

a) A continuing

b) A net landward

movement

of the shoreline

2.498 Recirculation System (in Docks ) - The system of recirculation of water by pumps in an impounded dock to maintain the required level of water in the dock. 2.499 Reaf, Sand Synonymous with bar. 45

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.500 Reflected Wave - That part on an incident wave that is returned back when a wave impinges on a steep beach, barrier, or other reflecting surface. 2.501 Reflection ( of a Wave ) - The returning back of a part of or a full incident wave on meeting a steep beach, barrier, a vertical wall or other reflecting surface, that is, the momentum of the incident wave is arrested and some of the wave energy is absorbed at the reflecting This reflected surface and some is returned back with the reflected wave. part on meeting another advancing wave gives rise to standing wave, clapotis, etc. 2.502 Refration Coefficient - The square root of the ratio of the spacing between adjacent orthogonals in deep water and in shallow water at a selected point. When multiplied by the shoaling-factor and a factor for friction and percolation, this becomes the wave height coefficient or the ratio of the refracted wave height at any point to the deepwater wave height. Also the square root of the energy coefficient. 2.503 Refraction and/or orthogonals direction. 2.504 Refraction Diagram - A drawing showing position of .wave crests in a given area for a specific deep water wave period and

( of ~a Wave )

a) The process by which the dire&on of a wave moving in shallow water at an angle to the contours is changed. The part of the wave advancing in shallower water moves more slowly than that part still advancing in deeper water, causing the wave crest to bend toward alignment with the underwater contours. b) The bending of wave crests by currents.

2.505 Resonance - The phenomenon of amplification of a free wave or oscillation of a system by a forced wave or oscillation of exactly equal period. The forced wave may arise from an impressed force upon the system or from a boundary condition. In case of an enclosed harbour, when the natural frequency of the harbour coincides with the frequency of an outside disturbance like a storm wave, the disturbance within the harbour is much more amplified and may cause disaster to ships and structures within the harbour, when it is called harbour resonance. 2.506 Retardation ( also Daily Retardation ) -The amount of time by which corresponding tidal phases grow later day by day ( about 50 minutes ) . 2.507 2.508 Retrogression Ridge, Beach ( of a Beach ) See Recession.

Se,eBeach Ridge. 46

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.509 Rill Marks -Tiny drainage channels in a beach, caused by the &W seaward of water, left in the sands of the upper part of the beach after the retreat of the tide or after dying down of storm waves. 2.510 Rip -A body of water made rough by waves meeting an opposing current, particularly a tidal current; often formed where tidal currents are converging and sinking, 2.511 2.512 2.513 Rip Current Rip Surf-See Riparian See Current, Current, Pertaining Rip. Rip.

to the banks of a body of water.

2.514 River Training-The process of regulating a river for improvement of navigable and/or hydraulic conditions by deepening the flow channel or confining a shifting, unstable or diverging flow to a single channel at one site by structures like spurs, groynes, etc, encroaching a part of the waterway, and/or dredging, embankment, etc. 2.515 Roadstead - A sheltered may anchor in relative safety. area of water near shore where vessels

2.516 Rock Breakers - Employed in dredging operation in rock beds for breaking up of hard masses of rock into small fragments so that the material may be removed either by multibucket dredger, dipper or grab The breaker dredger, and also where blasting operations are impracticable. is usually _in rectangular pontoon form, self propelled or dummy, very similar to a pile barge in its equipment, having a tripod derrick with winches for hoisting long pointed steel rams which are allowed to fall freely, and by succession of blows pierce the rock, compressed air or steam-operated hammers being also used in modern crafts. Some modern type of rock breakers combine dredging facilities with rock breaking. 2.517 Roller - An indefinite term, sometimes considered to denote one of a series of long crested, large waves which roll in on a shore, as after a storm. 2.518 Rolling Caisson See Caisson, Rolling.

2.519 Rolling of Ship-The transverse oscillating rotation of a vessel about a longitudinal axis, which results when it meets waves with crests approximately parallel to the length of the ship and which offers resistance to its propulsion. 2.520 Roll-On Roll-Off Vessels -Vessels through which vehicles can be driven. 2.521 Rose, Wind -See Wind Rose. 47 having side or end doors

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.522 Rubble

a) Loose angular waterworn stones along a beach. b) Rough, irregular fragments of broken rock. 2.523
2.524 Rubble Mound Breakwater See Breakwater, Mound.

Rubble Mound Structure -A mound of random shaped and random placed stones protected with a cover layer of selected stones or specially shaped concrete armour units, usually used for marine works to windstand wave action.

2.525 Runnel - A corrugation ,or trough formed in the foreshore or in the bottom just offshore by waves or tidal currents. 2.526 Runup ( alse Uprush ) - The rush of water up a structure or beach on the breaking -ofa wave. The amount of run up is the vertical height above still water level that the rush of water reaches. 2.527 Saltation - The method of sand movement in a fluid in which individual particles leave the bed by bounding nearly vertically and, because the motion of the fluid is not strong or turbulent enough to retain them in The travel path of the suspension, return to the bed at some distance. particles is a series of hops and bounds. 2.528
Sand Bar

a) See Bar. b) In a river, a ridge of sand built up to or near the surface by river currents. 2.529
2.530 Sand Bypassing See Bypassing, Sand.

Sand-Pump Dredger-A dredger in which the material to be dredged is pumped up through a pipe by a centrifugal pump either direct or after previous mechanical erosion or disintegration and delivered into hoppers with a large quantity of water for settling. Such dredgers were originally designed to deal with sand only, but later modifications and improvements have enabled them to be used for other materials also. Entrance channels to harbours with heavy littoral deposits are sometimes kept free by means of sand pump dredger which pumps the sand from the accreting side of the entrance to the eroding side.

2.531

Sand Reef -

Synonymous with bar.

2.532 Sand Wave ( Megaripple ) - A large wave like sediment feature composed of sand in very shallow water. Wave length may reach 100 m; amplitude is about 0.5 m. 2.533 Scrap,
Beach See Beach Scrap. 48

IS : 7314 - 1974 Scraping and Scuttling - Method of maintaining a fairway having tendency to silt up. The method consists of stirring the deposit by mechanical means, to enable it to be carried away by an exsiting outward current. Harrows are employed for the purpose, aided by high pressure water jets worked from a small tug during the ebb tide. The same method with a larger vessel has been employed for removing sandy-bars at the mouths of rivers. 2.534

2.535 Screw Moorings - Screw piles of steel usually of large diameter ( of the order of 1.2 m ) used for mooring of vessels with the help of chains and mooring buoys. 2.536 2.537
2.538 Sea Cliff Sea Level -

A cliffsituated
See Mean

at the seaward edge of the coast.

Sea Level.

Sea Mount - An elevation rising more than 1 000 metres above the ocean floor, and of limited extent across the summit.

2.539 Sea Puss -A dangerous longshore current, a rip current caused by return flow; loosely, the submerged channel or inlet through a bar caused by those currents. 2.540 Sea Wall - A structure separating land and water areas, primarily designed to prevent erosion and other damages due to wave action ( see also
Bulkhead ). 2.541 Sea Way -

A navigable portion of the sea.
See Gate, Sector.

2.542 2.543

Sector Gate Seiche a) A standing

wave oscillation of an enclosed water body that continues, pendulum fashion, after the cessation of the originating force, which may have been either seismic or atmospheric. b) An oscillation of a fluid body in response to a disturbing force having the same frequency as the natural frequency of the fluid system. Tides are now considered to be seiches induced primarily by the sun and moon.

2.544 Seismic Sea Wave ( Tsunami ) - A long period wave caused by Commonly misan underwater seismic disturbance or volcanic eruption. named ` tidal wave `. 2.545 Semaphore, Tidal - A navigational aid indicating the rise of tide at different stages of tide ina tidal river. The rises are indicated by a set of symbols ( lights during night) on a tall structure constructed on the shore. 2.546 Semi-Diurnal Tide - A tide with two high and two low waters in a tidal day with comparatively little diurnal inequality. 49

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.547 Set of Current The direction toward which a current
flows.

2.548 Set Up, Wave - Super elevation of the water surface over normal surge elevation due to onshore mass transport of the water by wave action along. 2.549 2.550 Set Up, Wind Shallow Water See Wind set up.

a) Commonly, water of such a depth that surface waves are noticeably affected by bottom topography. It is customary to consider water of depths less then one half the surface wavelength as shallow water. b) More strictly, in hydrodynamics with regard to progressive gravity waves, water in which the depth is less than l/25 the wavelength.

2.551 Shear Legs ( also Sheer-Legs, Sheers ) -A large lifting device used in shipyards etc, resembling a crane in which a pair of inclined struts take the place of a jib. 2.552 2.553 2.554 2.555 Shelf, Continental Shelf, Insular Ship Channel Ship Worm See Continental Shelf. in a waterway used for navigation. Shelf.

See Insular A channel

See Teredo Navals.

2.556 Shoal - A detached elevation of the sea bottom or river bed, comprised of any material except rock or coral, which may endanger surface navigation. 2.557 Shoaling Coefficient -The ratio of the height of a wave in water of any depth to its height in deep water with the effects of refraction, friction and percolation eliminated. Sometimes termed as shoaling factor or depth factor. 2.558 Shoreface - The narrow zone seaward from the low tide shoreline covered by water over which the beach sands and gravels activity oscillate with changing wave conditions. 2.559 Significant Wave -A statistical term relating to the one-third highest waves of a given wave group and defined by the average of their heights and periods. The composition of the higher waves depends upon the extent to which the lower waves are considered. 2.560 Significant Wave Height ( also Characteristic Wave-Height ) The average height of the one-third highest waves of a given wave group. In wave record analysis, the average height of the highest one-third of a selected number of waves, this number being determined by dividing the time of record by the significant period. 50

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.561 Significant Wave Period - An arbitrary period generally taken as In wave the period of the one-third highest waves within a wave group. record analysis, this is determined as the average period of the most frequently recurring of the larger well-defined waves in the record under study. 2.562 Sill See Dock sill.

2.563 Slack Tide ( Slack Water ) - The state of a tidal current when its velocity is near zero, especially the movement when a reversing current Sometimes considered the interchanges direction and its velocity is zero. mediate period between ebb and flood currents during which the velocity of the currents is less than 0.2 km/h ( see Stand of Tide ) . 2.564 Sliding Caisson A berthing See Caisson, space between Sliding. two piers. 2.565 Slip -

2.566 Slip Dock - A repairing dock in which the vessel is partially withdrawn from the water by means of ways, the remaining water being removed by natural or artificial means, for repair to the hull and keel of the vessel. 2.567 Slipway - A sloping platform used for hauling up and repairing vessels, usually of smaller capacity than those repaired in dry docks. 2.568 Slough See Bayou. of

2.569 Sluices, Gate - Sluices provided in a lock or dry dock for levelling water on both sides of a pair of lock gates preparatory to opening them. May be fitted in the gates themselves or located in the side walls. 2.570 Solitary Wave - A wave consisting of a single elevation ( above the original water surface ), its height not necessarily small compared to the depth, and neither followed nor preceded by another elevation or depression of the water surface. 2.571 Sound a) A wide waterway between the mainland and an island, waterway connecting two sea areas ( see also Strait ). or a wide

b) A relatively long arm of the sea or ocean forming a channel between an island and a mainland or connecting two larger bodies, as a sea and the ocean, or two parts of the same body; usually wider and more extensive than a strait. 2.572 Sounding - A measured depth of water. On hydrographic the soundings are adjusted to a specified plane of reference. 2.573 Sounding Datum nlso Chart Datum ). 2.574 2.575 Spending Spilling Beach Breaker The plane to which soundings See Beach, See Breaker. 51 Spending. are referred charts ( see

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.576 Spit -A small point of land body of water from the shore. 2.577 moon level. or a narrow shoal projecting into

a

Spring Tide - A tide that occurs at or near the time of new or full ( syzygy ), and which rises highest and falls lowest from the mean sea

2.578 Spur - A permeable or impermeable structure constructed from the bank in a river, estuary or any waterway, built usually perpendicular to the shore line or at a small angle from the perpendicular, for river training and bank protection works. 2.579 Squatting ( of a Ship ) - The tendency of a vessel to settle down in shallow water as she moves through it, for which sufficient clearance depending upon the speed of~the vessel must be allowed between the keel of the vessel and the bed of the waterway. 2.580 Staith - Used for loading of coal/ore into vessel and worked on principle of gravity. It is a jetty on to which the coal/ore wagons gravitate and discharge their loads into hopper from which the coal/ore runs on to a short belt conveyor or down a spout or chute into the vessel. 2.581 Standard Project Hurricane See Hypothetical Hurricane.

2.582 Standing Wave - A type of wave in which the surface of the water oscillates vertically between fixed points, called nodes, without progression. The points of maximum vertical rise and fall are called antinodes or loops where the underlying water particles have no horizontal motion but maximum vertical motion while at nodes these have no vertical motion but maximum horizontal motion. This may be the result of two equal progresSomesive wave trains travelling through each otherin opposite directions. times called clepotis or stationary wave. 2.583 Stand of Tide - An sensible change in the height high and low water for only times is so slow that it is not interval at high or of the tide. The an instant, but the usually perceptible low water when there is no waterlevel is stationary at change in level near these ( SEI Slack Tide ). stable point; form which does a fixed swelling.

2.584 Stationary Wave - A wave of essentially not move with respect to a selected reference Sometimes called standing wave. 2.585 Stern The after-part of a ship or boat. elevation that were absent.

2.586 Still Water Level-The would assume if all wave action

the surface

of the water downdrift ).

2.587 Stockpile -Sand piled on a beach foreshore to nourish beaches by natural littoral currents or forces ( see Feeder Beach 52

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.588 Stone Pitching See Pitching.

2.589 Storm - A wind of intensity less than a hurricane but higher than a gale, occupying No, 11 position in Beufort scale of wind forces with an average velocity between 103 to 117 km/h. 2.590 Storm Gate See Gate, Storm.

2.591 Storm Surge - A rise above normal water level on the open coast due to the action of wind stress on the water surface. Storm surge resulting from a hurricane also includes that rise in level due to atmospheric pressure reduction as well as that due to wind stress ( see Wind Set Up ).

2.592 Storm 2.593 Strait water 2.594

Tide -

See Storm Surge. narrow waterway between two larger bodies of

A relatively ( see also Sound ) . Suction Dredger -

See Dredger,

Suction. the shoreline and the with

2.595 Surf - The wave activity outermost limit of breakers.

in the area between

2.596 Surf Beat - Irregular oscillations periods of the order of several minutes. 2.597 Surf Zone of wave uprush. 2.598 Surge The area-between

of the nearshore the outermost

waterlevel,

breaker

and the limit

a) The name applied to wave motion with a period intermediate between that of the ordinary wind wave and that of the tide. It is of low height, usually less than 0.1 m ( see also Seiche ). b) In fluid flow, long interval variations in velocity and pressure, necessarily periodic, perhaps even transient in nature. not

c) See Storm Surge. 2.599 2.600 2.601 Surging Breaker --See Breaker. See Fender, Suspended.

Suspended Suspended

Fender Load

a) The material the upward suspension.

moving in suspension in a fluid, being kept up by components of~the turbulent currents or by colloidal from samples collected ridges. with

b) The material collected in or computed a suspended load sampler. 2.602 Swale The depression between 53

two beach

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.603 beach 2.604 Swash ( also Uprush, Runup ) - The rush of water face following the breaking of a wave. Swash Channel to or up onto the

a) On the open shore, a channel cut by flowing water in its return the parent body, for example, a rip channel. b) A secondary river bar. channel passing through or shoreward of an inlet

2.605 Swash Mark - The thin wavy line of fine sand, mica scales, bits of seaweed, etc, left by the uprush when it recedes from its upward limit of movement on the beach face. 2.606 Swell - Wind generated waves that have travelled out of their generating area. Swell characteristically exhibits a more regular and longer period, and has flatter crests than waves within their fetch ( Seas ). 2.607 Swinging Caisson See Caisson, Swinging.

2.608 Synoptic Chart - A chart showing the distribution ofmeteorological conditions over a given area at a given time. Popularly called a weather map. 2.609 Syzycy -The two points on the moon's orbit when the moon is in conjunction or opposition to the sun relative to the earth; time of new or full moon in the cycle of phases when or nearly when spring tides occur. 2.610 Tainter Gate See Sector Gate.

2.611 Teredo Navals ( Shipworm ) - A burrowing lamelli-branch molluse causing damage to timber structures used in marine work. The burrow of the teredo enter the surface of the wood generally at right angles to the grain and then curves upward or downward and follows the grain of the wood. The attacks extend down below high water mark to almost any depth. 2.612 Tetrapod - A patented form of concrete block consisting of four legs disposed in triangular form so that when three points are resting This shape possesses excellent on the ground the fourth leg is vertical. interlocking qualities and provides high roughness as well as permeability effecting a very great degree of dissipation of wave energy. This is extensively used for revetting the exposed faces of rubble mound breakwaters and beach protection works. 2.613 ThaIweg inlet or stream 2.614 2.615 Tidal Tidal - In hydraulics, channel. See Basin, the line joining Tidal. Tidal. 54 the deepest points of an

Basin Current

See Current,

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.616 Tidal Datum See Chart Datum.

2.617 Tidal Day -The time of the rotation of the earth with respect to the moon, or the interval between two successive upper transits of the moon over the meridian -of a place, approximately 24.84 solar hours or l-035 times the mean solar day. Also called lunar day. 2.618 Tidal Flats - Marshy or muddy land areas which are covered uncovered by the rise and fall or the tide. 2.619 2.620 Tidal Flow Tidal Inlet Oscillating A natural flow of water due to tidal action. inlet maintained by tidal flow. and

2.621 Tidal Levels - The levels attained by water in a tidal area during different stages of tide, like high water, low water, etc. 2.622 Tidal Period phases of the tide. The interval of time between two consecutive like

2.623 Tidal Pool - A pool of water remaining after recession of the tide. 2.624 Tidal Prism - The total amount or estuary and out again with movement water flow. 2.625 2.626 Tidal Range Tidal Rise -

on a beach

or reef or bank

of water that flows into a harbour of the tide, excluding any fresh

See Range of Tide. The height of tide as referred to the datum of a chart.

2.627 Tidal River-A waterway connecting the sea or estuary at the downstream end and a Auvial river at the upstream end where tide plays. 2.628 Tidal Wave a) The wave motion of the tides b) In popular usage, any unusually high and destructive water level along a shore. It normally refers to storm surges or tsunami. 2.629 Tide - The periodic rising and falling of the water that results from gravitational attraction primarily of the moon and sun, acting upon the rotating earth. Although the accompanying horizontal movement of the water resulting from the same cause is also sometimes called the tide, it is preferable to designate the latter as Tidal Current reserving the name tide for the vertical movement. 2.630 2.631 2.632 2.633 Tide, Daily Retardation Tide, Diurnal of See Daily Retardation Tide. of Tides.

See Diurnal

Tide, Ebb Tide, Flood -

See Ebb Tide. See Flood Tide. 55

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.634 Tide Gauge -An appliance used for indicating changes in the water surface level during different stages of tide. In the simplest form it consists of an upright stake or post driven into the shore, bank, or bed and graduated to linear measure. 2.635 2.636 2.637 Tide, Mixed Tide, Neap See Mixed Tide.

See Neap Tide. See Prediction of Tide. Tide.

Tide, Prediction

2.63% Tide, Semi-diurnal 2.639 2.640 Tide, Slack Tide, Spring -

See Semi-diurnal

See Slack Tide. See Spring Tide.

2.641 Tide Station - A place at which tide observations are being taken. It is called a primary tide station when continuous observations are to be taken over a number of years to obtain basic tidal data for the locality. A secondary tidest ation is one operated over a short period of time to obtain data for a specific purpose. 2.642 Tide, Storm See Storm Tide. and times to the the

2.643 Tide Table - A table giving the predicted daily heights of the tide for a specific period at one or more stations in a locality. 2.644 Tombolo - A bar or spit that mainland or to another island. connects

or ' ties ' an island

2.645 Track Marks - Artificial marks on shore or in water showing alignment of navigation route in a waterway. 2.646 2.647 2.648 Track, Navigation Wall Work See Navigaton Tracks. flow.

Training Training

A wall or jetty

to direct current

See River Training.

2.649 Transit Marks - Prominent objects or structures on a coastline or river bank, which act as a means of alignment or as an indication of change of direction in a navigating channel. 2.650 Transit Shed -A shed provided at a cargo berth for temporary accommodation and protection from weather of cargoes deposited on dock quay or of freights on the eve of shipment. A transit shed may be single or more storied according to the requirements and the covered area depends upon the quantum and types of cargo handled at the berth. 2.651 Transitional Zone ( Transitional Water ) - In regard to progressive gravity waves, water whose depth is less than l/2 but more than l/25 the wavelength. Often called Shallow Water. 56

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.652 Translatory Wave See Wave of Translation.

consisting of a 2.653 Transporter - An appliance for cargo handling long arm or track, placed horizontally or very nearly so, along which travels a carriage with a hook for the attachment of loads. 2.654 2.655 Transposed Traversing Hurricane Caisson See Hypothetical Hurricane.

See Caisson,

Traversing.

2.656 Trochoidal Wave - A theoretical, progressive oscillatory wave first proposed by Gerstner in 1802 to describe the surface profile and particle The wave form is that of a orbits offinite amplitude, non-sinusoidal waves. prolate cycloid or trochoid, and the fluid particle motion is rotational as opposed to the normal irrotational particle motion for waves generated by normal forces ( see Ii-rotational Wave ). 2.657 Tropical Cyclone Storm -A SeeHurricane. tropical cyclone with maximum winds less

2.658 Tropical than 34 km/h.

2.659 Trough of Wave - The lowest part of a wave form between sive crests. Also that part of a wave below still water level. 2.660 Tsunami See Seismic Sea Wave.

succes-

2.661 Tug - A small vessel of adequate power and a high degree of seaworthiness used primarily to drag a craft or to render the necessary assistance to ocean going vessels in docking and undocking, berthing in the docks and at jetties, etc, and in navigating and manoeuvring in narrow and congested waters. The type and power of a tug will be determined by the duties required for it. 2.662 Turnround ( of Vessels ) - The whole series of operations connected with the arrival and departure of a vessel, including the discharge of its cargo and the process of reloading. 2.663 2.664 Turning Typhoon Basin See Basin, Turning.

SeeHurricane.

2.665 Undertow - A current, below water surface, flowing seaward; also the receding water below the surface from waves breaking on a shelving beach. Often a misnormer for rip current. 2.666 Universal 3uoyage System -A uniform system of buoyage in regard to colours, shape and sizes of buoys used for navigational aids adopted over all the ports of the world as per international agreement of 1936. 2.667 Unmanned Light Vessel and fully decked over and equipped Small light vessel varying in length with light and sound signals suitably 57

IS : 7314 - 1974 divided damage into compartments to provide some measure by collision ( see also Light Vessel ). The coastal direction generally of safety in case tending toward of the

2.668 Upcoast north.

2.668 Updrift - The direction opposite that of the predominant of~littoral materials or bed materials. 2.670 Upland channel section. 2.671 Upland section coming 2.672 beach 2.673 The land area in the upstream direction

movement or

of a river

Discharge - The discharge from the upland area. The

through

a river

or channel up onto the

Uprush (also Swash, Runup ) following the breaking of a wave. Upstream Variability a) The Opposite of Waves of heights and For tidal rivers, it is the direction variation

rush of water

to the direction

in which the river

normally

flows.
2.674

of flood flow. periods between individual waves the

within a wave train. b) The variation in direction generating area. c) The variation in height along the wave `. of propagation the crest, at of waves usually an called leaving

along

`variation
wave

2.675 Velocity of Waves - The advances ( see Wave Celerity).

speed

which

individual

2.676 Vertical Exaggeration ( in Models ) - The ratio of the horizontal scale to the vertical scale used in a hydraulic model. 2.677 2.678 2.679 Vertical Vertical Wall Lift Gate See Gate, Vertical Lift. Vertical Wall. dock area or in or goods for shipperhaps indefinite are stored, are of Wall.

Wall Breakwater -

See Breakwater, Vertical

Breakwater

See Breakwater,

2.680 Warehouse -Accommodation provided in the the near vicinity for the reception of discharged cargoes ment, which are to be stored for periods of longer and duration. Bonded warehouses, where dutiable goods special help to importers.

2.681 Water Line -A juncture of land and water or sea. This line migrates, changing with the tide or other fluctuation in the water level. Where waves are present on the beach, this line is also known as the limit of backrush. 58

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.682 2.683 2.684 2.685 2.686 2.687 2.688 2.689 2.690 2.691 2.692 2.693 Wave Age The ratio -

ofwave

speed to windspeed. ( of Wave ). Wave.

Wave Amplitude Wave, Wave, Wave, Wave, Wave, Wave Wave Wave Capillary Celerity

See Amplitude See Capillary See Celerity. See Cnoidal Wave.

Cnoidal
Crest -

See Crest of Wave. See Crest Length, Wave. Wave.

Crest Length Cycloidal Decay-

See Cycloidal

See Decay

of Waves. ( of Wave ). ( of Water Waves ).

Deflection-

See Deflection See Diffraction The direction

Wave Diffraction Wave Direction

from which a wave approaches.

2.694 Wave Forecasting - The wave characteristics, usually from phenomena. 2.695 2.696 Wave Generation Wave, Gravity-See -

theoretical determination of future observed or predicted meteorological of Wave.

See Generation Gravity Wave.

2.697 Wave Group - A series of waves in which the wave direction, length, and wave height vary only slightly ( see also Group Velocity 2.698 Wave Height -The vertical distance between a crest preceeding trough ( see also Significant Wave Height ). 2699 Wave Height Coefficient-The selected point to the deepwater wave multiplied by the shoaling factor. 2.700 2.701 2.702 2.703 2.704 Wave Hindcasting Wave, Wave, Waves, Wave, Irrotational Length ratio height.

wave

).
the

and

of the wave height at a The refraction coefficient Wave. Wave.

See Hindcasting, See Irrotational

See Length of Wave. See Monochromatic Wave. Waves.

Monochromatic Oscillatory -

See Oscillatory

2.705 Wave Period - The time for a wave crest to traverse a distance equal to one wave length. The time for two successive wave crests to pass a fixed point ( see also Significant Wave Period ). 59

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.706 Wave Pressure-Pressure exerted by a wave on a structure It is composed of an impact pressure obstructing the path of wave motion. and a static pressure. 2.707 2.708 2.709 2.710 2.711 2.712 2.713 2.714 2.715 2.716 Wave, Progressive See Progressive Wave.

Wave Ray Wave,

See Qrthegonal. See Reflected See Refraction Wave. ( of a Wave ),

Reflected

Wave Refraction Wave Runup Wave Wave, Wave, Wave, Wave, Set up -

See Runup. See Set up, Wave. See Significant Wave. Wave.

Significant Solitary Standing Stationary Steepness Train -

See Solitary

See Standing ~Wave. See Stationary The ratio Wave. wave height to the wave

2.717 Wave length. 2.718 Wave

of the

A series of waves from the same direction.

2.719 Wave -of Translation -A wave in which the water particles are permanently displaced to a significant degree in the direction of wave travel. Distinguished from Oscillatory Wave. 2.720 2.721 2.722 2.723 2.724 2.725 Wave, Wave Wave Wave Wave, Waves, Trochoidal Trough See Trochoidal of Wave. of Waves. Wave.

See Trough -

Variability Velocity Wind -

See Variability

See Velocity See Wind -

of Waves.

Waves. Waves.

Internal

See Internal

2.726 Weir Jetty - An updrift jetty with a low section or weir over which littoral drift or sediment moves into a predredged deposition basin which is dredged periodically. 2.727 Wet Dock SeeDock, Wet.

2.728 Wharf so that vessels passengers.

A structure built on the shore of a harbour, river or canal, may lie alongside to receive and discharge cargo and 60

IS : 7314 - 1974 2.729 Wharf Apron See Apron. for hauling or hoisting other

2.730 Winch-A mechanical gear used bodies by the winding of rope on a drum. 2.731 2.732 2.733 Wind Wind, Wind, Chop See Chop. See Following See Opposing

Following Opposing

Wind. Wind. a pilot chart or weather chart direction and force of the wind. the wind and indicate by their also the direction of the wind.

2.734 Wind Rose -A diagram used on to indicate clearly and concisely the average The arrows which accompany each rose fly length and thickness the frequency and force, 2.735 Wind Set up

a) The vertical rise in the still water level on the leeward side of a body of water caused by wind stresses on the surface of the water. b) The difference in still water levels on the windward and leeward sides of a body of water caused by wind stresses on the surface of I the water. Storm surge is c) Synonymous with wind tide and storm surges. Wind usually reserved for use for ocean and large bodies of water. set up is usually reserved for use of reservoirs and smaller bodies of water. 2.736 2.737 Wind Tide--Wind Waves a) Waves being formed and built up by the wind. b) Loosely, any wave generated reach of by wind. a river or waterway where tidal 2.738 Zone Tidal -The phenomena are observed. See Wind Set up, Storm Surge.

IS 17314

- 1974 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Assistance 1) 2)

derived

from the following

publications

is acknowledged: published by

Cornick, H.F. - Dock and Harbour Charles Griffin & Co~Ltd, London. Brysson Cunningham of Dock Engineering, London. -

Engineering*,

A Treatise on the Principles and Practices published by Charles Griffin & Co Ltd,

3)

Glossary of Coastal Engineering Terms compiled by Richard H. Allen. Miscellaneous Paper 2-72, April 1972. US Army Corps of Engineer, US Army Coastal Engineering Research Centre, Washington. Illustrated Technical Dictionary: Chapter IV Boats, VesselsPropulsion, published by the General Secretariat of the Permanent International Association of Navigation Congresses, 155 rue de la Loi, Brussels-4. Du-plat-Taylor F.M. - `The Design, Construction and Maintenance of Docks, Wharves and Piers', published by Eyre & Spottiswoode ( Publishers ) Ltd, 15 Bedford Street, Strand, London W.C.2. Marine Dictionary', pub( Canada ) Ltd, 25 Hollinger

4)

5)

6) Irene de Kerchove - `International lished by D. Van Nostrand Company Road, Toronto 16, Canada.

*Copies of the book can be had from Current Technical Literature House, P. B. No. 1374, Bombay 400001 or from their branches.

Co Pvt Ltd.

India

62

