IS 5916 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


ARANA Ae 

TH free ot æt aaa di Tan — 
Ral Bed 
(Teal JTÜ ) 


Indian Standard 


CONSTRUCTIONS INVOLVING USE OF HOT 
BITUMINOUS MATERIALS — CODE OF SAFETY 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.100; 91.100.50 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


December 2013 Price Group 3 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Construction 
Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee had been adopted by the Civil Engineering 
Divisional Council. 


Hot bituminous materials are used in various operations connected with civil engineering jobs. The work involved 
is of specialized and hazardous nature which, some times leads to accidents. These accidents may cause burns to 
workman, injury to lungs due to breathing of dust laden air, or fire to materials and equipment. It is, therefore, 
necessary that certain rules are laid down for every phase of work involved and that these are meticulously 
followed by each member of the crew working on the job, not only for his own safety but also for the safety of his 
fellow workers and on-lookers. This standard has, therefore, been formulated to lay down safety requirements 
for constructions involving the use of hot bituminous materials. 


This standard was first formulated in 1970. This revision has been brought out to incorporate the improvements 
based on the experienced gained in use of the standard since the last version of the standard. In this revision, the 
following major modifications have been incorporated: 


a) A preference of specific material for personal protective wears such as boots and gloves, has been 
dispensed with. 

b) Reference to need for compliance to norms specified by the pollution control authority concerned, has 
been included. 

c) Provision for transportation of bitumen in insulated and covered vehicles exclusively designed for the 
purpose, has been included. 

d) Reference to Indian Standard has been updated. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5916 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


CONSTRUCTIONS INVOLVING USE OF HOT 
BITUMINOUS MATERIALS — CODE OF SAFETY 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down the safety requirements for 
constructions involving the use of hot bituminous 
materials. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard listed below contains provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


15683 : 2006 Portable fire extinguishers — 
Performance and construction — 


Specification 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Bituminous Materials — Binder materials, such 
as asphalt/bitumen (both penetration grades and 
cutbacks), road tars as well as mixtures of such binders 
with road aggregates, pitch, bituminous mastic and 
joint sealers. 


3.2 Bitumen Plant — A plant for producing 
bituminous mixtures with or without provision to batch 
and heat the aggregate materials as well as binder to 
the required extent and mixing them together. This 
includes storage for different aggregates, elevators, 
driers, screening and gradation control units, batching 
arrangements and mixing units. 


3.3 Boiler — A suitable container or tank in which 
bitumen or tar can be heated to the required extent and 
provided with suitable controllable outlets for taking 
out hot material. 


3.4 Sprayer — A mechanical equipment to spray hot 
binder uniformly at a constant volume or constant 
pressure to give the required amount of binder per unit 
area. 


3.5 Spreader — A mechanical equipment to spread 
uniformly stone chips at a desired rate per unit area. 


3.6 Paver — A mechanical equipment with 
arrangement to receive the hot mixture from tippers 
and to lay it uniformly to the required width, depth 
and camber as well as to give an initial compaction. 


4 SAFETY PROGRAMME 


4.1 General 


On all major works, an experienced and competent 
foreman or supervisor shall be placed in-charge of the 
work, and shall he made responsible for the strict 
observance of the safety rules. He shall guard against 
the use of defective appliances, tools and equipment, 
and shall brief all workmen on all potential hazards 
and the ways to eliminate or guard against them. He 
shall stock the necessary protective equipment, fire- 
extinguishing equipment, first-aid kit, etc. He shall also 
keep a record of the accidents taking place on any 
particular job, with reasons thereof, and shall suggest 
suitable remedial measures to the management for 
prevention thereof. 


4.2 Protective Covering 


Workers engaged on jobs involving handling of hot 
bitumen tar or bituminous mixtures shall use protective 
wears, such as boots and gloves, goggles and helmet. 
No worker shall be permitted to handle such materials 
without wearing the needed protective covering. 


4.3 Fire Fighting Arrangements 


4.3.1 When heating and handling of hot bituminous 
materials is to be done in the open, sufficient stocks of 
clean dry sand or loose earth shall be made available 
at the work site to cope with any resultant fire. When 
such materials are not available, nor are any suitable 
type of fire extinguishers provided at the work site in 
the open, and reliance has to be on using water for 
fighting any fire, the water supply available should be 
in abundance and in such an eventuality the water shall 
be applied to the fire in the form of spray. 


4.3.2 When heating of bituminous materials is carried 
out in enclosed spaces, sufficient number of properly 


IS 5916 : 2013 


maintained dry powder fire extinguisher conforming 
to IS 15683 shall be kept in readiness on the work site. 


5 BITUMEN PLANTS 


5.1 General Provisions 


5.1.1 Bitumen plants shall be provided with safe means 
of access. The working platforms shall be provided 
with hand rails. All pulleys, belts and drive mechanisms 
shall be protected by suitable guards. 


5.1.2 Compressors, electrical installations and other 
equipment, such as elevators and conveyors shall be 
adequately protected against weather and mechanical 
damage for safety of workmen. 


5.1.3 When necessary to prevent danger from rock 
dust in bitumen plants, precautions as given below shall 
be followed: 


a) Screen enclosure and the mixing chamber 
shall be equipped with a mechanical exhaust 
system. 

b) Screen overflow chutes and hoppers shall be 
enclosed. 

c) Waste conveyor system shall be enclosed at 
transfer and discharge points. 

d) All material transfer points shall be equipped 
with effective dust seals. 

e) Conveyor and elevator covers shall be dust 
tight. 

f) Drier discharge to the screen elevator shall 
be equipped with an effective dust seal 
provided with a dust collector. 

g) Contaminated air shall be so discharged that 
it does not return to working areas. 

h) Mixer elevator shall be enclosed in a wooden 
or sheet metal shaft. The shaft shall have a 
window for observation, lubrication and 
maintenance. 


j) Mixer shall be provided with a suitable cover 
to prevent dust coming out. 

k) Suitable protective guard, such as wire grill 
or asbestos cover sheets shall be provided 
behind the drier burner or bitumen boiler 
burner. 


The exhaust related and other performance factors of 
the plant shall conform to the norms specified by the 
pollution control authority concerned. 


5.2 Operation 


During operation of bitumen plants, the following 
precautions shall be observed: 


a) Only competent persons shall operate 
bitumen plants. 


b) When bitumen plants are working on a public 
road, an adequate traffic control system shall 
be established. 

c) Ample storage space shall be provided for 
materials, vehicles, etc, so that operations are 
not obstructed. 

d) Workers handling hot bitumen plants shall 
wear boots and gloves, goggles, helmet and 
if necessary, to prevent danger, suitable 
protective clothing. 

e) Burners shall be lighted by butane lights or 
other suitable devices and not by burning rags 
and the like. 

f) When not in use flexible piping shall not be 
left on the ground. 

g) Bitumen plants provided with oil-fired 
burners shall not be heated while, 

1) bitumen is being pumped; 
2) bitumen is being spread; and 
3) the plant is being transported. 

h) Mineral aggregate shall be added on to the 
elevator after the drying drum has warmed up. 

j) Drier drum and mixer shall not be inspected 
or repaired while they are in motion. 


Bitumen shall be transported by insulated and covered 
vehicles exclusively designed for the purpose. 


6 SPRAYER AND SPREADER/PAVER 


6.1 Sprayer 


The sprayer shall be provided with a fire resisting 
screen. The screen shall have an observation window. 
The following precautions shall be taken during use 
of sprayer: 


a) Piping for hot tar and bitumen shall be 
adequately insulated to protect workers from 
injury by burns. 

b) Flexible piping working under positive 
pressure shall be of metal which shall be 
adequately insulated as provided in (a). 

c) Workers shall not stand facing the wind 
directions while spraying hot binder, lest it 
may fall on them causing burns. 


d) Workers shall be provided with suitable 
protective equipment for the eyes, hands and 
legs (see 4.2). 


6.2 Spreader/Paver 


The following precautions shall be taken during use 
of spreader/paver: 


a) Spreaders in operation shall be protected by 
signals, signs or other effective means. 


b) People should be warned against walking over 
hot mixture laid. 

c) Gravel spreaders shall always be kept at a safe 
distance from sprayer. 

d) Workers with the hot mix shall have protection 
for eyes, hands and legs (see 4.2). 


e) Elevated platforms on spreaders shall be 
protected by suitable railing and be provided 
with an access ladder. 


7 EQUIPMENT FOR HEATING OF BITUMEN 
AND TARS 


7.1 Tanks, vats, kettles, pots, drums and other vessels 
for heating tar, bitumen and other bituminous materials 
shall, 


a) be adequately resistant to damage by heat, 
transportation, etc; 

b) be capable of holding a full load without 
danger of collapse, bursting or distortion; 


c) be provided with a close fitting cover suitable 
for smothering a fire in the vessel or protection 
from rain; and 

d) be leak proof and provided with suitable 
outlets which can be controlled for taking out 
the hot material. 


7.2 Suitable indicator gauges shall be used to ascertain 
level and temperature of the material in the boiler. On 
no account shall workers be allowed to peep into the 
boiler for this purpose. For ascertaining levels, in small 
plants, dipstick may also be used. 


7.3 Gas and oil-fired bitumen and tar kettles or pots 
shall be equipped with burners, regulators and safety 
devices of types approved by the competent authority. 


7.4 Heating appliances for vessels shall distribute the 
heat uniformly over the heating surface so as to avoid 
overheating. In case of bituminous mixtures using 
mineral aggregates filler together with bitumen, it is 
preferable to have some means for stirring as well. 


7.5 Only vessels heated by electricity shall be used 
inside buildings. 


7.6 Buckets for hot bitumen; bituminous materials or 
tar shall have, 


a) the bail or handle firmly secured; and 
b) asecond handle near the bottom for tipping. 


7.7 Bitumen or tar boilers mounted on wheels for easy 
transport or towing shall preferably be provided with 
hand pumps for spraying purposes. 


7.8 Vessels in operation shall be kept at a safe distance 
from combustible materials. 


IS 5916 : 2013 


7.9 When vessels are used in confined spaces, the 
gases, fumes and smoke generated shall be removed 
by exhaust, ventilation or by forced ventilations. 


7.10 Vessels that are being heated shall not be left 
unattended. 


7.11 Pieces of bituminous material shall not be thrown 
into the hot vessel so as to cause splashing. 


7.12 Covers shall be kept closed when vessels are not 
in use. 


7.13 Containers shall not be filled with hot bitumen 
or tar to a level that might cause danger when they are 
carried or hoisted. 


7.14 Enough space shall be left in vessels for expansion 
of binder when heated. 


7.15 Bitumen/tar shall be kept dry and to avoid fire 
due to foaming, boiler shall have a device that prevents 
foam from reaching the burners or anti-foaming agents 
shall be used to control the same. Alternatively to avoid 
fire due to foaming, the heating shall be at low 
temperature till the water entrapped, if any, is 
completely evaporated. 


7.16 Any water present in the boiler shall also be 
drained before using it for heating binders. 


7.17 No open light shall be used for ascertaining the 
level of binder in boilers. 


7.18 Heating tubes in boilers shall be kept well covered 
with bitumen. 


7.19 If a burner goes out, the fuel supply shall be cut 
off and the heating tube shall be thoroughly blown out 
by the fan so as to prevent a back fire. 


7.20 Cutbacks shall not be heated over an open flame 
unless a water jacket is used. While they are being 
heated the vessel shall be kept open. 


7.21 Piping shall not be warmed with burning rags 
and instead blow lamps or similar devices shall be used. 


7.22 Spilled bitumen or tar shall be promptly cleaned 
up around boilers. 


7.23 Inspection openings shall not be opened while 
there is any pressure in the boiler. 


7.24 When tanks are cleaned by steam, adequate 
precautions shall be taken to prevent any build up of 
pressure. 


7.25 Workers employed at vessels or handling hot 
bituminous materials shall be provided with suitable 
protective equipment for the eyes, hands and legs. 


8 HANDLING BITUMEN/TAR 


8.1 Bitumen or tar shall not be heated in open drums 


IS 5916 : 2013 


but only in boilers complying with the requirements 
of the relevant Indian Standard. 


8.2 Bitumen/tar shall not be heated beyond the 
temperature recommended by the manufacturer of the 
product. 


8.3 While discharging heated binder from the boiler, 
workers shall not stand opposite to the jet so as to avoid 
the possibility of hot binder falling on them. The 
container shall be handled only after closing the control 


valve. 


8.4 While handling hot bitumen/tar, workers shall 
exercise scrupulous care to prevent accidental spillage 
thereof. The buckets and cans in which the hot material 
is carried from boiler, shall be checked before use to 
ensure that they are intact and safe. 


8.5 Mops and other applicators contaminated with 
bituminous materials shall not be stored inside 
buildings. 


IS 5916 : 2013 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


Organization 
In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 
Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Consulting Engineering Services (India) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 
Delhi Metro Railway Corporation, New Delhi 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 

Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 

M.N. Dastur and Company (P) Limited, Kolkata 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, Army 
Headquarters, New Delhi 


Ministry of Railways, Govt of India, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, New Delhi 


National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Institute of Construction Management and Research, 
Mumbai 


Nirman Vikas Anusandhan Sansthan, Raipur 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KrisHNAN (Chairman) 


Suri A. K. PATHAK 
SHRI ANUPAM VERMA (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. PASRICHA 
SHRI SANJAY Soni (Alternate) 


Dr SHAILESH KR AGRAWAL 
SHRI PANKAJ Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri S. G. Dave 
Suri Asay SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
Suri MANU AMITABH (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. SWARUP 
Suri Ravi Jam (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. Datta 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 
SHRI ANKUR Dure (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KHURANA 
CHIEF ENGINEER (HQ) (Alternate) 


SHRI DALJEET SINGH 


SHRI JOSE KURIAN 
Suri B. K. Smaa (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 


Suri R. K. BATRA 
Suri M. K. Gara (Alternate) 


SHRI JAIVEER SRIVASTAVAA 
SHRI RAJEEV CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. SRIVASTAVA 
Suri P. S. CHADHA (Alternate) 


Pror B. BHATTACHARJEE 
Dr KN Jua (Alternate) 


Suri M. P.Naipu 
SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. GUHA 
SHRI GOBINDA PAL CHOUDHURY (Alternate) 


BRIG AMAR KRISHNA 
CoL SuniL Kumar (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr DEVENDRA VERMA 
Suri R. RAJESH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJENDRA CHAUDHARI 
Suri H. K. DHAwaN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. S. NAHAR 
Suri P. C. Arya (Alternate) 


Dr ANIL AGARWAL 


SHRI SANJEEV KASLIWAL 
SHRI AMARJEET SINGH (Alternate) 


IS 5916 : 2013 


Organization 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Planning Commission, New Delhi 


PMI Organization Centre Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


RITES Ltd, Gurgaon 


School of Planning and Architecture (Deptt of Building Engineering 
and Management), New Delhi 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 


Spectral Services Consultants Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (411, Technology Apartments, Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (W-12/34, Western Avenue, Sainik Farm, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Mother 
Dairy Road, Patparganj, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Ms Bina BuDHWAR 
Suri ANIL Kapoor (Alternate) 


Suri S. S. GANAPATHY 


SHRIMATI LEENA GUPTE SAMANT 
Suri TEJAS Sura (Alternate) 


SHRI VIPUL KUMAR 
SHRI JITENDRA KUMAR (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. PauL 


SHRI Manos Kumar MITTAL 


SHRI SANDEEP GOEL 
SHRI SANJAY KAUSHIK (Alternate) 


Lr Gen (RETD) Hart UNIYAL 
Suri O. P. GorL (Alternate) 


Dr VANITA AHUJA 


Suri R. P. Lang 


Dr ANIL SAWHNEY 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Suri A. K. Saini, Scientist "OG & Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretaries 
SHRI SANJAY PANT 
Scientist ‘E’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


and 


Shri S. Arun Kumar 
Scientist ‘C’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


Alert Group on Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction), CED 29/AG 


Organization 
In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 
Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 
Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, ECC Group, Chennai 


School of Planning & Architecture (Dept of Building Engineering and 
Management), New Delhi 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 
In personal capacity (C-2/2324, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Mother 
Dairy Road, Patparganj, Delhi) 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KrisHNAN (Convener) 
Suri H. S. PASRICHA 
Suri P. R. Swarup 
Suri M. P. Namu 
SHRI M. NACHIAPPAN 


Pror V. K. PauL 


Supt Manos KUMAR MITTAL 
SHRI CHANDRA PAL 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 29 (7776). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


