**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 4425 (1967): p-Nitrotoluene o-Sulphonic Acid [PCD 9: 
Organic Chemicals Alcohols and Allied Products and Dye 
Intermediates] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



ISt442S.IM7 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
p-NTTROTOLUENE o-SULPHONIC ACID 



UDC 668-81: 547-546 




<g> Copyright 1968 

NPIA%St,ANI>^>^DS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAJNt 9 BAHADUR ^HAU ZAPAR MARO 
^ NBW OEtSHl 1 



ISi4425-1967 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
jj-NITROTOLUENE o-SULPHONIC ACID 

Dye Intermediates Sectional Committee, CDC 46 

Chairman Representing 

Dr G. S. Sidhu Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), Hyderabad 

Members 
Dr I. K. Kacker ( Alternate to 
Dr G. S. Sidhu ) 
Shri J. D. Adhia Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri B. Sinoh ( Alternate ) 
Dr L. K. Behl Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Ltd, New Delhi 

Dr H. L. Bami ( Alternate ) 
Shri Nariman M. Dadachanji The DyestufTs Manufacturers' Association of India, 

Bombay 
Shri K. C. Marfatia ( Alternate ) 
Shri JooiNOER Sinoh Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Dr H. Kaiwar Indian Chemical Manufacturers* Association, 

Calcutta 
Dr Gunthur Laumann ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. A. Kulkarni Amar Dye-Chem Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. V. Desai ( AltemaU ) 
Shri G. G. Maniar Indian Dyestuff Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. M. Mehta Atul Products Ltd, Bulsar 

Shri M. V. Desai ( Alternate ) 
Representative National Chemical Laboratory ( CSIR ), Poona 

Shri I . J. Rundle ICI ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri Santokh Sinoh National Chemical Industries, Delhi 

Shri Kulwant Singh ( AltemaU ) 
Dr H. a. Shah Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries 

( Ministry of Industry ), New Delhi 
Shri G. S. Apte ( AlUmate ) 
Dr D. R. Swayampati Suhrid Geigy Ltd, Baroda 

Dr O. P. Mittal ( Alternate ) 
Dr Sadoopal, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Director ( Chem ) 



Secretary 

Shri M. S. Saxena 

Deputy Director ( Chem ), ISI 



Drafting Panel for Sulphonic Acid Dye Intermediates, CDC 46 : P3 

Convener 
Dr O. P. MriTAL Suhrid Geigy Ltd, Baroda 

Members 
Shri C. G, Maniar Indian Dyestuff Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Dr G. Thyaoarajan Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), Hyderabad 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI 1 



ISt4i25.1967 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
P-NITROTOLUENE o-SULPHONIC ACID 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 28 October 1967, after the draft finalized by the Dye Intermediates Sec- 
tional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 

0.2 ^-Nitrotoluene a-sulphonic acid is an intermediate used in the synthesis 
of dyes as well as for the manufacture of diaminostilbene disulphonic acid. 
It has the following structural formula: 



SOsH 




/ \ 



^Nitrotolucne o-Sulphonic acid 
( Molecular weight 217*2 ) 

0.3 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on dye inter- 
mediates. Other standards in the series are given on page U. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final values, observed or calculatedi express- 
ing the results of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off values should be the same as that of the specified values in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1,1 This standard prescribes the requirements and the methods of sampling 
and test for ^nitrotoluene o-sulphonic acid. 

2. REQIUIREMENTS 

2*1 Detcrlpdoii — The material shall be in the form of a yellow to pale 
brown crystalline powder or paste. 

*Rulet for rounding off numerical values ( rtfnsti ). 

2 



REQUIRElfENT 


Method op Test 
Ref to Cl No. 
IN Appendix A 


(3) 


(4) 


95-0 


A-l 


o-i 


A.2 


5-0 


A-S 



ISt4425.1967 

2*2 The material shall also comply with the requirements given in Table 1. 
TABLE 1 R£Q](7IR£M£NTS FOR p-NTTROTOLUENE o^ULPHONIG ACID 

SL GHARACTBltlSTIG 

No. 

(1) (2) 

i) Assay on dried sample ( calculated on 
molecular weight 217*2 )» percent 
by weight, Min 

ii) Matter insoluble in sodium carbonate 
solution, percent by weight, Max 

iii) Free sulphuric acid, percent by 
weight. Max 

3. PACKING AND MARKING 

3.1 Packing — Unless otherwise agreed, the material shall be packed in 
suitable drums {see 18:2352-1963*) lined with a suitable polyethylene 
film. 

3.2 Marking — The container shall be securely closed and marked with 
the following information: 

a) Name of the material; 

b) Name of the manufacturer; 

c) Lot or batch number; 

d) Gross, net and tare weight; and 

e) Registered trade-mark, if any. 

3.2»1 Each container shall also be marked with the minimum cautionary 
notice * TOXIC; HANDLE WITH CARE \ 

3.2.2 The containers may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The u^e of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, and the Rules and Regula- 
tions made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection^ testing and 

?uality control during production. This system, which is devised and supervised by 
SI and operated by the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as 
actually marketed are continuously checked by ISI for conformity to the standard. 
Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark 
may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian 
Sundards Institution. 



^Specification for steel drums ( galvanized and ungalvanized }. 



ISt4425-1967 

4. SAMPLING 

4*1 The method of drawing representative samples of the material and the 
criteria for conformity shall be as prescribed in Appendix B, 

5. TEST METHODS 

5.1 Tests shall be conducted according to the methods prescribed in 
Appendix A. References to relevant clauses are given in col 4 of Table 1. 

5.2 Qjoality of Reagents — Unless specified otherwise pure chemicals 
and distilled water ( see IS : 1070-1960* ) shall be employed in tests. 

Note — ' Pure chcmicak ' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities which 
aflfect the results of analysis. 



APPENDIX A 

( Table 1, and clause 5.1 ) 

METHODS OF TEST FOR 
j^NITROTOLUENE o-SULPHONIG ACID 

A-l. ASSAY 

A«1.0 Outline of the Method — The nitro group is reduced with zinc 
and concentrated hydrochloric acid. The resulting amino group is 
estimated by diazotisation with standard sodium nitrite solution. 

A-1.1 Reagents 

A-1.1.1 Zi^ J^^^ 

A-1.1.2 Standard Sodium Nitrite Solution — 0*2 N freshly standardized. 

A-1.1.3 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid — see IS : 265-1962t. 

A-1.1.4 Potassium Bromide— analytical reagent grade. 

A-1.1.5 Starch'iodide Test Papers 

A-1.2 Procedure — If the original material is in the form of a paste^ dry 
the sample by heating it to llO'^C till a constant weight is obtained. 
Dissolve^ about 20 g of the material^ accurately weighed, in hot water. Cool 
to room temperature and dilute up to mark in a l*litre measuring flask. 
From this solution pipette 200 ml into a wide-mouthed conical flask and 

^Specification for water, distilled quality ( retnsid), 
tSpecification for hydrochloric acid ( ntdsid ). 



ISt4425-1967 

add 20 g zinc dust in the flask. Close the flask with a rubber stopper 
through which a reflux condenser and a long stem separating funnel are 
inserted. Allow it to stand at room temperature for 10 to 15 minutes with 
occasional shaking. Add dropwise with thorough shaking 100 ml of 
concentrated hydrochloric acid from the separating funnel. When the 
reaction subsides, place the flask on a steam bath and allow it to stand on 
the bath for 30 minutes with occasional shaking. Then wash the inner 
sides of condenser afid cool the solution in ice water. Filter the solution 
through cotton wool and wash the residue thoroughly with water till the 
washing shows no acidity to Congo red paper. 

Transfer the filtrate and washings to a 1 '5-litre beaker and cool to 
about lO^C by adding ice directly. Then add 5 g of potassium bromide 
and stir mechanically. Titrate with standard sodium nitrite solution until 
an immediate blue ring test on starch-iodide test paper is produced, which 
may be obtained repeatedly during a period of 10 minutes without further 
addition of nitrite solution. 

A-U Galcnlation 

Assay, percent by weight |/.o.g v F v J\r 

( Calculated on molecular weight 217-2 ) = o y x ^ 

where 

V n volume in ml of standard sodium nitrite solution 
consumed, 

jVss normality of the standard sodium nitrite solution, and 

IV as weight in g of the material taken for the test. 

A.2. DETERMINATION OF MATTER INSOLUBLE IN SODIUM 
CARBONATE SOLUTION 

A-2.1 RMgent 

A->2»1.1 Sodium Carbonate Solution — 10 percent ( w/v ), approximately. 

A»2.2 Froeedur% — Weigh accurately about 10 g of the sample. 
Transfer this taa 500 ml beaker with 100 ml water. Dissolve it in just 
the required volume of sodium carbonate solution. Filter through a tared 
tinterea glass crucible, wash with water, dry in an oven at about lOO'^G to 
constant weight. Cool in a desiccator and weigh. 

A-2J Calcnhitloii 

Matter insoluble in sodium carbonate solution, wy 
percent by weight » -rj^ X 100 



ISt 4425- 1967 

where 

JV^ =B weight in g of the residue, and 

W^ « weight in g of the material taken for the test. 

A-3. DETERMINATION OF FREE SULPHURIC ACID 

A-3.0 Outline of the Method — The free sulphuric acid is precipitated 
as barium sulphate which is washed, dried and weighed, and from this the 
percent by weight of free sulphuric acid present is determined. 

A-3.1 Reagents 

A-3.1.1 Barium Chloride Solution — 10 percent ( wiv ), approximately. 

A-3.1.2 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid— see IS : 265.1962*. 

A-3.2 Procedure — Accurately weigh about 10 g of the sample. Dissolve 
in water and make up to 250 ml in a volumetric flask. If necessary, filter 
this solution into a clean dry beaker through a dry filter paper and use the 
filtrate for the determination of acidity. Pipette 50 ml aliquot of the 
sample into a 600 ml beaker and add 200 ml of water. Then add 2 ml of 
concentrated hydrochloric acid and heat to boiling. Remove the solution 
from the source of heat and add 25 ml of barium chloride solution in a 
fine stream with constant stirring. Add the reagent in slight excess of that 
required for precipitation [ 10 ml will precipitate about 0*4 g of sulphates 
( as SO4 ) ]. Place the beaker in a steam-*bath for 4 hours and allow the 
precipitate to settle. If the supernatant liquid is still turbid after 2 hours, 
allow the solution to stand overnight. Check completeness of precipitation 
by adding one or two drops of barium chloride solution to the clear 
supernatant liquor. If more precipitate is formed, continue the addition 
of hot barium chloride solution until an excess has been added. 

Wash the precipitate by decantation with hot water till washings are 
free from chlorides. Filter the precipitate through a weighed sintered glass 
crucible ( G No. 4 ) or a Gooch crucible or a filter paper ( Whatman 
No. 42 or equivalent ). If the filtration has been done through a sintered 
glass crucible, dry the precipitate at 110** ± 5^*0. In the case of Gooch 
crucible, dry the precipitate and ignite it over a burner or in the muffle 
furnace at &W to IWC for half an hour. In the case of filter paper, 
after drying, the filter paper containing the precipitate is burnt out on a 
low flame and then ignited over a burner or m a muffle furnace at 600^ to 
700**C f6r half an hour. Cool in a desiccator and weigh to constant 
weight. 

•Specification for hydrochloric addU^JMM). 

6 



ISs4425-1967 
A<^.3 Calealadoii 

Free sulphuric acid, percent by weight „, ^ oin.nft 
( on molecular weight 98 ) « ^ \y 

where 

w s=s weight in g of barium sulphate, and 

W ss weight in g of the material taken for the test. 

APPENDIX B 

{ClcmeAA) 

SAMPLING OF p-NITROTOLUENE o-SULPHONIC ACID 

B-l. GENERAL REQpIREMENTS OF THE SAMPLING 

B-1.0 In drawing, preparing, storing and handling test samples, the 
following precautions and directions shall be observed. 

B-1.1 Samples shall be titken at a place protected from damp air, dust and 
soot. 

B-l«2 Sampling instrument shall be clean and dry. 

B-1.3 Precautions shall be taken to protect the samples, the material being 
sampled, the sampling instrument and the containers for samples, from 
adventitious contamination. 

B-1,4 To draw a representative sample, the contents of each container 
selected for sampling, shall be mixed as thoroughly as possible, by suitable 
means. ^ 

B-1.5 The samples shall be placed in a clean, dry and air*tight glass or 
other suitable containers on which the material has no action. 

B-l»6 The sample containers shall be of such a size that they are almost 
completely filled by the sample. 

8-1*7 Each sample container shall be sealed air-tight after filling and 
marked with fuU details of sampling, the date of sampling, year of manu« 
facture, and other important particulars of the consignment. 

B-1.8 Samples ihaU be stored in a cool and dry place. 

7 



ISt442S-liM»7 

B.2. SAMPLING INSTRUMENT 

B-2.1 The sampling instrument is a closed type sampling tube, undivided 
( Fig. 1 ) consisting of two concentric cylindrical tubes made of a metal 
which is not affected by the material being sampled ( preferably of stainless 
steel ) closely fitting into each other throughout their entire length so that 
one tube may be rotated within the other, a suitable handle being provided 
for the purp>ose. Longitudinal openings of about one third the circum- 
ference are cut in both tubes throughout their length. In one position the 
two openings coincide and admit the material into the hollow inner tube. 
By rotating the inner tube through 180'' the opening is tightly closed and a 
"core " of material being enclosed therein may be withdrawn. This type 
of sampler is usually provided with locking arrangement so that the tubes 
are held together in any desired position. The outer tube is provided with 
a sharp conical end to facilitate penetration but the base of the cone shall 
be closed so that no material is entrapped in this portion. The height of 
the cone shall be equal to its base diameter. The whole instrument shall 
be of sufficient length to penetrate an entire diagonal of the container being 
sampled. The diameter of the inner cylindrical space may vary from 
20 to 40 mm proportionately to the length. A length of 150 cm and a 
diameter of 30 nun caters for most needs. 

B-2.1.1 Use of Sampling Instrument — The instrument b inserted in closed 
position in an oblique direction till it touches bottom. The material is 
admitted by rotating and opening the tubes and finally closing them, with- 
drawing the sample in this process. In case the minimum quantity of 
material required for test from each container is more than the capacity of 
die instrument, further * cores ' shall be taken from different parts of the 
same container such that they are at least 75 mm in the case of kegs, 
drums, bags, etc, and 25 mm in the case of small containers, from the wall 
of the container. In all cases the instrument shall be inserted till it touches 
bottom so that an entire cross-section is withdrawn. 

B.3. SCALE OF SAMPLING 

B-3.1 Lot — In any consignment all the containers of the same size and 
drawn from the same batch of manufacture, shall constitute a lot. If a 
consignment is known to consist of different batches of manufacture or of 
different sizes of containers, the containers belonging to^the same batch and 
size shall be grouped together and each such group shall constitute a 
separate lot. 

B-3.2 Tests shall be conducted on each lot separately for ascertaining its 
conformity to the requirements of this specification. The number of 
containers to be chosen at random from the lot for this purpose shall 
depend on the size of the lot and shall be in accordance with ecu 1 and 2 
of Table 2. 



ISs4425-1967 




-30 mm 10 
SECTION XX 




SECTION XX 
AFTER ROTATION , 
OF INNER TUBE BY 180 




150 cm 



HANDLE 



LOCKING 
ARRANGEMENT 



INNER TUBE 




OUTER TUBE 



OPENING 



CONE COMPLETELY 
CLOSED 



Fto. 1 Closed Type Samfuno Tube, Undivided 



ISt4425.1967 



TABLE 2 SCALE OF SAMPLING 

Lot Size No. of Containers 

TO BE Selected 
JV n 

(1) (2) 

Up to 100 5 

101 „ 200 6 

201 „ 300 7 

301 ,, 400 8 

401 ,, 500 9 

501 and above 10 
Note — In case of very small lots all the containers shall be selected. 



B-3.3 The containers shall be chosen at random from the lot with the help 
of a suitable random number table. In case no such table is available^ 
the following procedure is recommended for use. 

Starting from any container from the lot, count them as 1, 2i 3v 
up to r and so on in one order where r is the integral part of ^AT/n ( JV 
being the number of containers in the lot and n being the number of 
containers to be selected). Every rth container thus counted shall 
be withdrawn to give samples for tests. 

IM. PREPARATION OF TEST SAMPLES 

B-4.1 From each of the containers selected in B%)*2, a small representative 
portion of the material from different parts of the container shall be drawn 
with the help of a suitable sampling instrument ( see B«2 )• 

B-4.2 Out of these portions a small but equal quantity of material shall 
be taken and mixed thoroughly to form a composite sample. The 
composite test sample shall be divided into three equal parts one for the 
purchaser, another for the supplier and the third to be used as a referee 
sample. 

B-4«3 The remaining portion of the material from eacli of the containers 
( see B-4.2 ) shsdl be divided into three equal parts, e^ch forming an 
individual sample. One set of individual samples representing the contain- 
ers sampled shall be marked for the purchaser, another for the supplier 
and the third to be used as a referee sample. 

BAA All the individual and composite samples shall be transferred to 
separate containers and shall be sealed and marked with full identification 
particulars given under B-lt?. 

10 



ISt4425-1967 

B-4.5 The referee test samples consisting of a composite sample and a set 
of n individual samples, shall bear the seals of both the purchaser and the 
supplier. These shall be kept at a place agreed to between the purchaser 
and the supplier to be used in case of any dispute between the two. 

B-5. NUMBER OF TESTS 

B-5.1 Assay shall be conducted on each of the individual samples. 

B-5.2 Tests for the determination of all other characteristics given under 
Table 1 shall be conducted on the composite samples. 

BS. CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

B-6.1 For Individual Samples — The lot shall be declared as conforming 
to the requirements of assay, if the test results satisfy the relevant require- 
ments given under Table 1. 

B-6.2 For Composite Samples — For declaring the conformity of a lot 
to the requirements of all other characteristics tested on the composite 
sample {see B-4.2 ), the test results for each of the characteristics shall 
satisfy the relevant requirements given in Table 1. 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

Dye Intermediates 

IS: 

2630-1964 Nitrobenzene, technical 

2740-1964 Sulphanilic acid, technical 

2741-1964 p-Naphthol 

2744-1964 a-Naphthylamine 

2833-1964 Aniline^ technical ... 

3229-1965 Naphthionic acid ( sodium salt ) 

3242-1965 ^Oxy naphthoic add ( BON ACID } ... 

3562-1965 ^Nitrotoluene» technical 

4265-1967 4-4' Diaminoitilbene 2-2' disulphonic acid 

4334-1967 o-Ghloroaniline ... 

4335-1967 m-Cfaloroaniline ... 

4336-1967 i>-Ghloroamllne ... 



Rf 
3-00 
300 
300 
3*00 
3-00 
2*50 
300 
4*50 
4*00 
5*00 
500 
5*50 



11 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

The Indian Standards Institution (ISI), which started function* 
in^ in 1947, is the national standards organization for India. Its 

Enncipal object is to prepare standards on national and international 
asis and promote their general adoption. 

The overall control of ISI, which is run and financed jointly as 
a non-profit making body by the Government and private 
enterprise, is exercised by the General Council, composed of represen- 
tatives of Central and State Governments; leading trade, scientific 
and technological organizations; and subscribing members. The 
Union Minister of Industry is the ex-officio President of ISI. 

The present technical activity of ISI is carried out through 8 
Division Councils for Agricultural and Food Products; Chemical; 
Civil Engineering; Consumer Products; Electrotechnical; Mechanical 
Engineermg; Structural and Metals; and Textile. All technical work 
relating to the formulation and revision of standards is done by 
committees appointed by and under the direction of their respective 
Division Councils. These conmiittees consist of experts drawn from 
manufacturing units, technical institutions, purchase organizations 
and other concerned bodies. 

To make available benefits of Indian Standards to the common 
man, ISI has introduced its Certification Marks Scheme under the 
Indian Standards Institution {Certification Marks) Act^ 1952, as 
amended by the Ammdmetit Act, 1961. According to this Act, 
quality goods conforming to Indian Standards can carry the ISI 
Cotification Mark. This Mark is a third-party guarantee of quality 
of marked goods. Licences to use the ISI Certification Mark are 
granted to manufacturers using reliable methods of quality control 
subject to overall inspection by ISI. 

In the international field, ISI represents India on the Inter- 
national Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International 
Electrotechnical Commission (lEC). ISO and lEC respectively link 
54 and 40 countries, and function through 118 and 58 technical 
committees; ISI participates in 83 technical conmiittees of ISO and 
all the technical comnuttees of lEC. The committees and subcom- 
mittees of lEC and ISO for which ISI holds the secretariat deal with: 
Electric Fans, Lac, Mica, Pictorial Markings for Handling of Goods, 
Liquid Flow Measurements in Open Channels, Procedures for Inter- 
conversion of Values, Spices and Condiments, and Stimulant Foods. 



PUBLICATIONS OF INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
INDIAN STANDARDS 

About 4 500 Indian Standards, broadly classified under the following 
main heads, have been issued so fan 

Agricultiire & Food Electrotechnlcal 

Chemical Mechanical Engineering 

GliHU Engineering Stroctaral & Metala 

Conamner Products Teactile 

Of these, the standards belonging to the Chemical Group fall under 
the following categories: 

Acidj Laboratory Glassware, Thermometers 

Adhesives and Related Apparatus 

Alcohols and Allied Product! Uc and Lac Products ^ , ^ 

Alkalis Leather, Leather Goods and Leather 

Brushware Dressings 

Ceramicware, Enamelware and Labora- pojc" and Allied Products 

torv Pftrrplkin Lubricants and Related Products 

C^lZr^^ulTrA. Metal Containers and Qosures 

CoZSd C^?"^'" ^ MwceUaneous) J^^^^^ p p^^^^^ ^^ Packaging 

CoalCarbonizltionPr^ Perfumery* Materials. Natural and 

Cosmetics and Toilet Goods Synthetic 

Dye Intermediates Petroleum and Petroleum Products 

Electroplarfng ChOTicals Petroleum Measurements 

Explosive and Pyrotechnic Photographic Chemicals 

Materials Plasti^ 

l^riihztn Polishes 

Footwear Printing Inks 

Glass and Glassware Rubber and Rubber Products 

Industrial Gases Soaps and Other Surface Active Agenti 

Inks and Allied Products Thermal Insulation Materials 

KATTHA, Vegetable Tans and AlUed Treated Fabrics 

Products Water and Water Treatment 

OTHER PUBUGATION8 

Rs 

ISI Bulletin ( Published Every Month ) „ ^ 

Single Copv ... 2-<^ 

Annual SubscriptioD ... ••• ... — -.«» *2 ~ u 

Annual Reports (from 194^49 Onwards) ... ... ••• a-^ to 3*!h> CMb 

Handbook ofISIPublications» 1967 ... ... - ^^ 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 

T«l«plionM 27 36 11.20 Telegmoi* M a na kaa nathn 

Branch 0/fictt 

TeBefnuna MsuasOBaaiiatlm _ , . .. *« ^^ 

534 Sardmr V«U«bliblial Patel Road Bombay 7 Tolepboiia 35 69 44 

5 Chowrlngheo Approacb Calcutta 13 „ ^iKS 

Indoatrial Eatate Admlsilstrativa Hyderabad 18 ,» 39229 

BuUdingy Sanatnagar . ^^ .. 

117/418 BSarvodayaNaga* Kanpnr m 37695 

54 G«aaral Pattwa Road Madras 2 •• 87278 



PriotMi ftt NMlkMBMl IViotenT&elbl 6» lodU 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 DECEMBER 1982 

TO 

15:4425-1967 SPECIFICATION FOR 
p-NITROTOLUENE-o-SULPHONIC ACID 

Alteration 

(First eoovp, pages 1 and 2, title) - Suibstltut* 
Ut« following for the existing title: 

^Indian Standard 
IFICATIOM FOR l»-inTR0T0LUEllE-3-SULFH0HIC ACID* 

Reprography Unit, ISI, Mev Delhi, India 



