IS 2663:1999

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

DESIGNOFBUILDINGS FORARCHIVESRECOMMENDATIONSRELATINGTOITS PRIMARYELEMENTS
( Second Revision )

First Reprint JUNE 1992

UDC

721.81.011.2:930.25

@I BIS 1990

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

January

1990

Price Group 4

Planning,

Byelaws

and Dimensional

Co-ordination

Sectional

Committee,

BDC

10

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Second Revision 7 February 1989, after the draft finalized Sectional Committee had been approved ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian by the Planning, Byelaws and Dimensional by the Civil Engineering Division Council. Standards on Co-ordination

The bulk of documents to be preserved for their historical, legal and administrative value is ever on the increase and government departments, universities, local bodies and many commercial firms do need expansion of existing archival facilities or establishments of new archives for this Archives have to satisfy the basic requirement that all the records that are received are purpose. housed, maintained and preserved properly. Further, archives also cater to all'types of materials which vary from one collection to another and also in their nature and sizes. Archives of all types are expanding at an enormous rat&. Increasing literacy and demand of old Since the completion of a new documents or records also necessitates expansion of archives. archives building takes several years, the stock to be accommodated on the opening day, therefore, Unless the building for the archives is is larger than what was estimated at the planning stage. planned to meet the futuristic requirements, it may result in an unscientific arrangement of records. This standard was first published in 1964 and revised in 1977. The present revision has been undertaken with a view to updating its contents. In this revision, building design and construction aspect has been incorporated covering fire safety. The site location requirements have been covered in detail. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result .ofa test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 2663 : 19439

Indian Standard

DESIGNOFBUILD.INGSFORARCHIVES~RECOMMENDATIONSRELATINGTOITS PRIMARYELEMENTS (Second Revision )
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the recommendations concerning primary elements in the design of buildings for archives for proper storing, maintenance and preservation of records on paper and parchment, maps, photographs, microfilms and likewise. 1.1.1 This standard does not cover requirements for buildings for storing motion picture films, sound recording and allied media. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The Indian Standards listed in Annex are necessary adjuncts to this standard. 3 LOCATION AND SITE A W The site shall not be in the immediate neighbourhood of any hazardous occupancy; c) The site shall abut on a road of not less than 12 m width; one end of the road shall join another road of the same width and the road shall not have a dead end; d) Adequate supply of water fire fighting purposes; and is assured for

e) A public fire brigade is within easy running distance from the site. 4 DESIGN 4.1 Archives enshrine the past history and cultural heritage. The architectural design of the building should, therefore, reflect this character of the institute.. 4.2 Design of the building should be modular to facilitate addition and alterations to the structure whenever required. 4.3 It shall provide adequate safety for stored materials against fire, flood, theft or pilferage and deteriorating agents, such as, fungus, pests, dirt, direct sunlight and extremes of temperature and humidity. 4.4 The site shall be large that: enough to ensure

3.1 Preservation of documents is an essential Environmental factors function of archives. which may adversely affect the preservation, of documents, such as, polluted atmosphere, subsoil water and termite infestation shall be taken into consideration while selecting the site. 3.2 Convenience and requirements of major users of archives material, such as, creating agencies and scholars, is a primary consideration for determining the location of the site. However, where scholars are the primary users, proximity to a good library, easy availability of city transport and pleasant surroundings are advantageous. 3.3 Since archival holdings are ever growing, the site and plans should provide for future It should preferably cater to future expansion. needs for 20 to 25 years.
NOTE - The rate of increase of permanent archives over the past five years will give a basis to know the future requirements.

a) adequate passageway ( not less than 6 m wide ) and clearances required for fire appliances to enter the premises is provided; the width.of main entrance shall be not less than 4'5 m; if an arch or covered gate is .constructcd, it shall have a clear head-e of not-less than 5 m;

3.4 The site selected for building should satisfy the following norms: a) Adequate separation (about 10 m) should preferably be available between the building and the other neighbouring buildings;

b)

separate open space is available to park cars .and/or other vehicles in addition to (a); and a clear passageway of 6 m width is maintained contiguous, to and around the buildings. ,'

4

IS 2663 : 1999 4.5 The design shall provide for adequate safety against termites in accordance with IS 6313 (Parts 1 to 3) : 1981. 4.6 It shall be functional; providing utilization of space and convenience ment of men and material. optimum of move6.2 Each floor of the archival building shall be at one single level to facilitate the movement of records trolley from one part to another. Thresholds shall not be provided anywhere inside the building; All external doors shall be provided either with threshold or some other device so as to make them rodent and dust proof. 6.2.1 The movement of the records trolley from one tier to another where there are three or more tiers in the stack room, shall be through lifts provided within the stack room with landing at every tier of the stack room and at every floor of the other adjacent rooms. 7 STACK ROOMS ROOMS AND MUNIMENT

4.7 A space of at least 2 m x 2 m shall be provided in front of the elevators for the movement of trolleys and other equipment likely to be used in the storage area. 4.8 Only one entrance shall be provided for staff and visitors. Space for enquiry and reception shall be provided near this entrance. A separate entrance shall be provided for receiving of records. 5 ACCOMMODATION ARCHIVAL BUILDINGS 5.1 Essential val buildings REQUIBED IN

accommodation required is as given below: rooms and muniment room, rooms, rooms,

in archi-

4 b) 4 4 4

Stack Record Repairs

receiving

7.1 Stack room, as far as possible, shall be located as a separate unit. At the same time, it shall have easy access from records, reception Requirements for or other servicing units. future extension shall be taken into account while designing the stack room. The stack room should preferably be oriented so as to run generally from east to west to avoid direct sun. 7.1.1 The floor of the repository shall be capnble of taking a live load of 1 000 kgf/m' for the records and storage equipment. 7.2 Gangways

and rehabilitation rooms, and

Research Room

for administrative

purposes.

NOTE-The essential arcas for the above rooms are given in 8 to 1'2 and include the necessary provision for storage areas as well.

5.1.1 The following accommodation, ._ _ quired, shall be provided:

where

re-

All gangways providing access to the stacks and near the wall shall be 1'5 m wide except that the gangway between the stacks shall not be less than 0'80 m wide. 7.3 The dimensions of the stack as follows ( see Fig. 2 ): a) Clear length room shall be

4 cl 4 4 f)

Exhibition

room, hall, and photo-duplicating room,

b) Conference
Microfilming Research Oral Rooms

laboratory, room,

1.6 ( n- 1 ) +3'80 number of rows assuming:

in metres where of double-faced

n is the racks,

history

for library, cell, and needed

1) the widths of main and cross gangways to be 1'5 and 0'80 m respectively, and 2) the depth of rack to be 0'80 m.

4
h)

Computer Any other purpose.

'
for specific

rooms

NOTE - One square metre of stack room area may be assumed to -provide 4 linear metres of shelf space.

5.2 Adequate provision should also be made for canteen, rest rooms for the readers and the staff, parking areas, first aid room; etc, where necessary. 6 CIRCULATION 6.1 The main movement of records by .a flow diagram (see Fig. 1 ). is illustrated 2

b)

Clear width Length of one row of racks,

d-3 m.

cl

Clear he@ht Floor to ceiling, 2'40 m.
m and

NOTE -The height of the rack is 2'20 allowance for bay guides is 0'20 1x1.

FUMIGATION

f
C

STACKS I
REPAIR ,

1

V

PUBL IC ATION
FIG. 1 TYPICAL FLOW DLWRAM FOR MOVEMENTOF ARCHIVES

8 RECORD RECEIVING ROOM 8.1 The record receiving room shall be near the
stack room. 8.2 One square metre for every three linear metres of records received at a time shall be provided subject to a minimum of 15 ms. Additional space for cleaning and fumigation of records shall be provided as given in 8.3. 8.3 Fumigation

9 REPAIR AND REHABILITATION 9.1 Repair and Rehabilitation Room
Proximity of repair and rehabilitation room to The area required the stack area is desirable. per worker is 5 ma subject to a minimum of 20 ms for the repair and rehabilitation room.

10 RESEARCH ROOM 10.1 Research room shall be so located that it can be conveniently approached From the main entrance; it shah also be, conveniently served from all parts of the stack room.
10.2 The walls and ceiling. of research rooms may be acoustically treated to minimize noise, and the floor shall have a noiseless covering. .3

8.3.1 Vacuum Fumigation
Vacuum fumigation chamber of 10 cubic metres capacity requires a space of 60 m2 for equip-' ment and handling of.documents. This chamber can fumigate 25 .to 30 linear metres of records in one operation.

cl*5

y.0.

LENGTH

OF RACKS --p

1.54

3

z
3

3

3
D~ouB LE SHE LVING RACKS

3

3

3

3

3

3

CROSS

GANGWAY

3

'
3
+
QD i, t

t
3
f

_

m .

MAIN

GANGWAY

W - Window Alk dimensions in millimetres.

`

FIG. 2

TYPICAL LAYOUT OF STACK

ROOM ( SCHEMATIC )

10.3' An area of 7 m' shall be .provided for each scholar.

provide for the following:

10.4 Enclosed space for temporary housing of records deposited or requisitioned by the scholars, shall also be .provided. 10.5 For reading of microfilms, cubides of 5 m2 area shall be provided. 11 ADMINISTRATIVE ACCOMMODATION accommodation shall

4 b) 4

Space for officers Space for administration staff Space for technical staff engaged in research pubbcations, description of records, etc Space for stores-

15 ms per person 5 ms per person 10 ma per person

11.1Adminiiative

4
4

As required

.IS 2663 : 1939 12 MICROFILMING AND PHOTO DUPLICATION ROOM 12.1 An area of not less than 40 m2 shall be provided for accommodating one microfilming For every camera and processing equipment. additional camera, a space of 15 m" will be required. 12.2 The location of the room should be such that it is free from the effects of vibrations caused by air-conditioning plants, heavy traffic, etc. 13 BUILDING DESIGN CONSTRUCTION AND compartmentation wall avoidable. In all such a self-closing fire/smoke resistance rating of not except for a door;if uncases, the door shall be check door with a iire less than one hour.

13.2.1.6 Windows in the side walls of the stack room shall be opposite each cross gangway. Each window- shall `.be provided with glazed shutters and shall be additionally protected with wire .fabric. The wire fabric shall be of suitable mesh to prevent squirrels, rats, etc, from passing through. The glazed shutter, when, fully open, shall not project into the gangway. 13.2.1.7 The stack room shall be so located that it is easily accessible from and proximate to every part of this archive. 13.2.1.8 Each stack room shall be at the same level as the rest of the floor served by it. The stack room shall not be provided with any threshold. 13.2.1;9 In multi-storeyed buildings where lift(s) may be required for vertical movement of books/records, the lift(s) shall be electrically operated with landing at each level in the stack room. The lift(s) shall have solid non-combustible doors with a fire resistance rating of 2 hours and shall not be used as passenger lift(s). Where passenger lifts are required, these shall be installed separately and away from the stack rooms. 13.2.1.10 Stack room shall be so designed that it cannot get flooded and rain water cannot enter it through windows, ventilators, etc. The room shall be damp-proof. 13.2.1.11 All services, such as a lighting and electrical fittings, air-conditioning, sound insulation, etc, as may be necessary, shall. be considered at the initial stages of design of the archive and its building. 13.2.2 O&r Rooms

13.1 Building design and construction should take into account the following aspects specially to ensure'fire safety at the design and construction stage itself. For details of fire protection, reference shall be made to IS 11460 : 1985. 13.2 Building Design

13.2.1 Stack Room This is the most important and valuable feature It is, therefore, essential that of any archive. it is suitably compartmented, both horizontally and vertically, to ensure that fire in any compartment cannot spread to other compartments. 13.2.1.1 Stack room shall be so oriented avoid direct sun through windows, etc. as to

13.2.1.2 Relative position of each stack room, &-a-z& other rooms or buildings, shall be such that any fire outside the stack room cannot spread to it. As far as possible, stack room should be separated from administrative room. 13.2.1.3 Where the stack room has several tiers of racks, each tier shall be separated from the succeeding one by a non-combustible floor. The intervening floor shall not have any aperAny arrangement where the ture in' it. book racks extend through. several floor levels and the stack floors are merely platforms which provide a walkway through the stacks and result in slot-like openings, between the stacks and the walk-ways, shall be strictly avoided to prevent rapid uninterrupted upward spread of a possible fire. 13.2.1.4 Each stack ,room shall be divided into compartments so that no single compartment shall have a floor area exceeding 480 m2. Where possible, the area of each compartment may be further reduced. 13.2.1.5 Each compartmentation wall shall entirely be of non-combustible construction with a fire resistance rating of not less than two hours. No opening shall be provided. in any 5

Other rooms may be located according to the convenience of the -user in relation to day-today working. Some examples are given below. 13.2,2.1 Cubicles, rooms for group study, committee room, et<, may be placed in a separate wing or on a separate floor. 13.2.2.2 Exhibition room may be combined with the entrance lobby or may be placed as close to it as possible. 13.2.2.3 Rooms in proximity of or directly communicating with the catalogue room and the stack room shall be filled with self-closing fire/smoke check doors not less. than 1 hour rating.

13.2.2.4 All windows and ventilators in the rooms accessible from outside shall be provided with wire fabric to avoid pilferage. 13.2.2.5 Canteen for the readers and the staff shall preferably be placed in an independent building well separated from other buildings. Where this is not possible, the canteen kitchen shall be isolated from the adjoining rooms by fire resisting walls of not less than 2 hours rating, fitted with self-closing fire/smoke check doors of not less than 1 hour rating. In any case, the canteen shall not be placed in proximity of the catalogue and the stack rooms. 13.2.3 Compound

including the floor, roof, lining, surface finish, doors, and windows. b) Each compartment/room for storage of books/records shall be effectively segregated from other compartments/rooms and from other portions of the building, both laterally and vertically. For this purpose, openings between floors in multi-storeyed buildings shall be protected so that a fire on one floor cannot spread to the floors above or below. Stairways, lifts and cable/ pipe shaft shall be properly enclosed or protected so that openings do not detract from the ability of the 6oor assembly to resist the passage of fire. The separating walls/enclosures, including enclosures for all vertical openings, such as, stair-walls, shall have a fire resistance of not less than that of Type I construction, as specified in the National Building Code of India (1983), Part IV Fire protections,.with all openings protected by fire/smoke check doors of not less than 1 hour` fire resistance. c) Floors/stagings in storeyed buildings or specially built records facilities shall not be grated- or perforated because such construction aids the rapid vertical spread of fire. d) Roofs of buildings/compartments housing books/records and floors of storeyed records storage facilities shall be leakproof. In the latter case, adequate drainage shall be provided at all floor levels to prevent accumulation of water during fire fighting operations. 14 SANITARY REQUIREMENTS

A compound with adequate open space all round the buildings shall be provided to ensure adequate separation of buildings from the adjoining property and adequate space for internal roads, car park, water sources for fire fighting and an incinerator< 13.2.3.1 Entry gate to the compound shall have a clear width of not less than 4'5 m. 13.2.3.2 P,aved `access-ways shall be provided within the compound to enable vehicles to have access to parking areas and fire appliances to have access to water sources and various buildings in the complex. Each of these accessways shall be not less than 5 m in width. Turnings shall be widened and .hand standing(s) provided, where necessary, to ensure easy manoeuverability of fire appliances. 13.2.3.3 Parking area for cars and/or other vehicles shall -be placed well away ( not less than 6 m clear ) from any building. 13.2.3.4 Location of the incinerator `shall. be well away from any building or adjacent property. Where necessary, a suitable fire resisting enclosure of suitable height shall be provided for the incinerator to ensure its fire separation from the buildings. 13.2.3.5 Paved surface shall be provided up to a distance of3 m around each building so as to prevent the growth of grass or other vegetation in that area. 13.3 Building Construction

14.1 The installation and maintenance of sanitary appliances shall conform to IS 2064 : 1973. 14.2 Water closet_+ urinals, wash-basins and other similar facthties shall be provided in accordance with the requirements laid down for a library in IS 1172 : 1983. 15 LIGHTING 15.1 Lighting shall be provided IS 2672 : 1966. 15.2 Stack Room as given in

Building/compartment of `a building for housing books/valuable vital and permanent records shall have a fire resistance equal to not less than that of ype I construction, as specified in IS 1642 : % 1 60 and shall comply with the following minimum requirements: a) Use of combustible materials shall be avoided in the construction of the building/Compartment or any portion thereof, 6

At least two independent circuits for lighting, so arranged as to supplement each other, throughout the stack room shall be provided. 15.2.1 All wiring for the purpose of lighting or otherwise shall be enclosed in conduits. The wiring shall be done `in accordance with IS 732 (Part 2 ) : 1983.

iS 2663 : 1989
15.2.2 The main control located outside. the stack accessible position.

switches shall be room in an easily

per hour. 16.3 Passage to air-conditioned through a vestibule. 17 NOISE CONTROL stacks shall be

15.2.3 An automatic cutout device for switching off the circuit in case of short-circuiting should be provided as an added safety measure. 16 AIR-CONDITIONING VENTILATION AND

'

air-conditioning of the 16.1 Uninterrupted archival buildings throughout the year for maintaining optimum storage conditions for preservation of the collection is desirable. and 16.1.1 The design conditioning equipment IS 660 : 1963. installation of airshall conform to

17.1 Internal noise consisting generally of conversation, frictional noise ( chairs scrapping the floor and the impact of heels on hard floor) and mechanical noises ( from book hoists and typewriters ) shall be controlled effectively, for example;by using noise absorbing materials in ceiling, walls, floors and partitioning surfaces. 17.1.1 All legs of movable furniture should be nrovided with rubber shoes. The book trolleys ihould be with rubber tyres. 17.2 The maximum acceptable library should be 40 to 45 dB. noise level in a noise _ shall

16.2 Where air-conditioning is not provided, provision shall be made for ventilation and movement of air in all parts of the stack room providing for a minimum of three air changes

17.3 For de!nils of methods for achieving reduction and sound insulation, reference be made to IS 1950 : 1962.

ANNEX

A

( Clause 2.1)
LIST IS NO. 660 : 1963 732 (Part
Title

OF REFERRED

INDIAN

STANDARDS Title Code of lighting practice for library

IS a-0. refri2672 : 1966 6313 (Part

Safety code for mechanical geration (revised)

2 trical ) : 1983wiring Code installations: of practice for Part elec-2 Design and" construction revision ) ( second

1 ) : 1981 Code of practice for antitermite measures in buildings: Part 1 Constructional measures (first revi&n ) 2 ) : 1981 Code of pratice for anti: termite measures in buildings: Part 2 Pre-constructional chemical treatment measures (Jut reviJion )

1172 : 1983

Code water tation

of basic requirements for supply, drainage and sani( t..ird revision )

6313 (Part

1642 : 1989

Code of pratice for fire safety of buildings ( general ): Details of construction (jrst revision ) Code of practice for sound insulation of non-industrial buildings Code of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of sanitary appliances (jirst revision )

1950 : 1962 2064 : 1973

6313 ( Part 3 ) : 1981 Code of practic; fyda;.itermite measures in ui i : Part 3 Treatment for existing buildings (first revision ) 11460: 1985 Code of practice for fire safety of libraries and archives

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. -_~ --__-

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardizatidn, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No pait of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they at-e in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the foIlswing reference: Dot : No. BDC 10 (4392 )

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

F

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters :

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 311 01 31 331 13 75 I 37 86 62 53 38 43 235 02 16 6 32 92 95

Regional. 05ces

:

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 &stern
: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 3X;CHANDIGARH Western 160036

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113
: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East )

BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, F'ARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Reprography Unit,.BIS, New Delhi, India

