(Reaffirmed 2004)

METHODS FOR PREPARATION OF LABORATORY TEST 3AMPLES AND TEST SPECiMENS OF TEXTikE MATERIALS FOR CHEMICAL TESTING
Chemical
@iairman Db P. @. MEETA

Methods of Test Sectional

Committee,

TDC
Research

5
Associa-

Representing
Ahmadabad Textile Industry's tion, Ahmadabad

Members
DR V. G: AQNIHO~I Saab P. K. Bnsw National Peroxide Limited, Bombay Directorate General of Supplies ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi & Disposals

Ssar M. L. BEHRANI

Ministry of Defcnce ( R & D ) SHRI AoK. SIN~H ( Afternate ) Cotton Technological Research DR S. M. BETRABET Laboratory ( ICAR ), Bombay DR S. N. PANDEY ( Altarnate ) Silk & Art Silk Mills' Association, Bombay Sam R. K. BEATNAQAR Ahmadabad Manufacturing & Calico Printing Co Scar B. V. BHATT Ltd, Ahmadabad SHRI K. G. SHAH ( Altmzute ) The Silk & Art Silk Mills' Pesearch Association, DR ( KUMARI ) M. D. BEAVSAR Bombay Superintendence Company of India ( Private ) Ltd, SERI B. B. CHAKRAVERTI Calcutta Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay SERI K. S. DESIXAN The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay SHRI M. D. DIXIT Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, DR A. S. DUTT Cal&tta Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SERI S. P. KAPUR SHRI DEER RAJ YADAVA ( Alternate ) Textile Auxiliaries Manufacturers* Association, SHRI K. B. KULKARNI Bombay Textiles Committee, Bombay QR B. R. MANJUNATRA DR ( SHRIMATI ) G. R. PEALOUYANI ( Alternate )

S~irr A. K. SAI~AL ( Altcrnutc )

(
INDIAN

Contind

0R pege 2 )

@ Copyrighr 1919 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infriagemenr of copyright under the said &I.

IS : 9022 - 1979
( Continued from page 1 ) Members
SHRI S.S. MAVI

Representing Directorate of Industries, Chandigarh Government of Punjab,

SHR~ N. S. SIDHTJ ( Alternate ) SHRI S. M. MISTRY

Association of Merchants and Manufacturers of Textile Stores & Machinery, India, Bombay All India Handloom Board, Bombay SHRI R. S. PRAYAU Binny Limited, Madras SRRI R. RAMAKRISHNAN SHRI K. G. KRISHNASWAMY ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta REPRESENTATIVE The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay SHRI N. S. SARAIYA Raipur Manufacturing Co Ltd, Ahmadabad SRRI JAE~NADAS K. SHAH The Millowners' Association, Bombay SHRI K. M. SHAH Ahmadabad Textile Industry's Research AssociaSHRI R. c. SHAH tion, Ahmadabad Crescent Dyes & Chemicals Limited, Calcutta SHRI K. S. SRINIVASAN \ SHRI R. S. BAJEKAL ( Alternate 1 Ahmadabad Textile Industry's Research AssociaSRRI S. S. TRIVADI tion, Ahmadabad Director General, ISI ( Ex-oficio Member ) SHRI S. M. CHAKRABORTY, Director ( Tex ) Secretary
SHRI D. R. KOHLI Deputy Director ( Tex ), ISI

IS:9022

-1979

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR PREPARATION OF LABORATORY TEST SAMPLES AND TEST SPECIMENS OF TEXTILE MATERtALS FOR CHEMICAL TESTING

0.

FOREWOKD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 10 January 1979, after the draft finalized by the Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 0.2 This standard prescribes the methods in which the laboratory test samples are obtained by the combination of numerous small portions each drawn from a different part of the laboratory bulk sample. Therefore, any results obtained on test specimens from these samples will estimate the mean level in the laboratory bulk sample but will not indicate the variability of level from portion to portion of the laboratory Consequently it is appropriate to use this method in cases bulk sample. where it is desired to estimate the bulk composition, for example, the proportions ofdifferent fibres in a blend, but it is not appropriate in cases where variability is important, for example, in the determination ofpH where the local value is significant, or in the determination of fungicides, where a high value in one area of the material does not compensate for Also, it may not be appropriate for use in deterlow value elsewhere. mination of commercial mass values. 0.3 This standard is generally based on IS0 5089-1977 Textiles Preparation of laboratory test samples and test specimens for chemical testing, issued by the International Organization for Standardization. 0.4 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rcuirrd).

3

IS : 9022 - 1979 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies methods of obtaining laboratory test samples of textile materials from laboratory bulk samples taken from a bulk source and gives general directions for the preparation of test specimens of convenient size for chemical tests. 1.2 No provision for sampling is assumed that the laboratory procedure and is representative 2. DEFINITIONS 2.0 " For th e purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall from the bulk source is described since it bulk sample has been selected by a suitable of the bulk source.

PPlY *
be judged on for example, from a partibales of raw

2.1 Bulk Source - That quantity of material which is to the basis of one series of test results. This may comprise, all the material in one delivery of cloth; all the cloth woven cular beam; a consignment of yarn; a bale or a group of fibre. 2.2 Laboratory Bulk to be representative of bulk sample should be of the bulk source and

Sample - That portion of the bulk source taken the whole. The size and nature of the laboratory sufficient to overcome adequately the variability to facilitate ease of handling in the laboratory.

2.3 Laboratory Test Sample - That portion of the laboratory bulk The size and nature sample from which specimens are taken for testing. of the laboratory test sample should be sufficient to overcome adequately the variability of the laboratory bulk sample. 2.4 Test individual Specimen test result. The portion of material required to give an

3. PRINCIPLE 3.1 The laboratory test sample is taken so that it is representative of the laboratory bulk sample. The test specimens are taken from the laboratory test sample in such a way that each of them is representative of the laboratory test sample. 4. SAMPLING 4.1 Non-oriented OF LOOSE Fibres kg of loose test sample equal size, of required FIBRES

4.1.1 If the laboratory bulk sample consists of less than 5 Obtain the laboratory fibre, spread it out in an even layer. by taking at random a minimum of 100 tufts of approximately the total mass being sufficient to give a laboratory test sample size.

IS : 9022 - 1979
4.1.2 If the laboratory bulk sample is greater than 5 kg, divide it into a number of equal portions, and take an equal number of tufts of suitable mass from each portion such that the total number from all portions exceed 100. 4.1.3 Pretreat the laboratory test sample, if required, by the test method to be used. From the laboratory test sample remove at random, ,using forceps, small tufts of approximately equal mass to give a test specimen of the mass required. 4.2 Oriented Fibres ( Card Webs, Slivers, Rovings ) - From randomly selected parts of the laboratory bu!k sample cut not less than After applying ten cross sections each weighing approximately 1 g. pretreatment, if necessary, lay the cross-sections together and obtain the test specimen by cutting through them so as to take a portion of each of the ten lengths. 5. SAMPLING 5.1 Yarn OF YARN or in Hanks

in Packages

5.1.1 If the number of packages in the laboratory bulk sample is 25 or less, sample all the packages. Ifthe number exceeds 25, take 25 packages at random. If the linear density of the yarn, expressed in tex, is t, and the number of packages taken from the laboratory bulk sample is n, the length of yarn from each package to give a 10 g laboratory test sample is: 10s flxt cm skein

if n x t is ,high, for example, more than 2 000, wind a heavier and cut it across in two places to make a tow of suitable mass.

5.1.2 Withdraw the appropriate continuous length from each package either by winding skeins of the same number of turns on a wrap reel ( see N'ote ) or by some other means. Unite the length side by side either as a single skein or as a tow to form the laboratory test sample, ensuring that there are equal lengths from each package in the skein or tow. Pretreat the laboratory test sample, if required, by a suitable method and ensure that the ends of any sample in the form of tow are securely tied before treatment.
NOTE If the packages can be mounted in a convenient creel a number can be wound simultaneously.

5.1.3 Take specimens of the appropriate mass from the laboratory test sample by cutting a bunch of threads of equal length from the skein or tow and comprising all the threads in it, ensuring that test specimens are taken from a place remote from the tie bands. 5

IS:9022

-1979

5.2 Yarn on Warp
5.2.1 Take the laboratory test sample by cutting a length from the end of the warp, not less than 20 cm long and comprising all the yarns in the warp except the selvedge yarns, which are rejected. Tie the bunch of threads together near one end. If the sample is too large for any required pretreatment, divide it into two or more portions, each portion tied Reunite the portions after the together separately for pretreatment. pretreatment. 5.2.2 Take a test specimen by cutting a suitable length from the laboratory test sample from the end remote from the tie band, and comFor warp of .N threads of tex t, the prising all the threads in the warp. length of a specimen of mass 1 g is: 105 X-G6. SAMPLING OF FABRIC Sample Consisting of a Single cm

6.1 From a Laboratory Bulk Cutting Up to 1 m in Length

6.1.1 Cut a diagonal strip from corner to corner and remove the selvedges. For a laboratory test sample of X g the area of the strip required is: Xx 104

M
where

cm2 per square metre. in centimetres across its specim_cn_s the layers from each

M is the mass of the cloth in grams

6.1.2 This area divided by the length of the diagonal will give the required width of strip in centimetres.
bnath `___3`__ into __--- four ----

subjecting the strip to any pretreatment, cut it enual lenpths~_and sunerimnose them. Take test -l_-._ _---u~ _.~~_~ -_~_--___~--_~~_____ from any part of the layered material by cutting through all in such a way that each specimen comprises an equal length layer.

6.1.3

After

6.2 From a Laboratory Bulk Sample Consisting of a Single Cutting More Than 1 m in Length - Take two full-width cuttings, one from each end of the laboratory bulk sample and not more than 1 m long. Cut both into two equal portions by a cut parallel to the warp direction and mark the right-hand and left-hand halves of each. Put the right-hand half of one cutting to the left-hand half of the other, with the cut edges together, and cut a diagonal strip from the lower corner of one cutting to the upper corner of the other, after removing the selvedges. Proceed as in 6.1, treating the two half-width diagonal strips as if they were a full-width continuous strip. 6

ISt90!22-1979 6.3 From a Laboratory Bulk Sample Consisting of Several Cuttings - Treat each cutting separately as described in 6.1 or 6.2 and
give results 6.4 for each cutting in the test report.

From a Fabric with a Design Arising of Threads

from the Distribution

6.4.1 Ensure, if possible, that there is an integral number of complete repeats of the design in the laboratory bulk sample and proceed as in 6.1 unless the laboratory bulk sample so obtained is more than 1 m in length in which case proceed as in 6.2. Wh ere the pattern repeat is large and/ the entire strip should be cut into small fragments, or asymmetric, thoroughly mixed and then sampled by the procedure indicated in 4.1.
6.4.2 Where the laboratory bulk sample does not contain complete repeat of the design, report this under 8.1(b). 7. SAMPLING at least one

OF MADE-UP

ARTICLES
of a complete made-up

7.1 The laboratory bulk sample normally consists article or a representative part of such an article.

7.2 Determine whether all parts of the article are of similar composition; if so, treat the whole article as a laboratory bulk sample, and take a laboratory test sample representative of the laboratory bulk sample. 7.3 If parts of the article are of different composition, separate the parts and treat each as the laboratory bulk sample and take a laboratory test sample representative of the laboratory bulk sample. 8. TEST REPORT

4 b) 4 4

A statement that this standard, The The

the material

was sampled

in accordance ),

with

size of the laboratory

bulk sample test sample,

( see atso 6.4.2 and

The size of the laboratory

size of the test specimen.

7

INDIAN ON

STANDARDS

&EmICAL WETHODS OF TEST ANALYSIS OF FIBBE MIXTURES

FOR QUANTITATWE

CHEMICAL

IS: 667-1955 1564-1962 1889 Simple methods for identification of common commercial analysis of binary textile fibrer Method for quantitative chemical triacetate and certain other fibres Method for quantitative chemical cellulose fibres and cotton: 1889 ( Part I )-1976 1889 ( Part II )-I976 2095-1962 20061978 2176.1962 2177-1962 2727-1964 3416-1966 3421-1966 6503-1972 6504-1972 6570-1972 Cadoxcn mixtures of cellulose

analysis of binary mixtures of regenerated

Sodium zincate method (Jirsr rcision ) solvent method mixtures of polyamide of protein

Method for quantitative chemical analysis of binary fibres and certain other fibres Method for quantitative chemical analyris fibres and certain other fibres (Jrsf revision )

of binary

mixtures

Method for quantitative chemical analysis of binary mixtures cellulose acetate and certain other fibres

of secondary

Method for'quantitative chemical analysis of mixtures of cellulose triacetate and secondary cellulose acetate fibres Method for quantitative sisal fibres chemical analysis of binary mixtures of manila and of polyester fibrcs

Method for quantitative chemical analysis of mixtures with cotton or regenerated cellulose Method for quantitative certain other fi.bres

chemical analysis of binary mixtures of acrylic and mixtures mixtures mixtures of protein of viscose and

Method for quantitative chemical analysis of ternary fibres, nylon 6 or nylon 6'6, and certain other fibres Method for quantitative chemical rayon, cotton and protein fibres Method for quantitative animal fibres chemical analysis of ternary analysis of binary

of jute

