anda HAF IS 14944 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


vied ference ATA 
uza — utter aft 


( Teel TREAT ) 


Surgical Dressings — Methods 
of Test 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 11.040.30; 59.080.01 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 7 


Technical Textiles for Medtech Applications Sectional Committee, TXD 36 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Technical Textiles for Medtech Applications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textiles Division 
Council. 


This standard was first published in 2001. The first revision has been made in the light of experience gained since 
its publication and to incorporate the following major changes: 


a) Index for various test method has been specified. 


b) Test method for ether soluble substances (method II), weight of ointment, assay of chlorhexidine 
acetate, setting time, determination of tensile strength and determination of adhesive strength have 
been specified. 


Protective coverings for wounds are called dressings. These are placed directly on to wounds and may be used 
to control bleeding, to absorb secretions or to prevent contamination by bacteria or foreign material such as dirt. 


Dressings should be large enough to cover a wound completely. They should be sterile so that they do not introduce 
bacteria that could cause infection. A dressing should also be absorbent in order to prevent accumulation of sweat, 
otherwise the skin around the wound becomes moist and soft, thus encouraging infection. These are of various 
types, for example, adhesive bandages, which consist of absorbent pads held in place. They are commonly used 
to protect small wounds. Nonstick dressings consist of a non-adherent layer of perforated polyethylene or viscose 
with an impregnated gauge pad backing. Improvised dressings which are used in an emergency almost any clean 
dry, and absorbent materials may be used to cover wound. 


In view of the fact that a large number of surgical dressings are used in the country by the doctors as well as 
consumers, the committee decided to formulate a standard covering methods of test for various types of surgical 
dressings. The standard covers test methods for both adhesive and non-adhesive types of dressings. The standard 
gives provision for conducting various tests for minimum breaking load, elasticity, extensibility, adhesiveness, 
water vapour permeability, waterproofness, absorbency, content of antiseptics, etc. 


There is no ISO/IEC standard on the subject. This standard has been prepared based on the information provided/ 
data provided in the British Pharmacopoeia. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 14944 : 2020 


Indian Standard 
SURGICAL DRESSINGS — METHODS OF TEST 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the methods of test for various 
types of surgical dressings. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards. 


IS No. Title 
3073: 1967 Assessment of surface roughness 
3689: 1966 Conversion factors and conversion 


tables for yarn counts 
3 STANDARD TEST ATMOSPHERE 


Unless specified otherwise, the standard test atmosphere 
shall be a temperature of 27 + 2 °C and a relative 
humidity of 65 +5 percent. 


4 CONDITIONING FOR TESTING 


The materials to be tested for weights, areas, threads per 
stated length, minimum breaking load and absorbency 
are unwrapped, opened out or unwound and subjected 
to standard test atmosphere (see 3) for not less than 
24 h immediately before testing unless specified 
otherwise, and shall be tested in the same atmosphere. 


5 QUALITY OF REAGENTS 
Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and distilled 
or deionized water shall be employed in tests. 

NOTE — ‘Pure chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do not 


contain impurities which affect the results of analysis. 


6 TESTS METHODS 


6.1 Fibre Identification 
6.1.1 Cotton 


a) When examined under microscope, each fibre 
shall be seen to consist of a single cell, up to about 
4 cm long and up to 40 um wide, in the form of 
a flattened tube with thick and rounded walls and 
often twisted. 


b) Treat with iodinated zinc chloride solution. The 
fibres shall become violet. 


c) The fibres shall be soluble in sulphuric acid 
(66 percent). They shall swell uniformly and except 
for the contents of the lumen, finally dissolve in 
ammoniacal copper oxide solution. They shall be 
insoluble in 1.25 M sodium hydroxide. 


d) To 0.1 g, add 10 ml of zinc chloride solution, heat 
to 40 °C and allow to stand for 2.5 h, shaking 
occasionally. The fibres shall not dissolve. 


6.1.2 Polyacrylonitrile 


a) When examined under a microscope, the fibres 
shall be seen to be twisted ribbons of uniform 
width and thickness or cylinders of uniform 
width. In cross-section, the former are reniform or 
dumb-bell shaped and the latter are approximately 
circular. 

b) When examined under a microscope, the fibres 
shall be clearly visible in water or liquid paraffin 
but not easily visible in cedarwood oil or a liquid 
of similar refractive index. 


c 


wm 


The fibres shall dissolve in dimethyl-formamide 
at 90 to 95 °C within 5 min. They shall be 
insoluble in ammoniacal copper oxide solution, in 
cold acetone and in boiling xylene. 


6.1.3 Polyamide 6 


a) Heat 50 mg with 0.5 ml of 7 M hydrochloric acid 
in a sealed glass tube at 110 °C for 18 h and allow 
to stand for several hours. No crystals shall be 
produced. 


b) To 50 mg, add 10 ml of 7 M hydrochloric acid. 
The material shall disintegrate in the cold and 
dissolve completely within a few minutes. 


c) The material shall dissolve in a 70 percent (m/m) 
solution of anhydrous formic acid. 


6.1.4 Polyamide 6/6 


a) In contact with a flame, the material shall melt and 
burn, forming a hard globule of residue and shall 
give off a characteristic odour resembling that of 
celery. 


b) Place 50 mg in an ignition tube held in the 
vertical position and heat gently until thick 
fumes are evolved; when the fumes fill the tube, 
withdraw it from the flame and insert a strip of 


IS 14944 : 2020 


nitrobenzaldehyde paper. A violet-brown colour 
shall be produced slowly on the paper and fade 
slowly in air; it shall disappear immediately on 
washing with | M sulphuric acid. 


To 50 mg, add 10 ml of 7 M hydrochloric acid. 
The material shall disintegrate in the cold and 
dissolve within a few minutes. 


d) The material shall not dissolve in an 
80 percent (m/m) solution of anhydrous formic 
acid. 


6.1.5 Polyester 


a) When heated in dimethylformamide and in 
1, 2-dichlorobenzene, the fibre shall dissolve with 
difficulty. 


b) To 50 mg, add 10 ml of 7 M hydrochloric acid. 
The fibre shall remain intact even after prolonged 
immersion. 


6.1.6 Rubber 


Treat carefully a few small pieces with a little carbon 
tetrachloride in an evaporating dish, allow to swell, add 
0.2 ml of bromine, allow to stand for 2 min, add 1 g of 
phenol and remove the carbon tetrachloride by heating 
on a water-bath. The pieces shall be stained blue to 
violet-red. 


Cc 


wa 


6.1.7 Viscose 


When the term viscose is used in tests for fibre 
identification, it means bright viscose or matt viscose 
as appropriate. 


6.1.7.1 Bright viscose 


a) When examined in dry state under a microscope, 
the fibres shall be seen to be of a uniform width 
with many longitudinal parallel lines distributed 
unequally over the width. In waddings, the 
end-cuts are more or less straight. In cross-section, 
they are approximately circular or elliptical, with 
a diameter of about 10 to 20 um; the surface of the 
fibre shall be seen to be uneven or crenated. 


b) When examined under a microscope, the fibres 
shall be clearly visible in chloral hydrate solution 
and in lactophenol, almost invisible in cresol and 
invisible when viewed between crossed polars in 
the orthogonal position. 


Treat with iodinated zinc chloride solution. The 
fibres shall become violet. 


c 


wa 


d) Dissolve the residue obtained in the test for 
sulphated ash (see 6.1.8) in 5 ml of sulphuric 
acid with slight warming, allow to cool and 
add carefully 0.2 ml of hydrogen peroxide 
solution (10 vol). The solution shall not become 


orange-yellow. 


wa 


Soak in iodine solution for a few minutes, remove 
the excess of reagent with filter paper and add 


e 


wm 


0.05 ml to 0.1 ml of sulphuric acid (66 percent). 
The fibres shall be stained blue. 


f) Treat with a 1.0 percent (m/v) solution of 
phloroglucinol in ethanol (90 percent) followed by 
hydrochloric acid. The fibres shall not be coloured 
red. 


The fibres shall be soluble in sulphuric acid 
(66 percent). They shall swell and finally dissolve 
in ammoniacal copper oxide solution. They shall 
be insoluble in formic acid and almost insoluble in 
1.25 M sodium hydroxide. 


To 0.1 g, add 10 ml of zinc chloride solution, heat 
to 40 °C and allow to stand for 2.5 h, shaking 
occasionally. The fibres shall dissolve completely. 
6.1.7.2 Matt viscose 


Comply with the tests for identification described in 
6.1.7.1 with the following modifications: 


a 


8 


h 


— 


a) and b) When examined under a microscope, the 
fibres shall be seen to contain numerous granular 
particles with average diameters of 0.25 to 1 um. 


b) The solution shall become orange-yellow after the 
addition of the hydrogen peroxide solution. 


c) The granular particles shall remain undissolved. 


6.1.8 Wood Pulp 


a) When examined under a microscope, the fibres 
shall show the characteristics of the timber, 
usually coniferous, from which the wood pulp has 
been prepared, as follows: 


1) Coniferous woods 


Detached tacheids, transparent and laterally 
distended; bordered pits indistinct and may 
appear as rounded, somewhat jagged holes; 
distinct lattice-like striations may be present; 
fibre ends are broadly rounded and swollen. 


2) Broad-leaved woods 


Generally similar to coniferous woods but 
vessels show numerous well-preserved pits; 
wall thickness tends to be uneven and may be 
pierced by slit-like pores. 
b) The fibres shall swell and finally dissolve 
in ammoniacal copper oxide solution, some 
developing spherical swellings. 


Soak in iodine solution for a few minutes, remove 
the excess of reagent with filter paper and add 
0.05 ml to 0.1 ml of sulphuric acid (66 percent). 
The fibres shall be stained blue. 


6.1.9 Wool 


a) When examined under a microscope, each hair 
shall be seen to be composed of a cuticle of 
imbricated, flattened, epithelial scales and a wide 
cortex of nucleated spindle shaped fibres and may 
have a narrow medulla of polyhedral or rounded 


c 


wm 


cells. The free projecting edges of the epithelial 
scales are directed towards the apex of the hair 
and give rise to numerous irregular transverse 
markings on the surface of the hair. 


b 


wm 


The hairs shall be insoluble in sulphuric acid 
(66 percent) at 20 °C; soluble in 1.25 M sodium 
hydroxide at 100 °C; insoluble in but coloured 
blue by ammoniacal copper oxide solution. 


c 


<~ 


Treat with trinitrophenol solution. The hairs shall 
be stained yellow. 


6.2 Yarn Numbers 


Yarn are normally numbered in the Tex system. The tex 
number is the weight, in g, of 1 000 m of yarn. Agreed 
rounded values and their equivalents in traditional 
counts and numbering systems are given in IS 3689. 
The sectional count of rubber threads is given by the 
value of its cross-sectional area, expressed in square 
millimetres, multiplied by 1 000. 

NOTE — The sectional count corresponds to the tex count 

for a nominal density of 1 mg/m? (= 1 g/cm’). The use of the 

sectional count is recommended. 


6.3 Threads per Stated Length 


6.3.1 Unstretched 
Method I 


Determine the number of threads over a distance of 
10 cm, or if this is impracticable, over the greatest 
distance allowed by the material being examined, If 
the size or number of units available permits, repeat the 
determination at not less than four other independent 
positions selected as being representative of the material 
being examined and calculate the average number of 
threads per 10 cm, unless otherwise specified in the 
standard. 


Method IT 


Determine the number of threads over a distance 
of 2.5 cm by means of a suitable instrument. If the 
size or number of units available permits, repeat the 
determination at not less than four other independent 
positions selected as being representative of the material 
being examined and calculate the average number of 
threads per 10 cm, unless otherwise specified in the 
standard. 


Method HI 


Determine the total number of warp threads in the 
unstretched material and measure the width from 
the outside of the last warp thread on one side to the 
outside of the last warp thread on the opposite side. If 
the number of units permits, repeat the determination 
on not less than four other units selected as being 
representative of the material being examined and 
calculate the average number of threads per 10 cm, 
unless otherwise specified in the standard. 


IS 14944 : 2020 


Method IV 


Determine the numbers of warp threads and weft 
threads in an area of 10 cm x 10 cm in each of three 
places. Calculate the average number of threads per 
10 cm in the warp and in the weft directions. 


If the width of the ribbon gauze is less than 10 cm, 
count the number of threads over the whole of the 
width and calculate the number of threads per 10 cm 
on the basis of the declared width. If the width of the 
ribbon gauze is greater than 10 cm, omit the selvedge 
in the count. 


6.3.2 Fully Stretched 


Determine the number of warp threads while the 
material is fully stretched by the application of a 
force of 10 N per cm width (about 1.07 kgf per 
cm width) in the weft direction. Determine the 
number of weft threads while the material is fully 
stretched by application of a force 10 N per cm 
width (about 1.07 kgf per cm width) in the warp 
direction. Count the number of threads in a length 
of 10 cm, except that if there are 10 or more threads 
per cm, make the count in a length of 2.5 cm 
using a suitable instrument. If it is impracticable 
to measure over a length of 10 cm, use the greatest 
distance allowed by the material being examined. If 
the size or number of units available permits, repeat the 
determination at not less than four other independent 
positions selected as being representative of the 
material being examined and calculate the average 
number of threads per 10 cm, unless otherwise 
specified in the standard. 


6.4 Weight per Unit Area 


6.4.1 Non-adhesive Dressings 
Method I 


Determine the weight of the material being examined 
(W g). Measure its unstretched width (a cm) and its 
fully stretched length (6 cm) (see 6.6). Calculate the 
weight per unit area, in g/m* from the expression 
10 000 W/ab. 


Method II 


Determine the weight of the material being examined 
(W g). Measure its unstretched width (a cm) and its 
unstretched length (b cm). Calculate the weight per 
unit area, in g/m? from the expression 10 000 W/ab. 


Method III 


Cut a convenient sample from the material being 
examined, preferably not less than 100 cm? in area, 
and determine its weight (W g) and its area (A cm’). If 
the test has been carried out on a dried sample, correct 
the weight for percentage moisture regain. Calculate 
the weight per unit area, in g/m’, from the expression 
10 000 W/A. 


IS 14944 : 2020 


If the size or number of units of the material being 
examined permits, repeat the determination on further 
samples and calculate the average value. 


Method IV 


Determine the weight of the whole ribbon gauze and 
calculate its area by multiplying the nominal width by 
the length, measured on the unrolled gauze under slight 
tension along the centre. Calculate the weight per unit 
area, in g/m’. 


6.4.2 Adhesive Dressings 
Method 1 


Determine the weight of the material being examined 
(W g). Measure its width and length and calculate 
its total area (A m°). Cut out rectangular full-width 
samples, each weighing 3 to 4 g, from three positions 
approximately equidistant along the length of the 
material being examined, combine the samples and 
weigh accurately (w g). Macerate the combined samples 
with successive 250 ml quantities of chloroform or 
other suitable solvent until the adhesive mass appears 
to have been removed, decant each extract through a 
sieve with a nominal mesh aperture of 106 um and 
return any fibres retained by the sieve to the bulk of 
the fabric. 


Cover the extracted fabric with a 50 percent (v/v) 
solution of acetic acid and allow to stand until all of 
the zinc oxide retained in the fabric has dissolved. 
Decant the liquid and wash the fabric with successive 
quantities of water until the washings are free from 
acidity, passing the washings through the sieve, and 
return any fibres retained by the sieve to the bulk of 
the fabric. 


Dry the extracted fabric at 105 °C, recondition it 
by subjecting it to the standard test atmosphere for 
24 h and determine its weight (f g). 


Calculate the weight per unit area, in g/m’, from the 
expression /W/Aw. 


Method IT 


Determine the weight of the whole sample (W g). 
Measure its unstretched width and its fully-stretched 
length (see 6.6) and calculate its total area (A m’). 
Complete the test described under Method I, beginning 


’ 


at the words ‘Cut out rectangular.....’. 
Method III 


Measure the area of a sample weighing 
9.0 to 11.0 g. Macerate the sample in successive 
portions of petroleum spirit (boiling range, 
40 to 60 °C) or other suitable solvent until the adhesive 
appears to have been completely removed and dry the 
residual material to constant weight in a current of 
warm air. From the area of the unextracted sample, 
calculate the weight per unit area of backing material, 
in g/m’. 


6.4.3 Weight of Adhesive Mass 


Carry out the procedure described under 6.4.2 
Method I, Method II or Method III, as prescribed in the 
specification. Calculate the weight of adhesive mass, 
in g/m’, from the expression (w — f) W/Aw for Methods 
I and II or (W — f)/A for Method III where W is the 
original weight (in g) of unextracted sample, fis the 
weight (in g) of dry residual backing material and A is 
the original area (in m°) of unextracted sample. 


If the spread area of the adhesive (B m°) is different 
from the original area of the sample, substitute B for 
A in the above expression. 


6.5 Minimum Breaking Load 
Method I 


Prepare five strips of the material being examined as 
representative of the material as possible, each 200 mm 
in length and of known widths not greater than 25 mm 
(or cut longitudinally to give strips of that width) so 
that both surfaces are freely accessible to the standard 
test atmosphere for 24 h preceding the test. Determine 
the breaking load of each strip in turn on a machine 
having a movable grip with a constant rate of traverse of 
270 to 330 mm per minute and a capacity such that 
when the sample breaks, the reading obtained is 
15 to 85 percent of the full-scale deflection. Place one 
end of the strip in the fixed grip and the other in the 
movable grip in such away that the distance between 
the grips is 100 mm. Any strip that slips during the test 
or breaks within 10 mm of the grips should be excluded 
and replaced by another strip. Repeat the procedure on 
the other four strips and calculate the average value. 


Method IT 


Carry out Method I, using six representative strips, 
each 200 mm long, and a machine having a movable 
grip with a constant rate of traverse of 90 to 110 mm 
per minute. Place one end of a strip in the fixed grip 
and the other in the movable grip in such a manner that 
the distance between the grips is 175 mm except that in 
the case of plastic films, the distance may be reduced to 
100 mm. Repeat the procedure on the otherwise strips 
and calculate the average value. 


Method HI 


For ribbon gauzes more than 50 mm wide, make two 
cuts parallel to the selvedge edges so as to obtain from 
the centre of the ribbon pieces at least 60 mm wide. 
Remove warp threads from the two sides so as to leave 
fringes about 5 mm long and obtain a width of the 
remaining warp threads of exactly 50 mm. 


For ribbon gauzes of 50 mm or less wide, test the 
sample using the full width and calculate the result with 
respect to a 50 mm width. Prepare five pieces of ribbon 
gauze of sufficient length to allow the distance between 
the clamps of the machine to be 200 mm. Clamp each 
piece in turn between the jaws of a machine with a 


constant rate of traverse of 90 to 110 mm per minute 
and determine the breaking load. Calculate the average 
value. 


Method IV 


Prepare 10 pieces, each 50 mm wide and of sufficient 
length to allow the distance between the clamps of 
the machine to be 200 mm. Cut five pieces in the 
weft direction and five in the warp direction, not 
less than 15 mm from the edges avoiding folded or 
fraying edges. Clamp each piece in turn between the 
jaws of a machine with a constant rate of traverse of 
90 to 110 mm per minute and measure the breaking 
load of each piece. Calculate the average value. 


6.6 Elasticity 
Method I 


Measure the length of the material in the unstretched 
condition (L cm). Place one end of the material in a 
fixed grip and the other in a movable grip of a spring 
dynamometer or other suitable device in such a way 
that the material stretches in the elastic direction. 
Ensure that the ends of the material are securely held, 
for example, by means of pins in the grips, to minimize 
any slip while the material is under tension. Mark the 
material between the grips at points approximately 
50 cm apart (l cm). Apply gradually to the movable 
grip, a force of 10 N per cm width (about 1.0 kgf per 
cm width) ensuring that the full load is applied within 
5 s from starting to stretch. Measure the length of the 
material between the marks, to the nearest cm, as soon 
as the full load is applied (s cm). 


Maintain the load for a total stretching time of 
55 to 65 s, ensuring that at no time the load is exceeded, 
and then release the tension as rapidly as possible 
without allowing the material to tangle. Remove the 
material from the grips, loosely fold the whole length 
in a zig-zag with folds of 15 to 20 cm and allow the 
material to relax for 4.75 to 5.25 min from the time of 
release of the tension. In the case of adhesive material, 
fold it edge-to-edge along its length with the adhesive 
surface innermost before removing the material from 
the grips. Unfold the zig-zag and measure the length of 
material between the marks to the nearest cm (r cm). 


Calculate the fully stretched length (Ls//) and the regain 
length (Lr/). 


Repeat the procedure on another sample and calculate 
the average values. 


Method IT 


For tubular products that are elastic in the width 
direction, cut a sample 10 cm long and mark two 
measuring points across the width, the distance between 
which is not less than 50 percent of the nominal lay-flat 
width. Apply a load of 20 N (about 2 kgf) by means of 
fingers or stirrups inserted in the tube. 


IS 14944 : 2020 


6.7 Extensibility 
Method I 


Carry out the tests on a machine with a constant 
rate of traverse using six samples of the material 
being examined, each at least 100 mm long and as 
representative as possible of the material, and calculate 
the average result. 


Determine the load required to produce a 20 percent 
extension at a rate of extension of 270 to 330 mm per 
minute. The load shall not be more than 14 N per cm 
width (about 1.4 kgf per cm width). 


Maintain the 20 percent extension of the material 
for 55 to 65 s, allow to recover for 4.75 to 5.25 min 
and redetermine the length. The permanent set of the 
elongated material shall not be more than 5 percent of 
the original unstretched length. 


Method II 


Measure the width ofa 10 cm length of stockinette in the 
unstretched condition. Insert two circular fingers, one 
fixed and one movable, within the stockinette in such a 
way that they are parallel to each other and to the length 
of the sample. By means of a spring dynamometer or 
other suitable device, apply a load of 2.5 kg within 
5 s to the movable finger. Measure the extended width 
of the stockinette. 


6.8 Adhesiveness 


The tape shall comply with Tests 1 and 2 given in 6.8.2 
and 6.8.3. 


6.8.1 Apparatus 


6.8.1.1 Stainless steel plate 


Use a plate of corrosion resistant steel containing less 
than 0.12 percent of carbon, not less than 8 percent of 
nickel and not less than 17 percent of chromium, with 
sides 200 mm x 50 mm and thickness about 2 mm, of 
Brinell hardness between 130 and 200. The surface of 
the plate is mechanically polished and then abraded in 
a direction parallel with the longer side of the plate with 
a suitable abrasive. The abraded surface is examined 
by making five transverse measurements within an 
area bounded by two lines 10 mm from the longer axis 
of the plate to ensure that the gritting has produced a 
surface toughness (see IS 3073) that corresponds to an 
arithmetical deviation from the mean line of the profile 
of 0.05 to 0.40 um, a maximum height of irregularities 
of less than 4 um, a sampling length of 0.8 mm and a 
transferring length of five times the sampling length. 


The plate is marked along its longer sides at intervals 
of 30 mm, the first mark being 25 mm from one of the 
shorter sides. 


Between each test, keep the plate under conditions that 
prevent accidental scratching liable to change the state 
of the surface. 


IS 14944 : 2020 


Before use, clean the steel plate with absorbent cotton 
moistened with toluene, suspend the plate in a toluene 
vapour-bath in such a manner that the plate is not in 
contact with the liquid toluene, allow the vapour line 
to reach the top of the plate and maintain the plate 
in this position for 5 min. Remove the plate from the 
vapor-bath and condition it for about 30 min in the 
standard test atmosphere. 


6.8.1.2 Roller 


Use a polished metal cylinder not less than 50 mm in 
diameter. Increase the weight, if necessary, by adding 
weights so as to apply a load of 20 N (2 Kgf) per cm 
width of the material being examined. 


6.8.2 Test 1 


Condition the roll or sheet of tape for 24 h before the 
test. For tapes in the form of strips, unwind from the 
roll at a speed of approximately 30 cm/s immediately 
before testing and cut off a piece about 60 mm long. 
If the material being examined is not more than 
25 mm wide, use the whole width; if it is more than 
25 mm wide, carry out the strips 25 mm wide cut from 
the material. For tapes in the form of sheets, remove the 
protective covering immediately before testing and cut 
a piece of the tape of appropriate dimensions. Take care 
not to contaminate the adhesive surface during the test. 


Bring the adhesive side of one end of the prepared strip 
into contact with the cleaned surface of the stainless 
steel plate in such a manner that the whole width of 
the strip is attached to the plate for a distance of 
25 mm from one end, with the sides of the strip parallel 
to the longer sides of the plate, and the unattached 
portion of the strip overhanging the end of the plate. 


When attaching the strip, ensure that no air bubbles are 
trapped between the strip and the plate. Apply pressure 
to the attached portion of the strip by means of the 
roller, making four passages along the length of the 
strip at a speed of about 60 cm/min, and allow to stand 
in the standard test atmosphere for 10 min. Mark on 
the plate, the line of the end of the stip. Attach a weight 
equivalent to 0.8 N (80 gf)/cm width of the strip to the 
free end of the strip by means of a stirrup so that the 
load is evenly distributed across the width of the strip. 
Suspend the plate in a hot-air oven fitted with a device 
for circulating air at 36 to 38 °C for 30 min, in a sucha 
manner that the plate is inclined at an angle of 2° from 
the vertical in a direction that prevent the strip peeling 
from the plate and the weight is hanging freely. Repeat 
the procedure on further four strips. 


The top edge of the strip attached to the plate shall not 
slip by more than 2.5 mm during the period in the oven. 


For adhesive tapes and plastic film that are very 
extensible, attach a piece of non-extensible adhesive 
tape of the same width to the strip before applying the 
load. 


For adhesive tapes and textile fabric that are extensible 
in the direction of the length, carry out the test with 
the elastic thread running across the width of the 
plate and the load applied in the direction of the 
non-extensible threads. In these circumstances, the 
test can be performed only on materials at least 
25 mm wide, If the material being examined is exactly 
25 mm wide, attach a length of non-extensible adhesive 
tape (about 60 mm long and of the same width as the 
length of the strip) squarely to the strip so that the 
unattached portion of the tape overhang the end of the 
plate and attach the striruup bearing the weight of the 
free end of the tape so that the load is evenly distributed. 


6.8.3 Test 2 


Condition the roll or sheet of tape for 24 h immediately 
preceding the test. For tapes in the form of strips, 
unwind from the roll at a speed of approximately 
30 cm/s immediately before testing and cut off a piece 
about 400 mm long. If the material being examined is 
not more than 25 mm wide, carry out the test on strips 
25 mm wide, cut from the material. For tapes in the form 
of sheets, remove the protective covering immediately 
before testing and cut a piece of the tape of appropriate 
dimensions. Take care not to contaminate the adhesive 
surface during the test. 


Apply the strip to the center of the cleaned surface of 
the stainless steel plate so that the sides of the strip lie 
parallel to the longer sides of the plate. Apply pressure 
to the attached portion of the strip by means of the 
roller, making four passages along the length of the 
strip at a speed of about 60 cm/min, and allow to stand 
in the standard test atmosphere for 10 min. 


Determine the force required (when applied at 
an angle of 180° at a constant rate of traverse of 
270 to 330 mm/min) to detach the strip from the plate 
using a suitable instrument such that the force required 
represents 15 to 85 percent of the full-scale deflection. 
Detach the strip, observing the force being applied 
as the first 25 mm and then each succeeding 30 mm 
length is detached. Calculate the average of these six 
observations. Repeat the procedure on further four 
strips and calculate the average of the five mean values. 


The average force required shall not be less than 
1 N (100 gf)/cm width. 
6.9 Water-Vapour Permeability 


6.9.1 Tapes 


If the tape is declared to be permeable to water vapour, 
its permeability shall be not less than 500 g/m?’ per 
24 h when tested by the following procedure. 


6.9.1.1 Apparatus 


A box constructed of suitable non-corrodible 
material, having external dimensions of about 
95 mm x 25 mm x 20 mm, weighing not more than 


60 g when empty, and completely closed except for a 
rectangular opening, 80 mm x 10 mm, at the top. The 
box is completely impermeable to water and to water 
vapour, other than the opening (which is covered with 
the material being examined). 


6.9.1.2 Method 


Place a tray containing approximately | kg of anhydrous 
calcium chloride on the floor of an electrically-heated 
humidity cabinet fitted with an efficient means of 
circulating the air and maintained at 36 to 38 °C. Place 
about 2 g of absorbent cotton in each of five boxes 
complying with the above specification. Pour about 
20 ml of water into each and cover the opening in the top 
of each box with a strip of the material being examined, 
pressed down without stretching the material so that 
the opening is completely sealed. Ensure that the wet 
absorbent cotton is not in in contact with the under 
surface of the material being examined. The width of 
the material must be at least 5 mm greater than the 
corresponding dimension of the aperture. 


Weigh the sealed boxes to the nearest mg and place 
them in the cabinet for about 18 h (noting the time to 
nearest 15 min). Remove the boxes from the cabinet, 
allow to cool in the standard test atmosphere for 1 h and 
reweigh to the nearest mg. 


From the mean loss in weight and the area of the 
opening in the top of each box, calculate the water 
vapour permeability in g/m? per 24 h. 


Calculate the result of the test as the average of the 
values found on the five samples. 


LBS SS SS Sees AAA 


IS 14944 : 2020 


6.9.2 Foam Dressings 
6.9.2.1 Apparatus 


A cylindrical chamber will separate lid constructed 
of suitable non-corrodible material, having external 
dimensions as shown in Fig. 1 and completely closed 
except for a circular opening. 40 mm in diameter at 
the top. The separate lid has a central hole of the same 
diameter. It is attached to the chamber by means of four 
separate retaining bolts. A flat silicones rubber gasket 
2.4 to 2.6 mm in thickness, with a central circular 
opening, 54 to 56 mm in diameter, is inserted between 
the lid and the chamber. The chamber is completely 
impermeable to water and to water vapour, other than 
the opening (which is covered with the material being 
examined). 


6.9.2.2 Method 


Pour about 20 ml of water into each of five chambers 
complying with the above specification. Place a circular 
disc, 54 to 56 mm in diameter, of the material being 
examined on to the centre of the top surface of the 
chamber, locate the rubber gasket around it and clamp 
the lid in place using the four retaining bolts. 


Place a tray containing approximately 1 kg of 
self-indicating silica gel, spread ina layer approximately 
3 cm in depth, on the floor of an electrically heated 
cabinet fitted with an efficient means of circulating the 
air and maintained at 36 to 38 °C. 


Weigh the sealed chambers to the nearest mg and place 
them in the cabinet for 24 h. Remove the chambers 


RUBBER GASKET 


WATER RESERVOIR 


(ZZL EE | 7 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 1 APPARATUS FOR THE DETERMINATION OF WATER VAPOUILITYR PERMEA 


IS 14944 : 2020 


from the cabinet, allow to cool in the standard test 
atmosphere for | h and reweigh to the nearest mg. 


From the mean loss in weight and the area of the 
exposed surface of foam dressing, calculate the water 
vapour permeability in g/m? per 24 h. 


6.10 Waterproofness 


No water shall pass through at least five of the specimens 
when tested by the following procedure. 


6.10.1 Apparatus 


A suitable apparatus (see Fig. 2) consists of a cell 
that allows the application of hydrostatic head of 500 
mm of water to a circular area of about 20 cm? of the 
non-adhesive side of the material being examined. The 
sample is held in a horizontal position by two rings, the 
lower one forming part of the cell. The ring surfaces 
in contact with the sample are covered by a suitable 
coating material, such as, rubber. A screw device allows 
clamps to be tightened so as to prevent leakage of water 
or the movement of the sample during the test. The 
hydrostatic head is generated by means of a vertical 
tube, of internal diameter about 10 mm, connected to 
the base of the cell. 


LLLLL LL, 


N 


MATERIAL BEING 
MINED 


6.10.2 Method 


Prepare the samples without folding and without 
excessive handling. Fill the cell completely with water 
at 19 to 21 °C. Place the sample which should be 
circular, with the largest diameter possible up to 5 cm, 
on the lower ring by sliding it horizontally in such a 
way as to avoid the inclusion of air between the surface 
of the water and the lower surface of the sample. Cover 
the upper surface with a dry filter paper, 45 mm in 
diameter, locate the upper ring and tighten the screw 
device. Pour water into the tube until the required level 
above the surface of the sample is reached. Maintain the 
hydrostatic head for 5 min unless otherwise specified in 
the standard and examine the filter paper. 


Repeat the procedure on further five samples. 
6.11 Absorbency 


6.11.1 Apparatus 


A dry, cylindrical copper wire basket, 80 mm high and 
50 mm in diameter, fabricated from wire of diameter 
0.4 mm and having a mesh aperture of 15 to 20 mm; the 
basket shall weigh 2.4 to 3.0 g. 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 2 APPARATUS FOR MEASUREMENT OF WATERPROOFNESS 


8 


6.11.2 Sinking Time 
Method I 


Weigh the basket to the nearest 10 mg. Take five 
samples, each of approximately | g, from different 
places in the material being examined, pack loosely in 
the basket and weigh the packed basket to the nearest 
10 mg. Hold the basket with its long axis in the 
horizontal position and drop it from a height of about 
10 mm into water at 20 °C contained in a beaker at least 
12 cm in diameter and filled to a depth of 10 cm. 
Measure with a stopwatch, the time taken by the 
basket to sink below the surface of the water. Repeat 
the procedure on two further samples and calculate the 
average value. 


Method IT 


Using forceps, fold a sample of the material, weighing 
1 g, four times (that is, into 16-ply) and smooth the 
surface. For narrow ribbon gauze, fold as many times 
as is necessary to obtain a length not greater than 8 cm. 
Allow the material to drop lightly on to the surface of 
water at 20 °C contained in a beaker at least 12 cm in 
diameter and filled to a depth of 10 cm. Measure with a 
stopwatch, the time taken for the sample to sink below 
the surface of the water. Repeat the procedure on two 
further samples and calculate the average value. 


6.11.3 Water Holding Capacity 


After the sinking time has been recorded in 
Method I, remove the basket from water, allow it 
to drain for 30 s with its long axis in the horizontal 
position, transfer it to a tared beaker and weight to the 
nearest 10 mg. Calculate the weight of water retained 
by the sample. Repeat the procedure on two further 
samples and calculate the average value. 


6.12 Water Soluble Substances 


Use Method I, unless specified otherwise in the 
standard. 


Method I 


Boil 7 g with 700 ml of water for 3 min, stirring 
frequently, and replace the water lost by evaporation 
Decant the liquid into a breaker, squeeze the residual 
liquid from the material carefully with a glass rod, mix 
the liquids and filter the extract whilst hot. Evaporate 
400 ml and dry the residue to constant weight at 
100 to 105 °C. 


Method IT 


Dry 5 g to constant weight at 105 °C and determine 
the loss of weight. Heat slowly with 400 ml of water 
and boil for 1 min, cool by adding about the same 
quantity of water and decant the liquid through a sieve 
with a nominal mesh aperture of 106 um, wringing the 
material by hand to remove as much of the liquid as 
possible; return the material to the vessel and repeat 
the washing process with five 400 ml quantities 


IS 14944 : 2020 


of water. Place the washed material and any loose 
threads or fibres from the sieve in a breaker, cover 
with a 0.5 percent solution of diastase and maintain at 
70 °C, or if the material being examined contains wool, 
45 to 50 °C, until free from starch. Decant the liquid 
through the sieve, return any loose fibres or threads 
retained on the sieve to the bulk material in the vessel, 
repeat the washing process with boiling water and again 
return any loose fibres or threads retained on the sieve 
to the bulk material. Dry the material and determine the 
loss in weight. 


For cotton crepe, cotton stretch, cotton and rubber 
elastic, heavy cotton and rubber elastic and elastic 
net bandages, and unbleached calico that has not been 
dyed, subtract from the loss in weight, 3 percent of the 
weight of the final dry sample; if the materials have 
been dyed, subtract 1 percent; for crepe bandage and 
domette bandage, subtract 2 percent. 


Calculate the percentage of water soluble substances 
with reference to the material dried to constant weight 
at 105 °C. 


6.13 Ether Soluble Substances 
Method I 


Extract 5 g with ether in a Soxhlet apparatus for 4 h, 
operating the apparatus in such a manner that the rate 
is at least four extractions per hour. Evaporate the 
ether extract and dry the residue to constant weight at 
100 to 105 °C, unless specified otherwise in the 
standard. 


Method II 


Evaporate the ether solution reserved in the test for 
weight per unit area of fabric and dry the residue to 
constant weight at 105 °C. Divide the weight of the 
residue by the area taken for the test. 


6.14 Colour Fastness 


Make two 8-ply pads, 5 cm x 5 cm, of the material 
being examined, place each pad between two pieces 
of standard undyed bleached cotton lawn and, for each 
set, sew the three pieces of material together along one 
edge to form a composite pad. Carry out Test A and 
Test B given below. 


Test A 


Saturate one of the composite pads with ethanol 
(70 percent), lay it smoothly in a suitable 
flat-bottomed dish, add sufficient ethanol (70 percent) 
to cover the pad completely, place a smooth, square 
glass plate, with sides of 5 cm and weighing about 
50 g, centrally on top of the pad, press lightly on the 
glass plate to remove air bubbles and allow to stand at 
36 to 38 °C for 15 min. Without removing the glass 
plate, pour off the ethanol and allow the pad to stand at 
36 to 38 °C for 4h. Remove the glass plate, separate the 
three pieces of cloth forming the composite pad, allow 


IS 14944 : 2020 


them to dry separately at a temperature not exceeding 
60 °C and examine the two outer pieces of undyed cloth 
for staining. They shall be virtually unstained. 


Test B 


Subject the other composite pad to steam at 
134 to 138 °C for 3 min in an autoclave together with 
a separate piece of the standard undyed bleached 
cotton lawn. Separate the three pieces of cloth forming 
the composite pad and compare the two outer pieces 
of cloth with the separate piece of undyed cloth. The 
pieces from the composite pad shall not be significantly 
different in colour from the separate piece. 


6.15 Content of Antiseptics 


6.15.1 Aminacrine Hydrochloride 


Extract 25 g of the impregnated pad, in small pieces, 
with ether in an apparatus for the continuous extraction 
of drugs, (see Appendix XI F of BP, Edition 1988, 
Vol II), until the extraction of fatty matter is complete; 
shake the ether extract with 20 ml of water, allow to 
separate and reserve the lower aqueous layer. Dry 
the extracted material in a current of warm air and 
extract it again with methanol containing | ml of 
2 M hydrochloric acid until extraction of the antiseptic 
is complete, evaporate the extract to about 10 ml on 
a water bath, add the reserved aqueous layer from the 
ether extraction, followed by 100 ml of water, boil to 
reduce the volume to about 60 ml, cool and adjust the 
PH to 5.0 with a 10 percent (m/v) solution of sodium 
acetate. Add, with stirring, 5 ml of 0.04 M potassium 
hexacyanoferrate (II), allow to stand for 30 min, 
filter and wash the residue with 50 ml of water. To 
the combined filtrate and washings, add successively, 
mixing after each addition, 1 ml of hydrochloric acid, 
1 g of sodium chloride, 5 ml of a 2.0 percent (m/v) 
solution of potassium iodide and 2 ml of a 15.0 percent 
(m/v) solution of zinc sulphate. Allow to stand for 3 min 
and titrate with 0.04 M sodium thiosulphate VS using 
a 1 percent (m/v) solution of sodium starch glycollate 
as indicator. Repeat the operation without the material 
being examined. The difference between the titrations 
represents the amount of sodium thiosulphate required. 
Each ml of 0.04 M sodium thiosulphate VS is equivalent 
to 0.02985 g of C „H N, HCI.H,O. 


6.15.2 Benzalkonium Chloride 


6.15.2.1 Sample preparation 


Determine the moisture content. Weight about 1.5 g 
of the medicated pad removed from adhesive dressing 
in duplicate in 250 ml beaker. Add 100 ml of distilled 
water and boil it vigorously. Decant the solution to 
another 250 ml beaker. Repeat the extraction of lint 
with 75 ml water and evaporation of decanted solution 
till the lint is free from benzalkoniurn chloride. [Follow 
identification test B for benzalkonium chloride specified 
in British Pharmacopoeia, 1988 Ed, Vol I (p. 64) using 


10 


2 ml of solution]. Evaporate the decanted solution to 
about 50 ml and cool it. Transfer the above solution 
quantitatively to a separating funnel, washing the 
beaker with distilled water. Add 25 ml of chloroform, 
10 ml of 0.01 N sodium hydroxide and 10 ml of freshly 
prepared 0.5 percent (m/v) solution of potassium 
iodide. Shake well and allow to separate. Discard the 
chloroform layer. Repeat the extraction with 10 ml 
of chloroform three times and discard the chloroform 
layer. Collect the aqueous layer in 500 ml iodine flask, 
add 40 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid and allow 
to cool. Titrate with 0.005 M potassium iodate until 
deep brown colour is almost discharged. Add 2 ml 
chloroform and continue the titration. Shake vigorously 
until the chloroform layer no longer changes colour. 


6.15.2.2 Blank preparation 

Carry out blank titration on a mixture of 10 ml of 
freshly prepared 0.5 percent potassium iodide solution, 
20 ml water and 40 ml hydrochloric acid. 

6.15.2.3 Calculation 


Benzalkonium chloride (percent) = 


(Blank — Test result) x Molarity of potassium 
iodate x 0.0354 x 100 
Weight of the sample on dry 
basis in g x 0.05 


6.15.3 Cetrimide 


6.15.3.1 Sample preparation 


Weight about 1.5 g of sample in duplicate in 250 ml 
beaker by removing the medicated pads from adhesive 
dressings. Add 100 ml of distilled water and boil it 
vigorously. Decant the solution to another 250 ml 
beaker. Repeat the extraction of lint with 75 ml water 
and evaporation of decanted solution till the lint is free 
from cetrimide [Follow identification test B of strong 
certrimide solution given in British Pharmacopoeia, 
1988 Ed, Vol I (p. 112)]. Evaporate the decanted 
solution to 50 ml and cool it. Transfer 100 ml of solution 
to a separating funnel. Add chloroform, 10 ml of 
0.01 N sodium hydroxide and 10 ml of freshly prepared 
0.5 percent (m/v) solution of potassium iodide. Shake 
well and allow to separate. Discard the chloroform 
layer. Repeat the washings with three times and discard 
the washings. Collect the aqueous layer in 500 ml iodine 
flask, add 40 ml of concentrated hydrochloride acid and 
allow to cool. Titrate with 0.005 M potassium iodide 
until deep brown colour is almost discharged. Add 
2 ml chloroform continue the titration. Shake vigorously, 
until the chloroform layer no longer changes colour. 


6.15.3.2 Blank Preparation 


Carry out blank titration on a mixture of 10 ml of freshly 
prepared potassium iodide solution, 20 ml water and 
40 ml hydrochloric acid. 


6.15.3.3 Calculation 


Cetrimide (percent) = 


(Blank — Test result) x Molarity of potassium 


iodate x 3.364 x 100 
Weight of the sample in g x 0.05 


6.15.4 Chlorhexidine Hydrochloride 


To 30 g of the impregnated pad, add 140 ml of water 
and 60 ml of 1 M hydrochloric acid, shake for 30 min 
and decant the extract. Shake the residue for 15 min 
with two 100 ml quantities of a mixture of 7 volumes of 
water and 3 volumes of 1 M hydrochloric acid, decanting 
each extract. Dilute the combined extracts to 1 000 ml 
with water. To 40 ml of this solution, add 45 ml of water 
and 5 ml of a 20 percent (m/v) solution of cetrimide, 
make just alkaline to litmus paper with 5 M sodium 
hydroxide, add 2 ml of a 1.0 percent (v/v) solution of 
bromine in 10 M sodium hydroxide and shake. Add 
1 ml of propan-2-ol to suppress the froth, dilute to 
100 ml with water and allow to stand at 18 to 22 °C for 
25 min. Measure the absorbance of the resulting solution 
at the maximum at 480 nm (see Appendix II B of 
British Pharmacopoeia, Ed 1988, Vol II). Calculate the 
content of C,,H,,C,,N,,-2HCI using a calibration curve 
prepared from the absorbance obtained by repeating the 
operation using solutions containing 0.001 percent to 
0.005 percent (m/v) of chlorhexidine hydrochloride in 
a mixture of 5 volumes of 1 M hydrochloric acid and 
95 volumes of water and beginning at the words ‘To 
40 ml of this solution, add ....’. 


6.15.5 Chlorhexidine Gluconate 


Carry out the procedure described above under 
chlorhexidine hydrochloride but using solutions of 
chlorhexidine gluconate to prepare the calibration 
curve. Calculate the content of C,,H,,C,.N,,.2C,H,,O 


22° 30; ~ 12-10" 6 127. 
6.15.6 Domiphen Bromide 


Use Method I or Method II. Method I is usually suitable 
but in certain cases, the dye used in the dressing may 
interfere with the normal blue colour of the chloroform 


layer in the titration. In these circumstances, 
Method II may be used. 
Method I 


Dry 5 g (w g) of the impregnated pad, in small pieces, 
to constant weight at 105 °C. Immerse the dried 
material in 100 ml of 1 M methanolic hydrochloric acid 
prepared using gaseous hydrogen chloride, shake for 
30 min, decant the solution, transfer 50 ml to a round 
flat-bottomed flask, evaporate to 5 to 10 ml on a water 
bath and allow to cool. Add 40 ml of water and 0.2 ml 
of bromophenol blue solution, titrate with 2 M sodium 
hydroxide VS to a blue or green colour and add 5 ml 
in excess. Add 3.0 g of anhydrous sodium acetate and 


11 


IS 14944 : 2020 


10 ml of chloroform, shake and titrate with a 
0.014 percent (m/v) solution of sodium .dodecyl 
sulphate until the chloroform layer changes to colorless 
or yellow (V, ml). Repeat the procedure using, in 
place of the material being examined, 5 g of undyed 
non-impregnated base fabric, on which 5.0 ml of a 
0.140 percent (m/v) solution of domiphen bromide 
in methanol has been dispersed and which has been 
subsequently dried at 105 °C (V, ml). 


Calculate the percentage of C,,H,,BrNO in the sample 
from the expression 0.7 V./wV, 


Method IT 


Prepare a chromatographic column in the following 
manner. Suspend a suitable quantity of strongly basic 
anion exchange resin (Amberlite IRA-400, Deacidite 
FF-IP and Zerolite FF are suitable) in 2 M hydrochloric 
acid and allow to stand for 10 min. Transfer sufficient 
of the suspension to a suitable chromatographic tube, 
fitted with a glass wool plug at its tapered end, to give 
a column height of about 15 cm, wash the column with 
water until the eluate has a pH of 6 to 7 and then wash 
with several volumes of methanol. 


Dry 5 g of the material being examined, in small 
pieces, to constant weight at 105 °C, immerse in 
100 ml of methanol in a 250 ml conical flask and shake 
for 30 min. Decant the supernatant liquid, transfer 
50 ml to a separating funnel arranged so that the solution 
flows through the prepared column at a rate of about 
3 ml/min, collect the eluate in a flat-bottomed flask, 
wash the column with 40 ml of methanol, evaporate 
the combined eluate and washings on a water bath to 
a volume of 5 to 10 ml, allow to cool and proceed as 
described under Method I, beginning at the words ‘Add 


’ 


40 ml of water and ....’. 
6.15.7 Merbromin NF 


6.15.7.1 Standard preparation 


Dissolve about 1.0 g of accurately weighed merbromin 
NF standard sample in 100 ml of 0.25 percent 
ammonium acetate solution in volumetric flask. Pipette 
1 ml of above solution and dilute to 100 ml with 
ammonium acetate solution in standard volumetric 
flask. Pipette 10 ml of the above solution and dilute to 
100 ml with ammonium acetate solution in standard 
volumetric flask. Pipette 10 ml of the above solution 
and dilute to 100 ml with ammonium acetate solution 
in standard volumetric flask. 


6.15.7.2 Sample preparation 


Peel off sufficient medicated pads from adhesive 
dressing. Weigh accurately about 1 g of the pads and 
extract medication thrice in 50 ml boiling ammonium 
acetate solution each time. Extract the pads in one more 
50 ml boiling ammonium acetate solution each time. 
Extract the containing about 0.2 ml of strong ammonia 
solution containing 27 to 30 percent ammonia. 


IS 14944 : 2020 


The pads should become almost colorless. Combine the 
extract and dilute to 250 ml with ammonium acetate 
‘solution. Centrifuge this solution for 30 min at 1600 
rpm to remove suspended fibres. Pipette 25 ml of the 
clear supernatant solution and dilute to 100 ml with 
ammonium acetate. 


Measure the absorption of standard dilution and sample 
dilution against ammonium acetate as blank at 520 nm. 
6.15.7.3 Calculation 


ji AxW, 
Merbromin (percent) = 5 


xW, 


where 
S= standard reading, 
A= sample reading, 
W 


1 


W. 


2 
6.15.8 Assay of Chlorhexidine Acetate 


Carefully remove and weigh 100 cm? of dressing. 
Shake with 25 ml of chloroform for 2 min, add 
100 ml of 0.4 M hydrochloric acid and shake 
continuously for 45 min. Discard the chloroform layer 
and filter the acid layer. 


= weight of standard, and 
= weight of sample, 


Wash the extracted fabric with hot water to remove all 
traces of the ointment and dry the fabric to constant 
weight at 105 °C. Determine the weight of the ointment 
from the initial weight of the dressing. 


To 20 ml of the filtrate add 50 ml of water and 5 ml 
of a 20 percent w/v solution of cetrimide and shake. 
Add 8.5 ml of 1 M sodium hydroxide, 1 ml of 
propan-2-ol and 2 ml of sodium hypobromite solution, 
dilute to 100 ml with water and shake. Allow to stand at 
20 °C for 25 min. Measure the absorbance of resulting 
solution at the maximum at 480 nm. Calculate the 
content of chlorhexidine acetate in the ointment from 
the absorbance obtained by repeating the procedure 
using 20 ml of a solution prepared by diluting 5 
ml of a 0.12 percent w/v solution of chlorhexidine 
acetate in water to 100 ml with 0.4 M hydrochloride 
acid beginning at the words “add 50 ml of water ...”. 
Use 0.4 M hydrochloric acid in the reference. 


6.16 Content of Zinc Oxide in the Adhesive Mass 


Heat | g of the material being examined, cut into strips, 
with 75 ml of chloroform, 6 ml of 6 M acetic acid and 
40 ml of water in a conical flask until the chloroform 
layer boils, continue heating for 4 min, swirling the 
mixture frequently, allow to cool slightly, stopper the 
flask, shake vigorously for 2 min, rinse the stopper 
with water and collect the rinsing in the flask. Add 
10 ml of ammonia buffer pH 10.9 and, while still warm, 
titrate with 0.1 M disodium edetate VS, with continuous 
swirling, using as indicator 0.2 ml of a solution 


12 


containing 0.5 percent (m/v) of mordant black II and 
4.5 percent (m/v) of hydroxylamine hydrochloride in 
methanol. Each ml of 0.1 M disodium edetate VS is 
equivalent to 0.008137 g of zinc oxide (ZnO). Decant 
the titrated liquid through a sieve with a nominal mesh 
aperture of 106 um, return any collected fibres to the 
fabric in the flask, wash the material with several 
successive small quantities of chloroform and dry at 
105 °C. Allow the dried material to equilibrate with 
the atmosphere and weigh. The weight of the adhesive 
mass is given by the difference in weights. Calculate 
the percentage content of ZnO in the adhesive mass. 


6.17 X-Ray Opacity 


Place the material being examined or a representative 
sample of the X-ray detectable component under a 
30 mm thickness of 99 percent pure aluminum of 
commerce, in the centre of a non-screen X-ray film 
positioned on a sheet of lead not less than 2 mm thick, 
or on an equivalent thickness of lead rubber sheet, 
masking any parts of the film not covered by the test 
piece with 2 mm of lead, or an equivalent thickness 
of lead rubber sheet, to prevent scattered radiation 
from affecting the film. Irradiate the specimen and the 
aluminum simultaneously with X-rays at 70 kV peak, 
using an exposure sufficient to give a logarithmic 
photographic density of about 1.0 through a 10 mm 
thickness of the aluminum. When the developed 
radiograph is examined by transmitted light, the 
specimen image is clearly visible as a lighter area 
against a darker background. 


6.18 Sulphated Ash of Surgical Dressings 


Introduce 5 g into a previously heated and cooled, 
tared crucible, heat cautiously over a naked flame and 
then carefully to 600 °C and allow to cool. Add a few 
drops of 1 M sulphuric acid, heat and incinerate until 
all the black particles have disappeared and allow to 
cool. Add a few drops of 2 M ammonium carbonate, 
carefully evaporate and incinerate, allow to cool and 
weigh again. Incinerate for 5 min and allow to cool 
repeat until two successive weighing do not differ by 
more than 0.5 mg. 


6.19 Water Retention Capacity 
6.19.1 Apparatus 

6.19.2 Stainless Steel Tank 
6.19.3 Stainless Steel Tray 


The tray has a perforated metal base which can be 
suspended in the stainless steel tank, permitting a 
moistened material aid upon its surface to drain freely 
through the perforations. The base is perforated with 
circular holes, 3 mm in diameter, evenly spaced, so that 
the centre of each hole is 5 mm from the centres of 
those adjoining it. 


6.19.4 Metal Weight 


Use a suitable non-corrodible material which exerts a 
pressure of 2 kN/m’? (20 gf/cm?). 


6.19.5 Method 


Weigh the material being examined and place it on 
the perforated metal tray with the surface intended for 
wound contact in direct contact with the perforated 
surface. 


Immerse the tray and material in water at a temperature 
of 20 °C for 10 s. Transfer the tray and material to the 
stainless steel tank and allow the contents to drain 
for 10 s. Place the metal weight on the surface of the 
material such that a force of 2 KN m” is applied evenly 
over the surface of the sample, leave for 30 s and then 
remove it carefully. Transfer the material immediately 
by means of a pair of tweezers to a tared dish, taking 
care not to lose any water in the process; weigh and 
calculate the equivalent water-retention capacity for 
an area of 100 cm? of the dressing fabric. Record the 
results of five determinations and calculate the average 
water retention capacity. 


6.20 Weight of Ointment Min 100 g/m? 


Remove the dressing from the container/pouch and 
determine its area. Transfer it by means of forceps to an 
apparatus for the continuous extraction of drugs, Soxhlet 
apparatus, leaving behind any ointment adhering to the 
facing material, and extract the dressing with ether 
for 6 hrs or until extraction is complete. Reserve the 
ether solution for the test for Ether soluble substances. 
Remove the extracted fabric from the apparatus and dry 
it to constant weight at 105 °C. Calculate the weight per 
unit area of the fabric in g/m’. 


6.21 Setting Time 


The plaster mass remains workable for not less than 
1 min after removal of the bandage from water and 
it should be set after 8 min. When removed from the 
mandrel the cast should not crumble under the pressure 
of the fingers. Perform the test on a complete bandage; 
if supplied in slabs or continuous strips take a piece 
2.7 m x 7.5 cm, wind the bandage loosely on a suitable 
plastic core and immerse at an angle of 45° in water 
at 30° , allowing to soak until thoroughly wetted but 
for not longer than 15 seconds. Remove from the 
water, squeeze to express surplus water but avoiding 
the loss of significant amounts of plaster and wind the 
bandage concentrically on to a smooth non-absorbent 
cylindrical mandrel with a diameter of 5 cm, working 
the plaster on each successive layer to ensure adequate 
coalescence. 


6.22 Determination of Tensile Strength 


6.22.1 Determine the tensile strength of surgical suture 
on a motor-driven tensile strength testing machine 


13 


IS 14944 : 2020 


having suitable clamps for holding the specimen firmly 
and using either the principle of constant rate of load on 
specimen or the principle of constant rate of elongation 
of specimen, as described below. 


6.22.1.1 The apparatus has two clamps for holding the 
strand. One of these clamps is mobile. The clamps are 
designed so that the strand being tested can be attached 
without any possibility of slipping. Gauge length is 
defined as the interior distance between the two clamps. 
For gauge lengths of 125 to 200 mm, the mobile clamp 
is driven at a constant rate of elongation of 30 + 5 cm 
per minute. For gauge lengths of less than 125 mm, 
the rate of elongation per minute is adjusted to equal 
2 times the gauge length per minute. For example, 
a 5-cm gauge length has a rate of elongation of 
10 cm per min. 


6.22.1.2 Determine the tensile strength of the suture, 
whether packaged in dry form or in fluid, promptly 
after removal from the container, without prior drying 
or conditioning. Attach one end of the suture to the 
clamp at the load end of the machine, pass the other 
end through the opposite clamp, applying sufficient 
tension so that the specimen is taut between the clamps, 
and engage the second clamp. Perform as many breaks 
as are specified in the individual monograph. If the 
break occurs at the clamp, discard the reading on the 
specimen. 


6.22.2 Procedure for a Machine Operating on the 
Principle of Constant Rate of Load on Specimen 


This description applies to the machine known as the 
incline plane tester. 


6.22.2.1 The carriage used in any test is of a weight 
such that when the break occurs, the position of the 
recording pen on the chart is between 20 percent and 
80 percent of the capacity that may be recorded on 
the chart. The friction in the carriage is low enough to 
permit the recording pen to depart from the zero line 
of the chart at a point not exceeding 2.5 percent of the 
capacity of the chart when no specimen is held in the 
clamps. 


For surgical sutures of intermediate and larger sizes, 
the clamp for holding the specimen is of the roll type, 
with a flat gripping surface. The roll has a diameter of 
19 mm and the flat gripping surface is not less than 
25 mm in length. The length of the specimen, when 
inserted in the clamps, is at least 127 mm from nip to 
nip. The speed of inclination of the plane of the tester 
is such that it reaches its full inclination of 30° from 
the horizontal in 20 + 1 s from the start of the test. For 
surgical sutures of small sizes, the suitable clamp has a 
flat gripping surface of not less than 13 mm in length. 
The speed of inclination of the plane is such that it 
reaches its full inclination of 30° from the horizontal in 
60 +5 s from the start of the test. 


IS 14944 : 2020 


Except where straight pull (no knot required) is 
indicated in the suture monograph, tie the test suture 
into a surgeon’s knot with one turn of suture around 
flexible rubber tubing of 6.5 mm inside diameter and 
1.6 mm wall thickness. The surgeon’s knot is a square 
knot in which the free end is first passed twice, instead 
of once, through the loop, and pulled taut, then passed 
once through a second loop, and the ends are drawn 
taut so that a single throw is superimposed upon a 
double throw. Start the first knot with the left end over 
the right end, exerting sufficient tension to tie the knot 
securely. Where the test specimen includes a knot, 
place the specimen in the testing device with the knot 
approximately midway between the clamps. Leave the 
flexible rubber tubing in place for the duration of the 
test. 


6.22.3 Procedure for a Machine Operating 
on the Principle of Constant Rate of Elongation 
of Specimen — This description applies to any suitable 
tensile testing machine that operates on the principle of 
constant rate of elongation of specimen. 


Except where straight pull (no knot required) is 
indicated in the suture monographs, tie the test suture 
into a simple knot formed by placing one end of a 
strand held in the right hand over the other end held 
in the left hand, passing one end over the strand and 
through the loop so formed, and pulling the knot tight. 
The specimen is placed in the testing device with the 
knot approximately midway between the clamps. 


6.22.4 Textile Fabrics and Films 


Determine the tensile strength of textile fabrics, 
including adhesive tape, on a constant-speed or 


14 


pendulum type of testing machine of the following 
general description. 


The clamps for holding the specimen are smooth, flat, 
parallel jaws that are not less than 25 mm in length in 
the dimension parallel to the direction of application of 
the load. When the width of the strip being tested does 
not exceed 19 mm, the jaws of the clamp should be at 
least 25 mm wide. If the width of the strip is greater 
than 19 mm and not greater than 44 mm, the width 
of the jaws of the clamp should be at least 50 mm. If 
the width of the specimen is greater than 44 mm, cut a 
25-mm strip, and use a clamp with jaws not less than 
50 mm wide. Round all edges that might have a cutting 
action on the specimen to a radius of 0.4 mm. The jaws 
are 76.2 mm apart at the beginning of the test, and they 
separate at the rate of 30.5 cm + 13 mm per minute. 
The machine is of such capacity that when the break 
occurs, the deviation of the pendulum from the vertical 
is between 9° and 45°. 


6.23 Determination of Adhesive Strength 


Determine the adhesive strength of Tape that is made 
from fabric by cutting a strip of the tape 2.54 cm 
wide and approximately 15 cm long, and applying 
12.90 cm?, 2.54 cm x 5.08 cm, of one end of the strip 
to a clean plastic or glass surface by means of a rubber 
roller under a pressure of 850 g, passing the roller twice 
over the tape at a rate of 30 cm per minute. Adjust the 
temperature of the plastic or glass surface and the tape 
to 37°, and conduct the test immediately thereafter as 
directed under Tensile Strength, using a pendulum-type 
testing machine, the pull being exerted parallel with the 
warp and the plastic or glass surface: the average of not 
less than 10 tests is not less than 18 kg. 


IS 14944 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Technical Textiles for Medtech Applications, TXD 36 


Organization 


The South India Textile Research Association, 
Coimbatore 


3 M India Limited, New Delhi 

Association of Indian Medical Devices (AiMeD), 
New Delhi 

All Indian Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi 

Business Coordination House, New Delhi 

Cologenesis Healthcare Pvt Ltd, Salem 

Defence Research & Development Establishment 
(DRDE), Gwalior 

DGAFMS, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 

DGQA (Ministry of Defence), New Delhi 

Director General of Health Services, New Delhi 

M/s Dispoline India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Dr Sabharwals Manufacturing Labs Pvt Ltd, 
Panchkula 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & 
Industry, New Delhi 


Ginni Filaments Limited, NOIDA 
Govt Medical College & ESI Hospital, Coimbatore 


Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 
Johnson & Johnson Ltd, Mumbai 


Kamal Healthcare Pvt Limited, Tamilnadu 
KOB Medical Textiles Pvt Ltd, Palladam 


Livinguard Technologies Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr PRAKASH VASUDEVAN (Chairman) 


SHRI KULVEEN SINGH BALI 
SHRIMATI PRABHA HEGDE (Alternate) 


Dr G. D. AGARWAL 
SHRI JITENDRA SACHCHADE (Alternate) 


Dr VIJAYDEEP SIDDHARTH 
Dr Anoop Daca (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER GUPTA 
SHRIMATI RITIKA Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri R. KRISHNAKUMAR 
Suri K. RAMpRASAD (Alternate) 


Dr Vikas B. THAKARE 


CoL RAMESH CHANDRA 
Surg Lt CoR Korian V. Gora (Alternate) 


SHRI SENTHIL KUMAR 
SHRI ARNAB Das (Alternate) 


DR INDER PRAKASH 
DR SUNNY SWARNKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIR MARWAH 


SHRI MANISH SABHARWAL 
SHRI DHRUV SABHARWAL (Alternate) 


Dr SANIIIV REHLAN 
Ms Tuts! (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDEEP AGARWAL 


Dr N. TAMILSELVEN 
Dr K. KULENDAIVELU (Alternate) 


Dr CHANDRA SHEKHAR 


PROF ASHWINI AGARWAL 
Pror VIPIN Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr Anup RAKSHIT 
Mr ManesH Kupar (Alternate) 


Suri RAM SHUKLA 
MR VIVEK BANSAL (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SANKAR MARIMUTHU 


SHRI ARUN BUCHADE 
SHRI S. KUMAR SUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


Ms SHIVANI SWAMI 
Dr SHEFALI MISHRA (Alternate) 


IS 14944 : 2020 


Organization 
Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi 


Medline Healthcare Industries Pvt Ltd, Pune 


National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


Nobel Hygiene, Mumbai 
Office of the Drug Controller (CDSCO), Delhi 
Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


PGIMER, Chandigarh 
Procter and Gamble Co, Mumbai 


Surgicotfab Textile Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 


South India Textile Research Association, Coimbatore 

Textiles Committee, Mumbai 

The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 

The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, 
Mumbai 

Vimta Lab Limited, Hyderabad 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Dr P. N. AGARWAL 
Dr U. C. VERMA (Alternate) 


Mr Anthony Dcosta 
SHRI DHAVAL GHUGE (Alternate) 


Dr SANJAY YADAV 
Dr SHANKAR G. AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI KAMAL JOHARI 
Mr Joy Devassy (Alternate) 


Dr RAVIKANT SHARMA 
MR ARvind HIwatce (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
SHRI AMAR K. CHAPHEKAR (Alternate) 


DR PANKAJ ARORA 


SHRI PRASHANT JADHAV 
SHRI SIVAKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI PARESH PATEL 


DR E. SANTHINI 
SHRI VEERA SUBRAMANIAM (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTIKEYAN DHANDA 
Ms SHILPI CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


Suri V. K. PATIL 


Dr MANISHA MATHUR 
Suri Ravi SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr MUKESH AGRAWAL 
SHRI JAGADEESH Kopa tt (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. Bera, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI DHARMBEER 
Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


16 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 36 (15151). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


