IS : 4078-1980 ( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INDEXING AND STORAGE OF DRILL ( CORES

First Revision )
First Reprint JUNE 1989

UDC

622'243'57'004'4

: 006'76

0 Copyright 1980 BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI NEW 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

Gr 3

August 1980

IS :4078- 1980

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INDEXING AND STORAGE OF DRlLL CORES

( First Revision )
Subsurface
Chairman SHRI V. S. K~ISENASWA~~Y Members SHRI G. .PANT ( Altrrnatc to Shri V. S. Krishnaswatny ) SHRI P. A. BAKSHI SHI~IH. CH~NDRASEKA~ SARI K. N. DADINA SHRI K. R. DATYI" Geological

Exploration

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

BDC 49

Survey of India, Calcutta

DIRECTOR ( CSMRS ) SUPERINTENDINOENQINEEB, CH~NAB InvnaTlo~~10~ CIRCLE ( Alternate ) Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay SRRI V. L. GORIANI SHRI V. GUPTA ( Alternate ) Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, SHRI HARBANS SINQH Chandigarh SHRI S. R. BUDHWAL ( Al& .sti ) Ministry of Shipping and Transport, New Delhi SERI A. D. NARAIN Asia Foundation & Construction ( Pvt ) Ltd, Bombay SARI A. M. NERURKAR SHRI A. N. JANQLE ( Altemat6 ) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay Sanr B. K. PANTEARY SHRI S. K. FOTEDAR ( Altcmats ) SHRI N. K. PILLAI Voltar Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. N. INDURKAR ( Altnnatr ) MERI, Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, RES~AROH OFFICER, NASIK Bombay Irrigation and Power Department, Government of SI~RI S. SATAPAT~I Orissa, Bhubaneshwar ( Continued on pag6 2 )

Gementation Co Ltd, Bombay Public Works & Electrical Department, Government of Karnataka, Bangalore In personal capacity ( P-820, Block P, New Aliporc, Calcutta ) In personal capacity ( Rcham Mansion No. 244, S. Bhagat Singh Road, Colaba, Bombay ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi

@ Copyright 1980
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Zndian Copyright Act,( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permitsion of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of cop-right under the said Act.

IS : 4078 - 1980 ( Continued from page I )
Mombrrs SHRI K. R. SAXENA SHRI D. P. SENQUPTA Rgrssdding Engineering Research Laboratories, Hyderabad Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), Roorkce ) Public Works Department, Gandhinagar Government of Gujarat,

SHBI D. SRABMA ( Abut& SERI M. M. SHAH

SIJPERINTENDIN~ ENGINE= ( GEOLOGY) ( Alkrnofr ) Soar M. K. SIN~HAL SHBI VIJENDBA SINQH SERI D. AJITEA SIMHA, Director ( Civ Engg )

Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkce Government of Irrigation Department, Pradesh, Lucknow Director General, ISI ( Ex-o&cio Membrr )

Uttar

Secretary Sam

Deputy

K. K. SHlaYA Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INDEXING AND STORAGE OF DRILL CORES

( First Revision)
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 February 1980, after the draft revision finalized by the Subsurface Exploration Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0. 2 This standard was first published in 1967. The present revision has been made to reflect the experience gained on the subject since then. Some of the important modifications done in this revision relate to: (a) provision of serially numbering all pieces in a run, (b) method of numbering to be adopted when there are more than one core-box for a hole, and (c) provision of keeping copies of finally prepared detailed report on geological logs in the core library. 0.3 Core drilling is one of the most important items of subsurface exploration at the various river valley project sites and other sites of engineering construction. The data provided by such drilling, when interpreted by a competent engineering geologist, gives valuable subsurface geological information, such as depth of overburden at the site of the hole, lithological and physical nature of overburden/bedrock, continuity of the formation drilled, frequency and nature of joints as well as their water-tightness, location of bedding seams and other discontinuities, thrusts, faults, underground cavities and burried valleys and leads to the evaluation of subsurface geological features. 0.4 In order to extract maximum possible information from this process and to prevent the loss of the valuable subsurface data obtained by costly core-drilling, it is necessary that the cores obtained are kept in a good condition, properly arranged and accurately marked. In view of the above and to unify the diverse practices prevailing in the country in regard to indexing and storage of cores, this standard has been prepared. Even though the main intent of this code is to provide the necessary guidance for the indexing and storage of drill cores for river valley projects, the provisions of this code with appropriate modifications may oe applicable to other types of investigations, such as for bridges and mineral prospecting. 3

IS:4078

- 1980

0.5 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off values should be the same as that of the specified values in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down recommendations for indexing and storage of cores and cuttings obta.ined by drilling and special samples that may be recovered during the drilling operation.
2. ARRANGING

AND INDEXING

OF

GORES

2.1 At the site of drilling, the cores, immediately on their withdrawal from the core barrel shall be placed in core tray and then transferred to core boxes specially made for this purpose. These boxes should be made of seasoned timber or any other durable material. If made of timber the top lid of the box shall be made up of a maximum of two planks. If two planks are used the lid should be strengthened by means of battens. Battens should also be provided at each end at the bottom to facilitate handling,,,There should be different sizes of compartments to accommod& different sizes of cores. It is desirable to provide grooves on the inside .of the widthwise sides of the box corresponding to the widths of compartments for the AX, BX and NX size cores ( see Note 2 under Fig. 1 ) so that the partitions for the compartments can he slid in easily. The cores shall be arranged starting from the side nearest to .the hinge from the left to the right end of the box in the order of increasing depth from the surface, in a manner very similar to the lines on the pages of a book ( see Fig. 1 ). All core pieces shall be numbered serially, omitting very small pieces in the run. An arrow mark (-+) towards increasing depth shall be marked on every piece of core.
2.2 The cores shall be separated at the end ofthe runs, either by inserting cross partitions of wood or by using the side supports in the case of the end of the core box, and the depths shall be clearly marked with paint, indelible ink or copying pencil. For each run, the pieces of core should be tightly packed together, as nearly as possible to its original condition in the ground. The cross partitions of wood,wherever used, shall be of *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rc~irrd ). 4

IS:4078-1980
suitable size and fixed tightly to fit in the longitudinal partitions in the core box. (The cross partitions should be about 50 mm in width and of length and depth to fit tightly into the compartments. ) 2.3 In case there is no core recovery in an entire run, part of a run or in consecutive runs, separate wooden filler blocks, preferably a wooden dummy equal in length to the core loss, shall be inserted for each of the core loss sections and marked with paint, indelible ink or copying pencil thereon. The appropriate depths shall be marked on the wooden partitions on each flank of the core loss run. Each core loss dummy filler should be arranged in a position in the core box corresponding with the position of,core loss in the ground. If the position of a core loss within a run is not known ( and this is often the case) then, by convention, the core loss dummy filler may be placed at the bottom of the run. 2.4 For reaches where core recoverey is anticipated to be poor, the return drill water shall be collected in bowls and the settled sludge shall be recovered suitably packed in polythene bags and kept in the core box with separating wooden blocks on either side marked with the depths and the `inscription `Washings'. Attempt shall be made to collect the cores, as far as possible, even in the runs made in the overburden section at a drilling site. 2.5 Cores at the drilling sites shall be kept at a clean and dry place. The core boxes shall be closed immediatly after a core run is kept and the necessary indexing has been done, in order to avoid any infiltration of extraneous material and the consequent spoiling of the core surfaces, all of which may render proper interpretation of the cores difficult later on. The cores should be so packed in the core boxes that they are not damaged in transit. Packing material like dry straw, cotton waste, etc, may be used to make the cores tight in the box. Latches shall then be secured on each of the core boxes and, before they are transported to the,place of detailed examination and storage, it shall be ensured that the latches are well fixed and that there is no possibility of mixing of the cores during their transit from the field to the place of examination and then to- the core shed. 2.6 The drill hole number, the box number and the engineering feature for which the hole had been made shall be noted on the top of the lid of the individual core boxes at the drilling site itself su as to avoid any possibility of the mixing-up of the core boxes during transit. A suitable core box or a set of core boxes for each bore hole should be kept to avoid mixing of cores from different holes. When there are more than one core box for a single hole, these should be numbered indicating the numerator as serial number and denominator as total number of corn boxes for that hole ( for example, l/3,2/3 and 313 for three core boxes for a hole ).

5

f

20 mm THICK

I
63mm

DUMMY

(CORE. LOSS)
20 mm TtHCK I

/ t--yssmm
2omm THICK

OPEN

VIEW

CLOSED NOTE l-

VIEW

* Indicates depths at which cores were obtained.

DH - drill hole.
&C -

redgccd level,

NOTE 2 - This figure gives typical detaila of a box for 5k7 mm diameter core. The box with the ume overall dimension, may be used for cores of diameter 42.0 and 30.0 mm by dividing the inside of the box into 5 or 6 compartments respectively instead of the 4 compartments shown in the Figure for 547 mm core giving the following compartment widths: Cma Dianu&r mm 547 42.0 SO.0 The 51'7, 42.0 rcrpectively. and 30'0 mm corea are generally designated

W%?h of Cimportment in
thr Cow Box mm 61 48 36 as NX, BX, and AX cores

Fro. 1 TYPICAL DETAILS OF CORE

Box

FOR 54'7

mm

DIA CORE

IS:4078 -1980
2.7 On completion of drilling of each hole, the cores should be logged by a competent engineering geologist who should also check the ` Daily Drill Report' and discuss with the concerned driller any peculiarities or uncertainties recorded during the drilling of the hole. The core boxes shall be finally shifted under the instruction of the competent authority to a core library specially built for the purpose. Two copies each of the daily drill reports shall be sent along with the core boxes, one for study in connection with the preparation of the detailed geological logs of the drill holes and another for being kept as a record in the core library. 2.8 Copies of detailed report on geological logs, when finally prepared, should be maintained in the core library, after proper indexing, SO that these are readily available when required. 3. STORAGE OF CORES

3.1 It is recommended that a core library be maintained at medium and major river valley projects for at least 10 years after the completion of the project so that it may he possible to check. the sub-surface conditions and to study the problematical foundation features which may occasionally arise during the construction phase or the post-construction maintenance phase of the project. The question of storing the cores after this period may be reviewed. In the construction of a core library, a good system of ventilation and lighting shall be planned, so that the inspection and maintenance of the cores may be carried out efficiently. A small cabin should be provided in a suitable place in the core library for storage of the painting materials and spare core boxes. 3.2 Immediately on their arrival in the core library the core boxes shall be cleaned and painted. The paint shall be of such a nature as. to be durable and water resistant. After primary coating of the paint on the outside surfaces of the core boxes the top lid of the boxes shall be inscribed in a well contrasted paint colour with the feature of the project for which the drill hole was made, the drill hole number, location co-ordinates, reduced level of the drill hole, total length of the cores contained in the box and the box number. The sides of the core boxes shall further be inscribed with the drill hole number, ' the length of the cores contained in the box and the serial number of the box, for easy reference when the boxes are kept in the library racks. No painting is necessary inside the core box, except along the rim of the box, on the inserted dummy blocks and the partitions separating the individual runs, which should be inscribed with the reason for core loss and the lengths of the runs as marked earlier on the field. 8

IS:4078-1980
3.3 In the. case of cores which are liable to disintegrate on exposure, suitable representative samples may be taken and preserved by waxing or by any other suitable method. A copy of record of drilling information of the bore hole and the details of cores suitably prepared using the pro forma given in Appendix B of IS : 44641967* should be compiled If such samples are taken, a record to that and kept in the core library. effect should be kept at the corresponding section of the run in the core box. If any portion of the core is removed from the box for testing or other examination this should also be recorded by insertion of suitable remarks on a square section of timber painted white, kept in the core box. 3.4 A series of racks should be arranged in the boxes after being painted and suitably captioned, in the racks according to the serial order and area daily drill reports received from the field should ready reference in the core library. core library and the should he arranged of exploration. The also be available for

*Code of practice for presentation of drilling information and core description in foundation investigation. 9

BUREAU us~dquilrter81

OF

INDIAN -.

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 8 Bahadw lolephones

I 331 01 31,331 13 76 I

Shah Zatar MarQ, NEW DELHI 110002 Toleqrams I Manaksansthr ( Common to all offico8 )
Tdepbf?t3

Ragionsl

Ottices

*Western tEastorn Southern Northern

I Manakalaya, E9 MIOC, Marol, Andhori BOMBAY 400093

( East ),

6 32 92 96 36 24 99 41 24 42 2 1843 3 1641 2 63 46 I 2 63 49 22 48 06 66716 6 36 27 23 10 83 6 90 32 21 68 76 6 23 06 7 66 37

I l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Manlktola, CALCUTTA 700054 I C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS I SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANOIGARH 160036
I

600113

Br8nc/, Offices `Pushpak' AHMADABAD

Nurmohamed 330001

Shalkh Marg, Khanpur, Square,

`F' Block Unlty Bldg, Naraslmharaja BANGALORE 560002 GanQotrl Complex, Bhadbhada aHOPAL 462003

Road, 1. T. Nagar,

Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 5315, Ward No. 29. R. G. Barua Road 5th Byelane, GUWAHATI 781003 !I-8-56C L. N. Gupta Mar& HYDERABAD 500001 Rl4 Yudhlsler Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302006 117/418 B Saivodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208006 Patllputra lndustrlal Estate, PATNA 800013 Road, ) 1

Hantex Bldg ( 2nd Floor ), Rly Station TRIVANDRUM 695001
Inspection Office ( With

Sal0 Point

Pushpanjali 205-A West High Court RoaT' ! Bharampeth Extension, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engin(lgrs PUNE 411005 ( India ) Bulkilng, 1332 Shlvajl NaQar,

2 51 71 5 24 35

*Sales Omce In Bombay IO at NovoIty Chamborr.
Bombay 400007 Wales Omcc In Calcutta ?-rot. Calcutta 700071 Ir at 6 Chowrlnghoe Amroach,

Grant

Road,

P 0. Prlncw

