INATA HATAR IS 19039 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


-FAN & MA Alet AITA (MTA) 


& fee aen ae Tet — A wa 
ustao dfa 


Cleaner Cum Grader for Millets With 
Pre-cleaner — Specification and Test 
Code 


ICS 65.060 


© BIS 2023 


ameda HAH OT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
ee ey HAH MA, 9 RTT BS THK AMT, AE Reed - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2023 Price Group 10 


Agriculture and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Agriculture 
and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division 
Council. 


Millets are exceptionally nutritious and were once a dietary staple. However, changing consumer preferences and 
a lack of millet processing resources led to a decline in their consumption. Millets require processing before 
consumption, and the government initiated efforts to promote millet consumption during the 2023 International 
Year of Millet (YOM - 2023). Equipment used in millet processing are very crucial for ensuring the quality of 
processed millets. Therefore, it is important to establish equipment standards to maintain the overall quality and 
promote the consumption of this valuable and nutritious grain, benefiting both health and the economy. 


Pre-cleaning and cleaning of seeds/grains is an important post-harvest processing operation which upgrades the 
quality of seeds/grains and thereby its commercial value. Pre-cleaning precedes the cleaning to remove the larger 
size impurities, plant parts, stem stones, mud, etc, which permits the free flow of the produce into the cleaner and 
helps in achieving higher capacity and effectiveness of cleaning. 


Such equipment is manufactured by several manufacturers for use as multi-grain type, suitable for many food 
grains/seeds by making appropriate adjustment and replacing the sieves. Therefore, a need was felt to develop a 
standard to ensure the quality of this equipment and the produce as well as for third party testing and certification 
purpose. This standard will also serve as guidance to the manufacturers of these equipment. 


A series of Indian Standards are being developed on the equipment used in primary processing of millets. Apart 
from this standard, three other standards on millets processing equipment have been published which are as under: 


IS 19040 : 2023 Centrifugal type millet dehusker — Specification 
IS 19041 : 2023 Destoner for millets — Specification and test code 
IS 19042 : 2023 Symbols and flow diagram for primary processing of millets 


Another standard covering the specification for pearler-cum-polisher for millets is IS XXXXX : 20XX (under 
preparation). 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex K. 
In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 


calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules 
for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. 


IS 19039 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


CLEANER CUM GRADER FOR MILLETS WITH PRE-CLEANER 
— SPECIFICATION AND TEST CODE 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies material, constructional, 
performance and other requirements of cleaner cum 
grader with pre-cleaner for millet crops. It also 
prescribes test methods to evaluate the performance 
and durability of this equipment. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this standard, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreement based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of these standards. 


IS No. Title 


IS 210 : 2009 Grey iron castings — 
Specification (fifth revision) 

IS 277 : 2018 Galvanized steel strips and 

sheets (plain and corrugated) 

— Specification (seventh 

revision) 


IS 399 : 1963 Classification of commercial 
timbers and their zonal 


distribution (first revision) 


IS 816 : 1969 Code of practice for use of 
metal arc welding for general 
construction in mild steel (first 


revision) 


IS 2062 : 2011 Hot rolled medium and high 
tensile structural steel — 


Specification (seventh revision) 


IS 2405 Industrial sieves — 
Specification: 
(Part 1) : 2023 Wire cloth sieves (second 
revision) 


(Part 2) : 2023 Wire sieves (second revision) 


IS 4333 (Part 2): Methods of analysis for food 
2017/ ISO grains: Part 2 — 


712 : 2009 Determination of moisture 
content (second revision) 

IS 5718 : 2000 Agricultural produce 

processing equipment-seed 

cleaners — Test code 


(second revision) 


IS 6911 : 1017 Stainless steel plate, sheet and 
strip — Specification (second 


revision) 


IS No. Title 


IS 8132 : 2023 Tractors, machinery for 
agriculture and forestry, powered 
lawn and garden equipment — 
Operator's manual — Content and 
format (third revision) 


IS 8440 : 2023 Paddy cleaners — Test code 
(first revision) 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For this standard, the following definitions shall 
apply. 


3.1 Aspirator — A component of the pre- 
cleaner/cleaner used for drawing the air through the 
seed/grain mass to remove the lightweight 
impurities. 


3.2 Blower — A device to produce air blast by 
taking the atmospheric air through suction. 


3.3 Broken Grain/Kernel — Millet grains/kernels 
which are broken and whose size is less than 
three-fourth of its original size. 


3.3.1 Whole Grain/Kernel — Millet grains/kernels 
of size three-fourth and above in its original size are 
whole grains/kernels. 


3.3.2 Large/Big Brokens — Millet grains/kernels 
which are less than three-fourth of its whole grain 
size but bigger than medium broken. 


3.3.3 Medium Brokens — Millet grains/kernels 
which are less than half of its whole grain size but 
bigger than small/fine broken. 


3.3.4 Small/Fine Brokens — Millet grains/kernels 
which are less than one-fourth and bigger than 
one-eighth of its size of whole grain. 


3.3.5 Total Brokens — The total of the small, 
medium, and large brokens. 


3.4 Clean Seeds/Grains — The seeds/grains free 
from foreign matter. 


3.5 Cleaning — Removal of plant materials, foreign 
matter, light weight impurities, etc., based on the 
difference in terminal velocity from the grain mass 
using blast of air produced from blower. 


IS 19039 : 2023 


3.6 Dehusked/Unpolished Kernel — Millet grains 
from which husk only has been removed. 


3.7 Feed Mechanism — The mechanism which 
feeds the millet grains into the pre-cleaner/cleaner 
and regulates the feed rate. 


3.8 Foreign Matter — Includes inorganic and 
organic matters. The inorganic matter shall include 


sand, gravel, dirt, pebbles, stones, lumps of earth, 
mud, iron chips, etc. The organic matter shall 
include chaff, straw, weed seeds, dead insects, 
worms, other inedible grains, etc. 


3.9 Feed Rate — The mass of seeds/grains fed into 
the inlet of the equipment per unit time. 


3.10 Lower/Bottom Screen — The screen fitted as 
the last/at the bottom for separating finer/smaller 
foreign matter from seeds/grains. 


3.11 Maximum Input Capacity — The maximum 
feed rate at which no choking occurs in the 
processing equipment and no stalling occurs in the 
prime mover at the speed specified by the 
manufacturer. 


3.12 Millet Grader — A machine used for grading 
the millet grains/kernels according to size (diameter, 
thickness, width, etc) and to separate the broken 
grains, damaged grains, impurities and foreign 
matter from the grain mass. 


3.13 Polished/Pearled Millet Grains — The millet 
grains/kernels from which the bran layers have been 
fully/partially removed by polishing/pearling. 


3.14 Pre-Cleaning — Removal of larger size 
impurities from the mass of kernels/grains and 
facilitate further cleaning and grading. 


3.15 Rated Input Capacity — The feed rate at 
which the cleaning efficiency is within the specified 
limit. 


3.16 Routine Tests — Tests carried out on each 
equipment to check the requirements which are 
likely to vary during production. 


3.17 Scalper — An equipment fitted with screen 
used for pre-cleaning (removal of large size 
impurities) of seeds/grains. 


3.18 Screen/Sieve — The component in the form of 
perforated or slotted sheet or wire mesh which 
separates the seeds/grains on the basis of size. 


3.19 Screen/Sieve Cleaning Mechanism — The 
mechanism which keeps the perforations of 


the screen open and prevent clogging. 


3.20 Screen Slope — The inclination in degrees of 
the screen with the horizontal. 


3.21 Seed/Grain Cleaner — A machine which 
removes foreign matter from the given seed/grain 
mass. 


3.22 Shaking Mechanism — The mechanism 
which shakes the sieve box at the specified speed, 
stroke length, etc. 


3.23 Sieve Aspirator — A grader that separates 
broken grains/kernels from grain mass through 
vibrating screens in conjunction with an air stream. 
The light weight impurities are separated by an 
aspirator. 


3.24 Type Tests — Tests carried out on cleaner to 
prove conformity with the requirements of relevant 
standard. These are intended to prove the general 
qualities and design of a particular type of cleaner. 


3.25 Unclean Seeds/Grains — The mixture of 
clean seeds/grains and foreign matter. 


3.26 Upper/Top Screen — Screen to eliminate 
foreign matter bigger than the seeds/grains in size. 
The seeds/grains flow down from upper/top screen 
to lower/bottom screen as under flow. 


4 TYPES OF MILLETS AND EQUIPMENT 
USED 


4.1 Type of Millets 


Millets are the group of small grains and following 
are the crops classified under millets as given in 
Table 1, which can be processed by this equipment. 
Though they look similar in shape and size, they 
differ, and cleaning/grading require different sieve 
perforations as given below in Table 2. 


These types and size of sieves can be used for 
cleaning and grading of millet grains. However, the 
size of these sieve openings varies with the varieties 
and the manufacturer’s recommendation. 


4.2 Type of Pre-cleaners 


Pre-cleaning is essential in the process line to 
remove trash and other plant parts present in 
seeds/grains that would clog feed hoppers, elevators, 
sieves, etc and thereby increase capacity of 
processing machines. The commonly used types of 
pre-cleaners/scalpers are, vibrating type and 
real/rotary type scalper. 


IS 19039 : 2023 


Table 1 Common Name and Botanical Name of Millet Crops 
(Clauses 4.1 and 5) 


SI No. Common Name of Millets 
(1) (2) 
i) Sorghum/Jowar/Great millet 


ii) Pearl millet/Bajra 
iii) Finger millet/Ragi 


Botanical Name 
(3) 
Sorghum bicolor 
Pennisetum glaucum 


Eleusine corocana 


iv) Kodo millet Paspalum scrobiculatum 
v) Foxtail/Italian millet Setaria italic 
vi) Little millet/Kutki millet Panicium sumatrense 
vii) Proso/Common millet Panicum miliaceum 
viii) Barnyard millet Echinochloa esculenta 
ix) Browntop millet Urochloa ramose 
Table 2 Sieve Opening Size for Millets 
(Clause 4.1) 
SI No. Crop Screen Aperture Size in mm 
A 
Top Screen Bottom Seren 
0) 2) (3) (4) 
i) Sorghum/Jowar/Great millet 4.75 r 2.10 s, 3.50 r 
il) Bajra/Pearl millet 3.254 1.30 s, 1.30 r, 1.40 r, 
1.40 s, 1.60 r, 1.90 s 
ili) Finger millet/Ragi 3.251 1.40 s 
iv) Kodo millet 3.804 1.60 s, 2.00 r 
v) Foxtail millet 3.251 1.20 s, 1.30r 
vi) Little millet 2.5014 1.60r 
Vii) Proso/Common millet 3.80r 1.60 s 
viii) Barnyard millet 3.25r 1.40 s, 1.80 r 
ix) Browntop millet 3.25r 1.2 x 20 oblong 
NOTES 


1 Here “r” stands for round hole and ‘s’ stands for square slot. 
2 The reference for this table was taken from minimum seed certification standards issued in 2013 by 
Central Seed Certification Board, Government of India, New Delhi. 


4.2.1 Vibrating/Reciprocating Type Pre-cleaner 


The pre-cleaner/scalper consists basically of a 
vibrating screen/sieve. The screen opening is large 
enough to allow the rough seeds/grains to pass 
through readily, while larger size inert material is 
scalped off or removed. The material received in the 
feed hopper flows to the sieve. Vibration or 
reciprocation of the sieve is achieved through 
appropriate mechanism, namely eccentric, cranks, 
cams, etc. The levels of vibration depend on nature 
of seeds/grains. Normally the fan, blower or 
aspirator is used for air circulation and displacement 
of air to remove lighters impurities like immature, 
chaff, straw, etc. 


4.2.2 Reel/Rotary Type Pre-cleaner 


The sieve is formed in the shape of drum/reel. The 
opening in the reel provides the passage for the 
smaller impurities and seeds/grains delivered from 
outer circumference to pass through and larger size 
impurities discharged out from the outer surface. 
Air from blower removes the dust particles and 
light weight impurities and the seeds/grains will 
be delivered for further cleaning and 
grading/separation. A single cylinder rotary screen 
type pre-cleaner is shown in Fig. 1. 


IS 19039 : 2023 


UNDER SIZE 
FOREIGN ———~ 
MATTER 


CLEAN GRAIN 


ROTARY SCREEN 


OVER SIZE 
FOREIGN 
MATTER 


FIG. 1 SCHEMATIC OF SINGLE CYLINDER ROTARY SCREEN TYPE PRE-CLEANER 


4.3 Cleaners 


Cleaning of seeds/grains is the process of 
removal/separation of light weight impurities, 
chaffy grains, etc, to improve the quality of the 
produce. This is achieved by the action of the air 
which aspirates/blows the impurities based on the 
difference in the terminal velocity exist between 
them. A cleaner should necessarily be provided with 
blower(s) or aspirator(s) with a duct where the 
grain/seed mass come in contact with the air blast. 
They shall have outlets provided for the good/bold 
seeds/grains, immature grains, chaffy materials, etc 
and baffles should be also provided in the duct to 
adjust the locations of these outlets, depending on 
the seeds/grains. 


4.4 Graders 


Seeds/grains are primarily graded according to 
the physical properties such as size, shape, 
thickness/diameter etc using the sieves/screens of 
appropriate type of opening and size. 
Separation/grading based on length, width, mass, etc 
are done to remove the damaged/broken 
seeds/grains. The sieves are placed horizontal with a 
mild inclination and made to vibrate/reciprocate. 
The whole sieve arrangement is placed in a sieve 
box with provision to hold a number of sieves and 
changing the sieves as per requirement based on the 
type of the crop(s). Provisions shall be also there to 
adjust the slope, stroke length, speed (number of 
strokes/min), etc with outlet for collecting both 


overflow and underflow from each sieve. Rotary 
sieves/screens are made by rolling the sieves into a 
drum/rotor and mounted appropriately and rotated. 
Mild slope or auger for feeding shall be provided to 
facilitate easy movement of the feed entering the 
drum. Depending on the number of grades desired, 
number of sieves will be placed in both cases. 
Clogging of sieves shall be avoided through a 
suitable mechanism. A schematic of an air screen 
cleaner cum grader for millet grains is shown in 


Fig. 2. 
5 MATERIAL 


5.1 The material for various components (see Fig. | 
and Fig. 2) shall be as given in col (3) of Table 1. 
The material shall conform to the relevant Indian 
Standards given in col (4) of Table 3. 


5.2 The wire cloth sieve and perforated type 
sieve should conform to IS 2405 (Part 1) and 
IS 2405 (Part 2) respectively. 


6 CONSTRUCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
6.1 Frame 


The main frame shall be fabricated using suitable 
size of mild steel/galvanized iron material with 
channel/angle sections and shall be covered 
wherever required with mild steel sheet/galvanized 
sheet/stainless steel sheet of adequate thickness, not 
less than 1.0 mm, depending on the requirements. 


ROLL FEED 
HOPPER _,, 


DUST ——. 


DIRT, SMALL WEED 


IS 19039 : 2023 


ROUGH SCALPINGS 


ROUGH 


cLosg SEEDS AND TRASH — ORADED 
\ SCALPINGS __ oe A T n 
PREIRAS SHRIVELED SEED, WEED 
SEED AND TRASH 
CLEAN GRADED SEED 
FIG. 2 SCHEMATIC OF A CLEANER-CUM-GRADER FOR MILLETS 
Table 3 Material of Construction 
(Clause 5.1) 
SI No. Component Material Reference to IS 
0) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Bearing housing/plumber block Cast iron 210 
ii) Blower casing Mild steel 2062 
Cast iron 210 
Mild steel 2062 
iii) Blower impeller (blade holder) Cast iron 210 
iv) Bottom and top drum of elevator Cast iron 210 
v) Bucket/cups Mild steel 2062 
Plastic - 
vi) Elevator body/frame Mild steel 2062 
Wood 399 
vii) Feed hopper Mild steel 2062 
Stainless steel 6911 
(SS 304) 
viii) Feed roll Cast iron 210 
ix) Feed rate/distribution plates Mild steel 2062 
Stainless steel 6911 
(SS 304) 
x) Frame Mild steel 2062 
Galvanized iron 277 
xi) Gears High carbon steel - 
xii) Cam High carbon steel 5 
xiii) Hand wheels/adjustment levers Cast iron 210 
Mild steel 2062 
xiv) Plummer block Cast iron 210 
xv) Pullies Cast iron 210 
Mild steel 2062 


IS 19039 : 2023 


Table 3 (Concluded) 
SI No. Component Material Reference to IS 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
xvi) Screens/sieves Mild steel 2062 
Galvanized iron 277 
Stainless steel 6911 
(SS 304) 
xvii) Shafts Mild steel 2062 
xviii) Sieve frame Mild steel 2062 
wood 399 
6.2 Hopper 6.6.3 It is preferable that all the guards shall be either 


Hopper shall be made of mild steel/stainless steel 
(SS 304) sheet and provided with a feed regulating 
device. The hopper shall be provided with side slope 
for easy flow of the grains/kernels. 


6.3 Rotary Screen 


One or multiple perforated rotary screens depending 
on the capacity shall be used. In case of single 
screen, the cylinder screen shall rotate in clockwise 
direction. In case of multiple cylinders, the cylinder 
screen shall rotate in counter clockwise direction. 
The speed of rotation of cylinders should be 
variable. The inclination of the cylinder shall also be 
made variable to clean different types of 
seeds/grains effectively. 


6.4 Vibrating/Reciprocating Screen 


The screen opening shall be large enough to allow 
the rough seeds/grains to pass through readily, while 
larger size inert material is scalped off/removed. 
There will be provision to adjust the slope, stroke 
length and speed. 


6.5 Aspirator/Blower 


The aspirator/blower shall be provided with the 
control lever or VFD (Variable Frequency Drive) to 
regulate air flow rate. 


6.6 Transmission Drive 


The suitable drive system like gear drive, sprocket 
chain or V-belt pulley system for transmitting the 
power shall be provided. 


6.6.1 Suitable transmission guards shall be provided 
to prevent accidents due to contact with moving part 
of the machine with human beings while in 
operation. 


6.6.2 The guards shall not hinder the operations of 
the machines even while making adjustments 
available in the machines. 


permanently attached or firmly secured to prevent its 
removal without the aid or tools. The servicing and 
adjustment should be possible without removal of 
the guards. 


6.6.4 The guards shall have sufficient strength to 
support load at any point during the operation. 


6.7 Shafts 


The shafts shall be supported with suitable bearings 
and housings on the stable part of machine. 


6.8 The unit may be provided with provision to 
operate with electric motor/diesel engine/tractor 
PTO. 


7 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


7.1 The cleaner cum grader with pre-cleaner shall be 
operated at no load in accordance with the method 
given in 8 of IS 5718. During the no load run, the 
visual observation shall not show the following 
abnormalities: 


a) Presence of any marked vibrations during 
operation; 

b) Presence of undue knocking or rattling 
sound; 

c) Frequent slippage of belts/chains; 

d) Non-smooth running of shafts in the 
bearing housings; 

e) Any marked wear or slackness in any 
components; 

f) Any marked rise in temperature of 
operational bearings and its housing; 

g) Vibrations in running of blowers; and 

h) No mechanical damage to any components 
of cleaner cum grader. 


7.2 The rated input capacity in kg per kWh energy 
consumed, with 5 percent and 10 percent foreign 
matter in the cleaner cum grader, shall be declared 
by the manufacturer. The various adjustments, 
clearances and speeds for that capacity shall also 
be declared. When tested in accordance with the 


method given in 9.1.9 of IS 8440, the declared 
capacity shall not differ by + 5 percent. 


7.3 During and after the capacity test, the visual 
observation shall not indicate the following: 


a) Observations given under 7.1(a) to 7.1(h); 

b) Frequent clogging of screen perforations; 

c) Non-smooth flowing of material through 
different components; 

d) Frequent clogging of aspiration unit; 

e) Any marked wear, deformation and 
breakdown; 

f) Frequent loosening of fasteners; and 

g) Leakage of grains from the cleaner, while 
in operation. 


7.4 When tested in accordance with 9.2 of IS 8440, 
no breakdown shall occur in any units of the cleaner 
cum grader with pre-cleaner. 


7.5 When tested, the cleaner cum grader shall 
conform to the following requirements: 


a) The grader shall meet the requirement 
given in 6. 

b) The input capacity of the millet grains per 
kWh energy used shall be not less than 
1 250 . The capacity shall be declared by 
the manufacturer. 


7.6 The rated input capacity in tonnes/hour and rated 
energy consumption in kg/kWh for raw seeds/grains 
with 10 percent to 20 percent impurities like chaff, 
dust, soil particles, discoloured seeds/grains, cut and 
damage seeds/grains, for millets shall be declared 
when tested in accordance with the method given in 
9.6 of IS 5718. The declared value shall not differ 
by 5 percent. The cleaning efficiency shall not be 
less than 90 percent. It means 90 percent impurities 
will be separated by pre-cleaner, cleaner and grader 
from the millet kernels/grains. 


8 OTHER REQUIREMENTS 


8.1 Provision for tightening belts/chains shall be 
provided. 


8.2 Arrangement for lubrication of bearings and 
other moving parts as required shall be provided. 


8.3 Provision for easy transportation or towing with 
tractor shall be provided. Loading lugs shall also be 
provided for easily lifting of machine. 


8.4 The cleaner shall be provided with the operator's 
manual (see 4.2 of IS 8132). 


8.5 Provision for changing/adjusting the following 
shall be made: 


a) Feed rate; 


IS 19039 : 2023 


b) Air displacement; 

c) Sieves; 

d) Sieve slope; and 

e) Stroke length of sieve box. 


8.6 Magnets shall be provided to arrest iron 
contaminants. 


8.7 Provision for cleaning the screen and to avoid 
clogging shall be provided. 


8.8 Suitable inspection window may be provided to 
inspect the process of cleaning. 


9 METHODS OF TEST FOR CLEANER CUM 
GRADER FOR MILLETS 


9.1 Test Material 


9.1.1 Sufficient quantity of the raw, preferably the 
same variety shall be taken. The proportion of 
impurities, stones, mud, chaff, plant materials, etc 
shall be analyzed by taking 3 samples each of 100 g 
and the average shall be reported. 


9.1.2 The moisture content of test material shall be 
measured according to IS 4333 (Part 2) and shall be 
not more than 14 percent (wet basis). 


9.2 Running in and Preliminary Adjustments 


9.2.1 The cleaner cum grader shall be installed on a 
level and preferably on a hard surface with 
anti-vibration mount/concrete foundation. All the 
adjustments shall be made in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s recommendation. 


9.2.2 The cleaner cum grader shall be attached with 
a suitable prime mover, preferably with an electric 
motor and auto-voltage stabilizer. An energy meter 
or some form of transmission dynamometer shall be 
fitted. The power delivered to the cleaner cum 
grader may be supplied in the following ways: 


a) Direct coupling the prime mover with the 
main shaft of the cleaner cum grader; and 


b) Connecting the prime mover with the help 
of a flat or V-belt and pulleys with the 
grader's main shaft. 


9.2.2.1 In the case of (a), the power delivered to the 
grader would be the power output of the prime 
mover, whereas in the case of (b), the allowances for 
flat and V-belt drive losses may be taken at 6 percent 
and 3 percent, respectively. 


9.2.3 The cleaner cum grader shall be run-in without 
load before commencing the tests. The running-in 
shall be carried out in accordance with the 


IS 19039 : 2023 


manufacturer’s recommendation. In the absence of 
any recommendation by the manufacturer, the 
cleaner cum grader shall be run-in for 30 min. 
During the period of the run-in, adjustments for 
various functional components may be done. All the 
adjustments done shall be in accordance with the 
instructions contained in the manual supplied by the 
manufacturer. 


9.3 Tests 


Tests as indicated in 9.3.1 and 9.3.2 shall be carried 
out on millet cleaner. 


9.3.1 Type Tests 
9.3.1.1 General 


a) Checking of specifications (see 6 and 


Annex A); 

b) Checking of material (see 5.1 and 
Annex B); and 

c) Visual observations and checking of 
provisions for adjustments (see 8.5). 


9.3.1.2 Test at no-load 


a) Visual observations (Annex C); and 
b) Power consumption (Annex D). 


9.3.1.3 Test at load 


a) Short-run tests (see 7.1, Annex E); and 


1) Visual observations (see 7.3), 

2) Cleaning efficiency/effectiveness of 
cleaning (see 7.6), 

3) Power consumption (see 7.5 and 
9.7.3), and 

4) Rated input capacity (see 7.6 and 
9.7.4). 


b) Long-run test (see 9.8 and Annex H). 
9.3.2 Routine Tests 
a) Visual observations and checking of 
provision for adjustments (see 7.3); and 
b) Test at no-load (see 9.3.1.2). 
9.4 Pre-Test Observations 


9.4.1 Determination of Foreign Matter 


The foreign matter present in the millet lot to 
be cleaned shall be determined in accordance with 


3, 4 and 5.2 of IS 4333 (Part 1). 
9.4.2 Determination of Moisture 


The moisture content of the millet shall be 
determined in accordance with IS 4333 (Part 2). 


9.4.3 Running-in and Preliminary Adjustment 


9.4.3.1 The millet cleaner shall be installed on level 
and preferably on hard surface. All the adjustments 
shall be made in accordance with manufacturer's 
recommendations. 


9.4.3.2 The millet cleaner shall be run-in without 
load before commencing the tests. The running-in 
shall be carried out in accordance with the 
manufacturer's recommendations. 


9.5 General Tests 
9.5.1 Checking of Specifications 


The specifications given by the manufacturer shall 
be checked and reported in the proforma as given in 
Annex A. 


9.5.2 Checking of Material 


The material of construction of all the components 
of the cleaner shall be reported in the data sheet 
given in Annex B. 


9.5.3 Visual Observations and Checking of 
Provision for Adjustments 


The observations and adjustments given in data 
sheet in Annex C shall be made and reported. 


9.6 Test at No-Load 


After the running-in is over, the grader shall be run 
at no load for 30 min at the specified speed. During 
and after the no-load run, the visual observation of 
the cleaner cum grader shall not show the following: 


a) Presence of any marked vibration during 
the operation; 

b) Presence of undue knocking or rattling 
sound; 

c) Frequent slippage of belts/chains; 

d) Any marked unusual wear or slackness in 
any component; 

e) Any marked rise in bearing temperature; 
and 

f) Any breakdown of major components. 


9.7 Test at Load 
9.7.1 Operation and Collection of Data 


The cleaner cum grader shall be operated at its 
specified speed for 15 min at a feed rate slightly 
below the rated input capacity specified by the 
manufacturer. During the run period, collect the 
following samples and data: 


a) Three sets of samples in the pre-cleaner at 
feed, cleaned grain outlet and impurities 
outlet (s) shall be taken at an interval of 
5 min at each outlet; 


b) Similar three sets of samples at feed, cleaned 
grain outlet and impurities outlet(s) in the 
cleaner cum grader, also shall be taken; and 


c) The main shaft's speed and the reading of the 
energy meter or dynamometer shall be 
recorded. 


9.7.1.1 At the end of 15 min feeding, run the grader 
for some time to practically no more material 
already fed comes out. At the end of the test, weigh 
the material collected through all outlets. 


9.7.1.2 The test given at 9.7.1 and 9.7.1.1 shall be 
repeated for a minimum of three times at various 
feed rates covering approximately 90 percent, 
100 percent and 110 percent of rated input capacity 
declared by the manufacturer. 


9.7.2. Preparation and Analysis 


Three samples collected from feed, cleaned grain 
outlet and impurities outlet(s) in the pre-cleaner and 
cleaner cum grader shall be analyzed by manually 
separating the good grains and impurities and 
record as prescribed in Annex F. Their proportions 
to the total quantity of the sample will be expressed 
as fractions as given below: 


X; = mass fraction of good grains in feed; 

Xa = mass fraction of good grains in good 
grains outlet(s); and 

Xp = mass fraction of good grains in 


impurities/reject outlet(s). 


9.7.3 Determination of Energy Consumption 


The energy requirement for each feed rate shall be 
calculated in accordance with 9.7.3.1 and 9.7.3.2 
and recorded as prescribed in Annex G. 


9.7.3.1 In the case of prime mover fitted with an 
energy meter, the readings taken shall be the energy 


IS 19039 : 2023 


consumption for 5 min. The energy consumption per 
hour, giving due allowance to the type of drive, shall 
be calculated and reported. 


9.7.3.2 In the case of prime mover fitted with the 
dynamometer, the readings taken shall indicate the 
torque required. The energy consumption giving 
due allowance to the type of drive (see 9.2.2) shall 
be determined after computing power delivered by 
prime mover by the following formula: 


T xs 


= 354930 * 10 


where 


P = power, in kW, delivered by the prime 
mover; 

T = torque, in Nm; and 

S = speed, in rev/min. 


9.7.4 Determination of the Rated Input Capacity 


Select the feed rate at which the following 
requirements are met. The capacity in terms of 
energy consumed shall be calculated by dividing 
the capacity by the energy consumed (see 9.7.3): 


a) It shall be able to remove 90 percent of 
the impurities during pre-cleaning and 
95 percent of the impurities during 
cleaning and grading, present in the 
respective feed materials in one pass. The 
capacity will be calculated from the 
quantity of the millet grains cleaned and 
graded and the respective time taken as: 


Quantity of millet grain cleaned 
and graded (kg) x 60 
C ity, kg/h = 
apacity kg Time taken, in min 
9.7.5 Effectiveness of Pre-cleaning and Cleaning 
Cum Grading 


The effectiveness of pre-cleaning and cleaning cum 
grading shall be computed using the following 
formula by substituting the values as calculated in 
9.7.2. 


| (Xp = Xo) X (Xa — Xp) X Xa X (1- Xp) 


E 
(Xp — Xn )(Xp — Xp)? x (1 Xp) Xp 
where 
E = effectiveness of separation, decimal; 
Xs = mass fraction of good grains in feed; 
Xp = mass fraction of good grains in 
impurities/reject outlet(s); and 
Xa = mass fraction of good grains in good 


grains outlet(s). 


IS 19039 : 2023 


The overall effectiveness of pre-cleaning and 
cleaning cum grading will be assessed as the mean 
of effectiveness of pre-cleaning and effectiveness of 
cleaning cum grading. 


(Effectiveness of pre-cleaning + 


Overall effectiveness of cleaning cum grading) 
effectiveness = i a 
9.8 Long Run Test 


The grader shall be operated for a minimum of 20 h 
at load, which shall be covered by a continuous run 
of at least 5 h. During and after the operation, no 
breakdown or defect shall develop in the cleaner 
cum grader. 


9.9 Summary Report 


For the guidance of the user, compile a summary 
report on the proforma as given in Annex J. 


10 WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 


10.1 Welding used for joining components shall not 
be porous and should be as per IS 816. 


10.2 Any sharp corners and protruding fastens shall 
be avoided. 


10.3 Components shall be free from cracks, pits, 
burrs and other visual defects which may be 
detrimental for its use. 


10.4 All the components of machine shall be 
painted with the rust preventive paints. 


11 MARKING AND PACKING 
11.1 Marking 


Each grader shall be marked with the following 
particulars: 


a) Manufacturer’s name, address and his 
recognized trade-mark if any; 


10 


b) Batch or code number; 

c) Power rating and capacity; 
d) Type; 

e) Mode No.; 

f) Year of manufacturing; and 
g) Direction of rotating parts. 


11.2 A minimum cautionary notice worded as 
follows shall be written in vernacular language 
legibly and prominently on the main body of the 
grader: 


a) Do not wear loose dress, bangles, watch, 
etc, while working; 

b) Do not work under the influence of 
intoxicants like liquor, opium, etc; 

c) Children and aged persons should be 
discouraged for working on cleaner cum 
grader; 

d) Do not cross over moving belts; 

e) Do not operate cleaner cum grader without 
guards and safety devices; 

f) Do not make adjustments when grader is 
working; and 

g) Do not put or take-off belt while pulley is 
running. 


11.3 Packing 


The cleaner cum grader shall be packed for safety 
and security of human being while in transit and as 
agreed to between the purchaser and supplier for 
safe handling in transit. 


11.4 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed there under, and the 
products may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


IS 19039 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clauses 9.3.1.1 and 9.5.1) 
SPECIFICATION SHEET 
To be filled in by 
Manufacturer Testing Station 
A-1 GENERAL 

a) Make 

b) Model 
c) Type 


d) Year of manufacture 


A-2 POWER UNIT 


a) Type of prime mover 

b) Number of prime movers 
c) Recommended power, kW 
d) Type of drive 


A-3 MAIN DRIVE 


a) Type 

b) Size of belt 

c) Size of pulley 

d) Diameter of main shaft 

e) Type and number of bearings 


A-4 SCREENS 


A-4.1 Pre-cleaner 


a) Type 

b) Number of screens 

c) Total length and width, in mm 

d) Effective length and width, in mm 
e) Size of hole, in mm 

f) Number of holes per 100 cm? 

g) Sieve clearance, in mm 

h) Screen slope range, in degree 

j) Recommended screen slope, in degree 
k) Screen speed, rpm or strokes/min 
m) Screen stroke length, in mm 

n) Provision for screen cleaning 


A-4.2 Cleaner Cum Grader 


a) Type 

b) Number of screens 

c) Total length and width, in mm 

d) Effective length and width, in mm 
e) Size of hole, in mm 

f) Number of holes per 100 cm? 

g) Sieve clearance, in mm 

h) Screen slope range, in degrees 

j) Recommended screen slope, in degree 
k) Screen speed, rpm or strokes/min 
m) Screen stroke length, in cm 

n) Provision for screen cleaning 


11 


IS 19039 : 2023 


A-5 SHOES 


a) Type 

b) Number of strokes per minute 
c) Length of stroke 

d) Number and type of bearing 


A-6 BLOWER ASPIRATOR 


a) Type 

b) Number of blades 

c) Diameter, in mm 

d) Recommended speed, in rpm 

e) Provision for changing air displacement 
f) Drive, if separate 


A-7 MILLET FEEDING 


a) Method of feeding; 

b) Holding capacity of feed hopper, in kg 

c) Location and height of feeding hopper from ground level, in m 
d) Type of feed regulation mechanism 

e) Type of feed distribution mechanism 

f) Provision of elevator 


A-8 TRANSPORT ARRANGEMENTS 


a) Type 

b) Number of wheels 

c) Size of wheels 

d) Wheel bearings 

e) Type of towing arrangement 


A-9 OVERALL DIMENSIONS 


a) Length, in mm 
b) Width, in mm 
c) Height, in mm 
d) Ground clearance, in mm 


A-10 TOOLS, ACCESSORIES AND MANUALS PROVIDED 


Test Engineer 


12 


(Clauses 9.3.1.1 and 9.5.2) 
DATA SHEET FOR MATERIAL OF CONSTRUCTION 


B-1 DATE OF TEST: 


B-2 MATERIAL OF CONSTRUCTION: 


SI No. 


Component 
(2) 
Blower/Aspirator 
Blower casing 
Blower impeller 
Blower shaft 
Elevator 
Feeding chute/hopper 
Frame 
Hand wheels/adjustment levers 
Main shaft 
Pullies 
Screens/sieves 
Shoe 
Sieve box 
Transport wheel 
Others 


ANNEX B 


13 


Material 


(3) 


Size 


(4) 


IS 19039 : 2023 


Mass 
(5) 


Test Engineer 


IS 19039 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clauses 9.3.1.2 and 9.5.3) 
DATA SHEET FOR VISUAL OBSERVATIONS AND PROVISION FOR ADJUSTMENTS 


C-1 OBSERVATIONS 


a) Adequacy of marking of inlet and outlets 

b) Adequacy of protection of bearings against the ingress of dust 

c) Adequacy of safety arrangements, especially near moving parts and at inlet 
d) Provision for lubrication of moving parts 

e) Provision for belt tightening 

f) Provision for transportation 

g) Provision for easy changing of components requiring frequent replacement 
h) Provision for easy replacement and cleaning of screens 

j) Provision for anti-corrosive coatings 

k) Tightness of bolts, nuts and other fasteners 

m) Welding of seams 

n) Adequacy of marking to read speed of both main and blower shafts 


C-2 PROVISION FOR ADJUSTMENTS 
a) Feed rate 
b) Shaking speed 
c) Screen slope 
d) Air displacement 


Test Engineer 


ANNEX D 


(Clause 9.3.1.2 
DATA SHEET FOR TEST AT NO-LOAD 


D-1 POWER CONSUMPTION 


a) Source of power 

b) Type of drive 

c) Total time of run, in min 

d) Average power consumption, in W 


D-2 OBSERVATIONS: 


a) Presence of any marked vibration during operation 

b) Presence of undue knocking or rattling sound 

c) Frequent slippage of belts 

d) Smooth running of shafts in their respective bearings 

e) Any marked unusual wear or slackness in any component 
f) Any marked rise in bearing temperature 

g) Other observations 


Test Engineer 


14 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 9.3.1.3) 
DATA SHEET FOR TEST AT LOAD 


a) Source of Power 

b) Power Rating, kW 

c) Type of Drive 

d) Type and Variety of Millet 

e) Moisture Content, Percent, Wet Basis (w.b.) 

f) Percentage of Foreign Matter in the Feed Before Feeding/Pre-cleaning, Percent 
g) Screen Slope, Degree 

h) Sieve Clearance, in mm 

j) Air Flow Rate, in m?/min 


k) Maximum Input Capacity, in kg/h 


15 


IS 19039 : 2023 


IS 19039 : 2023 


m) Test Data 


Sl Date Starting Stopping Duration of Speed Feed Power Fuel No. of Quantity (kg) of Samples Total Total 
No. Time Time Operation Rate Required Cons- Samples Quantity of Quantity of 
umed CleanGrain Foreign Matter Grain Grain 
Outlet Outlet Mixture at Mixture at 
Clean Grain Sieve Under 
Outlet Flow 
(rpm) (kg/h) (kW) (1/h) (kg) (kg) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) 
Pre-cleaner 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
Cleaner Cum Grader 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 


n) Observation 


1) Presence of any marked vibration during operation 
2) Presence of undue knocking or rattling sound 

3) Frequent slippage of belts 

4) Smooth running of shafts in their respective bearings 
5) Frequent clogging of screen perforations 

6) Smooth flowing of material through different components 
7) Vibration free running of fan 

8) Frequent clogging of grain in elevator unit 

9) Any marked rise in bearing temperature 

10) Any marked wear, deformation and breakdown 

11) Frequent loosening of fasteners 

12) Other observations (if any) 


Test Engineer 


16 


IS 19039 : 2023 


ANNEX F 
(Clauses 9.7.2) 
DATA SHEET FOR ANALYSIS OF SAMPLES 


SI No. Feed Rates Source of Sample Mass, Mass of Clean Mass of Foreign Matter, Remarks 
Sample Grains, 


g g g 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 


Test Engineer 


17 


IS 19039 : 2023 


ANNEX G 


(Clause 9.7.3) 
DATA SHEET FOR EFFICIENCY, POWER REQUIREMENT AND CAPACITIES 


SI No. Item Test No. 
1 2 3 4 etc 
(1) (2) O 4 © © D 


i) Feed rate, in kg/h 

ii) Power required, in kW 

iii) Cleaning unit speed, in rpm 

iv) Total grain received at clean grain outlet, in kg 
v) Effectiveness of cleaning 


vi) Rated input capacity, in kg/h 


Test Engineer 


18 


2) 


DATA SHEET FOR LONG-RUN TEST 


Total Running Time, h 
Continuous Running Time, h 
Breakdowns in Cleaning Unit 
Breakdowns in Elevation Unit 
Breakdown in Body/Frame 
Any Major Repairs Conducted 


Any Other Observations 


ANNEX H 
(Clause 9.3.1.3 


19 


IS 19039 : 2023 


Test Engineer 


IS 19039 : 2023 


ANNEX J 
(Clause 9.9) 
SUMMARY REPORT 


Name and Address of Manufacturer 

Model Number 

Name of Testing Station 

Brief Description of the Cleaner Cum Grader 

Type and Variety of Millet Used 

Percentage of Foreign Matter Present Before Feeding 
Moisture Content of Raw Material, Percent, Wet Basis (w.b) 
Provisions for adjustment of: 


1) Shaking speed 

2) Screen slope 

3) Air displacement 
4) Feed rate 


Power requirement, kW 


1) Observed power at no-load 
2) Observed power at load at rated input capacity 
3) Observed power at maximum input capacity 


k) Effectiveness of Cleaning of Pre-cleaner 


m) Effectiveness of Cleaning of Cleaner Cum Grader 


n) Rated Input Capacity 


p) Any Marked Observation Affecting Performance 


q) Any Marked Breakdowns 


r) Input Grain, kg 


s) Output Grain, kg 


t) 


Other Observations 


20 


Test Engineer 


IS 19039 : 2023 


ANNEX K 


(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Agriculture and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 20 


Organization 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Agriculture Machinery Manufacturers Association, 
Pune 


CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar 


CSIR - Central Food Technological 
Institute, Mysuru 


Research 
Dr Panjabrao Deshmukh Krishi Vidyapeeth, Akola 
ICAR - Central Institute for Women in Agriculture, 


Bhubaneswar 


ICAR - Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, 
Bhopal 


ICAR - Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering 
and Technology, Ludhiana 


ICAR - Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, 
Bengaluru 


Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Indosaw Industrial Products Private 


Ambala 


Limited, 


Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, Rahuri 


Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture, 
New Delhi 


National Committee on Precision Agriculture and 
Horticulture, New Delhi 


National Institute of | Food Technology, 
Entrepreneurship and Management, Thanjavur 


North Eastern Region Farm Machinery Training and 
Testing Institute, Biswanath Chariali 


Northern Region Farm Machinery Training and 
Testing Institute, Hisar 


Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 


Representative(s) 
DR SHYAM NARAYAN JHA (Chairperson) 


DR SURENDRA SINGH 
SHRI MITUL PANCHAL (Alternate) 


DR RAVI GUPTA 


DR UMESH HEBBAR 
DR NAVIN KUMAR RASTOGI (Alternate) 


DR SUCHITA V. GUPTA 
DR BHAGYASHREE N. PATIL (Alternate) 


DR SACHIDANANDA SWAIN 
ER CHAITRALI S. MHATRE (Alternate) 


Dr S. K. GIRI 
DR RAVINDRA NAIK (Alternate) 


DR SANDEEP MANN 
DR SANDEEP P. DAWANGE (Alternate) 


DR A. CAROLINA RATHINA KUMARI 
DR S. BHUVANESWARI (Alternate) 


DR K. NARSAIAH 
DR KRISHNA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


DR VINOD H. KALBANDE 


DR VIKRAM PARASHARAM KAD 


SHRIC. R. LOHI 
SHRI Y. K. RAO (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND ZAMBRE 
SHRI KRISHNA KUMAR KAUSHAL (Alternate) 


DR S. BHUVANA 
DRP. P. RAO 
SHRI S. G. PAWAR (Alternate) 


DR MUKESH JAIN 
SHRI SANJAY KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR SANDHYA SINGH 
DR MANINDER KAUR (Alternate I) 
DR ROHIT SHARMA (Alternate II) 


21 


IS 19039 : 2023 


Organization 


Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore 


In Personal Capacity (CD 223, Ansal Golf Link 1, 
Greater Noida - 201315) 


In Personal Capacity (MIG - 154, E-7 Sector 
Aerea Colony, Bhopal - 462061) 


In Personal Capacity (12/36 Sowbhagya Nagar, A 
Block Civil, Aerodrome Post, Coimbatore - 


641014) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


DR V. THIRUPATHI 
DR P. RAJKUMAR (Alternate I) 
DR P. SUDHA (Alternate ID) 


DR PITAM CHANDRA 


SHRI S. D. DESHPANDE 


DR R. VISVANATHAN 


SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI PRADEEP SHARMA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(FOOD AND AGRICULTURE), BIS 


Panel to Formulate New Standards on Equipment Used in Primary Processing of Millet, FAD20/P16 


Organization 


ICAR - Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, 
Bhopal 


ICAR - Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering and 
Technology, Ludhiana 


Indian Institute of Millet Research, Hyderabad 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore 


National Institute of Food Technology, Enterpreneurship 
and Management, Thanjavur 


University of Agricultural Sciences, Raichur 


In Personal Capacity (12/36 Sowbhagya 
Aerodrome Post, Coimbatore - 641014) 


Nagar, 


22 


Representative(s) 


DR RAVINDRA NAIK (Convenor) 
DR DEBABANDYA MOHAPATRA 


DRR. K. VISHWAKARMA 


DR B. DAYAKAR RAO 
DR P. SUDHA 


DR V. PALALNIMUTHU 


DR UDAY KUMAR NIDONI 


DR R. VISVANATHAN 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 20 (22769). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


