IS: 4111 (Put

IV)-1960 ( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR ANCILLARY STRUCTURES IN SEWERAGE SYSTEM
PART IV PUMqlNG STATIONS AND (RISING MAINS) PUMPING MAINS

( Sixth Reprint FEBRUARY 1992 )

UDC

628.2.001.3t628.292

@ Copyright

1969
STANDARDS

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

MANAK BHP;VAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 5

I , Adizrch 1969

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR ANCILLARY STRUCTURES IN SEWERAGE SYSTEM
PART IV PUMPING STATIONS AND (RISING\ MAINS) PUMPING MAINS

Composition

of Water Supply and Sanitation

Sectional
Representing

Committee,

BDC 24

Chairman
SHRI Pi. V. MODAK

Instjtution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta
Centrai Public Health Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ) , Nagpur

Mcmbcis PROP S. J. ARCEIVALA

SHR~J. M. DAVE (A!!emati) The Indian Iron Sr Steel Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI H. R. B~~YAI. SHR~ K. R. P.~NDALAI ( Altnnafc ) The Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay SHRI J. R. BHAI.LA Don-Oliver ( India ) Ltd, Bombay D,R B. V. BH~~TA SHRI T. R. KRISHXA RAO ( Alternote ) Local Self Government Engineering Department, CHIEF ENGINEER Lucknow SUPERINTENDINGENQIIEF,R ( Afhmafe) CHIEP ENCXNEER( WATER ) Delhi Municipal Corporation DRAINAGE ENQINEER ( Alternate ) SHKI V.. D. DESA~ Bombay Municipal Corporation SHRI D. R. BHI~E ( Afternate) SHHI T. DUI~AI~IA.I Ministry of Health. Family Planning & Urban Development SI~RI S. RADHAKRISHNAN ( Alfernatr j !`ublic Health Department, Government of Madras SHHI M. E. HUSSA~N Sn~rr 1). R. JAOANNATH RAO Public Health Department. Govrrnment of Madhya Pradesh SHRI R. c. JER>\TH Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHILI P. %.~HAIx~~ ( Alremafe ) Corporatiun of Madras SHRI M. A. ~.411T11 The Hindustan Construction Co Ltd. Bombay SIIRI M. Y. M.~DAN Public Works Department, Government of Mysore SHH~ B. S. M~HANTHANNAVAR SHltt K. S. MEH'PA In personal capacity ( 78 Prithnm .Na.gor, Mangaldas All SHHI S. K. MAJUWIJPII

India Institute of Hygirnr & Public Health, Calcutta Public Ht*allh Engineering Department, Government of West Bengal
( Continued on pap 2 )

.RUREAU OF INDIAN MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
ZXFAR MAKG

SHAH NEW DELI11 110002

IS:4111 (Part Iv)

-1968

SRRI B. K. MALHAN John Tinaon & Co Private Ltd, New Delhi SHRI K. S. NARYANAN Central Public Worka Department SHRI G. A. PA~MANABHAN S. D. Marker & Co Private Ltd, New Delhi SHRI S. V. PATWARDHAN University of Roorkcc, Roorkee Public Health Engineering Department, Trivandrum SHRI P. S. RAJAQOPALAN SARI D. APPUKUTTAN NAIR ( Altmofe ) Public Works Dcoartment. Government of Puniab SHRI D. R. SINGAL Ministry of Rail&a ' TOWN ENQINEER, CHI~RANJAN LOCOMOTIVE WORKS Director General, ISI ( Er-O@O Mumbn) SHRI R. NAOARAJAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) salx&ary SHRI C. R. Deputy Director
RAMA RAO

( Civ Bngg ), ISI
Mains Panel, BDC 24/P3

Pumping

Stations

and

Pumping

SHRI S. K. MAJUXDER Members SXRI D. APPUKUTTAN NAIR SHRI J. M. DAVE SHRI D. R; JAOAIITNATH RAO

Public Health Engineering of West Bengal

Department,

Governmcnr

SHRI P. L. JAIN SHRI R. B. PATEL ( Al~rnatc) Kirloskar Brothers Limited, Kirloskarvadi SHRI M. A. JALIHAL SHHI D. D. ABHYANKAR (Alternate) SHRI S. RADHAKRISHNAN Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals

Health Deoartment. Trivandrum / Central Public Heahh Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur Public Health Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh Jyoti Ltd, Bar&a

2

IS:4111 (Part IV)-1968

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR ANCILLARY S-l-RUC-kJRES IN SEWERAGE SYSTEM
PART IV PUMPING STATIONS AND (RISING MAINS) PUMPING MAINS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part IV) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 16 October 1968, after the draft finalized by the Water Supply and Sanitation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 In a sewerage system ancillary structures like manholes, inverted syphons ( where provided ) are necessary appurtenances for proper functioning. This part of the standard on ancillary structures in sewerage system gives guidance for design and construction of pumping stations and pump ing mains. The other parts of the standard are the following: Code of practice for ancillary structures IS:4111 (Part I)-1967 in sewerage system: Part I Manholes IS:4111 (Part II)-1967 Code of practice for ancillary strllctures in sewerage system: Part II Flushing tanks IS: 4111 (Part III)-1967 Code of practice for ancillary structures in sewerage system: Part III Inverted syphons 0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded IS:2-1960*. off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part IV) lays down requirements for location, design, construction, equipment and safety precautions for installation of pumping stations and pumping mains used in sewerage system. *R&s for roundingoff numericalvalue; ( revised ). 3

IS:4111

(Part

IV)-1968 OF PUMPING STATIONS

2. LOCATION

2.1 General -The area in which the pumping station is situated is fixed generally by the duty it has to perform, but the precise site may vary so as to take into account the following considerations:
a) As pumping stations are frequently in low.-lying areas, considcration should be given to the possibility of flooding anti information should be obtained as to the highest recorded foocl levels in the area. b) The pumping station site should be above tht` l~i!ghcst recorded flood level, but when construction on ground liable to flood is unavoidable, it should be so designed that motors are well above the highest recorded flood level and above the coping of the wet well or suction chamber. c) The site should be selected if possible so that in the event of power failure any overffow which occurs may be diverted or will find its way into watercourse without causing flooding or serious damage to prol,erty; however, this should not pollute any watercourse used for drinking water purposes. 2.2

Nature

of Ground

2.2.1 Investigations of the nature of the ground should be made before a site is selected, and if the station involves deep excavation trial holes should be ,dug or boreholes drilled for this purpose. The level of the ground water should be recorded, as a high standing water-level may require special constructional methods.
2.2.2 Where the area is subject to underground working, such as coal or salt mining the site of the pumping station should be selected so as to be free as far as possible from the danger of subsidence. 2.3 Nuisance-A pumping station should be located as distant as possible from the residential propertres on account of possibility of complaints for noise or smell. 3. CAPACITY

OF PUMPING

STATIONS

variations in the rates of flow depend largely is for sanitary sewage or storm water or both. Pumping station should be capable of dealing with the daily and seasonal variations of the inflow. 3.2 If a pumping station is to be added to an existing system, records of the flow over as long a period as available should be obtained and the conditions to be anticipated in the future estimated therefrom.

3.1 Rates of Flow-The upon whether the station

4

IS:4111 (Part IV)- 1968 3.3 pumping Capacity- The number and capacity of the pumping units should be chosen'@ that fluctuations in the pumping rates are not considerable and also sb that under normal conditions frequent cutting in and cuttir@out is avoided. The number of different sized units should be selected after studying the overall economy and should be kept as low aspossible to facilitate repairs and to reduce the number ofnecessary spares ma minimum. 3.4 Stand-by pumps should be installed of sufficient capacity that with any one pump out of service, the remainder may deal with the peak flow. 3.5 In the case of electrically driven pumps, consideration should be given to the possibility of failure of the power supply. Duplication of power lines and switch gears may be desirable in the case of large instaliations. If serious flooding would result from electrical power failure, stand-by plant using some other. source of power should be provided. 4. PUMPS 4.1 Requirement of Sewage Pump - A sewage pump should be reliable and unchokable and accessible for quick maintenance, robust and wear resisting and some measure of overall efficiency may have to be sacrificed to secure these properties. 4.1.1 The type of pttmp to be installed at each pumping station should be judged on its merits in relation to the rate of pumping the total head, the physical composition of the sewage, septicity and preliminary treatment before pumping. 4.1.2 The types of pump available for handling of sewage may be divided broad.ly into three groups: a) Roto dynamic, b) Reciprocating, and c) Pneumatic. 4.2 Roto-Dynamic Pumps - Roto-dynamic pumps are more suitable and adoptable for sewage pumping purposes. They should conform to the requirements specified in the ' Indian Standard specification for rotor dynamic special purpose pumps " ( underpreparation ) and ` Indian Standard specification for sewage and drainage pumps ' ( under preparation j.
-- Until the Indian Standards referred to in 4.2 are published, NOTE shall be subject to agreement between the concerned parties.

the requirementa

4.2.1 The priming of all types of rota-dynamic pumps require specia: consideration especially when the sewage to be handled may be septic and, therefore, liable to generate gas. It is recommended to locate the pump so that there is a positive `head of sewage above the impeller of the pump on the suction side when starting up, particularly on automatically operated pumping stations for intermittent duty.

IS:4111 (Part IV)-1968 4.3 Reciprocating Pumps

4.3.1 Reciprocating pumps are not recommended for the pumping of sewage except in special circumstances, such as unusually high head. This type of pump when specially designed to run at .slow speed may be used for the pumping of sludge. 4.3.2 The reciprocating pump is heavy, of large dimension in relation to capacity, reliable, highly efficient when first installed, capable of operating with a suction lift and of discharging with very high heads but is susceptible to chocking, heavy wear-and-tear and loss of etllciency through `wear and valve jamming. The reciprocating pump may be either of the single-acting or double-acting type, but preliminary treatment to remove abrasive and other solids is advisable in the case of double acting pumps. Reciprocating pumps require essentially slow speed drive and gearing may be required between the pump and the prime mover. They afford very little flexibility in discharge capacity but will maintain a steady rated discharge over a wide variation in head duty. 4.3.3 Sewage should be screened with fine screen in order to prevent chocking of the valve mechanism by solids contained in the sewage. 4.4 Pneumatic Ejectors-The pneumatic ejector is a simple method of pumping sewage where reliability and ease of maintenance are of greater importance than overall efficiency. They are particularly applicable where a small quantity of sewage has to be pumped against relatively small heads, more especially in isolated installations, but are not recommended for larger installations. 4.4.1 The installation usually comprises an automatic self-starting aircompressor, air storage and the ejectors. At least two ejectors should be provided to Ocilitate repairs, and where breakdown would have serious result a secor.d air compressor should be provided. In residential areas the exhaust from the ejectors should be efficiently silenced. It is possible to serve several ejector stations from one central air compressing station if the distances are not too great. . 5. PRIME MOVERS

5.1 Choice of Prime Mover -The prime mover selected to drive a sewage pump should be reliable, robust, efficient, and silent in operation and the choice of plant to be provided at each installation should be judged on its merits in relation to the availability of a power or fuel supply and should be suitable for the type of pumping unit which has been selected as most suitable for the duty to be performed. It will be necessary to balance capital cost, running cost, and maintenance costs for each type of plant before reaching a decision, and consideration should also be given to the effect of possible interruption in the supply of power or fuel from causes outside the sewage authority's control. 6

1$:4111(Part 5.2 The types pumps are: a) electric b) internal of prime motor; mover commonly available fdr driving

IV)-1968 sewage

and engine (diesel oil, petrol or gas).

combustion

5.2.1 Electric Motor -The electric motor is a convenient, cheap and reliable prime-mover for all types of sewage pumping and many varieties of electric motor are available to suit particular conditions of duty to be performed by a sewage pump ( see IS: 325-1961* and IS:4722-1968t). 5.2.1.1 An electric motor is particularly automatically operated, unattended station, been developed to a high degree of perfection suitable for adoption at an automatic controls having and reliability.

5.2.1.2 The adoption of electricitv as the source of power, though reliable in itself, depends on the availability of the electricity supply. Where there is danger of interruption of the supply and the consequent risk of flooding with sewage which is unavoidable if pumping ceases, consideration should be given to backing up the public electricity supply with a stand-by independeqt generating plant; alternatively a ring main supply ensuring availability of pow& from two sources may meet the case. 5.2.1.3 Motors used for pumping of sewage shall be of drip-proof type.

5.2.2 Internal Combustion Engine ( Diesel Oil, Gas or Petrol ) -The are the details:

following

4

Diesel Oil-The diesel engine is a reliable, efficient type of prime mover for sewage pumping, but is heavy, expensive in capital cost and requires'heavy foundations, ample housing structure, and the continuous attendance of a properly skilled technician for operation and maintenance. It may be used to drive sewage pumps of all types.

b)

gas engine is comparable in all respects with the diesel engine except that, when operated on a gas supply, the running costs are apt to be high and its operation becomes dependent on the availability of gas from an outside source. Sewage gas, a bye-product of sewage purification Gas engine should be used as a fuel for a gas engine. of operating on oil as an alternative fuel. work, may be capable

Gas -The

Cl

Petrol --The petrol engine is rarely adopted as a form of primemover at a pertnanent sewage pumping station owing to the comparatively high fuel and maintenance cost.
for three-phase induction motors for rotating electrical machines ( rscond revision ).

*Specification +Qex3ication

( Third revision in 1970)

7

IS:4111 (Part IV)-1ssS 6. PUMP CONTROLS 6.1 Electrically Driven Pumps 6.1.1 Automatic -Automatic control may be provided for either ac or dc motor but overriding and supplimentary manual control should be included in the panel for emergency use. A float controlled switch or other suitable means, operated by the sewage level in the wet well, is used to actuate the main power control panel. In all cases the motor should have no-volt and overload protection, and the control gear made proof against adjustment or tampering while the current is on, by a mechanical and electrical interlock. 6.1.2 Manual -Manual control of electrically driven pumps should be provided separately, incorporated in an automatic control panel or may be. the sole means of operation. Emergency control, that is, stop buttons together with no-volt and overload release as well as controls against phase failure should be fitted in all cases. 6.2 Gas or Gil Engine Driven Pumps -`Automatic control may be used for electrical ignition .and compression ignition engines; but manual control is recommended for internal combustion engine prime mover. 7. PUMPING STATION 7.1 Site Investigation IS : 1892-1962' This should be carried out in accordance with

7.2 Sub-Structure - This usually consists of two underground compartments separated by a common wall, namely, a dry well to house the pumping plant, pipe work and control valves and a wet well containing thepsewage to be pumped. 7.2.1
Wet Well

7.2.1.1 Capacity of wet well -Most design principles base detention upon the average design rate flow, but the maximum and minimum rates are the determining factors in sizing the,wet well. The desired results may be accomplished if the size of the wet well is such that, with any combination of inflow and pumping, the cycle of operation for each pump will not be less than 5 minutes and a maximum retention time in the wet well not exceeding 30 minutes. 7.2.1.2 Shape - The wet well shall be so shaped as to have the suction The of several pumps suitably placed apart and.drawing from a channel. shape of the wet well should also conform to the shape of the pump house I *Code of practice for site investigations for foundations. 8 r_

IS:4111

(Part IV)-1968 settle-

and one which permits proper spacing of suction pipes, minimizes rnrLnt of solids and avoids formation of scum and dead-pockets, 7.2.1.3 f&or s&e-The sludge to <gravitate to pump than 1.1. bottom suction

slope should be such as to permit the and in Rio case it should be flatter

7.2.1.4 Construction-The structure as a tvhole should be designed to resist floatation due to external water pressme. Normal materials of construction, that is stone, brick, concrete or reinforced concrete may be used as available after giving clue consideration to the type of sewage to be pumped. When the sewage is corrosive a facing of special brick or cement concrete prepared out of acid resistant cement should be provided. c 7.2.2 Dry Well-Where, the dry well is to be constructed in reinforced cement concrete, it should be designed in accordance with IS : 3370 (Part II)-1965* or any other practice as may be approved by the authority. Where other materials are used, walls and floors subject-to external water pressure should be rendered waterproof. 7.2.2.1 PII@ foundationsA separate foundation block should be provided for each pump. When built in concrete, this should be constructed as an integral part of the floor of the dry well, the holes for holding down bolts being boxed to the required depth when pouring the concrete. Any desired decorative facing may be applied after the pump stool or bed plate has been correctly set and grouted in. 7.2.2.2 Lighting and ventilation -Adequate lighting and ventilation should be arrahged itlside the dry well. Mechanical ventilation may be necessary to supplement. natural ventilation for enclosed stations (see IS : 3103-19657). 7.2.2.3 arrangement 7.3 Dry well floor should be sloped to a small sump with adequate for dewatering.

Super-Structure

7.3.1 Engine OY Motcr Room-Although the term super-structure applies normally to a building erected above the existing ground level, it may be Sufficient floor space at both motor applied to an underground station. and pump level should be provided for dismantling and overhaul. 7.3.2 Travelling Gantries for Handling Pumps and Motors- An average travelling crane should be included in the machinery to be installed particularly in large station and arrangements made for its installation before that of the pumps. Chain controls for such a crane shall be of sufficient
*Code of practice for concrete structures for the storage of liquids: Part II Reinforced concrete atructurcs. tCodc of practice for industrial ventilation.

9

IS:4111 (Part IV)-1968 length to permit operationlat both motor and pump flo>r level. A hatch in the roof should be provided where necessary in case of vertical spindle driven pumps. 7.3.3 Lighting-The structure should be well.lighted and distribution of lighting points for the pumping station should be such that long flexes are avoided. 7.3.4 Architectural Finish - The superstructure of the pumping station should have a pleasing and attractive architectural treatment and a good landscaping for the surround is recommended. 7.3.5 Precautions Against JVuisance - Nuisance may be caused by a sewage pumping station by smell, noise, electrical interference, or vibration. 7.3.5.1 To control the smel it is desirable that the sewage be retained in the wet well for the shor t est possible time and that screenings be removed as soon as they have accumulated. 7.3i5.2 Noise may be reduced by employirig special silent motors, and double windows are of assistance in this respect. 7.3.5.3 Electrical interference may produce complaints from nearby radio set users and may only be eliminated by careful attention to the maintenance of brush and commutator g*ar and cleanliness of control gear generally. 7.3.5.4 Vibration from modern pumping set on individual foundation blocks should be negligible, but in exceptional cases insulation of the foundation from the building by suitable means should prevent transmission where vibration might occur [see IS : 2974 ( Part I )-1964* 1. 7.3.6 Protection of Plantfrotn Flooding -Flooding of a pumping station may occPlr because the pumps and accessories have been neglected or because of external circumstances. Suitable overflow arrangements for the wet well should be provided, where feasible, as a protection against flooding due to breakdown of plant or failure of the power supply. 7.4 Flow Recorders - It is desirable to measure the flow at an individual pumping station and it may be arranged either on the connecting sewer, at the inlet to the station, on the rising main, or at the delivery end. At the inlet and discharge ends flumes or weirs may be used and on the rising main venturi meter or orifice plates may be used for the measurement of flow. Recording and integrating devices may be installed on these measuring devices, if required. 7.5 Lay-out of Plant and Pipe Work -Equipment in a pumping station should be sited to permit the ease of operation and maintenance. *Codeofpracticefor design and construction
for reciprocating type machinca. of machine foundations: ( Since revised ). Part I Foundations

10

IS:4111 (Part Iv)-196fi 7.5.1 Pumps 7.5.1.1 Dry-well pumps-This is the most suitable methods of installation, as the machines are always accessible and gland packing and other ' routine maintenance may be achieved without considerable mess and trouble. 7.5.1.2 Submerged wet well PumPs-This type of installation is not suitable for permanent use for sewage pumping. A typical arrangement is shown in Fig. 1. horizontal, directly coupled pump 7.5.1.3 Horizontal aaft pumps -The set is free from some of the disadvantages of the vertical set and may be preferable when the depth of the installation is, say 4.5 m or less. It requires considerably more floor space than a vertical shaft pump. On the other hand intermediate bearings on the shaft are not required and the set is more easily-maintained; however, horizontal shaft pumps are not suitable for wet wells. A typical illustration of horizontal shaft dry well type pump is given in Fig. 2. 7.5.1.4 Vertical shaft pum#s -The vertical spindle pump has the advantage that the motor may be placed above the flood level to save it from being flooded due to break down of the pump or any other cause. This pump may be driven by a vertical-spindle electrical motor or through The vertical shaft may be of any gearing from a horizontal prime-mover. length; if required sufficient intermittent bearing should be provided to ensure steadiness. The space occupied by such a set is less than that occupied by a horizontal set of similar capacity. A typical arrangement is shown in Fig. 3. 7.5.1.5 Direct coupled vertically - Given suitable conditions, the tvpe of pump set in which the motor is directly mounted on a stool bolted directly to the casing of a vertical pump requires less space and may conveniently be controlled at one level. A typical arrangement is shown in Fig. 4. 7.5.2 Internal Pi@ M'ork

i

+.

7.5.2.1 Pipe connections- All pipe joints within the pump house should be flanged. Where a number of pumps discharge into a common delivery it is very desirable that connections to the mains should be made in horizontal direction, to avoid accumulation of silt and debris in vertical pipes connected to the pumps. 7.5.2.2 Valves-Valves both.sluice and reflex should be as accessible as possible. Sluice valves on horizontal pipe lines should never be inclined Where valve hand wheels are at more than 45 degrees to the vertical. difficult to approach for operation, the spindle should be extended and head-stocks fitted at a convenient level for operation. Such head-stocks may be off set from the valve spindle centre line by inserting suitable 11

IS14111 (Part IV)-1!368 universal .joints in the spindle extension. Non-return or reflux valves, should be inserted as near the pump as possible and in a horizontal position. 7.5.2.3 r/se of standard sficials comply with IS: 1538-1969* Standard specials, wher& used, should

IS:4111 (Part IV)-l!MJ 7.5.2.4 As a precaution against fracture and for ease of assembly, suitable flexible joint may, be used where pipe passes through valve and a puddle flange should be provided, built intn the wall. 7.5.2.5 Suction pipe arrangement-The minimum distance between the suction pipes within a sump should be five times the diameter, centre to centre or 50 cm between flanges whichever is greater.

Frc.2 TYPICAL ILLUSTRATION OF HORIZONTAL SHAFT
DRY WELL TYPE PUMP

13

Is:4111 (port Iv)-l!Ma

FIG.3 TYPICAL ILLUSTRATION OF VERTICALSHAFT DRY WELL TYPE PUMP

IsAl

(Part IV)-1968

WET WELL

M

V

FIG. 4. TYPICAL ILLUSTRATION OF DIRECT MOUNTED VERTICAL SEWAGE Pum 8. PUMPING
8.1 Velocity

MAINS ( RISING MAINS)

in Mains-In order to avoid sedimentation, the minimum desirable velocity is 0.8 m/s. At the maximum, pumping rate velocity in Within the above limits, economic excess of 1.8 rnls are undesirable. velocity usually falls between 0.8 m/s and l-2 m/s at the normal pumping rate.

8.2 Duplication circumstances:

of

Mains -This

may be desirable

in the following

4 b) 4

To provide a stand-by rising main in the event of the other mains being temporarily out of action. To accommodate storm water flow which could not be carried in a single main within the limits of velocity given in 8.1. TO permit parallel working of centrifugal pumps where this is proposed but where the characteristic of the pumps do not lend themselves to combined working through a single main.

IS:4111 (Part 8.3 Spithili~

IV)-1968

ment of the pipeline

of Joints and Be& - In order to obviate any displacedue to the pressure of flood, each bend should be properly anchored in a block of concrete. Where the main is inadequately covered or is exposed it should be suitably anbhored to prevent displacement of the joints under pressure. circumstances in

8.4 Valves oh Ppmping Mains -Subject to special individual cases, valves should be located as follows:

a) Rejluu Values-Immediately

above the pump to reduce back surge and water hammer, and should be placed on the horiz,ontal portion of the main. External levers may be provided to facilitate drainage of the pumping main arid back washing. `c

b)

Sluice Valves-As an isolating valve on the suction side of the pump and also above reflux valve to enable this to be readily isolated in the event of its requiring attention, for example, to clear a clogged seating; also at points on main where required to isolate sectiors. Val7w--Sufficient number summit points as required. of air valves should be provided at

C) Air 4

M'ash-out Values and Hatch Box-These should be provided at low points where a suitable means is available for the disposal of the drainage and their use should be confined to the emergency.

8.5 Materials and Construction 8.5.1 Gray Cast Iron ( Vertical Cad or Spun) -They should be of a suitable class to withstand the hydraulic firessure and external loads. The cast iron pipe should conform to IS : 1536-1967* or IS : 1537-l 9607 and the fittings shotild conform to IS: 1538-1969:. 8.5.2 Steel Pipes-Where steel pipes are used, increased and protective internal lining may be necessary to allow for sion and the pipe should he wrapped with a protective IS : 1239-19644). 8.5.3 Asbestos Cement Pressure Pipes -Asbestos cement should conform to IS: 1592-196Ojl. wall thickness possible corrosheathing (see pressure pressure pipes pipes

8.5.4 Reinjorced

Cement

Concrete

Pipes -

Cement

concrete

where used should conform *Specification for centrifugally
(First revision) tSpecification $Specification revision ) @pecificatioq parts). IlSpecification 1971)

to IS : 458-1961
cast ( spun ) iron pressure pipes for water, gas and sewage

:
for vertically cast iron pressure pipes for water, gas,and sewage. for cast iron fittings for pressure pi+ for water, gas and sewage. for mild steel tubes and tubulars ( rsviscd)

( First

( Second revision issued in two
in

for asbestos cement pressure pipes. ( Since revised). llSpecificati(~rlfor concrete pipes with and without reinforcement. ( Second revision

I
16

IS:4111 (Part IV)-1968 9. SAFETY MEASURES 9.1' General-The pumping station shall have all necessary precautions incorporated in the design and construction. 9.2 Wet Well 9.2.1 This should not be directly connected by any opening to the dry well or super-structure to prevent explosive gas leakage. 9.2.2 It should be properly ventilated means directly to outside if required. * ,> by suitable vents or mechanical provided [see IS: 4111 safety

9.2.3 Cast iron step iron should be suitably (Part X)-1967*,]. 9.3 Dry-Well and Super-Structure

9.3.1 All vertical drops in floor level should be protected with hand-rails and especially when the depth of the well exceeds two metres. 9.3.2 Electrical equipment and wiring should be properly insulated and grounded, and switches and controls shotrid be of non-sparking type. All wiring and devices in hazardous areas should be explosion-proof.

_*Specification

_for ancil!ary structures in sewerage system: Part I Manholes.

17

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah tafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( Common to all Offices ) Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 *Eastern : l/l 4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I, P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-448, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 180038 Telephone 331 ,oj 31 331 1375 I 38 24 99

21843 I 3 1841 41 24 42 41 25 19 q Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 800113 ( 41 2918 tWestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Mare!, Andheri ( East ), 8 32 92 95 BOMBAY 400093 4 i Branch Offices: 2 83 48 . `Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur. AHMADABAD 380001 2 83 49 I +,Peenya lndust rial Area 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road 38 49 55 38 49 56 BANGALORE 560058 I 887 16 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 482003 5 36 27 Plot No. 82/83. Lewis Road. BHUBANESHWAR 751002 3 31 77 53j5. Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, GUWAVATI 781003 23 1083 5-8-56C L.`N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), HYDERABAD 500001 83471 R14 Yudhister Marg. C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 I 8 98 32 21 88 78 1171418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 { 21 82 92 8 23 05 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 I8 21 04 T.C. No, 14/1,421. University P.O.. Palayam 18 21 17 TRIVANDRUM 695035 /nspection Offices ( With Sale Point ): Pushpanjali. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, ;-Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 2 6171 5 24 35

*Sales Office in Calcutta is a15 ChowringheeApproach, P. 0. Ptincep 27 68 00 Street. Calcutta 700072 " tSeler Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, 89 86 28 Bombay 400007 #Sales Office in Bangal& Bangalore 560002 is at Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, 22 36 71

Reprography

Unit,

MS,

New Delhi,

India

