UAT Wiad IS 16400 : 2015 
Indian Standard EE 


wanda ae A weather 
elen vote art tq — 
Tea faert 


Establishing Multiple 
Grades/Ratings in Indian 
Standards — Guidelines 


ICS 01.120 


© BIS 2015 


ada AM At 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© HAF gz, 9 eaae WAL mm, ae feeeit-110002 
mle ere og MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2015 Price Group 1 


Documentation and Information Sectional Committee, MSD 05 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Documentation 
and Information Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division Council. 


Indian Standards on products generally prescribe optimum quality and performance requirements. Grades/Rating/ 
Classes/Types have been used interchangeably in many Indian Standards primarily to define different requirements 
based on different functional use. The same terms are in some cases used for prescribing different quality or 
performance requirements for same functional use in products. 


Specifying multiple grades/ratings in Indian Standards provides an opportunity to manufacturers/service providers 
to scale up the quality as well as performance of their products and services. This can also play a crucial role in 
the marketing of products/services. Introducing grades/ratings of products in Indian Standard also help the 
consumer in making an informed choice for a particular product, suitable to his utility requirement, within his 
expectations and budget. It is, further, expected that the incorporation of multiple grades/ratings in Indian Standards 
shall reduce the time taken for formulating these standards, where consensus can not be reached on one optimum 
value for a particular requirement. 


Grades/Ratings of a product should be specified on the basis of different levels of quality/performance 
requirement(s) for same functional use in products intended to provide multiple choice to consumers. 


The terms ‘Classes’ or ‘Types’ should be used for the purpose of defining requirements based on different 
functional use. Products with different functional use should also be covered in different standards or parts of 
standards rather than being given different classes/types within the same standard/part of a standard. 


This Indian Standard has been formulated to provide guidelines to be followed by technical committees to introduce 
a uniform system of specifying grades/ratings in Indian Standard. This will also help other standards developing 
organizations to introduce grades/ratings, wherever possible, in the product/service standards. 


IS 16400 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


ESTABLISHING MULTIPLE GRADES/RATINGS IN 
INDIAN STANDARDS — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down the guidelines for establishing 
multiple grades/ratings of products/services, wherever 
possible based on the product quality or performance 
requirements on the basis of same functional use. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Functionality — The actions and activities 
assigned to or required or expected of a product. 


2.2 Grade — A category or rank given to different 
quality requirements for products having the same 
functional use. 


2.3 Process — A set of interelated or interacting 
activities which transform inputs into outputs. 


2.4 Product — A result of a process or set of processes. 
It also includes services. 


2.5 Quality — A degree to which a set of inherent 
characteristics fulfils requirements. 


2.6 Rating — A category or rank given to different 
performance requirement for product having same 
functional use 


2.7 Requirement — A set of characteristics required 
to be fulfilled to meet the functional need of a product. 


2.8 Services — The result of activity necessarily 
performed at the interface between supplier and 
customer and is generally intangible. 


3 OBJECTIVES 


3.1 The main objective of specifying multiple grades/ 
ratings of a product is to provide the consumer with 
multiple choice based on different levels of quality or 
performance suitable to his utility requirement within 
his expectations and capacity. 


3.2 Specifying multiple grades/ratings also provides 
an opportunity to manufacturers to scale up the quality 
as well as performance of their products. 


3.3 Incorporation of multiple grades/ratings in Indian 
Standards is expected to reduce the time taken for 
formulating these standards, where, consensus can not 
be reached on one optimum value for a particular 
Requirement. 


4 The terms ‘Grade’ or ‘Rating’ shall not be used to 
define requirement(s) based on different functional use. 
The terms ‘Class’ or “Type’ shall be used for defining 
requirements based on different industrial use. To the 
extent possible, products having different functional 
use shall be covered in different parts of a standard or 
by using the terms ‘Type’, ‘Class’, etc, to define such 
requirements. 


5 BASIS FOR GRADES/RATINGS 


5.1 Grade shall be assigned to a product to define 
different levels of quality requirements. 


5.2 Rating shall be assigned to a product to define 
different levels of performance requirements. 


5.3 A product may be considered suitable for multiple 
grades/ratings based on the following criteria: 


a) Products, the operation or use of which entail 
consumption of energy or other resources, 
where higher level of efficiency can be 
achieved by suitable modification in design 
or other aspects; 


b) Performance relating to mitigation of any 
adverse impacts, such as to the environment/ 
health, etc, over and above any such minimum 
requirements for the product; and 

c) Different values/limits of a particular 
requirement arrived at based on economic 
considerations. 


5.4 An indicative (but not exhaustive) list of 
requirements which may be suitable for incorporating 
multiple grades/ratings in Indian Standards is as given 
below: 


a) Energy efficiency/Fuel efficiency, 
b) Sound levels, 


c) Water consumption/Efficiency in the use of 
water, 


d) Quality of products (for example, Food), 


e) Emission levels (less than the maximum 
permissible), 


f) Security level, and 


g) Any other requirement considered suitable for 
grades/ratings. 


5.5 Not more than five requirements of a product shall 
be considered for multiple grades/ratings in a standard. 


IS 16400 : 2015 


5.6 All grades/ratings shall meet any prevailing 
regulatory requirements. Wherever, rating scheme of 
any other regulatory agency is existing, the same shall 
be integrated with the relevant Indian Standard. 


5.7 The minimum requirements for health and safety 
of a product shall be uniformly applicable for all 
categories of products irrespective of its grades/ratings. 


5.8 Rating in the case of service sector, such as hotels, 
hospitals, airports, educational institutions, etc, shall 
be defined based on the facilities/services provided. 


5.9 Normally, multiple grades/ratings shall be given 
only when there is a significant variation in the price 
that a consumer is required to pay for the product with 
different grades/ratings. 


6 CRITERIA FOR NUMBER OF GRADES/ 
RATINGS 


6.1 Number of grades/ratingsto be introduced for the 
product may depend upon the criticality of the quality 
and performance requirements, end usage and target 
customer. The number of grades/ratings to be 
introduced for defining quality/performance shall be 
a minimum of two and a maximum of five. 


6.2 While assigning grades, the highest quality 
requirements specified in the standard shall be given 
the lowest notation (Grade I) and the lowest permissible 
quality requirement shall be specified for the highest 
notation (Grade V) 


The following notations for product grades shall be used: 


Grade (I) for highest achievable level of quality 
Grade (II) 
Grade (III) 
Grade (IV) 
Grade (V) for lowest level of quality 
6.3 While assigning ratings, the minimum performance 
requirements specified in the standards shall be given 


the lowest notation (Rating I) and the maximum 
requirement shall be given highest notation (Rating V). 


The following notation for product ratings shall be 
used: 
Rating (I) for lowest level of performance 
Rating (II) 
Rating (II) 
Rating (IV) 
Rating (V) for highest achievable level of 


performance 


6.4 There shall be clear demarcation in the 
requirements between any two grades/ratings and there 
shall not be any overlap of requirements on which it is 
graded/rated. 


6.5 While formulating standards, 


a) lowest rating shall be benchmarked against 
the mininmum requirements, and 


b) highest rating to be benchmarked with the 
world’s best. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 05 (0518). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.IL.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


