UDC 001,4:621-86

IS ~10463 I Part VI \-

1993

Indian

Standard

( Reaffirmed 1999 )

Isl

1

I

GLOSSARY OF TERMS FOR BULK HANDLING EQUIPMENT
PART VI CYCLIC LOOSE BULK HANDLING EQUIPMENT (NO-N-STATIONARY)

1. Scope -Covers the definitions equipment ( non-stationary ). 2. Terminology 2.1 Accumulator - A reservoir and demand of power supply. 2.2 All Wheel Drive -A wheels of the equipment. 2.3 Angle Dozer 2.4 Apron -

of terms

used

in connection

with

cyclic

loose

bulk

handling

of energy

for use in the event of emergencies/fluctuations equipment, where power is transmitted

in supply

wheeled

earthmoving

to all

the

See 2.190X.2. gate of a scraper body. one unit or against total the other weight at in multiunit each machine, and axls in

The front

effected by rotating 2.5 Articulated Steering - Steering vehicles. This is also referred as steering by articulation. 2.6 Axle Weight Disfribution ( machine empty~and loaded 1. Distribution of machine

weight

2.7 Back Blading - The process of moving a dozer, grader or a similar blade equipped reverse to achieve a smooth levelling of loose soil already disturbed by excavation. attachment to the basic equipment such as excavators, 2.6 Back Hoe -An where excavation is achieved by pullHng the bucket towards the equipment. 2.9 Ballast - Heavy material except to increase the weight tractors

loaders

such as iron, sand, water, etc, which has no function in order to balance and/or stabilize the machine. above a digging position. or trucking position level.

in the machine Generally, lossening any or

a mass of soil rising 2.10 Bank -Specifically, mass of so~il which is to be dug from its natural 2.11 Bank excavation.

Measure - Volume of soil or rock measured It is measured in bank metres. of soil

in its original

before

metres 2.12 Bank Cubic Metres -Cubic digging. Also known as `Bank Metres'. 2.113 Blade 2.14 Bleed Usually

or rock measured

in its original

position

before

a part of a dozer or grader which

can dig and push.

To remove entrapped which

air or fluid in the system.

2.15 Body -Container

c~arries the material. cargo body tapered longitudinally sheets ~to allow of cargo body easy flow of cargo

2.15.1 Body, chafe type -The while dumping 2.15.2 Body, sandwich impact loads.

type -Planks Special

of wood between construction

material

to absorb

2.15.3 Body, quarry type 2.16 Bogie A unit consisting multiple

body for rocks and boulder.

of multiple axle driving

axle and wheel assembly. unit. material is excavated for taking to a nearby job.

2.17 Bogie Drive -A 2.16 Burrow Pit -

An excavation

place from which

Adopted

24 February 1983

@ June 1983, ISI

Gr 5 I

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS: 10463 (PartVI)-1983
2.19 Bottom Discharge ( Bottom Dump ) - A material unloading itself by~opening the floor of the body. 2.20 Bowl2.21 Brakes tracks. The bucket or body of a scraper A device for slowing, stopping carrying equipment material or soif. of the wheels/ which is capable of

used for carrying and holding

the rolling/~movement

2.21 .I Brake, emergency

See 2.65.

2.22 Bucket-A sturdy container, capable of being operated by controlled movement, mechanically, hydraulically or electrically, filted to various types of earthmoving equipment to dig, collect and convey earth. 2.23 Bulk Coeficienf Ratio of ' bank measure ' to ` loose volume of earth, rock, etc `. and to a

2.24 Bulldozer-A blade normally pushing materials through forward crawler tractor and wheel tractor.

mounted in front of self-propelled It is commonly motion of machine.

machine for scraping an optional attachment measured

2.25 Bulldozer, Blade Tilt -The vertical movement of end bit from horizontal If opposite ends vary, specify both. metres that end bit can be raised. 2.25.1 Bulldozer, be angled to either blade angle - The number of degrees side from a straight position. that the blade

in millican

in midpitch

position,

2.25.2 Bulldozer, blade height - The vertical distance in millimetres ing on ground to the top of the blade (excluding name plate and spill midpitch position.

from the cutting edge restguard ) with the ~blade in the

2.25.3 Bulldozer, blade lift height - The maximum vertical distance in millimetres that the centre of the cutting edge, in the midpitch position, can be raised above ground with no blade tilt or angle. forward from the rearmost pitch position an 2.25.4 Bulldozer, blade midpitch - Blade positioned angle equal to one half of the total blade pitch. fore and aft movement of the blade around the blade pivot 2.25.5 Bulldozer, blade pitch -The expressed in degrees of total movement, with the cutting edge at ground level when in the rearmost pitch position. 2.256 Bulldozer, blade width The maximum distance in millimetres from from outside to to outside outside of

2.25.6.1 Without end bits of blades exclusive of end bits.

2.25.6.2 With end bits-The maximum distance blades including the end bits. Specify end bits used. 2.26 Bre2hout
upward force

in millimetres

outside

Force
exerted

ability to lift conditions:

and/or

( Bucket) -Breakout force in kilograms is the maximum sustained vertical 100 mm behind the tip of the bucket cutting edge and is achieved through the roll back the bucket about the specified pivot point under the following in neutral; not tied down;

a) Tractor on a hard level surface with transmission

b) cl 4
f)

All brakes released; Unit at standard operating edge

weight, parallel

rear of tractor

d) Bottom of cutting

s) h) j)

the ground line; When bucket circuit is used, the pivot point must be specified as the bucket hinge point and the unit blocked under the bucket hinge pin pivot in order to minimize linkage movement; When the lift circuit is used, the pivot point must be specified as the lift arm hinge pin. Wheel loader shalt have front axle blocked to eliminate change in position of pivot pins due to tyre deflection; If both circuits are used simultaneously the dominating pivot point listed in ( e ) and (f ) must be specified; If the circuits used causes the rear of the vehicle to leave the ground, then the vertical force value required to raise the rear of the vehicle is the breakout force; and For irregular shaped buckets, the tip of the bucket cutting edge, referred to above shall mean the farthest forward point of the cutting edge. 2

to and not more than 25 4 mm above or below

IS : 10463 ( Part VI ) - 1963
2.27 Cab ( Cabin ) conditions. A shell designed to protect the instruments and operator from adverse weather

2.28 Cab Guard-On a dumper, a heavy metal shield and projected over the cab to keep operator safe while 2.29 Cable Control Unit -A high speed control, used to operate dozers at&towed 2.30 Canopy tractor winch equipment. sun, protect

extending up from the front wall of the body it is under loading operations by shovel. having partially one to three drums under against rain and snow. or body, when the or body, a pump when the separate

A roof set to block off direct

2.31 Capacity Heaped -The capacity or volume measure of a bowl material filling the same is heaped up at its angle of repose. 2.32 Capacity, material filling

or bucket

Struck -The capacity or volume measure of a bowl or bucket the same is struck level from the edges of its open end.

system by which a single reservoir and/or 2.33 Centralized Lubrication -A various part of the equipment thus avoiding lubrication of individual points. 2.34 Cat Walk A pathway, usually

lubricates

of metal that gives access to parts of the machine. from the ground to the~centreline of the bucket hinge

2.35 Carry Position - The pin with angle of approach

vertical distance at 15 degrees.

2.36 Chain-Roller

- Generally, any sprocket-driven chain made up of links connected by hinge pins and sleeves. Specifically, a chain whose hinge sleeves are protected by an outer sleeve or roller that is free to turn. mover and the transchassis is capable of it in only one direction. along which

basic understructure of a machine including the prime 2.37 Chassis -The mission, frame, bumper, springs, deadaxles, wheels, tyres or tracks. The self-propelling. 2.38 Check Valve Any device which will allow fluid or air to pass through in quality by sighting. two revolving or soaking.

2.39 Cleavage Planes - Any uniform joint, rock will break easily when dug or blasted. 2.40 Clinometer A hand instrument which

crack,

or change grades

of formation

for measuring

2.41 Clutch - A device the other driven. 2.42 Compaction -

connects

and disconnects

members,

one driving

and

Reduction

in bulk of fill by rolling,

tamping

unit in the front 2.43 Compensating Drive - In a four wheel drive truck, a free wheeling propeller shaft that allows the front wheels to go farther than the rear on curves. 2.44 Crawler Chain -One of a pair machine mounted on such tracks. 2.45 Crawler-Shoe See 2.163. of roller chains used to support and propel a machine,

of

the

or any

2.46 Creep a) Very slow travel of a machine or a part. b) Unwanted turning of a shaft due to drag in a fluid coupling 2.47 Crowd forcing. 2.48 Cycle The process A complete of forcing a bucket into the digging performs

or other disconnecting or the mechanism which

device. does the

set of operations

a machine

before a cycle.

repeating

them.

2.49 Cycle Time2.50 Datum -Any elevations. 2.51 Depth operation. of

The time required level Cut surface

or measured

to perform

taken

as a plane of reference achieved below the

in determining digging level a filling

and recording during operation, a

other cutting

The

vertical

depth

2.52 Depth of Spread -

The vertical

depEh above the ground

level during them

2.53 Differential - A device that drives two axles and allows adjust to varying resistance. 2.54 Double Clutching - Practice of disengaging and engaging order to synchronize gear speeds. 3

to turn

at different a single

speeds

to in

twice during

gear shift

IS : 10463 ( Part VI ) - 1983
2.55 Drag Line - An attachment to a basic excavating suspended bucket through the material. 2.56 Drawbar -In a tractor, machines or loads. a fixed or hinged equipment which digs by pullying the loosely towed

bar extending

to the rear, used as fastening

2.57 Draw Bar Pull-The horizontal force, calculated or For torque converter, hydrostatic machine moving forward. pull is specified by means of pull/ground speed curves.

measured, or electric

available at the draw bar, drive machines, the drawbar

For machines without torque converter or other variable torque drive mechanisms, the drawIt may also be reported at bar pull is reported for each gear ratio at rated governed engine rpm. maximum engine torque. 2.58 Drawpin A removable pin that attaches to a towed power a load to a drawbar. machine, fitted with some device for attaching is supplied power. body, designed and which to a

2.59 Draw Tongue tractor.

A bar hinged

2.60 Drive Axle - An axle to which movement of the equipment. 2.61 Driveline -

from

the prime-mover which transmits

enables

A shaft and connected

components

2.62 Dumper - A self propelled off-the-highway equipment having an open cargo to haul and dump material. Loading is done by means external of the dumper. 2.63 Electric Steering -A Steering of the equipment is higher by electric motors. surface. of service steering

2.64 Embankment 2.65 Emergency

fill whose-top auxillary

than the adjoining

Brake -An

brake for use in the event of failure

brakes. control of the

means provided to continue maintaming 2.66 Emergency Steering -A machine, in the event of failure of an engine or a steering power source. 2.67 Excavate -To 2.68 Excavator dig out. Anequipment used for digging out material. the poisonous of the engine

for converting 2.69 Exhaust Conditioner - An attachment tively-safer gases, to obviate exhaust poisoning. 2.70 Exhaust Muffler exhaust noise. 2.71 Face -Any 2.72 Fifth-Wheel semi-trailers. A device -exposed interposed in the exhaust

gases of exhaust which muffles

to rela-

or reduces

surface The

by excavation swivel

for development connection

or for getting

of mineral. vehicles and

weight-bearing

between

self-propelling

axle is one which receives 2.73 Full-Floating ( Related to Axle ) - A full-floating load from the power source and does not support any weight of the equipment. 2.74 Four-by-Four 2.75 Gooseneck 28j7o6pfrade . An A vehicle with four wheels usually or sets of wheels, between a tractor all engine

only the torsional

driven.

arched connection, the elevation

and a trailer. Also means surface

Usually

of a real or planned to ascend

surface

or structure.

2.77 Gradeability qurface material,

-The ability of a machine load, speed and gear.

a grade under specified

conditions between

such as front and

machine having an adjustable blade, positioned 2.78 Grader - A self-propelled rear axles to cut, move and spread material usually to grade requirements. 2.79 Gradient Slope along a specific route, as of a road surface, channel

or pipe,

distance from the ground level 2.80 Ground Clearance, Except for Graders - It is the perpendicular to the lowest point of the centre portion of the vehicle. The centre portion of the vehicle is defined as 25 percent of the tread or track gauge to either side of the longitudinal centre line, between the horizontal 2.81 Ground Clearance, Graders -Distance point of the front axle at the longitudinal centre line of the machines. 4 ground plane and the lowest

IS : 10463 _( Part VI ) - 1983
Effective area of the tyres or tracks in contact with the ground. 2.82 Ground Confact Area -Area depends on load, penetration, ground material and tyre ~pressure or track adjustment; hence all pertinent conditions should be specified or carefully described. 2.83 Ground Pressure -The supporting it. 2.84 Grouser-A 2.85 Grubbing 2.88 Half-Track in front. 2.87 Hardpan 2.88 Hauler weight of a machine divided by the area of the ground directly

ridge or cleat across Digging out roots. with

a track shoe which

improves

its grip on the ground.

A heavy truck Hard tight soil.

high speed crawler

track drive in the rear and driving

wheels

A mobile

equipment

which

hauls. which surface

Also

see 2.62. is moved usually material Also, from excavation area area to

distance 2.89 Haul Distance -The to the place of fill or dump. 2.90 Haul Road - Usually the place of fill or dump. 2.91 HeapThe material

through

material

an unimproved carried

used for hauling

from excavation the material piles

above the sides of a bucket or body. as distinguished

stock-~pile.

A face which 2.92 High Wallsoil or rock bordering a cut. 2.93 Hoist The mechanism

is being excavated, by which

from spoil or the process

or undisturbed it. end so that the

a bucket or blade is lifted

of lifting to either

mechanism in which 2.93.1 Hoist, double acting -A the movement can be obtained in either direction. mechanism in which 2.93.2 Hoist, single acting -A movement can be obtained in only one direction. 2.94 Hour Meter 2.95 Idlers 2.98 Idling An instrument which

power can be supplied power clocked is supplied

to one end so that

reads the hours rollers.

by the equipment,

These are supporting The process Resistant

non-drive

of running

an engine

at no load.

2.97 Impervious 2.98 Jack -A 2.99 Jackshaft

to movement or hydraulic

of water. device. connecting Also, a hydraulic ram or cylinder. '

mechanical A short

lifting usually

drive shaft,

a clutch

and transmission. especially a detachable it without surface dismant-

2.1~00 Lagging - The surface or contact or one of special composition. 2.100.1 Lagging-Split ting the drum. 2.101 Lay Drum lagging

area of a drum or pulley,

made in two pieces to allow

changing

The direction

of strand

or wire helix, lay of the wires in the strand is in the same direction as

2.101 .l Lay, langs - A rope in which-the the lay of the strand in the rope. ISO definition is given below:

Langs lay rope:

Rope in which the direction of lay in the strands direction of lay in closing the rope. the lay of the wires in the strand

is the

same as the in direction

2.101.2 Lay, regular - A rope in which to the lay of the strand in the rope. IS0 definition Ordinary is given below: or regular lay rope:

is opposite

Rope in which the direction of the lay in the stranding opposite to the direction of lay in closing the rope. revolving weight drum.

is

2.102 Lay-Shaft

-

A fixed shaft supporting Sum of operating

2.103 Loaded Weight

and the manufacturer's 5

rated pay load (see 2.119 ).

IS :10463( Part

VI)-

1983

2.104 Loader Dump Time - The time in seconds required to move the bucket from the load carrying position at maximum height to the full dump position while dumping a rated operating load. 2.105 Loader, Front End - A self-propelled machine with front mounted bucket supporting structure and linkage that loads material into the bucket through forward motion of the machine and lifts, Tractors with front-end loaders attachment are not included. transports and discharges material. 2.106 Loader, Lowering Time - The time in seconds the full height to a level position on the ground. 2.107 Loader, Operating Load - The rated operating normal loading in the following typical conditions: a) Lifting ability of operating load, b) Bucket attachment the machine in all bucket required load to lower the empty is a nominal value loader bucket from to represent the specified

intended

positions

to be no less than

of specified

size and type, and

c) Maximum travel speed of 6 km/hr for crawler mounted and 15 km/h for wheel mounted, d) Operating surface: i) shall be hard, moderately smooth and level for wheel loaders, ii) shall be softer, less smooth or level with resulting reduced percentage of tipping, applied. 2.107.1 For crawler loaders, the rated operating 100 percent of lifting capacity whichever is less. load shall be 35 percent be 50 percent to raise the of the tipping of the tipping bucket from

load

load or load the or

2.107.2 For wheel loaders, the rated operating load shall 100 percent of the lifting capacity, whichever is less. 2.108 Loader, Raising Time - The time in seconds required position on the ground to the full height with a rated load. 2.109 Loader, Rollback above horizontal. The angle maximum in degrees that the bottom at groundMaximum

level rotate

of the bucket cutting without

edge will of

2.109.1Loader, rollback arm.

rollback

movement

the

lift

2.109.2 Leader, maximum rollback fully raised - The edge level position to the maximum rollback position.

angle

in degrees angle in

from the bucket degrees from

cutting

2.109.3Loader, maximum rollback at carry position - The cutting edge level position to the maximum rollback position. 2.110 Loader, Tipping Load 2.111 Loose Yards See 2.178.

the bucket

Measurement

of soil or rock after it has been loosened by an engine, machine

by digging

or blasting.

2.112 Load Factor - Average of its maximum capacity. 2;113 Lugging Down -The beyond capacity.

load carried process

or plant expressed down

as a percentage in its load

of an engine

getting

slowed

due to increase

2.114 Mold Board - A curved surface of a plough, gives dirt moving over it a rotary, spiral or twisting 2.115 Neff Weight 2.116 Off-the-Highway 2.117 On-fhe-Highway capacities. See 2.119. Unimproved Improved surface,

dozer, or grader movement.

blade or other dirt mover, which

outside

the purview

of road/highway which

load limitations. on load Used to

surface

for movement

of transport

have limitation to sky.

method of excavation in which the working 2.118 Open Cut -A distinguish from ` cut-and-cover' and ` u~nderground ' work.

area is kept open

as specified, without 2.119 Operating Weight - Weight of the machine, with the machine equipped payload, with full fuel, lubricating and cooling systems and with operator weighing 75 kg. Also known as unladen weight or nett weight. 2.120 Outcropping A stratum of rock or other material 6 which breaks surface of ground.

IS : 10463 ( Part VI ) - 1983
2.121 Outrigger - An outward increase the stability. 2.122 Overburden extension of a frame which is supported by a jack or block used to

Soil or rock lying on top of a pay formation. Ground contact part of a crawler stopped track. stationary machine. which an earthmoving machine gears can equipsteer with respect to the rest

2.123 Pad ( Shoe or P/ate ) 2.124 Parking Brake of the machine. 2.125 Pass A working

Brakes capable

of holding

wheels

trip or passage of an excavating

or grading

2.126 Payload - The maximum load expressed normally in kilograms ment can carry as per reco~mmendation of the -manufacturer. 2.127 Pivot Steer - Articulated steering where through different angles and in opposite directions 2.128 Planetary gear. Drive A gear drive consisting

by the front and rear of the to enable to take sharp turns. of a ring gear, a .s_etof planet for the purpose and

and a sun and

2.129 Plug Magnetic - A drain or inspection plug magnetised holding iron or steel particles in lubricants or working fluids. 2.130 Power Control Unit - One or more winches parts of bulldozer, scraper or other machines. 2.131 Power Shift sion gear ranges. The facility mounted

of attracting

on a tractor and shifting

used to manipulate run of transmis-

to use power for easy shifting for tapping of the power

during

2.132 Power Take-off

A mechanism

from power train. which is one of the factors for

2.133 PR ( Plyrating ) maximum load limitations 2.134 Primemover a) A source b) A tractor

The plyrating on the wheel.

a pneumatic

wheel

of power for a self propelled machine, and or other vehicle used to pull other~towed type of machine. grades and distances, and usually depth of cut and height It is commonly taken along the centre line. with universal joints.

2.135 Profile - A charted line indicating of fill for excavation and grading work. 2.136 Propeller 2.137 Pusher Shaft A tractor Usually

a drive shaft fitted a scraper

that pushes

to help it pick up a load. one, and turning independently of it.

2.138 Quil Shaft 2.139 Ram -

A light drive shaft inside

of a heavier

A power cylinder.

2.140 Reach, Fully Raised - The horizontal distance in millimetres from the foremost point on the vehicle ( including tyres, tracks or loader frames) to the cutting edge to the bucket hinge pin at maximum height and the bucket at 45' dump angle. If dump angle is less than 45", it shall be specified. 2.141 Reach, At Specified Height on the vehicle ( including tyres, Specify if dump angle is less. 2.142 Rearing Rising distance in millimetres - The horizontal tracks or frames ) to the bucket cutting when pulling which from the foremost point edge at 45" dump angle.

of the front of the tractor

a heavy load. are not loaded, and which serve to

2.143 Relief Holes - Holes drilled closely along a line, weaken the rock so that it breaks on that line.

driving force available between the tyre and the ground. Rimpull is 2.144 Rimpull - Horizontal It is. given by calculated or measured pull versus machine speed and is usually shown by curves. normally specified for dumpers, tractor scrapers, skidders and wheel tractors but not loaders. 2.145 Rock Bucket material. A bucket used for loading and carrying rocks. between Usually of a high wear resisting

2.146 Rock Ejector Bar 2.147 Rollback -

A bar used to eject rocks wedged

tyre duals.

See 2.109. 7

IS : 10463( Part VI) - 1983
2.148 Roller, Hook - In a revolving shovel, a roller attached by a bracket and contacting the lower face of a circular track on a travel unit. 2.149 Roller Support In a crawler machine, shovel, machine, a roller that supports tapered to the revolving section

the slack upper wheels

part of the track. turn of the

2.150 Roller Swing - In a revolving table and support the upper works. 2.;~!.i~;~ller, Track --In a crawler

one of several the rollers

that roll on a circular

that rest on the track and carry most

2.152 ROPS ( Roll Over Protective Structures ) - Systems machine in such a way as to accomplish its primary purpose when wearing a seat belt being crushed should machine roll subframe, bracket mounting, socket, bolt, pin-suspension or the system to the machine frame but excludes mounting machine frame. 2.153 Root 2.153.1 Root buttress A rootthat heavy is above ground hook designed

of structural members arranged on a to reduce the possibility of an operator over. Structural members include any flexible shock absorber used to secure provisions which are integral with the

where

it joins

the trunk. big roots when it is

2.153.2 Root hook - A very dragged along the ground. 2.154 Rooter -

to catch

and tear out

A heavy duty ripper. To bend a line A digging over a drum or a sheave, and then in the opposite can revolve used pile. between edge. cutting edge tip and the front and chiefly direction

2.155 Reverse Bend over another sheave.

2.156 Revolving Shovel of the supporting unit.

machine

in which roller

the superstructure or other from machine, stock

independently for shallow

2.157 Scarifier - An accessory loosening of road surfaces. 2.158 SCOOP-

on a grader,

An act of take up or hollow

out the material

2.159 Scraper - A self-propelled rear axles, which loads, transports, 2.159.1 Scraper-bottom dump -

machine having a cutting edge positioned discharges and spreads material. A scraper which ejects its load over cutting

distance ~between the lowered 2.159.2 Scraper-depth of cot - Perpendicular a line tangent to the load radii ( LR) of the front and rear tyres. 2.159.3 Scraper, rear dump A scraper that discharges load at the rear.

2.159.4 Scraper, tractor towed crawler or wheeled tractor which distance and spreading. 2.160 Seat Belt 2.161 Semi-Grouser 2.162 Serrated 2.163 Shoe 2.164 Shoring 2.165 Shuttle

A large bowl mounted is capable of digging, or similar device

on pneumatic tyred wheels towed by a loading, hauling over a considerable to secure a person in a vehicle.

Any strap, webbing, A crawler

designed

track shoe with one or more low cleats.

An edge cut into a line of teeth. plate forming bracing a link of a track or bolted to a track link. from caving. to face in one direction. it is taken,

A ground -

Temporary

to hold the sides of an excavation of a machine which continues

A back and forth Piling spoil

motion

2.166 Side-Casting 2.167 Sidehill -

alongside

the excavation

from which

A slo~pe that crosses A long excavation A limit switch

the line of work. in a slope that has a bank on one side, and is near original if a machine part is moved beyond its safe

2.168 Sidehill Cut grade on the other. 2.169 Smart Aleck range. 2.170 Snaking -

that cuts off power

Towing

a load with a long

cable. 8

IS : 16463 (Part VI ) - 1983
2.171 Snatch Block - A pulley of a hook ring or shackle. 2.172 Spoil Dirt or rock which in a case which can be easily fastened to lines location. or objects by means

has been removed

from its original or a crawler track.

2.173 Sprocket

A gear that meshes with a chain A multi-piece of overburden sprocket

2.174 Sprocket, Split of the shaft bearing. 2.175 Strip Removal it.

that can be assembled

on a shaft

without

removal

or thin layers of pay materials: layer or deposit usually for the purpose of excavating other

2.176 Stripping material under 2.177 System

Removal -

of a surface

Pressure

The rated pressure

in a hydraulic

circuit.

2.178 Tipping Load - The minimum weight in kilograms at the centre of gravity of the rated load in the bucket which will rotate the machine to a point where, on the crawler units, the front track roller are clear of the track and, on wheel loaders, the rear wheels are clear of the ground under the following conditions: a) b) c) d) Vehicle on a hard level surface and stationary. Maximum bucket roll back. Centre of gravity of load at the maximum forward position Vehicle at operating weight and equipment as specified.
Articulated steer

in the raising~cycle.

Note

loader shall be in full turn position ( specify angle ). alarm to warn the operator refers members Fluid power purposes. in a crawler machine for the purpose of adjustto soil which used on the failure of one or all of is capable members -the

2.179 Three Way Alarm - An audiovisual any three functions of the equipment. 2.180 Topsoil of supporting

- The topmost layer of soil usually a good plant growth. - The media. structural ) -

containing connect

humus which the longitudinal

2.181 Torque Cross Members and act as torque absorbing 2.182 Hydroretarder equipment. 2.183 Towing Hitch -

( Torquematic

Brake

in transmission

to decelerate

A hook provided A mechanism

for towing incorporated

2.184 Track Adjuster ing track tension.

2.185 Track, Crawler - One of a pair of roller chains used to support and propel a machine. It has an upper surface which provides a track to carry the wheel of the machine and a lower-surface providing continuous ground contact. 2.186 Track, 2.187 Track attached. i.188 Track tracks. 2.189 Track Roller Frame Gauge Width See 2.151. In a crawler In a tracked In a tracked propelled to move mounting, vehicle, vehicle, a side frame centre to which to centre the track roller distance and idler are the two

the horizontal

between

the edge to edge width

of each track. force through a mounted both crawler tractors and are necessary for its own

2.190 TractorA self attachment or drawbar wheel tractors. 2.190.1 Tracfor, movement. 2.190.2 Tractor,

machine used to exert a push or pull objects or material. Tractors include having only those accessories pusher which

bare bulldozer

A tractor -

A tractor

fitted

with front

blade.

2.190.2.1 Tractor, bulldozer straight dozer-A tractor fitted with a blade in front of it either cable operated or hydraulically operated and capable of only tilting but not angling. The blade is moved parallel to itself while remaining perpendicular to the vertical-axial ~plane of the tractor, its base being parallel to the line of ground rest of the track. 9

IS:10463(PartVl)-1983
A tractor fitted with a blade in front of it either cable 2.190.2.2 Tractor, bulldozer angle dozeroperated or hydraulically operated and capable of both tilting and jangling. It gives a variation in the angle of the vertical-axial plane of the tractor to the vertical plane passing through the base of blade without varying the angle of the base of the blade with the line of ground rest of the tracks. front 2.190.2.3 Tractor, scraper - A self propelled machine having a cutting edge positioned and rear axles, which loads, transports, discharges and spreads materials. Weight See 2.119. A dragline shovel which drags itself along the ground by means of sidematerial being between

2.191 Unladen

2.192 Walking Dragline mounted shoes.

2.193 Wearbars - Bars welded on inside of a cargo body to break the impact loaded and reduce the wear on the cargo body. between vertical planes perpendicular 2.194 Wheel Base -Distance axis and passing through the centres ~of the front and rear wheels. 2.195 Winch A drum that can be rotated so as to exert a strong

of hard

to the machine winding

longitudinal in a line.

pull while

EXPLAN
This standard parts: Part I Part II Part III Part IV Part V Part VI Unloading Stacking, Hydraulic equipment loading on glossary of terms

ATORY
for bulk handling

NOTE
equipment is being issued in following

and reclaiming equipment

equipment

conveying

Pneumatic conveying equipment Cyclic loose bulk handling equipment Cyclic loose bulk handling equipment 10

(stationary

)

(non-stationary).

Prlnted at New lndla Prlntlnu Press, Khurja, India

