NAT HA IS 3675 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


aaf — AUTE HIN — Bare deet 
Al gea Aaa omt (akur 


( Teel FRAT ) 


Textiles — Cotton Fibres — 
Determination of Breaking Tenacity 
of Flat Bundles 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 59.060.10 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAA, 9 TEGE TH HM, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2020 Price Group 4 


Physical Methods of Tests Sectional Committee, TXD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Physical Methods of Tests Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textiles Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1966. This revision is based on the advancement in technology and the 
prevalent practice followed in the Indian textile industry. In the present revision, the following major changes 
have been made: 


a) Additional method of test by rapid instrument testing machine like HVI tester has been included. 


b) Source of calibration cotton to be used has been modified. Accordingly, use of ICAR-Central Institute for 
Research on Cotton Technology (ICAR-CIRCOT) calibration cotton and its quality parameters have been 
specified. 


Strength of cotton fibre contributes substantially to the quality of cotton. The method of estimating the tenacity of 
cotton by testing individual fibres is tedious and time consuming. For both commercial and technical purposes, 
quicker methods have been developed which test the fibres in the form of bundles. This standard covers some of 
such methods. 


The bundles of fibres may be secured by clamps which are either in close contact (zero gauge length) or by clamps 
separated to give a finite gauge length. Fibre strength testing at 3.2 mm gauge length is a current commercial 
practice. 


ICAR-CIRCOT calibration cotton standards have been established to enable different operators to adjust their 
personal level of testing to an agreed common level. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised y. 


IS 3675 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


TEXTILES — COTTON FIBRES — DETERMINATION OF 
BREAKING TENACITY OF FLAT BUNDLES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes the method for 
determination of strength of flat bundles of cotton fibres 
arranged in parallel manner. The method is applicable 
to fibres being tested either at zero gauge length or at 
3.2 mm gauge length. 


1.2 The standard is applicable to fibres from raw cotton 
or to fibres from various stages in the manufacturing 
process or to fibres separated or extracted from 
manufactured cotton products. 


1.3 This standard is especially intended to be used with 
strength testing instruments which have been designed 
for specific use of testing flat bundles of cotton fibres 
(see Annex A, Annex B and Annex C). 


1.4 In view of theoretical deficiencies of Pressley-type 
of tester, it shall not be used in case of disputes. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard given below contains provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject 
to revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of this standard. 


IS No. Title 


196 : 1966 Atmospheric conditions 
(revised) 


for testing 


3 PRINCIPLE 


A flat bundle is fastened in a pair of clamps of prescribed 
size and the fibres protruding beyond the clamps are 
cut. Increasing force is applied to the specimen until it 
ruptures. The broken fibres are weighed and the ratio of 
the breaking load to the weight of fibres is determined 
and the tenacity is calculated therefrom. The test may 
be carried out either at zero or at 3.2 mm gauge length. 


4 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


4.1 Flat Bundle — A test specimen consisting of a 
thin layer of parallel fibres arranged with the centres of 
the fibres substantially colinear across the width which 
is approximately 6 mm. 


4.2 Tenacity — The maximum load applied during 

a tensile test on a bundle of fibres carried to rupture 

divided by the mass per unit length of the bundle. 
NOTE — Tenacity is usually expressed in terms of force 
per unit cross-sectional area. However, the tenacity of textile 
strands is mostly expressed in terms of force per unit linear 
density, for example, in grams weight per tex. 


4.3 Gauge Length — The distance between the inner 
faces of the pair of clamps at the start of the test. 


5 SAMPLING 


5.1 Gross Sample — Take samples at random from the 
different portions of the bulk sample to make up a gross 
sampleweighing from 250 to 1 000 g. 


NOTE — If the bulk sample weighs less than 250 g, the whole 
of it shall constitute the gross sample. 


5.2 Test Sample — Spread the gross sample evenly on 
a level surface in the form of a square with each side 
slightly more than one metre. Over this, place a metallic 
framework 1 x 1 m (inside dimensions) divided into 
25 equal sub-squares. From each of these sub-squares, 
pull out at random approximately equal bunches of 
fibres so as to get a sample weighing about 100 g. This 
shall constitute the test sample. 


5.3 Laboratory Test Sample — Spread the test 
sample and divide it into 25 approximately equal 
groups. Extract small pinches of loose fibres at random 
from each group, thus obtaining a composite laboratory 
test sample weighing from 300 to 500 mg. Blend 
the loose cotton fibres from each pinch by preparing 
either a hand sliver or by using a mechanical blender. 
Condition the laboratory test sample thus obtained to a 
state of moisture equilibrium (see 6.1). 

NOTE — If mechanical blenders are used, care shall be taken 

to avoid fibre damage. 


5.4 Sampling for Cotton Bales for Rapid 
Instrument Testing Machine (HVI Tester) — For 
sampling of the bales for rapid instrument testing 
machine (HVI tester), the sampling procedure given 
in C-2 shall be followed. 


IS 3675 : 2020 


6 CONDITIONING OF LABORATORY TEST 
SAMPLE 


6.1 The laboratory test sample shall be conditioned 
in standard atmosphere at 65 + 5 percent relative 
humidity and 27 + 2 °C temperature for 4 h 
(see IS 196). 


6.2 Pre-conditioning may be used if the contract 
specification requires it or if the laboratory test sample 
is very moist. If so, the laboratory test sample shall be 
brought approximately to equilibrium in an atmosphere 
having relative humidity between 10 percent and 
25 percent and a temperature not exceeding 50 °C. 


6.2.1 These conditions may be obtained by heating air 
at 65 percent relative humidity and 27 °C temperature 
to a temperature up to 50 °C. 


7 ATMOSPHERIC 
TESTING 


CONDITIONS FOR 


The test shall be carried out in standard atmospheric 
conditions (see 6.1). 


8 APPARATUS 


8.1 Balance — Capable of weighing to an accuracy of 
+ 0.01 mg. 
NOTE — A balance of capacity 0 to 5 mg is sufficient for most 
fibre bundle strength tests. If test specimens are to be weighed 
collectively (see Note under 12.1.2), use a balance of capacity 


0 to 10 mg or 0 to 20 mg capable of weighing to an accuracy of 
+ 0.02 mg. 


8.2 Fibre Bundle Strength Tester — Three 
commercially available fibre bundle strength testers are 
described in Annex A, Annex B and Annex C. Other 
strength testers may be used, if equipped with adapters 
to accommodate the fibre clamps of Pressley type. The 
strength tester shall be equipped with the following 
accessories. 


8.2.1 Specimen Clamps (of Pressley Type) — A pair 
of clamps with a combined width of 11.81 mm, while 
testing at finite gauge length, a suitable spacer, usually 
of 3.2 mm may be used between the clamps. 


8.2.2 Clamp Vice — A jig equipped with a locking 
screw or cam for holding the clamps while they are 
being loaded and unloaded. A vice equipped with an 
appropriate construction to ensure the application of 
predetermined force when tightening the jaws of the 
clamps, may be preferred. 


8.2.3 Devices — For preparation of specimens and 
removing them from the clamps: 


a) Coarse comb — with approximately 8 teeth per 
25 mm. 


b) Fine comb — with approximately 52 teeth per 
25 mm. 


c) Wrench — for tightening the clamps. A torque 
wrench is needed, ifthe clamp vice is not equipped 
with a torque device. 


d) Shearing knife 
e) Tweezers 
f) A fine camel hair brush 


8.2.4 Checking Accessories — Such as stop-watch and 
spirit-level for initial checking of the strength testing 
instrument. 


9 ADJUSTMENT AND CALIBRATION OF THE 
INSTRUMENT 


9.1 Adjustment of the Instrument 


Adjust the instrument in accordance with the 
instructions given in Annex A, Annex B and 
Annex C for specific instrument or with the 
manufacturer’s instructions. 


9,2 Calibration 


After the adjustment of the instrument, test the standard 
ICAR-CIRCOT calibration cotton samples on the 
instrument (see Note). Ensure acceptable results on 
the standard samples before performing tests on test 
specimens. The results may be considered acceptable 
if they do not depart by more than + 5 percent 
from the standard values given for the calibration 
cottons. Repeat the tests on standard ICAR-CIRCOT 
calibration cotton samples at regular intervals to ensure 
a constant level of testing. 
NOTE — ICAR-CIRCOT calibration cottons are 
available from the ICAR - Central Institute for Research 
on Cotton Technology, 5, Adenwala Road, Grant Road 
West, Matunga, Mumbai, Maharashtra 400019, e-mail: 
circotcalibcot@rediffmail.com. 


9.2.1 When possible, use a standard ICAR-CIRCOT 
calibration cotton sample which has an established 
tenacity similar to that of the cotton being tested. 
Quality characteristics of ICAR-CIRCOT calibration 
cottons for HVI mode and ICC mode are given in 
Table 1 and Table 2 respectively. 


IS 3675 : 2020 


Table 1 Quality Characteristics of ICAR-CIRCOT Calibration Cottons for 
High Volume Instrument (HVI mode) 


( Clause 9.2.1 ) 


SI No. Code UHML Uniformity Index (UI) Micronaire Tenacity (g/tex) @ 3.2 Elongation 
(mm) (Percent) Value mm Gauge Length (Percent) 
(1) (2) 6) (4) (5) (6) 0) 
1) S-4 22.2 77 4.8 22.7 5.3 
ii) L-3 30.7 83 3.6 29.0 5.0 
iii) EL-3 32.0 81 2.8 31.5 6.0 
1v) Tolerance EOS +1.0 +0.10 E15 = 
Table 2 Quality Characteristies of ICAR-CIRCOT Calibration Cottons for 
High Volume Instrument (ICC mode) 
( Clause 9.2.1 ) 
SI No. Code 2.5 percent Span Uniformity Ratio Micronaire Tenacity (g/tex) @ 3.2 Elongation 
Length (mm) (UR) (Percent) Value mm Gauge Length (Percent) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) S-4 22.0 48 4.8 17.6 5.3 
ii) L-3 30.9 44 3.6 23.8 5.0 
iii) EL-3 32.0 43 2.8 27.5 6.0 
iv) Tolerance + 0.5 +1.0 +0.10 + 1.5 = 
9.2.2 When the observed value differs from the 10.2 Method B 


established value for the standard ICAR-CIRCOT 
calibration cotton sample, re-check the apparatus and 
repeat the test after making necessary adjustments. If 
the difference still persists, the ratio of the established 
value to the observed value for the calibration samples 
shall be used as the multiplying factor for correcting the 
observed results on test specimens. 


10 PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMENS 


Prepare the test specimens by one of the two methods 
prescribed below. Method A is preferable under 
tropical conditions. 
NOTE — For rapid instrument testing machine (HVI tester), 
follow the instructions of the equipment manufacture for 
preparation of test samples. 


10.1 Method A 


10.1.1 Place the conditioned sliver or mechanically 
blended sample (see 5.3) across a set of parallel combs 
(like a comb sorter). Align one end of the sliver after 
removing the protruding fibres and draw a suitable tuft 
with the help of a tweezer. Gently comb four or five 
times to remove the fibres not gripped by the tweezer. 
Grip the combed end with another tweezer at such a 
distance from the first tweezer so as to leave fibres 
having length at least equal to the width of the pair of 
clamps, along with the spacer, if any. Release the first 
tweezer and comb the free end of the fibres gently. 


10.1.2 Take the tuft of fibres obtained as in 10.1.1 and 
form it into a flat bundle of 6 mm in width. The flat 
bundle thus obtained shall constitute a test specimen. 


10.2.1 The test specimen shall consist of pinches taken 
from the test sample (see 5.2). Hold a tuft obtained 
by placing pinches one on top of the other near the 
mid-point in one hand between the thumb and the 
forefinger and comb with a special coarse hand comb. 
The initial combing stroke shall not be very deep, and 
shall be governed by the force necessary to pull the 
comb through the tuft. Each succeeding stroke shall 
be slightly deeper, until the teeth of the comb extend 
all the way through the tuft and the fibres have been 
combed close to the point held between the fingers. 


10.2.2 Discard the fibres removed during combing and 
pull away and discard the loose fibres from the end of 
the tuft. Reverse the tuft as held in the fingers and comb 
the other end of the tuft in a similar manner, making 
certain that the combs have passed several times 
between fibres at the centre. 


10.2.3 Condition the tuft of fibres to a state of moisture 
equilibrium in the standard atmosphere (see 6.1). 


10.2.4 Hold the prepared tuft between the thumb 
and fore-finger of the left-hand about one fourth the 
distance from the end of the tuft. Hold the other end in 
the same manner and pull out a portion of fibres in the 
flat bundle. 


10.2.5 Hold the loose ends of fibres of the flat bundle 
with the left-hand in the same manner as before. With 
the right-hand, comb the bundle of the fibres with a fine 
comb so that all fibres not held between the fingers of 
the left-hand will be withdrawn during combing. Hold 


IS 3675 : 2020 


the fibre bundle again with both hands, with the bundle 
narrowed to 6 mm in width and pull the other end ofthe 
fibres through the comb with the right-hand. The flat 
bundle thus obtained shall constitute a test specimen. 


11 TEST PROCEDURE 


Make the necessary preliminary 
appropriate to the instruments used. 


adjustments 


11.1 Mounting of Fibre Bundle on the Pressley 
Clamps 


11.1.1 Using Pressley Type Vice 


Take a test specimen and place it in the open fibre clamps 
at approximately the centre of the lower faces with the 
ends of the flat bundle projecting approximately to 
an equal length on each side of the clamp. Hold the 
bundle against the vice and lower the auxiliary clamp 
of the vice. Straighten the fibre by applying just enough 
tension. Then gradually lower the top jaws of the fibre 
clamps when the fibres are held under tension. Press 
the top jaws to lock the specimen. Tighten the jaws to 
a constant torque with the help of the torque wrench, 
tightening a little at a time, the screws on the two jaws 
in turn. 

NOTE — The torque may be controlled by either a 


vice-mounted torque indicating attachment or by a friction disc 
wrench. A torque of about 9 kgf.cm may be used. 


11.1.2 Using Special Vice as in Stelometer 


Grip the test specimen at one end with the sample clip. 
Comb out all fibres which are not held by the clip. 
Holding the clip with its flat side down, grip the other 
end of the test specimen in the auxiliary clamp of the 
vice. Draw the clip through the open jaws of the fibre 
clamps until it clears the jaws and falls to the recessed 
section of the vice. Raise the hook on the pre-tension 
lever and position the sample clip so that the hook 
passes through the hole on the clip. Release the hook to 
make the clip hang loosely. Close the jaws of the fibre 
clamps and tighten with the help of the torque wrench 
the jaw screws gradually till the vice starts to rotate. 
NOTE — The torque may be controlled by either a vice- 
mounted torque indicating attachment or by a friction disc 
wrench. In order to ascertain that the elasticity of the spring 
remains the same, the vice shall be checked now and then to 
see that it starts to rotate with the application of a torque of 
about 9 kgf.cm. 


11.2 Remove the clamps from the vice and shear offthe 
protruding ends of the fibres with the shearing knife, 
shearing downward and away from the movable face 
of the fibre clamps. 


11.3 Adjust the instrument in accordance with 
the instructions given in Annex A, Annex B and 
Annex C for specific instrument or with the 
manufacturer’s instructions. 


11.4 Place the prepared clamps in the instrument, break 
the specimen and record the breaking load. 


11.5 Remove the clamps from the instrument, check to 
see that all fibres are broken and place the clamps in the 
vice. If all fibres are not broken, or broken irregularly, 
or if the breaking load is less than the required 
minimum for the instrument used, discard the specimen 
and make a new test. If the break is acceptable, open 
the clamps, collect all the broken fibres with forceps, 
or preferably with a fine camel hair brush and weigh 
them to the nearest 0.01 mg (see Note 1 under 12.1.2). 
Do not touch the fibres with the fingers while collecting 
and weighing to avoid gain in weight from moisture 
pick up. 


11.6 Perform the test on a total of at least 10 specimens. 
12 CALCULATIONS 


12.1 Breaking Tenacity 
12.1.1 For test made at zero gauge length, based on a 
bundle length of 11.8 mm, use the following formula: 
a) For Pressley type instruments: 
Breaking tenacity (g per tex) = 
Breaking load in Ib x 5.36 
Bundle weight in mg 


b) For Stelometer type instruments: 
Breaking tenacity (g per tex) = 
Breaking load in kg x 11.81 
Bundle weight in mg 


Calculate the mean of all the values and express it as 
breaking tenacity of the fibres. 


12.1.2 For tests made at a finite gauge length of 
3.2 mm based on a bundle length of 15 mm, use the 
following formula: 


a) For Pressley type instruments: 
Breaking tenacity (g per tex) = 
Breaking load in 1b x 6.80 
Bundle weight in mg 
b) For Stelometer type instruments: 
Breaking tenacity (g per tex) = 
Breaking load in kg x 15.00 
Bundle weight in mg 
Calculate the mean of all values and express it as the 
breaking tenacity of the fibres. 


NOTE — If the variation among the individual test results 
is not required, combine all tufts and find their weight to 
the nearest 0.02 mg. Calculate the breaking tenacity by the 
following formula: 


a) For Pressley type instruments: 


FxK 
Breaking tenacity (g per tex) = FK, 
W 


b) For Stelometer type instruments: 


À Y FxK, 
Breaking tenacity (g per tex) = “y 


where 
2F= sum of the values of the breaking load of tufts; 
W= weight of all the tufts; 
K, = 5.36 for tests at zero gauge length and 6.80 for tests at 
finite gauge length; and 
K,= 11.81 for tests at zero gauge length and 15.00 for tests at 
finite gauge length. 


NOTE 2 — When the Pressley Index is found out, the 
individual test values shall, not have a significant difference of 
more than + 10 percent from the average of all the test values. 


IS 3675 : 2020 


13 REPORT 


The test report shall include the following: 


a) 
b) 


c) 


d) 
e) 


Reference to this standard; 


Mode of testing in case of HVI instrument 
(HVI or ICC); 


The average breaking tenacity of 10 specimens 
for Pressley and Stelometer type instruments and 
4 specimens for rapid instrument testing correct to 
one decimal place; 

Type of strength testing instrument used; and 


Gauge length used. 


IS 3675 : 2020 


ANNEXA 
( Clauses 1.3, 8.2,9.1 and 11.3 ) 
OPERATION OF THE PRESSLEY FIBRE STRENGTH TESTER* 


A-0 DESCRIPTION OF APPARATUS 


The Pressley strength tester is an inclined plane 
fibre strength tester, with a free rolling load carriage, 
designed to break flat bundles of cotton fibres and to 
indicate the load required to cause the rupture of the flat 
bundle. The beam scale is graduated in pounds force 
units. 


A-1 ADJUSTMENT OF THE INSTRUMENT 


A-1.1 Place a thin metal strip in the clamps to prevent 
movement or separation and insert the clamps in the 
slots provided in the tester. 


A-1.2 Level the instrument with the spirit-level on the 
carriage track by turning the adjustment screw on the 
base plate of the instrument. For older models, which 
are not equipped with the spirit-level, set the carriage 
track to an angle of 1.5 degrees. 


A-1.3 Release the carriage and determine the time 
required by the carriage to travel from the 5-pound 
reading to the 20-pound force reading. If properly 
adjusted, it shall take approximately one second. 


A-2 OPERATION OF THE INSTRUMENT 


A-2.1 Place the clamps, with the flat bundle prepared 
as in 11.1.1, 11.1.2 and 11.2, in the slots provided in 
the tester. 


A-2.2 Release the carriage by gently raising its locking 
lever. After the carriage stops, record the breaking load 
from the position of the carriage on the beam scale to 
the nearest 0.1 pound force. If the observed breaking 
load is less than 10 pound force, discard the specimen 
and make a new test. 

*Mention of the name of a specific (or proprietory) instrument 

is not intended to promote, or give preference to, the use ofthat 

instrument over others not mentioned. 


ANNEXB 
( Clauses 1.3, 8.2, 9.1 and 11.3 ) 
OPERATION OF THE STELOMETER FIBRE STRENGTH TESTER* 


B-0 DESCRIPTION OF APPARATUS 


The Stelometer is a pendulum type, constant-rate-of- 
loading strength testing instrument, designed to break 
a flat bundle of cotton fibres and to indicate the load 
required to rupture the specimen. The scale is graduated 
in kilograms-force. This instrument is also equipped 
with a device to indicate the percent fibre elongation 
for tests made at finite gauge lengths. 


B-1 ADJUSTMENT OF THE INSTRUMENT 


B-1.1 Level the instrument with the bubble level by 
turning the screw immediately below the right handle. 


B-1.2 Place a thin metal strip in the fibre clamps to 
prevent movement or separation and insert the clamps 
in the slots provided on the tester in the same orientation 
as that used during the test. 


B-1.3 Release the pendulum by depressing the release 
trigger and determine the time required for the load 
indicator to advance from 0 to 7 kgf. If necessary, 
adjust the small valve attached to the control cylinder 
as required to obtain a rate of loading of one kgf per 


second, that is, the load indicator shall travel from 0 
to 7 in seven seconds. Hold the pendulum where the 
first indicator reads 2 kgf by grasping the instrument 
head and check the position of the elongation indicator, 
which should be on the first red line to the left of 
zero. If a change in the elongation indicator is needed, 
loosen the set-screw on the instrument head, turn the 
adjustment screw until the correct setting is obtained, 
and re-tighten the set-screw. This adjustment usually 
has to be changed whenever different clamps or clamp 
spacer are used. 


B-2 OPERATION OF THE INSTRUMENT 


B-2.1 Place the fibre clamps with the fibre bundles, 
prepared as in 11.1.1, 11.1.2 and 11.2, in the slots 
provided in the tester. 


B-2.2 De-press the release trigger to start the load 
indicator moving across the scale. After the bundle 
breaks and the indicator stops, record the breaking load 
from the position of the indicator on the scale to the 
nearest 0.01 kgf. If the observed breaking load is less 
than 3 kgf, discard the specimen and make a new test. 


IS 3675 : 2020 


ANNEX C 
( Clauses 1.3, 8.2,9.1 and 11.3 ) 
OPERATION OF RAPID INSTRUMENT TESTING MACHINE (HVI TESTER)* 


C-1 GENERAL 


High volume instrument systems are based on fibre 
bundle strength testing, that is many fibres are checked 
at the same time and their average value determined. 
Traditional testing using micronaire, pressley, 
stelometer and fibrograph are designed to determine 
average value for a large number of fibres, the so called 
fibre bundle tests. In HVI, the bundle testing method 
is automated. Here, the time for testing is less and 
so the number of samples that could be processed is 
increased, quite considerably. The influence of operator 
is reduced. Testing is done by the determination of the 
breaking tenacity at the breaking force of cotton fibres 
in a specimen in which fibres are distributed randomly 
in a specimen comb and using 3.2 mm clamp spacing. 


NOTES: 


1 HVI uses the ‘constant rate of extension’ principle while 
testing the fibre sample. The available conventional methods 
of strength measurement are slow and are not compatible to 
be used with the HVI. In the HVI instruments the fibres are 
randomly selected and automatically prepared for testing. 
They are combed to remove loose fibres and to straighten the 
clamped fibres, also brushed to remove crimp before testing. 
The mechanization of the sample preparation techniques has 
resulted in a “tapered” specimen where fibre ends are found 
in the jaw clamp surfaces as well as in the space between the 
jaws. 

2 A second important difference between traditional laboratory 
strength measurements and HVI strength measurements is 
that in the laboratory measurements the mass of the broken 
fibres is determined by weighing the test specimen. In the HVI 
systems the mass is determined by the less direct methods of 
light absorption and resistance to air flow. 

The HVI systems break the fibres about 10 times faster than the 
laboratory methods. For the bale sample, report the average of 
the specimens for strength to the nearest one tenth of a gram 
per tex unit. 


C-2 SAMPLING 


Take one sub sample from the bale sample. One 
subsample from each bale shall consist of two portions, 
one portion from each side of the bale. Take the 
subsample from the space between the wires or ties in 
such a way that each portion shall be 305 mm long and 
154 mm wide. Weight of each portion shall be 114 g 
approximately so as to give a total specimen weight of 
228 g approximately. 


NOTE — For sampling from laps, slivers or other source 
of lint cotton, sampling specified in 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 shall be 
followed. 


C-3 PROCEDURE 


Take four specimens from each subsample of the 
bale sample or any other intermediate package or 
process. For HVI testing, HVI mode shall be used. 
Follow the instructions of the equipment manufacturer 
for calibration and testing procedure and place the 
specimen into the instrument’s strength measurement 
area. A vacuum system draw the prepared cotton 
sample by assembly drums into optical system, then 
length and uniformity is measured by optical system. 
A clamping jaw system (breaking gauge is 3.2 mm) 
measures straight by obtaining force required to break a 
cotton sample of known mass, elongation by measuring 
the average distance to which the fibre extends before 
breaking. 


*Mention of the name of a specific (or proprietory) instrument 
is not intended to promote, or give preference to, the use of that 
instrument over others not mentioned. 


IS 3675 : 2020 


ANNEXD 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Physical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TXD 01 


Organization 


ICAR - Central Institute for Research on Cotton 
Technology, Mumbai 

Bidhata Industries Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

Central Silk Technological Research Institute, 
Bengaluru 

Delta Ropes Mfg Co, Kolkata 

Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 
of Defence, New Delhi 

Garware Technical Fibres Limited, Pune 

ICAR - Central Institute for Research on Cotton 
Technology, Mumbai 

Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Indian Jute Industries Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Mills Association, Kolkata 


Intertek India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 

North India Textile Research Association, Ghaziabad 
Office of Jute Commissioner, Kolkata 

Office of Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 

SGS India Pvt Ltd, Chennai 

Testtex India Laboratories Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
Texanlab Laboratories Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 
Textiles Committee, Mumbai 


Thanawala & Co, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 
Dr P. G. Parr (Chairman) 


Suri R. K. PACHERIWALA 
Suri RoHIT PACHERIWALA (Alternate) 


Dr Susuas V. NAIK 
Dr PRAKASH BHAT (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND MAJARIA 
SHRI AAYUSH MAJARIA (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. BORUAH 
Suri S. S. Kasnyar (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY VASUDEO RAUT 

SHRI SACHIN KULKARNI (Alternate) 
Dr PRADEEP MANDHYAN 

Dr T. SENTHIL Kumar (Alternate) 


Pror R. S. RENGASAMY 

Pror APURBA Das (Alternate) 
Ms SAUMITA CHOUDHURY 

Suri D. P. Gon (Alternate) 
SHRI S. K. CHANDRA 

Suri J. K. BEHERA (Alternate I) 

SHRI RAMA SHANKAR UPADHYAY (Alternate 11) 
SHRI NARAYAN B. BORADE 

SHRI HEMANT PARAB (Alternate) 
SHRI YOGESH KUSUMGAR 

Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 
SHRI SANJEEV SHUKLA 

SHRIMATI NASRAH HIMAYAT Kipwal (Alternate) 
SHRI SOMYADIPTA DATTA 

Suri MAHADEB Dutta (Alternate) 
SHRI N. K. Gupta 

Suri JAMIL AHMAD (Alternate) 
Dr KARTHIKEYAN K. 

SHRIMATI ANITHA JEYARAJ (Alternate) 
SHRIMATI MEETA SHINGALA 

SHRI MAHESH SHARMA (Alternate) 
SHRI HARIT SARDANA 

Ms Yojana Gawas (Alternate) 
SHRI KARTIKAY DHANDA 

Dr P. RAVICHANDRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMAL THANAWALA 
SHRI UPENDERA THANAWALA (Alternate) 


Organization 
The Arvind Mills Limited, Ahmedabad 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 
The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills’ Research 
Association, Mumbai 


Tirupati Technik, Mumbai 
TUV Rheinland (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


Uster Technologies India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
VJTI, Mumbai 


Wool Research Association, Thane 
World Traders Manufacturing Co, Mumbai 
In Personal Capacity (B-21, Parijat, Talepakhadi, 


Eskar Road, Borivali, Mumbai-400091) 
BIS Directorate General 


IS 3675 : 2020 


Representative(s) 


SHRI NARENDRA KAJALE 
SHRIMATI MAMTA CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


SHRIR. A. SHAIKH 
SHRIMATI PRAGTI KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Dr. MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI A. A. SUDAM (Alternate) 


SHRI VISHAL MASAND 


SHRI CHARAN SINGH 
SHRI AsHOK MEHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI JAGDISH KULKARNI 


DR SURANJANA GANGOPADHYAY 
Dr S. P. Borkar (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SEEMA PATEL 
Suri Mayur Basuk (Alternate) 


SHRI VARUN GUPTA 
Suri ADITYA Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr R. P. NACHANE 


Suri A. K. Bera, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Suri J. K. Gupta 
Scientist ‘D’ (TXD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 01 (14321). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


