( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 1885 ( Part LII/Sec 13 ) - 1980

Indian

Standard
VOCABULARY

ELECTROTECHNICAL

PART LII DATA PROCESSING Section 13 Analog and Hybrid Computing Basic Standards on Electronics and Telecommunication Sectional Committee, LTDC 1
Chairman MAJ-GEN K. K. MEHTA ( RETD ) Members SHRI D. C. BHATTACHAREE DR V. P. KODALI ( ALternate) DR K. CHANDRA SHRI B. A. CHEW DIRECTOR DR C. G. KHOT SHRI RAVINDRANATH ( Altcrnatc ) SHRI 0. P. KHUSHU GP-CAPT J. S. LAMBA Institution of Electronics Engineers, New Delhi and Telecommunication New Delhi New Delhi Representing Chairman, Electronics Division Council and Telecommunication

National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR), Department of Electronics, New Delhi Department of Science & Technology, Railway Board, Ministry of Railways

All India Radio, New Delhi Directorate of Technical Development & Production (Air), Ministry of Defence, New Delhi SHRI R. SOMASUNDARAM ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence SHRI M. H. V. MURTHY Posts and Telegraphs Department, New Delhi SHRI J. V. SASTRY Vice-Chairman, Electronics and Telecommunication SHRI T. V. SRIRANGAN Division Council Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Member) SHRI R. C. JAIN, Head ( Electronics ) ( Secretary )

Computers,
Chairman

Business Machines and Calculators Committee, LTDC 24

Sectional

BRIG A. BALAWBRAMANIAN, AVSM Members SHRI K. S. ANANDA RAO SHRI C. K. BAPIRAJU

Ministry of Defence ( R & D ), New Delhi

Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore State Bank of India, Bombay ( Continued on page 2 ) 0 INDIAN Copyright 1981 INSTITUTION of 1957 ) and

STANDARDS

This publication

is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 1885 ( Part LXI/Sec 13 ) - 1980 ( Continued from page 1 )
Members SH~I A. K. BASAK R@rcsmting Development Commissioner, New Delhi Small Scale Industries,

SHRI P. P. MALHOTRA ( Ahnatc ) Weston Electron&s Ltd, New Delhi SHRI A. K. BINDAL Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co Ltd, Delhi SHRI V. M. GA~JTAM SHRI ANUFNM GIJPTA ( Altemate ) SHRI A. C. JAIN Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, New Delhi Hindustan Computers Ltd, New Delhi SHRI ARJUNMALHOTRA SHRI R. S. PAWNER ( Ahmate) Tata Electric Companies, Bombay SHRI S. C. MODI SHRI H. V. JAIN ( Altematc ) Reserve Bank of India, Bombay SHRI K. P. N. NAIR Department of Electronics, New Delhi SHRI S. S. CBERAI SHRI AsHt.9SEN Indian Statistical Institute,_ Calcutta SHRI S. K. SENGIJPTA Indian Airlines, New Delhi SHRI KAPAL DEV ( Altmut.~ ) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SWRI M. hANKRALINGAbl ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi Kerala State Electronics Development Corporation SHlU M. R. SLtd, Trivandrum SHRI.S. M. V. BHAW ( Alternate ) `Electronics Trade & Technology Development SHIU C. G. SUBRAMANYAN Corporation Ltd., New Delhi Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI T. N. SWAMY Department of Science & Technology, New Delhi SHRI R. THIACARAJAN Hindustan Teleprinters Ltd, Madras SHRI K. R. VENKATARAMAN SHRI S. DEVARAJAN( Al&a&c) Life Insurance Corporation, Bombay SHRI L. P. VENKATARAMAN Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&i0 Member) SHRI R. C. JAIN, Head ( Electronics)

secretary

A. S. RAWAT Assistant Director ( Electronics ), IS1
SHRI

IS : 1885 ( Part LII/Sec 13 ) - 1980

Indian

Standard
VOCABULARY

ELECTROTECHNICAL
Section

PART LII DATA PROCESSING 13 Analog and Hybrid Computing

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part LII/Sec 13 ) was adopted by the Indian

Standards Institution on 15 September 1980, after the draft finalized by the Basic Standards on Electronics and Telecommunication Sectional Committee, in consultation with Computers Business Machines and Calculators Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 Electronic data processing is utilized for numerous exchanges and analysis of information of both intellectual and material nature. Application of electronic data processing becomes difficult, either because of the great variety of terms used in various fields to express the same concept, or because of the absence of or the imprecision of useful concepts. To overcome these barriers, this standard has been formulated. 0.3 This standard is one of the series of twenty Indian Standards on data processing vocabulary, constituting the Part LII of the electrotechnical vocabulary, which deals with the main areas of data processing classified under the following heads: Section Section Section Section Section Section Section Section Section Section Section Section Section Section Section Section 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Fundamental terms Arithmetic and logic operations Equipment technology Organization of data Representation of data Preparation and handling of data Digital computer programming Control, input-output and arithmetic equipment Data media, storage and related equipment Data communications Operating techniques and facilities Information theory Analog and hybrid computing Computer graphics and computer micrographics Programming languages Data basis

3

IS : 1885 ( Part LII/Sec Section Section Section Section 17 18 19 20

13 ) - 1980

Data structures Information systems characteristics and development Reliability, maintenance and availability Control and integrity

0.4 Prime importance has been given to simplicity and clarity of the definitions so that they may be understood by all. It may, therefore, be felt that some definitions do not cover all the cases and exceptions. 0.5 Assistance has been derived in formulating this standard from International Standard IS0 2382 ` Data Processing - Vocabulary - Section 19 prepared by the International Organization for Analog Computing', Standardization. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard hybrid computing 2. FUNCTIONAL ( Part LII/Sec 13 ) covers terms related as used in data processing. UNITS A continuously variable or a physical quantity. high-gain operations signal representing either to analog and

2.1 Analog Variable a mathematical variable 2.2 Operz+ional external elements

Amplifier -A to perform specific

amplifier connected or functions.

to

2.3 Summer/Analog Adder-A functional unit whose output analog variable is equal to the sum, or a weighted sum, of two or more input analog variables, 2.4 Inverter - A functional unit whose output analog variable is equal in magnitude to its input analog variable but is of opposite algebraic sign. 2.5 Coefficient Unit - A functional unit whose output analog is equal to the input analog variable multiplied by a constant. 2.6 Analog Multiplier - A functional unit whose output analog is proportional to the product of two input analog variables. variable

variable

NOTE - This term may also be applied to a device that can perform more than one multiplication, for example, a servo multiplier.

2.7 Quarter-Squares Multiplier - An analog multiplier whose operation is based on the identity, xy = [ ( x +r )z- ( x -y )z ] / 4, incorporating inverters, analog adders, and squarelaw function generators. 4

IS t 1885 ( Part LII/Sec 13 ) - 1980 2.8 Analog Divider - A functional unit whose output analog is proportional to the quotient of two input analog variables. 2.9 Integrator - A functional unit whose output analog integral of an input analog variable with respect to time.
NOTE -

variable is the

variabIe

For some integrators, the variable of integration may be other than time.

2.10 Summing Integrator - A functional unit whose output analog variable is the integral of a weighted sum of the input analog variables with respect to time or with respect to another input analog variable. 2.11 Function Generator - A functional unit whose output variable is equal to some function of its input analog variables. 2.12 Fixed Function function it generates user. 2.13 Variable the function computation. it analog

Generator - A function generator in which the is set by construction and cannot be altered by the Generator-A may be set function generator the user before in which or during

Function generates

by

2.14 Comparator ( In Analog Computing compares two analog variables and indicates 2.15 Limiter-A from exceeding functional unit specified limits. used

) - A functional unit that the result of that comparison. an analog variable

to prevent

2.16 ` Dead Zone' Unit is constant over a particular

A functional unit whose output analog variable range of the input analog variable. are the are the converts that

2.17 Resolver - A functional unit whose input analog variables polar coordinates of a point and whose output analog variables Cartesian coordinates of the same point, or vice-versa. 2.18 Analog-to-Digital Converter - A functional unit that data from an analog representation to a digital representation.

2.19 Digital-to-Analog Converter ( DAC ) - A functional unit converts data from a digital representation to an analog representation.

2.20 Track and Hold Unit/Track and Store Unit - A functional unit whose output analog variable is equal to either the input analog variable or a sample of this variable selected by the action of an external Boolean signal. NOTE -When tracking, the device follows the input analog variable; when holding, the device holds the value of the input analog variable at the instant of switching. 5

IS : 1885 ( Part LII/Sec 13 ) - 1980 3. MODES AND OPERATIONS 3.1 Potentiometer Set Mode during which the coefficients 3.2 Static Test Mode - That which special initial conditions and consequently, the proper integrators. That set-up mode of an analog computer of the problem are set. set-up mode of an analog computer during are set in order to check the patching, operation of all computing device except

3.3 Initial Condition Mode/Reset Mode-That operating mode of an analog computer during which the integrators are inoperative and the initial conditions are set. 3.4 Compute Mode/Operate Mode-That operating analog computer during which the solution is in progress. mode of an

3.5 Hold Mode - That operating mode of an analog computer during which integration is stopped and all variables are held at the value they had when this mode was entered. 3.6 Time Scale Factor - A number used as a multiplier the real time of the problem into computer time. 3.7 Real-Time Operation ( in Analog Computing ) the compute mode, during which the time scale factor is 1. to transform

Operation

in

3.8 Repetitive Operation - The automatic repetition of the solution of a set of equations with fixed combinations of initial conditions and other parameters.
NOTE - The repetitive operation is often used to permit the display of an apparently steady solution; it is also used to permit manual adjustment or optimization of one or more parameters.

3.9 Iterative

Operation/Automatic Sequential Operation - The repetition of the alogrithm for the solution of equations with successive combinations of initial conditions or other parameters; each successive combination is selected by a subsidiary computation based on a predetermined set of iteration rules.
NOTE - Iterative operation is usually used to permit solution of boundry value problems or for automatic optimization of system parameters.

6

IS : 1885 ( Part LII/Sec 13 ) - 1980 INDEX
NOTE -This

numbers

index has been are clause numbers. A

prepared in accordance

with IS : 1275-1976 l . I

Index

Adder, Analog 2.3 Amplifier, Operational 2.2 Analog adder 2.3 converter ( DAC ), Digital-to- 2.19 divider 2.8 multiplier 2.6 to-diiital converter 2.18 variable 2.1 Automatic sequential operation 3.9 C Coefficient unit 2.5 Comparator (in analog computing) 2.14 Compute mode 3.4 Condition mode, Initial 3.3 Converter Analog-to-digital 2.18 ( DAC ) Digital-to-analog 2.19 D ` Dead zone ' unit 2.16 Digital converter, Analog-to- 2.18 to-Analog converter ( DAC ) 2.19 F Factor, Time scale 3.6 Fixed function generator 2.12 Function generator 2.11 Fixed 2.12 Variable 2.13 G Generator Fixed function 2.12 Function 2.11 Variable function 2.13 H Hold mode 3.5 Unit, Track and 2.20

Initial condition mode 3.3 Integrator 2.9 Summing 2.10 Interative operation 3.9 Inverter 2.4 L Limiter 2.15
M

Hold 3.5 Initial condition 3.3 Operate 3.4 Reset 3.3 Static test 3.2 Potentiometer set 3.1 Multiplier Analog 2.6 Quarter-squares 2.7 0 Operate mode 3.4 Operation Automatic sequential 3.9 Interative 3.9 ( in analog computing ) Real-time Repetitive 3.8 Operational amplifier 2.2 P Potentiometer set mode 3.1

Mode

3.7

Q
Quarter-squares multiplier R Real-time operation ( in Analog Computing) Repetitive operation 3.8 Reset mode 3.3 Resolver 2.17 3.7 2.7

* Rules for making alphabetical indexes (jrst r&&n ).

IS : 1885 ( Part LII/Sec 13 ) - 1980
S ScaIe factor, Time 3.6 Sequential operation, Automatic Set mode, Potentiometer 3.1 Squares multiplier, Quarter 2.7 Static test mode 3.2 Store unit, Track and 2.20 Summer 2.3 Summing integrator 2.10 T Test mode, Static 3.2 Time Opex;;i;; ( in analog computing ) Scale factor 3.6 Track and hold unit 2.20 store unit 2.20 3.9 U Unit Coefficient 2.5 ` Dead zone ' 2.16 Track and hold 2.20 store 2.20

V
Variable Analog 2.1 function generator

2.13

8

