**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11413 (1986) : Character structure for start/stop and 
synchronous transmission for information processing [LITD 
13: Information and Communication Technologies] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 11413-1 986 

UDC 68V327'8:e81 304 ,SO 1177-1985 



I 

E 
o 
o 

c 
q 

CO 

c 

3 

E 
E 
o 
O 

(0 

« 




Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

CHARACTER STRUCTURE FOR START/STOP AND 

SYNCHRONOUS TRANSMISSION FOR 

INFORMATION PROCESSING 

( ISO Title : Information Processing — Character Structure 
for Start/Stop and Synchronous Transmission ) 



National Foreword 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 1177-1985 'Information processing — 
Character structure for start/stop and synchronous transmission,' issued by the International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO), was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on the 
recommendation of the Computers, Business Machines and Calculators Sectional Committee 
and approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

Wherever the words International Standard 1 appear referring to this standard, they 
should be read as 'Indian Standard*. 

Cross Reference 

International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard 

ISO 646-1983 Information processing — ISO IS : 10315-1982 7-bit coded character set for 

7-bit coded character set for informa- information interchange 

tion interchange (Technically equivalent) 



c 

(0 

M » 

<D 

c 
.c 
o 

CO 

S 

CO 
CO 

© 

c 



CO 



■s 

a. 
£ 

o 



Adopted 15 January 1986 



© March 1986, I SI 



Gr 2 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 11000k 



IS : 11413-1986 
ISO 1177-1985 



1 Scope and field of application 

This International Standard specifies the character structure to 
be used for serial-by-bit start/stop and synchronous data 
transmission systems using the 7-bit coded character set which 
is the subject of ISO 6461), the 8-bit coded character set which 
is the subject of ISO 4873 and extensions to these coded 
character sets which are the subject of ISO 2022. 

It also specifies the parity sense to be used with the 7-bit coded 
character set. 

It applies to the information transfer through the interface stan- 
dardized by CCITT and IEC/ISO between the data terminal 
equipment, DTE, and data circuit-terminating equipment, DCE, 
as defined in the relevant CCITT V and X series Recommenda- 
tions. 



2 References 

ISO 646, Information processing ~ ISO 7-bit coded character 
set for information interchange. 

ISO 2022, information processing — iSO 7- bit and 8-bit coded 
character sets — Code extension techniques. 2 > 

ISO 2047, information processing — Graphical representations 
for the control characters of the 7-bit coded character set. 

ISO 4873, Information processing — 8-bit code for information 
interchange — Structure and rules for implementation.® 



a) the bit identification b 1 to b 7 as defined in the 7-bit code 
table of ISO 646 with the least significant bit transmitted 
first; or 

b) the bit identification b 1 to b 8 as defined in the 8-bit code 
table of ISO 4873 with the least significant bit transmitted 
first. 

When the rank in the combination represents the order of the 
bit in binary numbering, the bits shall be transmitted in serial, 
working with the low order bit first. 

The numerical meaning corresponding to each information bit 
considered in isolation is that of the digit 

for a unit corresponding to condition A 
(Travail = Space), and 

1 for a unit corresponding to condition Z 
(Repos = Mark), 

in accordance with the definitions of these conditions for two- 
condition transmission systems. 41 



4 Parity bit — Start/stop and synchronous 
operation 

For 7-bit working, a parity bit shall be added to every character 
and shall be located in the eighth position, b & and is therefore 
transmitted after the seven significant bits for the character. 



3 Bit sequencing — Start/stop and 
synchronous operation 

In serial working data transmission systems, the chronological 
order of transmission of the information bits shall correspond 
to either 



5 Parity sense — Start/stop and 
synchronous operation 

For start/stop systems using 7-bit working, the parity bit shall 
be chosen in such a way that the number of "ONE" bits is even 
in the sequence of eight bits thus formed. 



1} This character set is also standardized by CCITT : International Alphabet No. 5, Recommendation V 3. 

2) At present at the stage of draft. (Revision of ISO 2022-1982,) 

3' At present at the stage of draft. 

4) Condition A is that which corresponds to the start signal of a standardized start/stop apparatus, and condition Z is that which corresponds to a 
stop signal. For further details see the CCITT list of definitions of essential telecommunication terms. 



IS : 11413*1986 
ISO 1177-1985 



For synchronous systems using 7-bit working, the parity bit 
shall be chosen in such a way that the number of "ONE" bits is 
odd in the sequence of eight bits thus formed. 



6 DTE reaction to parity error 

The detection of a character out-of-parity in 7-bit working may 
be represented by 

a) a reverse question mark graphic character or a repre- 
sentation of the capital letter SB (see ISO 2047) provided 
that this letter occupies a single character position on 
screen or printer, and could have been entered by a single 
key stroke whilst recognizing that it may be difficult to 
achieve a legible "SB" character for some matrix printers or 
displays where the characters are printed or visually dis- 
played; and/or 

b) recording of the 1/10 (SUB) character in the tape or 
other storage medium, where provided. 

Where a SUB character occurs in a received transmission, or is 
presented to a DTE via a storage medium, for example paper 
tape, then the reaction should be as in a) and b) above. 



7 Character framing 

7.1 Start/Stop operation 

In start/stop systems using the 7-bit or 8-bit coded character 
sets, ten or eleven unit elements snail be used per character. 

The first information bit of the transmitted coded combinations 
shall be preceded by a start element corresponding to condi- 
tion A (Travaii - Space). The duration of this start element 
shall be one unit interval at the data signalling rate at the 
transmitting interface. 

The combination of seven information elements completed by 
its parity- element or of eight information elements shall be 
followed by a stop element corresponding to condition 2 
{Repos = Mark). 

As for the stop element duration the following provisions 
should be observed depending on the types of network used : 

a) For systems using the 7-bit or 8-bit coded character sets 
over the general switched telephone and telegraph net- 



works with electromechanical data terminal equipment 
operating at data signalling rates up to and including 
200 bps, the stop element duration at the transmitter shall 
be TWO unit intervals at the data signalling rate of the 
transmitter. 

In other cases the use of a stop element with a duration of 
ONE unit interval is recommended. However, this is subject 
to mutual agreement between the parties concerned. 

Similar situations when a ONE unit interval stop element 
can be used may apply to leased circuits. 

The start/stop receivers should be capable of correctly 
receiving start/stop signals comprising a single-unit stop 
element, whose duration will be reduced by a time interval 
equal to the deviation corresponding to the degree of gross 
start/stop distortion permitted at the receiver input. 
However, for electromechanical equipment which is re- 
quired to use a two-unit stop element (11 -unit alphabet) 
with a data signalling rate of 200 bps or less, receivers 
should be capable of correctly receiving signals with a stop 
element reduced to one unit. 

b) For public asynchronous data networks, data terminal 
equipment using the 7-bit coded character set should use a 
stop element lasting at least two unit intervals. However, 
the receivers may only be capable o* correctly receiving 
signals when the stop element is not reduced below one 
unit interval (even in the presence of distortion). 

The time between the end of the stop element of a character 
and the beginning of the start element of the next character 
may be of any duration; the polarity of the signal during this 
time shall be the same as that of the stop element. 

7.2 Synchronous operation 

In synchronous systems eight bits per character shall be used. 
For 7-bit working, these eight bits comprise the seven informa- 
tion bits followed by the parity bit. 

The time between the end of the last bit of a character and the 
beginning of the first bit of the next character shall be zero time 
or a multiple of the unit interval at the data signalling rate of the 
transmitter. When character synchronism is required to be 
maintained, this time interval shall be zero or a multiple of the 
character interval. 

in systems that use the eighth bit for parity, the parity sense 
shall be maintained. 



Printed at Slmco Printing Press, Delhi, India 



