**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  8252-3  (1978) :  Environmental  tests  for  aircraft 
equipment ,    Part  3:  Humidity  (24  hours  cycle)   [TED  14: 
Aircraft  and  Space  Vehicles] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


■K^y  / 1  juaaaws^fea  rs^^TTF^ 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


udc  629-1305: 620-193-23  IS  :  8252  <  Part  III )- 1978 


(  Reaffirmed  2005 ) 

Indian  Standard 


ENVIRONMENTAL  TESTS  FOR 
AIRCRAFT  EQUIPMENT 

PART  III    HUMIDITY  (24-HOUR  CYCLE) 


1-  Scope  —  Specifies  tests  to  assess  the  resistance  of  equipment  to  high  humidity  conditions  and 
the  accompanying  daily  cycles  of  temperature  such  as  those  encountered  in  tropical  areas. 

1.1  This  standard  applies  to  equipment  mounted  externally  on  aircraft,  to  equipment  in  unpressurized 
bays  protected  from  rain  and  sunlight  by  the  aircraft  structure,  and  to  equipment  in  zones  where  no 
air-conditioning  is  applied  while  an  aircraft  remains  out  of  service.  It  is  not  intended  to  be  applied 
to  equipment  that  is  packed  and  in  a  store,  but  may  be  applied  to  such  equipment  that  has  been 
unpacked.  The  test  determines  the  degree  to  which  serviceability  is  impaired  by  corrosion  or  other 
deterioration. 

2.  Grades  of  Resistance  to  Humidity —  When  required  by  the  relevant  equipment  specification, 
the  equipment  shall  conform  with  one  of  the  following  grades  of  resistance  to  humidity: 

a)  Grade  A — Applicable  to  equipment  to  demonstrate  resistance  to  conditions  that  occur  in 
nature,  for  example,  to  equipment  in  unconditioned  but  ventilated  bays  and  to  items  of 
exposed  equipment. 

b)  Grade  B  —  Applicable  to  equipment  installed  in  semi-protected  zones  of  aircraft  (  pressurized 
compartments  and  conditioned  equipment  bays)  but  which  may  only  occasionally  be 
subjected  to  a  high  vapour  pressure  resulting  from  a  combination  of  high  bay  temperature 
in  aircraft  zones  where  moisture  may  have  accumulated,  for  example,  from  condensation. 
Grades  B1  and  B2  are  alternative  test  cycles  which  are  currently  in  use. 

c)  Grade  C  — It  is  the  severe  humidity  grade  used  to  accelerate  defects  resulting  from  exposure 
to  conditions  of  high  vapour  pressure  and  prolonged  exposure  to  humidity. 

3.  Test  Chamber 

3.1  The  test  chamber  shall  be  so  constructed  that  the  temperature  and  humidity  can  be  varied 
cyclically  and  controlled  within  the  limits  specified  in  5. 

3.2  Condensed  water  shall  not  be  allowed  to  drip  on  the  equipment  under  test. 

3.3  The  temperature  and  humidity  shall  be  monitored  by  sensing  devices  located  in  the  working 
space.  Conditions  within  the  working  space  shall  be  kept  as  uniform  as  possible  by  continuous  air 
movement  having  a  velocity  not  exceeding  45  m/min. 

3.4  Water  used  for  the  humidification  of  the  chamber  shall  have  a  pH  value  between  6'5  and  7'5 
measured  at  25°C,  or  shall  have  a  resistivity  of  not  less  than  500  ftm. 

4.  Test  Conditions 

4.1  The  appropriate  standard  conditions  stated  in  IS:  8252  (Part  l)-1976  '  Environmental  tests  for 
aircraft  equipment:  Part  I  General '  shall  apply. 

4.2  The  equipment  shall  be  subjected  to  the  test  described  in  5  of  the  standard.  It  shall,  unless 
otherwise  specified  in  the  relevant  equipment  specification*  be  mounted  in  its  normal  operating 
attitude. 

4.3  Connections  to  the  equipment  may  be  made  as  in  normal  operation  or,  if  permitted  by  the 
relevant  equipment  specification,  may  be  made  immediately  after  the  equipment  is  removed  from  the 
test  chamber. 

4.4  Unless  otherwise  required  by  the  relevant  equipment  specification,  all  covers  shall  be  in 
position  and  all  other  seals  made  as  for  normal  operation. 

4.5  The  equipment  shall  not  be  operated  at  any  time  during  the  test,  unless  this  is  specifically 
required  by  the  relevant  equipment  specification. 


Adopted  6  April  1978 


®  Julyi978,  ISI 


Price  Rs  6'0£ 


INDIAN    STANDARDS    INSTITUTION 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR    SHAH    2AFAR    MARG 

NEW    DELHI    110002 


IS:  8252  (Part  III )- 1978 
5.  Test  Procedure 

5-1  Initial  Examination  —  The  equipment  shall  be  visually,  mechanically  and  electrically  checked,  as 
required  by  the  relevant  equipment  specification,  and  any  sealing  features  shall  be  checked  to  ensure 
that  they  have  been  assembled  correctly. 

5.2  Test  Cycle  —  The  equipment  shall  be  placed  and  mounted  in  the  test  chamber,  with  or  without 
connections  as  required  by  the  relevant  specification. 

5,2-1  Equipment  Grade  A  and  Grade  fii 

5.2.1.1  The  temperature  of  the  equipment  shall  be  stabilized  to  25  ±  3°C  and  the  humidity  of 
test  chamber  increased  to  not  less  than  95  percent  RH, 

5.2.1.2  The  equipment  shall  then  be  subjected  to  a  diurnal  variation  of  humidity  between 
temperature  limits  of  25  and  40  or  55°C  as  appropriate  to  the  grade.  The  test  cycle  and  humidity 
limits  shall  be  as  shown  in  Fig.  1. 

5.2.1.3  The  equipment  shall  be  subjected  to  the  number  of  such  cyctes  as  is  appropriate  to  the 
grade  (see  5.3). 


ENDJ5F  THE  TEMPERATURE  RISE 

'       START  OF  THE  TEMPERATURE  FALL 

967. 


TIME   IN   HOURS 


FIG.  1     TEST  CYCLE  —  EQUIPMENT  GRADES  A  AND  Bx 

2 


IS  :  8252  (  Part  III )  - 1978 


5.2.2  Equipment  Grade  fi2  and  Grade  C 


5.2.2.1  The  temperature  of  the  chamber  shall  be  raised  to  the  upper  temperature  limit  of  50  or 
70CC  ±  3°C  as  appropriate  to  the  grade,  in  a  period  of  2  ±  0*5  hours  and  a  relative  humidity  of  not 
less  than  95  percent  RH.  These  conditions  of  temperature  and  humidity  shall  be  maintained  for  a 
further  6  ±  0'5  hours  ( see  Fig.  2 ). 

5.2.2.2  During  the  remaining  period  to  complete  a  24  h  cycle  (that  is,  over  a  nominal  16  h 
period)  the  temperature  shall  be  decreased  gradually  to  38°C  or  lower;  the  humidity  shall  be 
maintained  as  high  as  possible  but  shall  not  fall  below  65  percent  RH. 

5.2.2.3  The  equipment  shall  be  subjected  to  a  number  of  such  cycles  as  appropriate  to  the 
grade. 


cc 


->■ 

Q 

X 


50  OK  70  - 
(±3) 


CC 

3 

% 

UJ 
Q. 

UJ 


*38 


1  I 

2  8 
(i  0.5)                   (±0.5) 

TIME  IN  HOURS 

FIG.  2     TEST  CYCLE  — EQUIPMENT  GRADES  B2  AND  C 


2U 


5-3  Test  Severity  — The  severities  appropriate  to  the  various  equipment  grades  shall  be  as  stated 
in  the  following  table: 


Equipment 
Grade 

Upper 
Temperature 

Lower 
Temperature 

25  ±  3°C 

Numder  of 
Cycles 

A 

40  ±  3°C 

12 

Bi 

55  ±  3°C 

25  ±  3°C 

2 

B2 

50  ±  3X 

<38°C 

2 

C 

70  ±  3°C 

<38°C 

10 

Note  — T 

equipment  sd< 

he  number  of  cycle 
deification. 

s  may  be  extended 

by  the  relevant 

IS:  8252  (Part  III)  -1978 

6.  Measurements—  If  allowed  by  the  relevant  equipment  specification,  a  period  of  15  minutes  may 
elapse  after  applying  the  power  before  carrying  out  the  performance  check. 

6.1  The  equipment  shall  be  checked,  for  example,  by  having  the  normal  power  applied,  either  while 
it  is  still  in  the  chamber  or  immediately  on  removal  from  the  chamber,  as  required  by  the  relevant 
equipment  specification,  and  it  shall  function  as  required  by  the  latter  specification. 

6.2  After  its  functional  check,  the  equipment  shall  be  subjected  to  any  other  tests,  for  example, 
insulation  resistance,  flashover  voltage,  etc,  as  required  by  the  relevant  equipment  specification,  and 
it  shall  finally  be  subjected  to  a  visual  examination  for  evidence  of  corrosion  or  other  deterioration. 

6.3  No  intermediate  measurements  shall  be  made,  unless  specifically  required  by  the  relevant 
equipment  specifscatian. 

6.4  It  is  recommended  that  no  period  of  recovery  (for -example,  wiping  off  or  draining  free  moisture  ) 
should  be  permitted  by  the  relevant  equipment  specification. 

7.  Information  to  be  Stated  in  the  Relevant  Equipment  Specification  —  When  a  humidity  test  is 
specified  in  the  relevant  equipment  specification,  the  following  information  shall  be  given,  as  far  as 
applicable: 

Relevant  Clause 

a)  The  equipment  grade  2 

b)  Mounting  attitude,  if  other  than  normal  4.1 

c)  Connection  permitted  after  removal  from  test  chamber, 

if  applicable  4.3  and  5.2 

d)  Mechanical   and    electrical    tests   to    be    made   before 

placing  the  equipment  in  the  chamber  5.1 

e)  intermediate  measurements,  if  any  4.5  and  6 

Note  — It  is  recommended  that  the  relevant  equipment  specification 
should  not  call  for  intermediate  measurements  or  checks  on  equipment 
containing  moving  parts  or  where  self-generated  heat  may  alleviate  the 
effects  of  humidity. 

f )  Mechanical  and  electrical  checks  to  be  made  at  the  end 

of  the  test  6 

g)  The  degree  of  corrosion  that  may  be  tolerated  6 


EXPLANATORY    NOTE 

This  standard  is  one  of  the  series  of  standards  relating  to  the  environmental  and  operating 
conditions  for  aircraft  equipment.  The  scope  and  applicability  of  these  standards  is  given  in 
IS:  8252  (Part  I  )-19769 

This  standard  is  based  on  ISO/DIS  2652  Environmental  tests  for  aircraft  equipment  — Part  2.2 
Humidity  (24h  cycle),  issued  by  the  International  Organization  for  Standardization. 


Printed  at  New  India  Printing  Press,  Khurja,  India 


