IS 12833 : 1889

(Reaffirmed 1999)

AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE MILLING MACHINERY - ROLLER FLOUR MILLS FLOW DIAGRAM

664.733 : 65'015'13 : 66'011

1--w_

_

@ BIS 1990

BUREAU
MANAK May 1990

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG Price Group 3

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Agricultural

Produce Milling Machinery

Sectional Committee,

FADC 39

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 27 October 1989, after the draft finalized by the Agricultural Produce Milling Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. This standard has been prepared to provide a basic idea for various processes and equipment involved in roller flour milling for the guidance of the millers particularly for modernization and setting up of new mills. In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived tural Engineering ( ICAR ), Bhopal. from Central Institute of Agricul-

IS 12833 : 1989

Indian Standard
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE MILLING MACHINERY - ROLLER FLOUR MILLS FLOW DIAGRAM
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard roller flour milling. 2 TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, ing definitions shall apply. 2.1 Equipment 2.1.1 Aspirator used for aspiration. the followcovers tlow diagrams for 2.1.10 Plane S;frer A shifting machine consisting of a number of super-imposed sieves gyrating together in a horizontal plane, having a rotary motion. 2.1.11 Purser

An equipment 2.1.2

A machine with one to three layers or ducts of sieves set in an oscillating frame. It employs the principle of separation by size and density to separate a mixture of pure endosperm, composite pieces of endosperm and bran and branny material from each other. 2.1.12 Reels or Revolving Screens

Break Roll Mill

A mill equipped with a pair of corrugated rolls placed diagonally or horizontally in parallel alignment, rotating at differential speed towards each other. 2.1.3 Conveyor

Cylindrical screens with slight inclination into which the material enters at. one end and falls through openings into a collecting mechanisms while over-size material is discharged at the opposite end. 2.1.13 Roller Mill

An equipment or component through which material is moved from one point to other. 2.1.4 Cyclone Separator

A separating device in which strong centrifugal force acting radially is used in place of relatively week gravitational force acting vertically downwards. 2.1.5 Destoner device which separates stones

A mechanism used to grind wheat into flour and by-products. It consists of one or more pairs of cylindrical rolls arranged with their axis parallel and set in a heavy frame. Rolls may be corrugaed (break rolls) or smooth (reduction rolls). 2.1 14 Spiral Trieur A device used principally for separating raw seeds from fractioned or shrivelled wheat kernels. It consists of several spiral canals wound concentrically round on a vertical shaft. 2.1.15 Thickness Grader by thickof unripe

A mechanical from the grain. 2.1.6 An ter can ted and

Disc Separator particles longer or shorbut similar in diameter wheat by means of indenof pre-determined shape

equipment in which than wheat grains be separated from discs with indents size. Elevator

A machine which separates particles ness. It is cffectivc for separation grain from whole grain. 2.1.16 Whizzer

2.1.7

A conveyor wards. 2.1.8

in which the

material

is

moved

up-

A machine which removes surface wheat grain after washing by centrifugal force. 2.2 Operations

from

Magnetic Separator magnetic materials from the

A device to remove grain mass. 2.1.9 Middlings

2.2.1

Aeratim

Rolls

A pair or pairs of smooth rolls uced to reduce to flour partlclcs size. middlings in process, Also called reduction rolls. 1

The process of blowing small quantity of air through the bulk of agricultural produce for cooking and equalizing the temperature of the produce, to prevent moisture migration and for agricultural produce from preserving tt1c biological deterioration.

IS 12833:1989 2.2.2 Air Classification
currents in air which uses A process combination with centrifugal force, to effect the separation of flour particles into different ranges according to size and density. 2.2.3 Aspiration 2.2.13 Gradual Reduction

The process by which wheat is broken down to flour and by-products in several stages. This makes it possible to separate much of the bran before wheat is pulverized into flour particle size, resulting in a whiter flour with improved baking properties. 2.2.14 Impact Milling

The process of cleaning by air blast and seperawhich is substantially ting the foreign material than the produce to be ;r;erer specific gravity Blending of Wheat measured and mixing amount of these parts

The reduction in size of particles by flinging them at very high speed against a hard surface. 2.2.15 Middling

2.2.4

The process of drawing different lots from bins into a uniform blend. 2.2.5 Bolting

Particles of wheat endosperm extracted from the break system which have yet to be ground into flour. Also commercially, a by-product of milling, consisting mainly of the coarse material tailing over the end of the reduction system. 2.2.16 Pneumatic Conveying

Sifting of mill stocks silk or nylon covered 2.2.6 Break System

(flour) seives.

by means

of wire,

The stage in the milling process where the grain is broken open and treated on successive rolls to separate the endosperm from the bran coat. 2.2.1 Brushing

Transporting of material in enclosed tubes using air under negative or positive pressure as the conveying medium. 2.2.11 Reconstitution of original conas found in the

A step in cleaning of wheat, where dust remaining after scouring is removed by action of brushes on the surface of grains. 2.2.8 Chafing of very light materials

The blending or mixing together stituents in the same proportions original complex substance. 2.2.18 Scouring

Pneumatic separation from the produce. 2.2.9 Cleaning

Part of the cleaning section in the wheat mill where superficial dirt and loose shreds beeswing are removed by abrasion of wheat surface against perforated metal or emery lined cylinder and thereby blowing away the dirt by air current. 2.2.19 Screening

The removal of foreign or dissimilar material washing, screening, hand picking, aspiration any other mechanical means. 2.2.10 Conditioning

by or

Separation of grains by a mechanical device where the desired material is carried over the device and the undesired material penetrates the device. It is a method of separating particles according to size alone. 2.2.20 Tempering A process less elaborate than conditioning which produces desired physical changes, resulting in optimum milling in wheat by means of water additions and time for penetration. 2 3 Products

Adjustment of moisture content under controlled conditions, followed by a resting period to achieve a proper equilibrium of moisture through and which toughens bran individual grains mellows the endosperm, thereby improving the separation of endosperm from bran. 2.2.11 camping for inducing optimum moisof milling process and for moisture content of the final

Addition of water ture for operation getting the desired products. 2.2.12 Grading

2.3.1 Whole rate. 2.3.2

ATTA wheat llour of 90 to 95 percent Agent extraction

Blwching

In terms of milling, it means the classification by sifting, prior to purilication, of the endosperm particles emanating from the break system into a relatively narrow range of particle size. 2

A substance added to flour to bleach out the yellow pigmcnl, naturally present in flour and thereby grves a whiter appearance to the flour and the bread product from it, for example, benzoyl peroxide.

IS 12833 : 1989
2.2.3 Bran 2.3.7 Resultant ATTA

The outer most wheat grain,

covering

or seed coat of the

it is a by-product of the NOTE - Commercially, milling process consisting of the large pieces of bran remaining after the flour has been extracted from wheat.

A by-product of roller flour mills. After removal of MAIDA, SUJI and bran, the rest 01 the endosperm adhered with bran is ground to make resultant ATTA. This ATTA is quite different from whole meal ATTA. 2.3.8 Shorts A mixture of small pieces of bran and fibrous material remaining after flour has been extracted from the wheat. It is a by-product used for animal feed. 3 FLOW DIAGRAM 3.1 A basie flow diagram of the flour milling is given in Fig. 1. 3.2 A general flow diagram of milling section is given in Fig. 2. 3.3 A flow diagram for roller flour mill is given in Fig. 3. 3.4 Flow diagram for fractioning process of flour mill is given in Fig. 4.

2.3.4 Break Flour Flour produced by the break rolls as the grain passes through the break system of the milling process. 2.3.5 Clean Wheat The wheat that has been run through a receiving separator for the removal of dockage and other extraneous materials such that it is fit for conditioning and milling. 2.3.6 Germ The embryo in a cereal the new plant. grain which grows into

STORAGE

CLEANING CONDlTlONlNG

AND

MILLIKG

STORAGE FINISHED

OF PRODUCTS

FIG. 1
BREAK SYSTEM

BASIC FLOW
REOUCTICN SYSTEM LOUR DRESSING v rEklrPlC"GES

DUSTING

AND.

GRADING

I

PURIFICATION BY PURIFIERS

11 1

SIFTER SYSTEM

FIG.

2

FLOW SHEET MILLING SECTION

3

PURIFIER

BRAN S SHORTS REDUCING ROLLS fr iI PURIFIER SEPARATOR

d
P

cl cl
BRAN
SHORTS

P

.R

0 0

SHORTS

cl
CLEAR FLOUR u

TJ
9
II
@
ENTOLETER SCOURER FIRST BREAK

BLEACHlkG i-i-w __. -____I ..--_-_-\

.

BULK STORAGE

8

=m / 6
EPlRlCHlNG HOME 8 8AKEQlES

IsI
SIFTER

El
GERM

C

1

PATENT

FLOUR

FIG.~ FLQW DIAGRAM FOR ROLLER FLOUR

IS 12833: 1989

~TERMEOIATL

FRACTION

FIG.4 FRACTIONING PROCESS OF FLOUR

5

Standard Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

Borean of Indian Standards BLS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. FADC 39 ( 3059 1 Amendments Issued Since Poblication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected publications may be reproduced in does not preclude the free use, in such as symbols and sizes, type or to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Act, 1986 to and quality

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 3310131, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg,

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

NEW DELHI CALCUTTA

110002 700054 160036

3310131 331 13 75 37 86 62 2 18 43 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH

: C. I. Ta Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Marol, Andheri ( East )

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093
Branches

: AHMADABAD.

CGIMBATORE. HYDERABAD.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM.
Printed at Swarantra Bharat Press, Delhi. India

