( Reaffirmed 2000 )

Indiun Standard

CODEOFPRACTKE FORCULTIVATIONOF AROMATICPLANTS
PART 3 CITRONELLA ( JAVA )

UDC

665526.22

0 BIS 1992 BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

September

1992

Price Group 1

Natural & Synthetic Perfumery Materials

Sectional

Committee,

PCD 18

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Natural & Synthetic Perfumery Materials Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. Natural perfumery materials like essential oils, are known to vary in olfactory and other physico-chemical characteristics depending on different agro-climatic conditions. Working on this premise, the Committee had quite some time back published IS 6774 : 1992 `Classication of essential oil bearing aromatic plants'. This standard covers information relating to botanical identity, habitat, economic stage oE growth, harvesting season and part of the plant used for essential oil production. These factors have long been recognized to govern the quality of the natural essential oils. Realizing the importance of endemic variations of these factors including fertilizer, irrigation, modern technology and appropriate agronomic practices developed through a process of evaluation trials at recognized cultivation centers for aromatic plants in the country, the Committee decided to amplify these efforts directionally, and prepare specific codes for good cultivation practices for individual aromatic This series of Indian standards for specific aromatic plants is plants used for essential oil production. expected to provide guidance to prospective cultivators, producers and users of the essential oils to obtain the optimum yield of the essential oil of an acceptable qualiry for the perfumery industry. Oil of Citronella (Java) was earlier imported into India. However, in the recent past, citronella grass of Java type is being cultivated extensively in various parts of India particularly in Assam (Eastern Regions), Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh. The oil produced in India is found to be by and large comparable with the imported Java type oil. Oil of Citronella (Java) is one of the most important essential oils used in perfumery industry. It acts as a main starting material for the production of numerous important perfumery mate1 ial such as geraniol, citronella1 and their derivatives. The oil as such also finds extensive use in perfumery, various household cleansers, technical products, insecticides etc. In the preparation of this standard, assistance have been derived from R & D work of ICAR and CSIR laboratories besides Stated Directorates and Institutes for medicinal and aromatic plants.

IS 13358 ( Part 3 ) : 1992

Indian Standard

CODEOFPRACTICEFORCULTIVATIONOF AROMATIC PLANTS
PART 1
SCOPE

3 CITRONELLA

( JAVA )

covers cultivation practices of the aromatic plant for production of oil of Citronella (Java) botanically known as Cymbopogon winterianus Jowitt, family Gramineae. 1.2 The requirements of methods and tests for oil of Citronella ( Java separately covered in IS 512 : 1988. 2 REFERENCES The following Indian standards adjuncts to this standard: IS MO. 512 : lC88 G597 : 1988 Specification Title for oil of Citronella are necessary of sampling ) have been

1.1 This code

and North-Eastern hilly states ( Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Meghalaya, etc ) as a rainfed crop and in parts of Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu largely as an irrigated crop. The oil contains 85-90 percent alcohols calculated as geraniol and 36-40 percent citronellal. The oil has a characteristic sweet odour. 5 VARIETIES/CULTURES The crop introduced 6 CHOICE is grown from a common eariier from Indonesia. culture,

AND PREPARATION FOR CULTIVATION

OF LAND

(Java)
Glossary of terms relating to natural and synthetic perfumery material ( first revision )

The land should be very well prepared to a fine tilth, free of weeds. The land should preferably be laid out into small plots having proper irrigation channels. when the crop is cultivated under irrigated conditions. 7 SUITABLE TLME FOR PLANTATION

The above mentioned standards contain provithrough reference in this text, sions which, constitute provisions of this code. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are to investigate the possibility of encouraged applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated above. 3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this code, the given in IS 6597 : 1988 shall apply. 4 TYPES 4.1 l'he following Citronella, namely: a) Citronella Jowitt are the two varieties of definitions

The planting can be done any time in warm weather ( generally March-April ) with irrigation.. 8 CLIMATE AND SOIL

This species is a native of warm tropical regions with high annual rainfall (200-250 cm) throughout the year and alround sun-shine. Frost and shade adversely affect the growth and crop yield. The crop favours rich, organic, well drained soils, loamy in texture with p1-I of 5.0 to 7.0. It cannot stand water logging. 9 PROPAGATLON AND PLANTING

( Java

) ( Cymbopogon winterianus ) ) ( Cymbo#ogon nardus

b) Citronella ( Ceylon Link ) W.

The plant is propagated through rooted slips separated from a growing clump and planted with the advent of monsoon rain or with irrigation. The crop is planted at 45 x 45 cm to 60 x 60 cm spacing depending upon soil fertility, on slopes in the hills. Lower spacing is recommended where plantation is kept for a shorter duration. Two rooted slips are planted in each hill up to 15 cm depth and light irrigation is given immediately after planting. IO MANURES AND FERTILIZERS

4.1.1 This

code is mainly confined to Citronella ( Java ), as Ceylon type Citronella is not produced commercially in India. The latter is grown sporadically because of its low oil yield and poor quality, The crop of Citronella (Java) iS mainly cultivated in Assam, West Bengal 1

This crop is a heavy feeder on inorganic nutrients and application of NPK fertilizer is favourable. Under irrigated conditions fertilizers NPK 300,40 and 40 kg/ha are recommended.

IS 13358 ( Part

3 ) : 1992
advent of winter when it can be cut close to the ground. The harvested crop is wilted in field for 2 to 3 hours and this wilted semidried grass is distilled. On an average, 100 kg oil is obtained in the first year, 200 to 250 kg of oil in second and onward years per hectare per annum. It is maintained for 4 years in the field. Higher yield up to 400 kg is also reported.

The entire quantity of phosphatic and potash fertilizers are given as basal preferably at the time of land preparation and nitrogen is given in six equal split applications. Foliar spraying of 1 percent urea solution is found to improve and could be given after growth of plants fortnight intervals.

11 WEEDING

AND

INTERCULTURE

A minimum of two weedings are required in a year. Initially, wheel hoe or bullock drawn cultivators are used for interculture. However, once the crop picks up growth, one hand weeding per harvest may be done to maintain a weed free crop. The crop completely covers the fields in ,65 days or over after planting/last harvest. I2

14 DISTILLATLON

OF OIL

IRRIGATION

The grass is chopped and filled in stills. Steam distillation/hydra distillation is recommended which gives yield of 1 ,O percent oil from semidried grass. The grass is firmly packed in the still to prevent formation of water channels and each charge is thus exhausted in 90 minutes for steam distillation and nearly 3 h for hydrodistillation. 15 DlSEASE

Since the crop is moisture loving, it needs irrigation twice in a week during summer season. In places where rainfall is well distributed, as in hills of Assam, West Bengal and neighbouring states, no irrigation is required from the month of March to October. 13

AND

PEST

HARVESTING

AND YIELD

First crop is ready for harvest after nine months of planting and thereafter 3 harvesting may be taken per annum, say after 120 to 140 days interval. The plant bear rosette leaves with no stem and should be cut about 10 cm above the ground except before close of season that is

The white grub which attacks pearl millet is a serious pest of Java Citronella. It bores inside the lower shoots and causes wilting the plant outright. NO effective remedial measures are yet reported. In South India, yellowing and crinkling of the growing leaves is a common occurrence particularly during summer months. The affected plants are found to be highly infested with mealy bugs. The symptoms usually disappear after the rains. Spray drench with phorphomidon starting from January/February months at 15-20 days interval is recommended as control.

2

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in any BIS has the copyright of all its publications. form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. PCD 18 ( 1022 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 15 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 T Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern i SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 600113 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices) Telephone 331 01 31 I 331 13 75 37 84 99, I 37 86 26, 37 85 61 37 86 62

Southern : C. 1. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS Western
: Manakalaya,

53 38 43, 53 16 40 t 53 23 84 235 02 16, 235 04 42 235 15 19, 235 23 15 t 632 92 95, 632 78 91, 632 78 58 632 78 92

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COTMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
hinted at New India Printing Press. Khurra. India

