NAT Alan IS 1981 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


ay arafsat— te ua Fahne 


(FAT JRT ) 


Animal Casings — 
Grades and Specification 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 67.120.10 


© BIS 2018 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay fereft— 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2018 Price Group 4 


Slaughterhouse and Meat Industry Sectional Committee, FAD 18 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Slaughterhouse and Meat Industry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council. 


Animal casings are generally obtained from the intestines of sheep, goats, cattle and hogs, and are mainly used in 
the production of sausages and also for non-edible purposes, such as surgical sutures, guts for sports goods and 
strings for musical instruments. The process of manufacture of animal casings has been included in this standard 
as a guide (see Annex A). In view of the common trade practice, the term ‘sheep casings’ has been used in this 
standard to include ‘goat casings’ also. 


This standard was first published in 1962 and subsequently revised in 1978. The first revision was undertaken to 
incorporate modifications like, inclusion of dry ready-to-wet casings; and to align various grades with the grades 
laid down under the Animals Casings Grading and Marking (Amendment) Rules, 1975. 


The second revision has been undertaken to align various grades of animal casings specified in this standard 
with the grades laid down under the amended Animals Casings Grading and Marking Rules as amended in 1997. 
Particularly the calibration of various grades of animal casings has been modified to align with the said rules. This 
standard is subject to the provisions of the said rules. In this revision grades ‘bladder’, ‘weasands’, ‘bungs’, and 
‘fat ends’ have been incorporated for dried cattle casings and salted cattle casings. 


While formulating this standard, due consideration has been given to the relevant rules prescribed by the Food 
Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011. This standard is 
however, subject to the restriction imposed under these, wherever applicable. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 1981 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


ANIMAL CASINGS — 
GRADES AND SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the requirements and methods 
of sampling and test for animal casings derived from 
sheep, goats, cattle and hogs. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. 
IS 253 : 2014 


Title 


Specification for common salt 
( fourth revision) 


IS 1982:2015 Antemortem and post-mortem 
inspection of meat animals — 


Code of practice (second revision) 


IS 4905: 2015 Random sampling and 
randomization procedures (first 
revision) 

IS 10500: 2012 Drinking water — Specification 


(second revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Black Node 


Black node is usually caused by the residue of the 
ingesta or slime left behind in the casing. 


3.2 Calibration 


(a) Measurement of the diameter of the casing in the 
case of wet-salted casings; 


(b) Flat measure (half circumference) in the case of 
dried casings; and 


(c) Measurement of the diameter of the casings after 
their treatment with water for at least fifteen min 
in the case of dry ready-to-wet casings of sheep 
and goat. The diameter is found out by inflating 
the casing with air or water and measuring the 


diameter by means of suitable calibration frames 
after properly stretching out the casing wall and 
taking the mean of several readings. 

3.3 Cattle 


Includes bull, cow, ox, heifer, calf, steer, bullock and 
buffalo. 


3.4 Cattle Casing 
Includes the following: 


a) Fat End — The terminal end of the large intestine 
measuring about 1.5 m in length from the anus. 


b) Middle — Remaining part of the large intestine. 
c) Bung — Caecal part of the intestine. 

d) Runner — Small intestine. 

e) Bladder 

f) Weasand — Gullet or oesophagus. 


3.5 Cicatrix 


Scar of healed-up wound. 


3.6 Domestic 


Small grease spot in the casing. 


3.7 Kink 


Twisted loop in the casing. 


3.8 Nodule 


Small rounded structure. 


3.9 Rings and Hanks 
Bundles of casings. These shall be as follows: 

a) Rings of sheep and goat casings — A ring shall 
contain not more than 4 pieces and shall measure 
at least 21 m in length, no single piece measuring 
less than 1.5 m. 

b) Rings of hog casings — A ring shall contain not 
more than 4 pieces and shall measure at least 9 m, 
no single piece measuring less than | m. 


c) Hanks of sheep or goat casings — A hank shall 
consist of not more than 18 pieces and shall 
measure at least 92 m in length. 


d) Rings, hanks or cocoons of dry ready-to-wet 
casings of sheep and goats — May be made up of 
several pieces joined together with adhesive and 
other approved materials; each single piece shall 
measure not less than 1.5 m. 


IS 1981 : 2018 


e) Hanks of cattle casings — The minimum length of 
a hank shall measure as follows: 


Dried runners 180m 

Dried middles 90 m ora packet of 25 m 
Salted runners 30m 

Salter middles 18m 


No single piece shall measure less than | m. 


3.10 Rust 

Black spots caused by putrefaction due to bacterial or 
fungal action. 

3.11 Salt Burn 

Areas of discoloration generally caused by: 


(a) The entry of air-into tin containers in which the 
casings are packed, and 


(b) By the use of poor quality salt. 


4 TYPES 
The animal casings shall be of the following types: 


a) Dried cattle casings known commercially as ‘Beef 
Casings’; 
b 


wm 


Salted cattle casings known commercially as 
‘Beef Casings’ 


c 


st 


Salted sheep casings (including goat casings) 
known commercially as ‘Sheep Casings’; 


d 


wa 


‘Dry ready-to-wet’ sheep casings (including goat 
casings) known commercially as ‘Sheep Casings’; 
and 


e) Salted hog casings known commercially as ‘Hog 


5 GRADES 


The grade designation for animal casings shall be as 
given in Table 1. 


6 REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 General 


6.1.1 The casings shall be obtained from healthy 
animals slaughtered in licenced premises and subjected 
to ante-mortem and post-mortem inspection according 
to the procedure prescribed in IS 1982. 


6.1.2 The casings shall be prepared under hygienic 
conditions and shall be wholesome and otherwise fit 
for human consumption. 


6.1.3 The casings shall not have been subjected to any 
bacterial activation or fermentation. 


6.1.4 The casings shall be free from any parasitic 
infestation and from scars of healed-up wounds. 


6.1.5 Quality of water used for processing shall be of 
potable quality (see IS 10500). 

6.2 Preservatives 

Preservatives other than common salt (see IS 253) shall 
not be used. 


6.3 Calibration and Individual Requirements 


6.3.1 Dried Cattle Casings 


Dried cattle casings shall comply with calibration and 
requirements given in Table 2. 


6.3.2 Salted Cattle Casings 


Casings’. . p PEPE 
Salted cattle casings shall comply with calibration and 
requirements given in Table 3. 
Table 1 Grade Designation for Animal Casings 
( Clause 5.1 ) 
SI No. Type of Cattle Casings Grade Designation 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Dried cattle casings Prime Quality (PQ), Grade I, Grade II, Grade II, Bladder, 
Weasands, Bungs, and Fat ends. 
ii) Salted cattle casings Prime Quality (PQ), Bladder, Weasands, Bungs, and Fat ends. 
iii) Salted sheep casings (including goat casings) Prime Quality (PQ) or Grade I, Grade II, and Grade II. 


iv) ‘Dry ready-to-wet’ sheep casings (including 
goat casings) 


v) Salted hog casings 


Prime Quality (PQ) or Grade I, Grade II, and Grade III. 


Prime Quality (PQ) 


SI No. 


(1) 


IS 1981 : 2018 


Table 2 Calibration and Requirements for Dried Cattle Casings 


Grade 
Designation 


(2) 


( Clause 6.3.1 ) 


Calibration 


(3) 


Requirements 


(4) 


i) 


ii) 


iii) 


iv) 


v) 


vi) 


vii) 


viii) 


SI No. 


(1) 


Prime 


(PQ) 


Grade I 


Grade II 


Grade III 


Bladder 


Weasands 


Bungs 


Fat ends 


Quality The calibration shall be by flat measure, in steps of 


5 mm for example, 35 mm and below, above 35 mm 
to 40 mm, above 40 mm to 45 mm and so on up to 
65 mm and above 65mm; or in steps of 2 mm for 
example, 35 mm and below, above 35 mm to 37 mm, 
above 37 mm to 39 mm. and so on up to 65 mm and 
above 65 mm; or as agreed to between the purchaser 
and the vendor. 


The calibration for Grade I shall be same as for grade 


PQ. 


The calibration for Grade II shall be same as for 


Grade PQ. 


The calibration for Grade III shall be same as for 
grade PQ 


The casings shall be of uniform natural colour, 
lustrous throughout without any spot or mark and 
free from discolouration. The casing wall shall be 
intact, free from any tear or laceration and shall 
be perfectly rolled. The casings shall also be free 
from salt burns, rust, domestics, black nodes, slime, 
mucus, dung, mould or fungus infestation and free 
from defects like holes, blisters, lacerations, nodules 
and cicatrices. 


The requirements for this grade shall be the same as 
for grade PQ except that a slight deviation in colour 
and folds and a few black nodes shall be permitted. 
Total fat streaks shall not exceed 40 per meter; a 
streak of fat shall not exceed 30 mm in length and 
10 mm in breadth. The middle of the seam shall be 
free from fat-streaks. 


Casings not conforming to Grade PQ or Grade I due 
to defect in rolling and/or having larger black nodes 
or rough texture or streaks of fat not exceeding 60 in 
a meter shall be classed in this grade. 


This grade shall include short pieces of any or all of 
the above grades and/or having fat streaks in excess 
of 60 in a meter. 


Bladder, otherwise conforming to requirements of 
grade PQ 


Weasands, otherwise conforming to requirements of 
Grade PQ 


Bungs, otherwise conforming to requirements of 
grade PQ. 


Fat ends, otherwise conforming to requirements of 
grade PQ. 


Table 3 Calibration and Requirements for Salted Cattle Casings 


Grade 
Designation 


(2) 


( Clause 6.3.2 ) 


Calibration 


(3) 


Requirements 


(4) 


i) 


ii) 


Prime 


(PQ) 


Bladder 


Quality 


The calibration shall be by diameter, in steps of 2 
mm for example up to 28 mm, above 28 mm to 30 
mm, and so on up to 40 mm and above 40 mm; or as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the vendor 


The casings shall be of uniform natural colour, 
lustrous throughout without any spot or mark and 
free from discolouration. The casing wall shall be 
intact, free from any tear or laceration and shall 
be perfectly rolled. The casings shall also be free 
from salt burns, rust, domestics, black nodes, slime, 
mucus, dung, mould or fungus infestation and free 
from defects like holes, blisters, lacerations, nodules 
and cicatrices. On being inflated with air, rolled 
round the finger and pressed, the casings shall burst 
with a sharp sound 


The wall shall be of uniform natural colour, lustrous 
throughout without any spot or mark and free from 
discolouration. The material shall be free from any 
tear or laceration. The material shall also be free from 
salt burns, rust, domestics, black nodes, slime, mucus, 
dung, mould or fungus infestation and free from 
defects like holes, blisters, nodules and cicatrices 


IS 1981 : 2018 


Table 3 ( Concluded ) 


SI No. Grade Calibration Requirements 
Designation 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
iii) Weasands = Weasands, otherwise conforming to requirements of 
‘Bladder. 
iv) Bungs = Bungs, otherwise conforming to requirements of 


v) Fat ends 


‘Bladder’ 


Fat ends, otherwise conforming to requirements of 


‘Bladder’ 


6.3.3 Salted Sheep Casings (Including Goat Casings) 


Salted sheep casings (including goat casings) shall 
comply with calibration and requirements given in 


Table 4. 


6.3.4 Dry Ready-to-Wet’ Sheep Casings 


‘Dry ready-to-wet’ sheep casings shall comply with 
calibration and requirements given in Table 5. 


6.3.5 Salted Hog Casings 


Salted Hog Casings shall comply with calibration and 
requirements given in Table 6. 


Table 4 Calibration and Requirements for Salted Sheep Casings 


(Including Goat Casings) 
( Clause 6.3.3 ) 


SI No. Grade Calibration Requirements 
Designation 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Prime Quality The calibration shall be 12 mm to 26 mm. in steps The casings shall be of natural colour throughout 
(PQ) or Grade I of 2 mm, for example, up to 12 mm., above 12 mm without any discolouration. The casing wall shall be 


ii) Grade II 


ili) Grade III 


to 14 mm., above 14 mm. to 16 mm etc.; or 13 mm 
to 27 mm in steps of 2 mm. for example up to 13 
mm., above 13 mm. to 15mm, above 15mm. to 17 
mm. etc.; or as agreed to between the purchaser and 
the vendor. 


The calibration for Grade II shall be same as for 
grade PQ 


The calibration for Grade III shall be same as for 
grade PQ 


intact and not torn or lacerated. The casings shall also 
be free from salt burns, rust, domestics, black nodes, 
slime, mucus, dung, mould or fungus infestation and 
free from defects like holes, blisters, lacerations, 
nodules and cicatrices. The casing shall not burst 
when filled with air or water to its normal capacity 
and slightly pressed. The rings or hanks shall 
have been cured properly with common salt (see 
IS 253). 


The requirements for this grade shall be the same 
as for grade PQ except that a slight deviation 
shall be allowed in respect of colour and/or 
strength and pinholes on walls not exceeding 
2 in a meter. The material should be fit for use in 
preparation of sausages. 


The requirements for this grade shall be the same as 
for Grade II except that the presence of nodules shall 


be permitted 


SI No. 


(1) 


Grade Designation 


(2) 


IS 1981 : 2018 


Table 5 Calibration and Requirements for 
‘Dry Ready-to-Wet’ Sheep Casings 


( Clause 6.3.4 ) 


Calibration 


(3) 


Requirements 


(4) 


i) 


ii) 


iii) 


SI No. 


(1) 


Prime Quality (PQ) or 
Grade I 


Grade II 


Grade III 


Grade Designation 


(2) 


The calibration shall be 12 mm to 26 mm. in steps 
of 2 mm., for example, up to 12 mm., above 12 mm 
to 14 mm., above 14 mm. to 16 mm etc.; or 13 mm 
to 27 mm in steps of 2 mm. for example, up to 13 
mm., above 13 mm. to 15 mm, above 15 mm. to 
17 mm. etc.; or as agreed to between the purchaser 
and the vendor. 


The calibration for Grade II shall be same as for 
grade PQ 


The calibration for Grade III shall be same as for 
grade PQ 


The casings shall be of natural colour throughout 
without any discolouration. The casing wall shall 
be intact and not torn or lacerated. The casings 
shall also be free from salt burns, rust, domestics, 
black nodes, slime, mucus, dung, mould or fungus 
infestation and free from defects like holes, 
blisters, lacerations, nodules and cicatrices. The 
casing shall not burst when filled with air or water 
to its normal capacity and slightly pressed. The 
rings or hanks shall have been cured properly with 
common salt (see IS 253). 


The requirements for this grade shall be the same 
as for grade PQ except that a slight deviation shall 
be allowed in respect of colour and/or strength 
and pinholes on walls not exceeding 2 in a meter. 
The material should be fit for use in preparation 
of sausages. 


The requirements for this grade shall be the same 
as for Grade II except that the presence of nodules 
shall be permitted 


Table 6 Calibration and Requirements for 
‘Dry Ready-to-Wet’ Sheep Casings 


( Clause 6.3.5 ) 


Calibration 


(3) 


Requirements 


(4) 


i) 


7 PACKING AND MARKING c) 


Prime Quality (PQ) 


7.1 Packing 


Unless agreed otherwise, between the purchaser and 
the vendor, the rings or hanks of the casings shall be 
packed in suitable containers lined with polyethylene. 
Casings of only one type shall be packed in a lot. 


7.2 Marking 


Each container shall be marked with the following 


information: 


a) Name, type and grade of the material; 


The calibration shall be 12 to 26 mm. in steps 
of 2 mm., for example, up to 12 mm., above 
12 mm to 14 mm., above 14 mm. to 16 mm etc.; 
or 13 to 27 mm in steps of 2 mm. for example, 
up to 13 mm., above 13 mm. to 15mm, above 15 
mm. to 17 mm. etc.; or as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the vendor. 


The casings shall be of natural colour throughout 
without any discolouration. The casing wall 
shall be intact and not torn or lacerated. The 
casings shall also be free from salt burns, rust, 
domestics, black nodes, slime, mucus, dung, 
mould or fungus infestation and free from 
defects like holes, blisters, lacerations, nodules 
and cicatrices. The casing shall not burst when 
filled with air or water to its normal capacity 
and slightly pressed. The rings or hanks shall 
have been cured properly with common salt (see 
IS 253). 


Batch or code number; 
Calibration; 


e) Number of hanks or rings; 


and the 


f) Date of packing; and 


Any other marking required under the Legal 
Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011, 


Food Safety and Standards (Packaging 


and Labelling) Regulation, 2011. 


The product 
Mark. 


b) Name of the manufacturer; 


7.3 BIS Certification Marking 


may also be marked with the Standard 


IS 1981 : 2018 


7.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 
Rules and Regulations framed there under. The details 
of the conditions under which the licence for use of 
the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 


8 SAMPLING 


Representative samples of the material for tests shall be 
drawn as prescribed in Annex B. 


9 TESTS 


Shake the test sample (see B-2.4) free of salt and soak 
in water for about an hour. Measure the lengths and 
inflate the casings with water or air and check the 
diameter and defects, like holes, punctures, pimples, 
etc. Also carry out the test for strength. 


IS 1981 : 2018 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


PROCESSING OF ANIMAL CASINGS 


A-1 GENERAL METHOD 


A-1.1 While the slaughtered animal is being dressed, 
the viscera is removed in such a way that it does not get 
contaminated with the intestinal refuse. Immediately 
after the removal of the stomach, the intestines along 
with the peritoneal and mesenteric covering are sent to 
the gut and tripe room. The intestines are then separated 
from their mesenteric attachments by easy pulls. Before 
disengaging the intestines from their attachments, it 
may be advantageous to put the intestines along with 
the peritoneal and mesenteric covering in barrels with 
crushed ice or ice-cold water till the fat surrounding 
the guts sets. This step might make it easier to pull 
the intestines from their attachments without much 
damage. After the removal of the intestines from their 
attachments, the contents of the intestines should 
be stripped off by uniformly gentle pressing and by 
drawing the gut between the fingers. The guts should 
then be washed thoroughly by flushing with tap water 
at full pressure. The guts are then taken to the casings 
factory in barrels packed with crushed ice. 


A-1.2 In the casings factory, the guts are given a 
thorough rinse in ordinary tap water after allowing to 
remain for some time so that the chill due to packing in 
ice is taken off, if processed immediately. Otherwise, 
the guts are kept in wooden barrels in ice-cold water 
overnight. Next morning, they are processed. All 
adhering fat and tissue are removed with knife or 
scissors. Defatting of the guts with such mechanical 
implements does not completely remove the fat in the 
case of cattle casings. In such case, the guts should be 
treated with warm water at 35 to 40°C and the fat so 
loosened trimmed off. The guts are then completely 
washed in ordinary water. 


A-1.3 The next step is to remove the mucus and slime. 
For this purpose implements with smooth surface 
should be used. In the case of cattle casings, the guts 
are turned inside out and the mucus and slime are 
removed by scraping with smooth-edged implements. 
Care should be taken not to lacerate the casing wall. 
Complete removal of slime and mucus is very important 
as these affect the appearance and shine of the wall. 
Complete removal of the slime and mucus gives a 
bright and whiter appearance to the casing. 


A-1.4 During washing with water, all the holes and 
other defects, such as blisters, pimples, etc, should be 
detected and preliminary assortment of the guts should 
be done. In the case of cattle casings, this is done at the 
time of inflation with air. 


A-1.5 In the case of dried cattle casings, the next step 
is the inflation of the guts with air and drying. The air 
should be blown by mechanical means and care should 
be taken to blow air in such a manner that the gut spreads 
out fully and expands evenly. It should not be too tense 
nor should it leave any folds or kinks in the gut. Correct 
blowing is very important as it influences calibration. 


A-1.6 Drying of casings in shaded places should be 
preferred to the direct hot sun as the former facilitates 
gradual and uniform drying. When the casings are 
subjected to direct hot sun, the superficial layer dries 
and contracts before the internal layers are properly 
dried. This reduces the keeping quality. If the casings 
are left too long in the sun, the surface gets too dark and 
the color is affected. 


A-1.7 After the casings are dried, the air is expelled 
by pressing the guts between rollers. Metal rollers with 
smooth, even and exacting surfaces should be used. 
While pressing the guts between the rollers, care should 
be taken to see that uniform pressure is applied at all the 
paints of the exacting-surfaces of the rollers, so that the 
gut is pressed evenly and it spreads properly. 


A-1.8 While feeding the gut to the pressing machine, 
the gut should be led dorso-ventrally to the pressing 
surfaces and the gut should be at right angles to the 
surface. This will facilitate the formation of fine, 
uniform marbling lines in the gut wall (dorsal part). If it 
is not led at right angles to the surface, folds and kinks 
would farm in the gut wall. 


A-1.9 Calibration of the casings should be done 
between the dorso-ventral paints. If there are wrinkles, 
overlapping or folds in the casing wall, these should be 
spread out properly before measuring and the mean of 
several readings should be taken. 


A-1.10 The calibrated casings should be graded and 
assorted and prepared in rings or hanks. In damp 
atmosphere and on rainy days, a further step for 
thorough dehydration should be taken. The casings may 
be hung up in a hall in rows one above the other and hot 
air passed through. Charcoal fire should be avoided as 
the smoke, even in traces, darkens the casing wall. 


A-1.11 Sheep casings are packed wet. After they are 
cleaned as described in A-1.3 they are calibrated 
and assorted in different grades. Rings or hanks are 
prepared and these are stuffed with common salt and 
allowed to remain for at least 3 to 4 days after which 
they are taken out, cleared of excess salt and packed in 
wooden barrels with layers of common salt. 


IS 1981 : 2018 


ANNNEX B 
( Clause 8.1 ) 


SAMPLING OF ANIMAL CASINGS 


B-1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF SAM- 
PLING 


B-1.0 In drawing, storing and handling samples, the 
following precautions and directions shall be observed. 


B-1.1 Samples shall be taken in a protected place not 
exposed to dust or soot. 


B-1.2 Samples shall be protected from adventitious 
contamination. 


B-1.3 The sample containers shall be sealed air-tight 
after filling and marked with full details of sampling, 
date of sampling, batch or code number, name of 
manufacturer and other important particulars of the 
consignment. 


B-1.4 The samples shall be stored in such a manner that 
there is no deterioration of the material. 


B-1.5 Sampling shall be done by a person agreed to 
between the purchaser and the vendor and if desired, 
in the presence of the purchaser (or his representative) 
and the vendor (or his representative). 


B-2 SCALE OF SAMPLING 


B-2.1 Lot 


In any consignment, all the containers of the same 
size and from the same batch of manufacture, shall be 
grouped together to constitute a lot. 


B-2.1.1 Samples shall be tested for each lot for 
ascertaining the conformity of the material with the 
requirements of this standard. 


B-2.2 The number of containers to be selected from 
each lot shall be in accordance with col 1 and 2 of 
Table 1. 


B-2.3 The containers shall be selected at random. In 
order to ensure the randomness of selection, a random 
number table (see IS 4905) shall be used. In case such 
tables are not available, the following procedure may 
be adopted: 


a) Starting from any container, count them as 1, 2, 
gh Peoivesacts , up to rand so on ina systematic manner 
and withdraw every r* container, r being the 
integral part of N/n. 


where, 
N = total number of containers, and 


n =number of containers to be selected (see 
Table 1). 


b) Every r container thus counted shall be separated 
until the requisite number of containers is obtained 
from the lot to give samples for test. 


B-2.4 Test Samples 


From each of the containers selected as in B-2.2 
and B-2.3, draw at random from different parts of 
the same container, at least one percent of the total 
number of hanks or rings packed in it. This shall 
constitute the test sample for that particular container 
and shall be tested for the requirements prescribed in 
6, as applicable. 


B-3 CRITERION FOR CONFORMITY 


A lot shall be considered as conforming to the 
requirements of this standard if all the samples tested 
satisfy the requirements prescribed for the various 
characteristics in 6, as applicable. 


Table 1 Number of Containers to be Selected From a Lot 
( Clause B-2.2 ) 


Number of Containers 


Number of Containers 


in the Lot (N) to be Selected (n) 

(1) (2) 

2 to 15 2 

16 to 40 3 

41 to 65 4 
66 to 110 5 
111 to 250 7 
Above 250 10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 18 (2442). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


