INATA Alb IS 7155 (Part 2) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


area MAT Set ita a Aisa 
ATT 2 ATA AAMT TORTE 
(UG) 


Code of Recommended Practice for 
Conveyor Safety 
Part 2 General Safety Requirements 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 53.040.10 
O BIS 2023 
ARA HAR A 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WH, 9 FTL Me TH AM, Ag feet - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


NS DUTY 


June 2023 Price Group 5 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee, 
MED 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
recommendation of the Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related 
Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) first published in 1974 and subsequently revised in 1986. It covers the recommended 
practice to be adopted in the safe use of conveyors and conveying machinery used for transportation of bulk 
materials or unit loads. 


This revision has been taken up to keep pace with the latest technological developments. In this revision, the 
standard has been brought into latest style and format of Indian Standards, and references to Indian Standards, 
wherever applicable have been updated. 


The code of recommended practice for conveyor safety is in eight parts. This standard (Part 2) covers the general 
safety requirements. Other parts in this series under the general title are as follows: 


Part 1 General information 
Part 3 Belt conveyors and feeders 
Part 4 Vibrating conveyor/feeder 
Part 5 Apron conveyors/apron feeders 
Part 6 Selection, training and supervision of operators 
Part 7 Inspection and maintenance 
Part 8 Flight conveyors 
The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 7155 (Part 2) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR CONVEYOR 


SAFETY 
PART 2 — GENERAL SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 2) covers general safety 
requirements relating to continuous mechanical 
handling equipment, including its construction, 
installation, utilization and maintenance, to ensure 
its uses to the optimum advantage, and to prevent, as 
far as possible, any accidents or mishaps that could 
arise from misuse. 


1.2 These safety requirements shall be in addition to 
the requirements/information given in 
IS 7155 (Part 1). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below, contain provisions 
which, through their reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards listed below: 


IS No./Other Title 
publication 
IS 7155 (Part 1): Code of recommended 
1986 practice for conveyor 


safety: Part 1 General 
information (first revision) 


IS/IEC 60947-4-1 Low-voltage switchgear 

: 2012 and controlgear: Part 4 
Contactors and motor- 
starters, Sec 1 
Electromechanical 


contactors and motor- 
starters (first revision) 


3 APPLICATION 


3.1 These safety requirements apply in the normal 
working conditions defined in 3.3 of 
IS 7155 (Part 1). 


3.2 These safety requirements apply to continuous 
mechanical handling equipment proper, excluding 
the structures (building frameworks, planks, etc) to 
which such equipment is affixed or on which it is 
placed and for which the user is responsible, except 
when such structures have been designed, supplied 
and erected along with the conveying device. 


3.3 The main object of these requirements is the 
safety of the personnel defined in 3.4 of IS 7155 
(Part 1). 


3.4 Skilled personnel, such as fitters, maintenance 
and repair personnel, who only work from time to 
time at the request of the person responsible for the 
plant, shall observe special requirements, 
particularly those set out in 4.4.17 to 4.4.21. 


3.5 Persons whose duties do not demand their 
presence on the plant or in the vicinity of the 
equipment under consideration shall observe orders 
forbidding access to certain areas. 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 The construction and operation of all continuous 
mechanical handling equipment for loose bulk 
materials and unit loads shall meet the statutory, 
specific and other requirements relating to safety in 
general; the principles laid down in 1 and the 
following general requirements. 


4.2 In the Construction Stage (Design and 
Manufacture) 


4.2.1 Design and Construction of Platform, 
Walkways, Stairways and Ladders 


The design of platforms, walkways, stairways and 
ladders shall be such that adequate clearance is 
provided for normal operation; servicing and 
maintenance, giving sufficient room for freedom of 
movement and access for carrying out such duties. 


4.2.2 The stability and strength of the equipment 
(static or mobile) shall be ensured under all normal 
working conditions, including climatic conditions as 
agreed to by the interested parties. 


4.2.3 The whole conveyor path and especially the 
loading, unloading and transfer points, shall be 
designed so as to avoid as much as possible all 
spillage of products or conveyed material. 


4.2.4 The slopes and the characteristics of the 
conveying element shall be designed so as to avoid 
slipping and/or unintentional dropping of the 
conveyed products under normal working 
conditions. 


4.2.4.1 The support element of the material or load 
(belt, buckets, swing trays, etc) shall have sufficient 
size to be suitable for the transport of the specified 
product or load. 


IS 7155 (Part 2) : 2023 


4.2.5 To prevent over running or running backwards 
of the conveying device, all inclined or vertical 
appliances shall include a safety device which 
operates whenever the motive power is cut off or 
fails and where the load conveyed possesses kinetic 
or potential energy. Nevertheless, a safety device for 
this purpose is not compulsory for those special 
cases as agreed to between the purchaser and the 
manufacturer. 


4.2.6 Certain fixed or mobile appliances may 
include an articulated or mobile part in a vertical 
plane, actuated by a motor or manually; in which 
case, there shall be a compulsory safety device for 
immobilizing such an articulated part in the event of 
voluntary or accidental stoppage of the motive 
power even if the later is manual. 


4.2.6.1 The lowering and raising system shall be 
fitted with a safety device to prevent accidental 
lowering or lifting of the boom, and to prevent 
kickback of any manually operated crank. 


4.2.6.2 The device for lowering and raising the 
movable part shall be so located that there is no 
necessity for the operator to be under the conveyor 
for operating the device. 


4.2.6.3 The movement shall be the stress due to the 
load limited at the extreme positions, by stops 
capable of supporting the stress due to the load. 


4.2.7 In cases of manual loading and/or unloading, 
the characteristics of the unit (height, width, speed, 
etc) shall be suitable for the working stations. 


4.2.7.1 Mechanical devices shall be installed for: 


a) The loading and unloading of unit loads 
exceeding 50 kg; 


b) The loading of unit loads when the vertical 
speed exceeds 0.5 m/s; and 


c) The unloading of unit loads when the 
vertical speed exceeds 0.25 m/s. 


4.2.8 The in running nips and pinch points of the 
conveying device (belts, chains, belt pulleys, etc) 
and the movable parts (chain sprockets, spur gears, 
couplings, etc) shall be protected. 


4.2.9 When shearing and squeezing points or zones 
exist on the path of the conveying element (for 
example at a change of direction, or the close 
approach to fixed parts, etc), guards shall be 
provided. 


4.2.10 All movable parts giving access through 
mechanical handling equipment shall be designed so 
that they cannot be opened whilst the apparatus is 
working and so that the appliance cannot be used or 
started while they are ‘open’. 


4.2.11 The loading and unloading openings of the 
enclosed units (in casing or in housing) shall be 
made in such a way that they prevent access to the 


moving components; otherwise suitable protection 
shall be provided. 


4.2.12 Openings in enclosed appliances, which give 
access to moving parts, shall be guarded by covers 
which require a hand tool for removal or are locked 
or are inter locked with the drive to the equipment. 
Cover which it is necessary to open while the 
appliance is in operation shall expose a suitable 
fixed grating, which shall prevent access. 


4.2.13 Access to inspection holes shall be easy. 


4.2.14 All the lubrication points used frequently 
shall be accessible without it being necessary to 
remove the guards. 


4.2.15 It is recommended that equipment be so 
designed that cleaning is facilitated. 


4.2.16 Equipment mounted on a moving frame, or 
any other additional equipment, such as the loading 
chute, feeders, etc, whether they are self propelled 
or hand operated shall be provided with a device 
enabling them to be immobilized. 


4.2.16.1 Safety devices shall be provided to limit the 
travel of such equipment. 


4.2.17 Wheels or rollers of travelling conveyors and 
of additional travelling equipment shall be guarded 
at points accessible to personnel under normal 
working conditions. 


4.2.18 Whenever an operator remains on the 
travelling equipment, a platform shall be provided 
and be so designed as to prevent any accidental 
contact with mobile components or any part of the 
fixed installation. 


4.2.19 When mobile appliances or equipment travel 
alongside an unprotected gangway, warning devices 
shall be provided. 


4.2.20 Sharp edges and corners shall be avoided. 


4.2.21The projecting parts of moving equipment 
shall be as small as possible. 


4.2.22 Overhead gentry portion of road and rail 
crossings, walkways, galleries, work places under 
the overhead conveyors used by the personnel, shall 
be protected by means of suitable covering such as 
plates/steel sheet covers to prevent falling of the 
material/objects over such areas/personnel. 


4.3 During the Installation Stage (Layout, 
Erection and Entry into Service) 


4.3.1 All powered appliances or complete 
installations shall carry the following indications 
permanently and legibly marked in a clearly visible 
place: 


a) Name of the manufacturer or the supplier; 
and 


b) Year of manufacture and serial number. 


4.3.2 Access to Conveyors 


Permanent platforms shall be provided from which 
all parts of the plant which need to be reached for 
the purpose of operation, regular servicing and 
maintenance are regularly and safely accessible. A 
clear access platform or floor space of at least 
0.50 m width shall be provided for the maintenance 
of every driving mechanism. All service platforms 
of appliances and cabins on which operating 
personnel may be required to be stationed should 
remain horizontal. 


4.3.3 All gangways, staircases, steps or platforms 
provided shall offer a minimum passageway of 0.50 
m. They shall be protected on the open side by 
guard-rails composed of a handrail normally 1 m 
above the walkway, a knee rail and a toe guard, or 
by an equivalent plain sheeting. In the case of 
gangways inclined more than 5°. A suitable non slip 
surface to avoid slippage/skidding shall be provided 
with uninterrupted vertical sheeting on the side 
remote from the moving appliance. A handrail shall 
be provided on this side. To avoid the risk of 
trapping by a moving device, the height of the 
handrail can be modified to not less than 0.80 m 
above the walkway so as to ensure a minimum 
clearance of 0.50 m between the appliance and the 
handrail. 


4.3.3.1 Access between movable parts of static 
appliances, or the load that they carry and fixed 
obstacles, shall be prevented by guards when the 
free space is less than 0.50 m. 


4.3.3.2 Access between the preset path of mobile 
appliances and fixed obstacles shall be prevented by 
guards when the free space is less than 0.50 m. 


4.3.4 There shall be fixed access to platforms, floors, 
or similar constructions located more than 1.50 m 
above ground level. 


4.3.4.1 Platforms at different levels shall be 
adequately and conveniently connected by stairways 
or where stairways are not practicable, by fixed 
ladders. It is recommended that ladders be avoided 
as a means of access and access shall preferably be 
by a sloping ramp with slats, or by a staircase. The 
angle of staircases in relation to the horizontal shall 
not exceed 60°. 


4.3.4.2 If a ladder has to be used, the width between 
the uprights shall be 0.35 m minimum; on the access 
side, the free space between the ladder and any 
continuous obstacle shall be 0.60 m minimum; this 
free space may be reduced to 0.40 m near a localized 
obstacle of small width; on the opposite side, the 
free space between the ladder and any obstacle shall 
be 0.20 m minimum. When the ladder is put 
vertically or at an angle equal to or greater than 70 ° 


IS 7155 (Part 2) : 2023 


and its vertical height is equal to or greater than 5 m, 
a protection (crinoline, guard or other device) shall 
be provided commencing 2 m from the starting 
level. 


4.3.4.3 Suitable landings or resting places, where 
practicable, shall be provided if agreed to between 
the purchaser and the manufacturer. 


4.3.4.4 Access to plant for purposes of operation 
shall be from floors and platforms and not from 
stairways or fixed ladders. Portable ladders shall not 
be used as places from which operation or regular 
servicing may be carried out. However, their use 
may be permitted for occasional maintenance in 
situations not exceeding 3.5 m in height. Where the 
height exceeds 3.5 m up to a maximum of 6 m, other 
suitable means such as an approved mobile work 
platform or a tower ladder may be used provided 
adequate access is available for their use and to 
enable placement with ease. 


4.3.4.5 Where walkways are provided on both sides 
of a conveyor and where convenient access to either 
side of the conveyor may be required by employees, 
who regularly work in the area, crossovers shall be 
provided at appropriate intervals and at the head and 
tail ends of the conveyors where. No other crossing 
is available. Safe means of access shall be provided 
at crossovers. 


4.3.5 All flooring of platforms or gangways and 
treads of staircases and stops shall be selected to suit 
individual installations and working conditions, and 
shall have a non-slip surface. 


4.3.6 It is recommended that sharp edges and 
corners be avoided in the areas normally accessible 
to personnel between the floor and a height of 2 m. 


4.3.6.1 This recommendation need not be followed 
if such edges and corners are protected. 


4.3.7 In case where the clearance beneath the 
appliances, at a passageway, is less than 1.90 m, it is 
recommended that access be by means of a gangway 
running over the appliance. 


4.3.8 All authorized passageways, protected if 
necessary, shall be indicated in a clear manner. 


4.3.9 In cases where appliances which penetrate into 
a pit or extend through floors leave openings, the 
latter shall be protected by guard-rails and toe- 
guards. 


4.3.10 Where appliances pass above work stations 
or passageways, suitable protection shall be 
provided against accidental dropping of conveyed 
materials. 


4.3.11 Conveyer control 


Except where the conveyor is under the control of an 
operator, electrical and/or mechanical devices shall 
be provided on all conveyor systems to 


IS 7155 (Part 2) : 2023 


automatically stop a conveyor or the load when the 
conveyor, bin, or hopper to which it feeds, has been 
stopped or has been blocked with load so that it 
cannot receive additional load or material. This 
requirement may also be applicable to chutes for 
special applications and if agreed to by the 
manufacturer and the user at the time of enquiry or 
order. 


4.3.11.1 Sequence interlocks shall be provided so 
that no mechanical handling appliance can supply 
another appliance which is inoperative or has 
reached its full capacity. 


4.3.12 All starting and stopping devices shall be 
clearly indicated and easily accessible and shall be 
in accordance with the requirements of IS/IEC 
60947-4-1. 


4.3.12.1 Instantaneously operating manual 
stop-lock devices shall be provided either 
continuously or at selected points along the 
installation. Resetting of these devices shall be 
carried out by authorized personnel and only after 
the fault has been rectified. 


4.3.12.2 Pull cords 


The conveyor system shall be provided with 
stay-put type pull cord switches at suitable intervals 
along the conveyor so that any particular conveyor 
may be stopped from any position and in case any 
sequential operation is intended, the conveyor in 
sequence may also be stopped automatically. In case 
of sequential interlock system, zero speed switch 
and belt sway switch shall also be provided. 


4.3.13 When an appliance extends out of sight of the 
control station operator, audible and/or visual 
signals shall be provided to warn personnel that the 
starting of the appliance is imminent. 


4.3.14 All starting and stopping devices shall be 
clearly indicated and easily accessible. It is 
recommended that they be painted to a specified 
pattern. 


4.3.15 It is recommended that all lubrication points 
be painted to a specified pattern. 


4.3.16 Gangways, hand-rails, staircases, ladders, 
guards, etc shall be erected before the installation is 
put into service. 


4.3.17 The feeding and discharge controls, either 
manually or mechanically operated, shall be easily 
accessible. They shall, where necessary be placed so 
as to permit supervision of the flow. 


4.3.18 The openings of feeding or transfer hoppers 
and chutes shall be guarded if normally accessible to 
personnel. It is recommended that inspection doors 
be provided on large hoppers and chutes. 


4.3.19 Counter weight tension devices shall be 
guarded at points normally accessible to personnel. 


Guards shall prevent access to the space directly 
below the counter weight; in the absence of these 
guards, sustaining devices shall be provided, giving 
a clearance of at least 2.5 m above ground or other 
operating level. 


4.3.20 All loading, unloading and transfer points 
shall be designed so as to prevent, as far as possible, 
the product or objects being conveyed from 
escaping, at these points or any other points along 
the conveyor route. Also, for personnel employed at 
a loading, unloading work station transfer of passage 
point adequate safeguards in the form of guard rails 
fences or close fitting guards shall be installed to 
prevent injury to personnel. 


4.3.21 Principles of Guarding 


Guards shall be designed to prevent injury to 
persons and shall be provided at every dangerous 
part of a conveyor. 


4.3.21.1 Guards shall be planned into the design of 
the conveyor or conveyor system and shall neither 
be added as an afterthought nor do themselves 
provide a hazard. Guards shall not have to be 
removed for normal cleaning, lubrication or belt and 
chain tension adjustments. 


4.3.21.2 At points along a conveyor where material 
is likely to become dislodged and in falling become 
a hazard to persons, suitable guards or non — return 
flaps shall be provided. 


4.4 During the Utilization Stage (Operation and 
Maintenance) 


4.4.1 No continuous mechanical handling 
equipment shall be used for duties other than those 
for which it is designed nor under conditions other 
than those stated in the contract of the concerned 
parties and in the installation and maintenance 
booklets. 


4.4.2 The user shall be careful to ensure a regular 
feed, avoiding over-loading. In particular, the user 
shall not change the feeding points, particularly not 
their position, or increase the flow, without 
previously consulting the manufacturer/constructor. 


4.4.2.1 Clear operating instructions concerning the 
loading of the appliances shall be prominently 
displayed adjacent to the loading positions: they 
shall include the permissible unit load, its 
positioning and its limiting dimensions. 


4.4.3 It shall be strictly forbidden to use continuous 
mechanical handling equipment for conveying 
people, unless it has been specifically designed for 
that purpose and meets the special requirements laid 
down in connection with the conveyance of people. 


4.4.4 Continuous mechanical handling equipment, 
particularly its conveying elements, shall be kept in 
proper working condition as recommended by the 


manufacturer and shall be well maintained at all 
times. 


4.4.4.1 All loading and working stations and the 
passageways shall be kept clear and clean. 


4.4.5 The inspection, adjustment, maintenance and 
cleaning of moving parts (belts, pulleys and idlers, 
chains, sprockets, etc) and of cleaning devices shall 
be carried out regularly according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. 


4.4.5.1 The frequency of these operations shall 
depend on the nature of the conveyed materials. 
With the exception of automatic cleaning, or in the 
case of special devices designed to allow cleaning 
while the equipment is in operation, these operations 
shall only be undertaken when the equipment is at 
rest, and after rendering the starting devices 
inoperative. 


4.4.6 No inspection hole shall be opened while the 
appliance is in operation unless it complies with 
4.2.11. 


4.4.7 No one, except those so authorized, shall 
operate or interfere with the normal working of the 
plant; in particular, all starting operations shall be 
carried out by qualified and competent personnel 
only. 

4.4.8 Normal and emergency stopping devices shall 
be made known to all personnel and be easily 
accessible; all areas giving access to them shall be 
kept clear of obstacles. Their proper working shall 
be periodically checked. 


4.4.9 All restarting operations on an appliance which 
has been inoperative because of an emergency or 
accidental stoppage shall be preceded by an 
inspection aiming at: 


a) Determining the cause of the emergency or 
accidental stoppage; and 
b) Repairing the fault. 


4.4.10 It shall be strictly forbidden to cross over or 
under an appliance except at the points specially 
provided for the purpose. 


4.4.11 All adjustments, whether mechanical or 
electrical, shall be carried out by competent and 
authorized persons, particularly in the case of safety 
devices. 


4.4.12 Repairs and removal of protective enclosures 
or panels, shall only be carried out after stopping the 
equipment, and after starting devices have been 
rendered inoperative, by a competent person 
appointed for that purpose. 


4.4.12.1 Recommissioning shall be carried out only 
after the protective devices have been replaced and 
an order received from the authorized responsible 
person. 


IS 7155 (Part 2) : 2023 


4.4.13 It shall be forbidden to carry out any 
lubrication while an appliance is in operation, except 
in cases where the parts to be lubricated are so 
located or there are special devices which will 
permit their lubrication without danger. 


4.4.13.1 If, for lubrication purposes, it is necessary 
to remove or to open guards, lubrication shall only 
be carried out with the equipment rendered 
inoperative as stated in 4.4.12. 


4.4.14 A log-book shall be kept for each appliance 
and/or for each installation. 


4.4.15 Suitable training (with particular reference to 
the operating and maintenance booklets) shall be 
given to a continuous mechanical handling 
equipment personnel, both operating and carrying 
out maintenance, as in the long run this may serve as 
the best form of accident prevention. 


4.4.16 The user shall not make alternations which 
affect the design, construction, installation or 
handling requirements of the appliances without the 
consent of the manufacturer constructor and/or the 
contractor, as some alterations may give rise to 
detrimental consequences. 


4.4.17 Inspection and adjustment of continuous 
mechanical handling equipment, in motion or in use, 
shall only be carried out with guards in position 
unless it is impracticable for the said operations to 
be carried out other than with the guards removed. 
If the guards are removed, such removal shall be 
restricted, to the immediate area involved, taking all 
necessary precautions and especially forbidding any 
approach to nip points. 


4.4.18 If the area where guards are removed is 
situated in a working area or where personnel walk, 
such an area shall be fenced off to prevent personnel 
approaching it when the appliance is in motion. 


4.4.19 When guards are not in position, and the 
appliance is in motion, work shall only be done from 
a stable standing place. If a ladder is required, it shall 
be secured in position or firmly held by another 
person(s). 

4.4.20 When guards have been removed from 
continuous mechanical handling equipment in 
motion, work shall only be undertaken by personnel 
authorized and well acquainted with the risks 
associated with machinery in motion. Such 
personnel shall wear close fitting overall with no 
loose ends, preferably made in one piece. 


4.4.21 If work has to be carried out on unfenced 
machinery in motion, another person(s), well 
acquainted with the actions to be taken in case of 
emergency shall keep watch on the person at work, 
and hold himself close to and ready to operate a stop 
device. 


IS 7155 (Part 2) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 06 


Organization(s) 


Rites Limited, Gurugram 


Conveyor and Ropeway Services Private 


Limited, Kolkata 


CSIR - Central Institute for Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 


Damodar Ropeways & Infra Limited, Kolkata 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and 
Labour Institutes, Mumbai 


Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 


Durgapur Steel Plant, Sail Durgapur 


Indian Association of Amusement Parks and 
Industries, Mumbai 


Lepton Projects Private Limited, Ghaziabad 


Mecon Limited, Ranchi 


Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, 
New Delhi 


National Mineral Development Corporation, 
Hyderabad 


Ntpc Limited, New Delhi 


Phoenix Conveyor Belt India Private Limited, 
Kolkata 


Project and Development India Limited, Noida 


Rites Limited, Gurugram 


Representative(s) 


SHRI D. MAJUMDAR (Chairperson) 


SHRI S. SHEKHAR CHKRAVARTY 
SHRI KAMAL KUMAR BOSE (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHISH BASAK 
SHRI GIRENDRA M. PRASAD (Alternate) 


SHRI D. L. DAS 


SHRI G. P. NIJALINGAPPA 
SHRI H. M. BHANDARI (Alternate) 


SHRI D. B. NAYAK 
SHRI VIJAY YADAORAO BARAPATRE (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI DEEPAK BISWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP SHARMA 
SHRI ANIL PADWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI PIYUSH RATHI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJOY BHATTACHAR 
SHRI AMIT PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL PRUTHI 
SHRI RAMJI SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK KUMAR MEHTA 
SHRI S. SURENDER (Alternate) 


SHRI O. P. KALIA 


SHRI RAJEEV SHARMA 
SHRI ASOKE KUM GHOSH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA SINGH 


SHRI DINESH KUMAR 


Organization(s) 


Ropeway and Resorts Private Limited, Kolkata 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Navi 
Mumbai 


Usha Breco Limited, Ghaziabad 


Usha Martin Limited, Ranchi 


In Personal Capacity (BH/VI/SF, VIP Floors 
Sector 81, DPS Faridabad, Haryana 
121007) 


In Personal Capacity (F-7B DDA MIG Flats, Hari 
Nagar, New Delhi 110006) 


In Personal Capacity (20 D, Dhakuria Station 
Road, Kolkata 700031) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 7155 (Part 2) : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI BIPLAB DAS 
SHRI SUDIPTA KRISHANA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIREESH S. SWAMI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ PANWAR 
SHRI SANJEEV DHARIWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBRATA DUTTA 
SHRI SANDEEP JAISWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH BHADRA 


SHRI S. C. GANDHI 


SHRI RANJAN MUKHERJEE 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (MECHANICAL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI AMAN DHANAWAT 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 06 (20448). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


