IRRI He IS 6609 (Part 4) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


dais faecal HN HET 
Sua on Y ago gara 


ATT 4 ATA RAT 
(FURIA) 


Methods of Test For Commercial 
Blasting Explosives and Accessories 


Part 4 Detonating Fuses 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 71.100.30 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR UT, 9 TEE TH HM, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2020 Price Group 5 


Explosives and pyrotechnics Sectional Committee, CHD 26 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 4) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Explosives and Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 


Testing of commercial explosives is of utmost importance for ensuring their safety during transport and handling, 
stability in storage and adequate life and performance under all conditions of use. Test methods included in this 
standard cover these aspects for all the groups of explosives under consideration. Depending upon the origin/ 
production of the explosives stores, a large number of test methods are in vogue, which though similar in nature, 
differ in minor details of experimental procedure and expression/ interpretation of results. Therefore, choice has 
been effected in favour of those methods, for which sufficient experience and experimental data is available and 
which are mutually acceptable to all concerned, namely, the producers, the inspection agencies and the consumers 
in the field. 


The test methods cover both general and permitted explosives and accessories like detonators, detonating fuses 
and safety fuses. All items are not covered but only those have been included which are currently used and 
manufactured in the country. The methods covered under other parts of this standard are as follows: 


(Part 1) Gunpowder 

(Part 2/Sec 1) Explosives, general 

(Part 2/Sec 2) Explosives, permitted 

(Part 2/Sec 3) Explosives, slurry/emulsion 

(Part 3) Detonators, general and permitted 
(Part 5) Safety fuses 


In the first revision in 1984, a test for the determination of sensitivity of the detonating fuse after waterproofness 
and flexibility tests was incorporated. Certain modifications in the Dautriche method for the determination of 
velocity of detonation and in the determination of mass of explosive core for encapsulated detonating fuse for 
achieving more accurate results were introduced. 


In this revision, use of lead plate has been replaced by aluminum plate in view of lead toxicity. Side brisance test 
has been added. Minimum strength of detonator has been specified for performing sensitivity after waterproofness 
test and determination of velocity of detonation by Dautriche method. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )”. 


IS 6609 (Part 4) : 2020 


Indian Standard 


METHODS OF TEST FOR COMMERCIAL BLASTING 
EXPLOSIVES AND ACCESSORIES 


PART 4 DETONATING FUSES 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 4) prescribes the methods of test for 
detonating fuses. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of and necessary adjuncts to this standard. At the 
time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
All standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated. 


IS No. Title 

170 : 2004 Acetone — Specification (fourth 
revision) 

10081: 1981 Terms relating to commercial 
explosives, pyrotechnics and blasting 
practices 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given in IS 10081 shall apply. 


4 TEST METHODS 


4.1 Visual Examination 


The detonating fuse shall be visually examined for 
smoothness, pliability and surface blemishes. 


4.2 Determination of Diameter 


The diameter shall be measured with the help of 
a micrometer or calipers. The instrument shall be 
preferably a ratchet type or spring loaded. Take 1 m 
length of sample and measure the diameter at three 
different places and at each place, in two positions 
right angle to each other. Record the results giving the 
diameter of the detonating fuse, in mm, and calculate 
the average diameter. 


4.3 Test for Flexibility and Sensitivity after 
Flexibility Test 


4.3.1 Test for Flexibility 


4.3.1.1 At low temperature 


Take 1 m length of the sample and keep it in a chamber 
at a temperature of- 10 + 1 °C for 4 h. Take out the fuse 
from the chamber after this period and quickly make 
5 knots on the fuse 15 cm apart. Examine the surface 
of the fuse visually for any crack on the outer covering 
and record the number of cracks noticed in the sample. 


4.3.1.2 At high temperature 


Keep 1 m length of the sample in an air-oven at a 
temperature of 50 + 1 °C for 24 h. Take out the fuse and 
make 5 knots 15 cm apart quickly. Examine the surface 
of the fuse for any crack on the outer sheath and record 
the number of cracks noticed on the sample. 


4.3.2 Sensitivity after Flexibility Test 


4.3.2.1 Apparatus 
a) Aluminium plate — 20 cm x 6 cm x 1 cm. 
b) Detonator, of at least No. 6 strength. 


4.3.2.2 Procedure 


Take the fuse after completing the visual tests (see 4.1), 
lay about 5 cm of its one end over the aluminium plate 
and retain it with the help of adhesive tapes. Detonate 
the fuse from the other end and record if the full length 
of the fuse has detonated and whether the end portion 
has left any burning mark in the aluminium plate. 


4.4 Test for Waterproofness and Sensitivity after 
Waterproofness Test 


4.4.1 Test for Waterproofness 


4.4.1.1 Apparatus 


a) Water pressure test vessel — It consists of a steel 
cylinder of 25 cm internal diameter and about 


IS 6609 (Part 4) : 2020 


1.5 m length which can be filled with water and 
maintained at any pressure up to 4 kg/cm? and 
provided with a pressure gauge. 


b) Copper or aluminium cups — About 6 mm internal 
diameter and 25 mm length. 


4.4.1.2 Procedure 


a) Take 1.5 m length of the fuse to be tested ensuring 
that the ends are squarely cut. Melt two parts of 
bitumen with one part of ceresin wax in a boiling 
water-bath. By means of a pair of tongs, immerse 
the copper cup in the mixture and fill it to the 
brim. Allow the mixture to cool for a few seconds, 
introduce the end of the fuse into the cup and 
allow the mixture to solidify. Re-dip the cupped 
end of the fuse into the sealing mixture, withdraw 
and allow it to cool. Alternatively, one can crimp 
the metal cup on to the fuse by suitable crimper 
to provide water proof seal. Follow the same 
procedure for sealing of the other end of the fuse. 


b 


= 


Take the fuse with sealed ends and lay it 
longitudinally inside the vessel with ends of the 
fuse vertical. Fill the vessel with water in such 
a way that the sealed ends are always above the 
water surface. Subject the sample to a water 
pressure. The limit of pressure and duration 
shall be as specified in the relevant material 
specification. At the end of the period, take out the 
fuse, wipe dry of water and pierce it with a sharp 
pin at various points and then twist it to see if any 
water oozes out through these holes. If any water 
comes out, slitting of the fuse and examining the 
PETN for water absorption as given in (c) would 
not be required. 


c 


wa 


In case no water oozes out in (b), then cut a piece 
of the fuse 1 m long and examine the explosive 
core for any water absorption. 


4.4.2 Sensitivity after Waterproofness Test 


4.4.2.1 Apparatus 
a) Aluminium plate — 20 cm x 6 cm x 1 cm. 
b) Detonator, of at least No. 6 strength. 


4.4.2.2 Procedure 


Take the fuse after completing the visual tests in 4.1, 
lay about 5 cm of its one end over the aluminium plate 
and retain it with the help of adhesive tapes. Detonate 
the fuse from the other end and record if the full length 
of the fuse has detonated and whether the end portion 
has left any burning mark in the aluminium plate. 


4.5 Determination of Velocity of Detonation (VOD) 
by Microtimer 


4.5.1 General 


The time taken by the detonation front to traverse a 
known distance in the fuse is measured by a timer, in 


microseconds. Thus, the velocity of detonation (VOD) 
is expressed as metre per second. 


4.5.2 Apparatus 


4.5.2.1 Microtimer — The microtimer is an electronic 
instrument which is suited for measuring very short 
time intervals such as those involved in detonation 
processes. Two signals which define the beginning 
and end of the time interval to be measured are used 
as ‘start’ and ‘stop’ signals to operate a gate. This gate 
turns on and off a constant current supply to a capacitor 
and the voltage developed across the capacitor is 
measured by an electrometer-voltmeter circuit. Thus, if 
the capacitor starts with zero potential difference across 
it, the potential registered by the voltmeter circuit at 
the end of the time interval is directly proportional 
to the time interval. By suitably selecting the various 
circuit constants the voltmeter is made to read directly 
in microseconds. 


4.5.3 Procedure 
4.5.3.1 Preparation of VOD probes 


Take four pieces of enameled copper wire of 
0.32 to 0.56 mm diameter, each of 60 cm length. Pick 
up two enamelled wires at a time and twist together one 
end of each of the wires over 3 to 4 cm length. Remove 
the insulations of the free ends of the wires. These 
wires twisted together should have an electrically 
open circuit. The twisted wires with the bare ends are 
called ‘VOD probes’. 


4.5.3.2 Preparation of test sample 


Take a 50 cm long sample and mark two points 
10 cm a part at 30 and 40 cm from one end. Insert the 
“start probe’ at the point at 30 cm mark and “stop probe” 
at 40 cm mark. 


4.5.3.3 Operation of the microtimer 


The test sample as prepared in 4.5.3.2 is detonated 
suitably and the interval of the propagation of the 
detonation wave between the two probes is measured 
on the microtimer. Attach an electric detonator to the 
‘start end’ of the detonating fuse by means of adhesive 
tape and fire by a suitable exploder. In case of firing 
with safety fuse, take a length of freshly cut safety 
fuse, insert one end of this into a detonator and crimp 
the detonator into the fuse using a crimper. Attach the 
detonator on to the detonating fuse near the ‘start end’ 
using adhesive tape. 


4.5.3.4 Precautions 


The following precautions shall be observed: 


a) Keep the timer key and exploder key (in case of 
firing by exploder) always in possession while 
connecting the detonator to the shot firing cable; 


b) Incase of incomplete detonation, carefully collect 
all the fragments of the charge; 


c) In case of misfire, wait at least for 10 min in case of 
shot firing electrically or for at least 30 min in case 
of shotfiring with safety fuse before approaching 
the shot; and 


d) The timer shall be calibrated once in 6 months. 
4.5.4 Calculation 
Velocity of detonation (VOD), m/s = g x 1 000 
where i 
d = distance between the probes, in mm; and 
t= time taken for the wave to travel, in 
microseconds. 


4.6 Determination of Velocity of Detonation (VOD) 
by Dautriche Method 


4.6.1 General 


The method is similar in principle to the Dautriche 
method for blasting explosives, the only difference 
being that in case of VOD measurement of detonating 
fuse, a standard detonating fuse of known VOD is taken 
as the time standard and the detonators at each end of 
the standard are kept in contact with the test sample by 
metal T-unions. 


4.6.2 Apparatus 
4.6.2.1 Aluminium plate — 20 cm x 6 cm x 1 cm. 
4.6.2.2 Standard detonating fuse of known velocity 


4.6.2.3 Detonator (of at least No. 6 strength), and safety 
fuse if required. 


4.6.2.4 T-shaped copper/brass unions 


IS 6609 (Part 4) : 2020 


4.6.3 Procedure 


4.6.3.1 Cut a 100 cm length of the detonating fuse and 
mark two points 25 cm and 75 cm from one end on it 
accurately with pencil. Slide two copper T-unions along 
the test sample until the centre of the vertical limb of 
each union is directly above one of the marks. Secure 
each T-union in position by means of a light crimp as 
shown in Fig. 1. 


4.6.3.2 Take an aluminium plate of the dimensions 
given in 4.6.2.1. Along the length of the plate, cut a 
3 mm deep groove in the centre. Using a sharp knife, 
make a scratch along the whole width at one end of 
the plate about 10 mm from the edge. Take 1 m of the 
standard detonating fuse of known velocity and mark its 
middle point by a pencil. Lay the standard detonating 
fuse along the groove of the aluminium plate in such 
a way that its middle point is in line with the scratch 
made on the end of the plate. Retain the detonating fuse 
in position on the aluminium plate by using strips of 
adhesive tape. Insert the ends of this detonating fuse, 
one in each of the vertical limb of the T-union so that the 
ends are in contact with the test sample. Crimp lightly 
the ends of vertical limb of the T-union near the open 
end. Take an ordinary detonator and crimp a length of 
0.5 m of safety fuse to it. Secure this detonator to one 
end of the test sample by means of adhesive tape. Light 
the safety fuse and retire to safe distance. After the 
system is detonated, recover the aluminium plate and 
measure the distance of the mark on the plate (made at 
the meeting point of the two detonation fronts travelling 
in opposite directions in the standard detonating fuse) 
from the scratch made on the wider end. 

NOTE — The point of meeting of detonation wave will be 

seen more clearly on the reverse of the plate. For initiation of 

the detonating fuse, electric detonator can also be used. 


r- ALUMINIUM PLATE 


SCRATCH / 


y ADHESIVE 
| TAPES 


DETONATING FUSE 


DETONATORS 


DETONATING FUSE, 
UNDER TEST 


STRIPS OF ADHESIVE TAPES 


3 mm DEEP GROOVE 
IN ALUMINIUM PLATE 


A - DETONATOR 


TO INITIATE 
VI TY. 
OF KNOWN VELOCI DETONATING 
FUSE UNDER 
NO.6 STRENGTH TEST 


| SLL 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 1 APPARATUS FOR DETERMINATION OF VELOCITY OF DETONATION BY DAUTRICHE METHOD 


3 


IS 6609 (Part 4) : 2020 


4.6.4 Calculation 


; j V, 
Velocity of detonation (VOD), m/s = dii 
24 
where 
d= distance between the two pencil marks on the 
sample, in cm; 
V,= VOD of the standard detonating fuse, in m/s, 
and 
AL= distance between the middle point of standard 


detonating fuse (scratch on the aluminium 
plate) to the point on the aluminium plate 
where the two detonation fronts travelling in 
opposite directions meet, in cm. 


4.6.5 Precautions 


The following precautions shall be observed: 


a) In case of misfires with electric firing, wait at least 
for 10 min and in case of safety fuse firing, wait 
at least for 30 min before approaching the test 
charges; and 


b) Destroy the misfired detonating fuse sample or 
detonator by using a fresh detonator. 
4.7 Test for Transmission of Detonation 


4.7.1 Procedure 


Take 6 samples of 4 m each. Take one sample as the 
main line and to this tie the other samples by clove 
hitch knots at 1 m intervals and at an angle of 60° to 
form five branch lines as shown in Fig. 2. Detonate the 
main line using a No. 6 strength detonator and record 
the result giving the particulars of the detonating fuse 
and the number of branch lines detonated. 


4.7.2 Precautions 


Follow the same precautions prescribed in 4.6.5. 
4.8 Determination of Mass of Explosive Core 


4.8.1 Apparatus — Soxhlet apparatus, complete with 
condenser. 


4.8.2 Reagent — Acetone (see IS 170). 
4.8.3 Procedure 


4.8.3.1 For detonating fuse 


Cut a 20 cm long sample of the detonating fuse. With 
a sharp blade, cut lengthwise the PVC layer and peel it 
off making sure that no PETN is sticking to the PVC. 
Hold the fuse over a filter paper thimble and gently 
tap the PETN from the yarn core into the thimble. 
Then add the yarn over the PETN and assemble 
this in the extractor of the Soxhlet apparatus. Place 
250 ml of acetone in the flask which has been tared 
and set it on a water-bath and extract for about 
one-and-a-half hours. At the end of the period 
remove the flask, evaporate the acetone to dryness 
on a water-bath and dry the flask in an oven at 60 °C 
for about an hour. Cool in a desiccator and weigh. 
Conduct the blank using the same length and quality 
of the yarn as used in the making of the detonating 
fuse. Subtract the mass of the extract obtained from 
the yarn from the mass of the PETN extracted from 
the detonating fuse. Calculate the mass of PETN in 
1 m of the detonating fuse. 


4.8.3.2 For encapsulated detonating fuse 


Take 25 cm of the detonating fuse sealed at both ends 
with adhesive tape and weigh it accurately (4). With a 
sharp blade/knife, slit it open in such a way that only 
the outer covering is cut. Peel this covering off carefully 
and keep it aside. Take out the inner yarns, plastic 
covering, if any, paper/plastic tape, etc., and carefully 
brush these to free any PETN sticking to them and keep 
aside. Weigh the plastic covering, yarns, inner covering 
the tape, etc, together (B). From the difference in the 
mass (A) and (B), the PETN charge mass is calculated. 


NOTE — By this method, error arising out of PETN loss due 
to spillage, while taking out of the fuse to determine the charge 
mass could be minimised. 


4.9 Determination of Breaking Load of Live 
Detonating Fuse 


y DETONATING 
FUSE 


DETONATOR 


ee 


Fic. 2 TRANSMISSION OF DETONATION 


4 


4.9.1 Outline of the Method 


The ends of a small length of detonating fuse are 
secured to two separate holders (see Fig. 3) provided 
with hooks. To one of the holders, the required weight 
is attached. The whole assembly consisting of knurled 
holders, fuse and weights is lifted off the ground by 
a suitable arrangement in such a way that the holder 
with the weight is vertically below the other holder 
with the fuse stretched tightly between them and under 
tension on account of the weight attached to the bottom 
holder. The load at which the fuse breaks within 20 s of 
suspension is taken as the breaking load. 


NOTE — It is presumed that the weight of the bottom holder 
and the hook will be small and negligible as compared to the 
load required for breaking. However, for the sake of correctness 
of the method, the same may also be taken into account. 


KNURLED 
SURFACE 


IS 6609 (Part 4) : 2020 


4.9.2 Procedure 


4.9.2.1 Cut a length of fuse 175 + 1.25 cm long and seal 
ends with adhesive tape. Thread one end of this length 
through the holes in the knurled holders marked “top” 
and tie a simple thumb knot in the end of the fuse. The 
holder shall be held with the shank position vertical, the 
hook facing left and the circular portion away from the 
tester. The end of the fuse is threaded outside to inside 
of the circular portion through the hole marked 1 and 
then inside through hole 2. The knot is then tied on the 
outside of hole 2. 


4.9.2.2 Outside of hole 2 


Pull the fuse until the knot is tight against the “holder” 
and then wind the fuse twice through the knurled 
circular portion in the direction of the arrow. The fuse 
shall lie flat and not cross or kink. 


30° 
APPROX 


60 Y NB 
MS PIPE 


TOP HOLDER 


1751.25 cm 
LONG,FUSE 


KNURLED 
SURFACE 


BOTTOM 
HOLDER 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 3 DETONATING FUSE BREAKING LOAD TEST ASSEMBLY 


5 


IS 6609 (Part 4) : 2020 


4.9.2.3 Place the holder carefully on the bench, still 
holding the fuse in position. Using a pen, put a mark on 
the fuse opposite the mark near the bottom of the shank 
of the knurled holder. Measure 30 cm from this mark 
along the length of the fuse as accurately as possible 
using a ruler and again mark the fuse at this point. 


4.9.2.4 Place the fuse with this mark opposite the mark 
near the bottom of the shank of the other holder. The 
hook of the othe4r holder is provided with a base plate 
to which required weights could be slipped in as desired. 
The mass of the base plate is also to be taken into 
account. The base plate is supported on a jack before 
the start of the experiment. The jack is operated from 
outside the cell by a long handle. Additional weights 
are placed or removed on the base plate as required. 
The top holder is left lying on the bench so that the fuse 
remains loosely coiled in position and it is necessary to 
take care not to disturb this position while connecting 
the fuse to the other holder. It is convenient to hold the 
other holder with the shank portion horizontal and on 
the left, the hook facing towards the right, the circular 
portion facing vertically downwards and in such a 
position that when the free end of the fuse is wound 
around the knurled circular portion, the hooks on each 
holder will be at opposite end of the whole assembly. 


4.9.2.5 Wind the free end of the fuse twice around the 
knurled circular portion of the holder and then thread 
the end through hole No. 1 from outside to inside and 
out through hole 2. 


4.9.2.6 Tie a simple thumb knot in the end of the 
fuse and pull this knot tight against the outside of the 
holder. Carry out the assembly to the test cell and place 
it carefully on the floor so that the fuse remains in 
position on the holders. 


4.9.2.7 Place the required weight on the equipment. If 
the approximate breaking load is known, place weights 
to give 5 kg below the breaking load for the first test. If 
the breaking load is unknown, start with a 25 kg load. 


4.9.2.8 Connect the test assembly to the hooks 
provided, ensuring that the fuse stays on the holder in 
the correct position. The “top” holder shall be connected 
to the top hook and the other holder to the hook on the 
base plate carrying weight. 


4.9.2.9 Proceed outside the cell and wind the handle 
provided to operate the jack in a clockwise direction 
until the weight is lifted clear of the floor. Check the 
time at this instant and allow the weight to remain 
suspended for 20 s, if the fuse does not break. The 
fuse will be stretched and it is, therefore, necessary to 
continue winding for a time to keep the weight clear of 
the floor. 


4.9.2.10 Ifthe fuse does not break after 20 s suspension, 
wind the handle in an anti-clockwise direction until 
the base plate rests on the floor and tension is fully 
removed. 


4.9.2.11 Re-enter the cell and remove test assembly 
from the hooks. 


4.9.2.12 To begin with, take one piece each time and 
go on increasing the weight till the fuse-snaps. Reduce 
the weight by 5 kg. Make 3 determinations to know 
whether the fuse stands that weight, if any one of them 
shows a failure, go down further by 5 kg steps till the 
fuse stands the test in all the 3 determinations with a 
fresh piece of fuse each time. Report the mass, in kg, 
at which the fuse breaks as the breaking load, to the 
nearest 5 kg. 


4.9.3 Precautions 

Take all the usual precautions for testing explosives. 
It is advisable to keep the apparatus inside a building 
and observations made from outside. However, if the 
observations are also made inside, the operator should 
be protected during the test by interposing a 6 mm thick 
mild steel shield between the operator and the machine. 


4.10 Side Brisance Test 
4.10.1 General 


This test is a measure of the ability of the detonating 
fuse/cord to initiate another cord when it is kept at a 
distance apart by its side. The core loads of detonating 
fuse and the corresponding distance/gap that is normally 
kept is given in Table 1. 


4.10.2 Apparatus 
4.10.2.1 Aluminium plate — 20 cm x 6 cm x 1 cm. 


4.10.2.2 Wooden spacer — 5 cm long, 1.5 mm thick, 
and 5 mm, 10 mm or 15 mm wide, as required. 
Table 1 Gap corresponding to core load of fuses 
( Clause 4.10.1 ) 


SINo. Core load (g of PETN) Gap (mm) 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 5,6 10 
ii) 8, 10, 12 15 
iii) 20 20 
iv) 40 25 
v) 80 55 
4.10.3 Procedure 


Take two pieces of 30 cm long fuse for test. Mark 
one of them as donor fuse and the other as acceptor 
fuse. Place them apart across specified wooden spacer 


(see 4.10.2.2) and tie by means of a suitable material so 
as to ensure good contact with spacer. The tied portions 
of fuse should be parallel. Place the assembled sample 
on the firing ground. Keep the aluminum plate securely 
tied as witness plate on the acceptor end of the fuse. 


Initiate the end of the donor detonating fuse by a No. 
6 cap observing usual precautions. Record the data 


IS 6609 (Part 4) : 2020 


wherein the acceptor detonating fuse has detonated 
in full or not, by seeing the indentation mark on the 
witness plate. In case of failure, the acceptor fuse 
will be undetonated and there will be no marks on the 
aluminium plate. Normally, a 10 g detonating cord will 
pass the test where there is 10 mm gap between fuses/ 
cords. 


IS 6609 (Part 4) : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Explosives and pyrotechnics sectional committee, CHD 26 


Organization Representative 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organization (PESO), Suri M. K. JHALA (Chairman) 


Nagpur 


SHRI K. MARIAPPAN 
SHRI ARUN LALITH KUMAR (Alternate) 


Arumugam Fireworks Pvt Ltd, Sivakasi 
Ayyan Fireworks, Sivakasi SHRI G. ABIRUBEN 


CDET Explosives Industries Pvt Ltd, Nagpur SHRI RAGHAV RATHI 


SHRI SAUMITRA RATHI (Alternate) 


SHRIR. R. SINGH 
SHRI C. SAWMLIANA (Alternate) 


Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research, Dhanbad 


SHRI MANOJ Kumar JHA 
SHRI BINAY KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Ltd, Ranchi 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 
Coal India Ltd, Kolkata 


Consumer Guidance Society of India 


Defence Standardization Cell (DRDO), Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 


Departmental Testing Station, PESO, Nagpur 
Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 


Directorate of Standardization, New Delhi 
ENif Paper Products Pvt, Ltd 


Fireworks Manufacturers Association (North India), 
Gwalior 


Fireworks Research & Development Centre, Sivakasi 
Hariwansh Packaging Pvt, Ltd 

Gudiya Fireworks, Delhi 

GOCL Corporation Ltd, Hyderabad 


High Energy Materials Research Laboratory, Pune 


Ideal Wrappers, Nagpur 
IDL Explosives Ltd, Hyderabad 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), New Delhi 


Ministry of Defence, Ordnance Factory, Bhandara 


SHRI ABHIJIT PATHAK 
SHRI NRIPENDRA NATH 


SHRI SITARAM DIXIT 
DRM. S. Kamaru (Alternate) 


Dr H. L. Yapav 
Ms HEMLATA GAUTAM (Alternate) 


SHRI R. P. PIPLANI 


Suri C. RAMESH KUMAR 
Suri S. S. Soni (Alternate) 


SECRETARY ASSC/JD (STD) 
SHRI MANAN DESAI 


SHRI HARISH MILWANI 
SHRI RAJEEV JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIT GOEL 
SHRI VIJAY MURARKA 
NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI C. SAINATH 
Suri P. SITARAMASWAMY (Alternate) 


SHRI C. GURURAJA RAO 
SHRI M. P. KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI KISHORE JUNHERS 


SHRI N. VIDYASAGAR 

Suri A. K. DAsGUPTA (Alternate) 
Suri R. K. RAMTEKE 

Dr R. N. Aparasit (Alternate) 


Dr ONKAR MONDHE 
D. K. UrkuDE (Alternate) 


Organization 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organization (PESO), 
Nagpur 


Shri Kaliswari Fireworks, Sivakasi 
Solar Industries India Ltd, Nagpur 


Standard Fireworks, Sivakasi 
The All India Chamber of Match Industries, Sivakasi 


The Coronation Fireworks Factory, Sivakasi 


The Indian Fireworks Manufacturers Association, 
Sivakasi 


The Metal Powder Co Ltd, Thirumangalam 


The Singareni Colleries Co Ltd, Kothagudem 


The Tamil Nadu Fireworks and Amorces Manufacturers 
Association, Sivakasi 


WETWO Fireworks, Sivakasi 
Yogeshwar Packers, Nagpur 
BIS Directorate General 


IS 6609 (Part 4) : 2020 


Representative 
Suri M. MUTHUKUMARAN 
SHRIR. A. GUJAR 


SHRI A. P. SELVARAJAN 


SHRIR. K. GUHA 
Suri A. K. Jar (Alternate) 


SHRIM. S. SARAVANAN 


PRESIDENT 
SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI P. KANAGAVEL 
SHRI K. JEYAKUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri T. KANNAN 
SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI P. SUNDARAPANDIAN 
SHRI N. CHANDRASEKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. N. Siva KUMAR 


PRESIDENT 
SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI G. V. SHYAMSUNDAR 
SHRI Y. K. YADAV 


SHRI P. RAJESH, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (CHD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI SACHIN S. MENON 
SCIENTIST ‘B’, (CHD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 26 (14577). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


