lS 14670

:1999

Ww#vmm

%G-fadmmwammT m-am$-aTmmFi-@

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR ACOUSTIC EMISSION INSPECTION DURING HYDROSTATIC PRESSURE TESTING OF SYSTEM

ICS 17.140.99;

19.100

0 BIS 1999 BUREAU MANAK OF BHAVAN, INDIAN STANDARDS 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

MARG

April 1999

Price Group

2

Non-Destructive

Testing Sectional Committee,

MTD 21

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by Non-Destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. Acoustic Emission (AE) testing is of specific importance towards hydrostatically pressurized, such as pressure vessels and piping system. non-destructive testing of systems

The basic functions of an acoustic emission monitoring system are to detect, locate and classify emission sources. Other methods of NDT may be used to further evaluate the significance of acoustic emission sources. For the purpose of deciding whether observed or calculated, expressing IS 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off the rounded off value should be the a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 14670:1999

Indian Standard

RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR ACOUSTIC EMISSION INSPECTION DURING HYDROSTATIC PRESSURE TESTING OF SYSTEM
1 SCOPE This recommended practice guidelines for acoustic emission (AE) testing of systems, such as pressure vessels, piping systems or other structures during hydrostatic pressure testing of the system. e) 2 PRINCIPLE When a system is pressurized hydrostatically, the pressurization produces changes in stresses in the structure. During pressurization of a structure, AE is produced due to such source as (a) deformation, (b) initiation and propagation of cracks, (c) reshuffling of stress pattern at the region of high stress as (1) fluid leak, (2) loose part motion, and (3) relative movement between different parts of a structure. These AE signals can be detected by an instrumentation system using sensors which being normally of the piezoelectric type transform the mechanical excitation stimulated by stress wave, into electrical signals. In addition to immediate evaluation of the emissions detected during the application of hydrostatic pressure a permanent record of the number and location of emitting sources and the relative amount of acoustic emission detected from each source provides a basis for comparison with sources detected during the test and during subsequent pressurization. 3 PERSONNEL QUALIFICATION shall be performed Q d) The pressurization schedule should be specified. The pressurization schedule shall include holding time at each pressure level in terms of percent of maximum pressure and pressure should be continuously recorded. There shall be proper communication between acoustic emission test control centre and pressurization control point. All potential sources of extraneous acoustic noise such as mechanical vibrations, friction, and fluid flow should be identified. These sources should be isolated and minimized . Acoustic emission monitoring system should be identified. Calibration should at least be done before and after the test. Additional calibration checks may be performed during the test if so required. OF EQUIPMENT

g)

5 CALIBRATION

5.1 The sensitivity and locationa! accuracy of the Acoustic Emission monitoring system -shall be determined by using the acoustic emission simulator. 5.2 Sensitivity follows. Calibration shall be carried out as

The acoustic emission inspection by qualified personnel. 4 PREPARATION

FOR INSPECTION

5.2.1 In order to set the gain for each sensor channel, locate the acoustic emission simulator at a selected distance from each sensor in turn. Monitor a sensor's response to the simulated emission and adjust the channel again to a specified amplitude level. Repeat this procedure for each acoustic emission sensor on the structure and adjust the amplified outputs, corresponding to the identical simulations of each to the specified peak voltage, within +1 dB. 5.3 Accuracy as follows. of source location shall be determined

It shall be carried out as follows: a) Areas which bend specific monitoring as repaired regions, nozzles identified stress areas etc, should be specified. such high

b)

The type of sensors and their frequency ranges should be identified. Both sensor and couplant must be compatible with the surface conditions and the structural material to ensure the signal to noise ratio. The maximum pressure that the vessel can be subjected to should also be specified.

5.3.1 Check the operation of the acoustic emission source location function by analyzing simulated acoustic emission signals from several random locations on the structure as well as from any specific critical locations. For each placement of the simulator, determine and record the precision and accuracy of the acoustic emission location function. 6 INSPECTION 6.1 Acoustic PROCEDURE data shall be accumulated

c)

emission

1

IS 14670:1999
during and if only after pressurization, then how to plotthe dataassuggested in Fig. l after pressurization of the system or both. 6.1.1 During application ofhydrostatic pressure the locations of acoustic sources are usually determined through analysis of the difference in time of arrival of Acoustic Emission signals at acoustic sensors. Such analysis may be performed through the use of an analog or digital computer. The computer accumulates and analyses data over a specified pressure range. As the pressure is applied record the number and location of emitting source and the amount of acoustic emission detected from each source. The acoustic emission activity at one or more sensors maybe monitored and displayed in realtime during pressurization. If the acoustic emission count rate in the form of acoustic emission, count rate, event rate, energy or a-similar acoustic emission quantity shows an appreciable increase noti~ the owner of the structure or his representative immediately. It shall be his decision to reduce, hold or stop the test. The cause of acoustic emission increase shall be investigated before continuing the test. 6.1.2 Calibration shall be repeated after the test and changes recorded in gain setting and source location performance. Appropriate compensation shall be made during data interpretation. 7 INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS source with pertinent 7.2 Source Location All locations data resulting from analysis shal! be presented in a manner consistent with the previously established calibration accuracy. comments,

7.3 Source Classification
Sources shall be classified with respect to their acoustic activity and intensity.

7.3.1 Activity of a source shall be measured by event count or emission count. Source is considered to be active if its event count or emission count continues to increase with increasing or constant stimulation. A source is considered to be critically active if the derivative of its event count or emission count with respect to stimulus continuously increases with increasing pressurization or with time under constant pressure (see Fig. 1). 7.3.2 An intensity measure of a source is its average
amplitude per event also, the emission count per event, the emission energy per event or other quantities that can be shown to be related to the amplitude of the signal, can be used as intensity measures. A source is considered to be intense if it is active and its intensity measure consistently exceeds, by a specified amount, the average intensity of active source. The intensity of a source can be calculated for increments of the stimulus or of events. An intense source is considered to be critically intense if its intensity continuously increase with increasing stimulation or with time under constant stimulus (see Fig. 2).

7.1 All results shall be summarized on an appropriate layout map, displayed or tabulated or both for ready reference and interpretation. This layout or tabulation shall display the location and classification of each

SOURCE 3

1/'
PRE5WK -i
NOTE -- To the right of the vertical line, Source 1 is inactive, Source 2 is active and Source 3 is critically active,

FIG. 1 SCHEMATIC REPRESENTATION OFTHREEDIFFERENTTYPES

2

IS 14670:1999 7.4 Evaluation below:
a) of classified source shall be as given data, shall be included in the records of the inspection and be signed by the inspecting authority. The information recorded shall be sufficient to permit complete re-analysis of the results. This information shall include the following: a) Complete identification of vessel, material, method of fabrication, manufacturer's name, previous history and maintenance as well as its maximum operating pressure prior to AE inspection; Details of AE equipment, name, Model No.; Sensor specification, type of couplant; manufacturers frequency,

Sources considered to be critically active or critically intense or both are indicative of questionable structural intensity and, if possible, shall be evaluated by other NDT methods. Sources considered to be int&se are indicative of possible flaw growth and, if possible should be evaluated by other NDT methods. Sources considered to b; active but not intense shall be recorded for comparison with sources detected during subsequent examination. Sources considered to be of.low activity and intensity are not usually required to be further evaluated for subsequent correlation.

b)

c)

b) c) d) e) f)

sensitivity,

d)

Vessel sketch with number their locations; Inspector's

of sensors with and

8 REPORT A"ll calibration data and instrument adjustment including equipment description and performance

name and his qualification;

Suspect areas to be shown on a sketch ofvessel along with data of AE signals and interpretation of results.

I
k10 1

NOTE -- Four different regions are shown prior to S., the source was inactive between .S. and ,S,, the source was of low intensity between S; and SZ,tie source is classified as critically in"tense. `

FIG.

2 SOURCEINTENSITY I DIVIDEDBY A WEIGHTEDAVERAGEINTENSITY OF ALL
SOURCES,kIo PLOTTEDAGAINSTTHEPRESSURE

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indiutz Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BJ,S has the copyright .of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of neeessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. SL~ndards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendmcnk is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of lndian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions' This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. MTD21 (3614).
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of-Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELI-H 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A CHANDIGARH 160022 Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617,3233841 3378499,3378561 { 3378626,3379120 603843 { 602025 2350216,2350442 { 2351519,2352315 8329295,8327858 { 8327891,8327892

: C.I.T. campus, IV Cross Road, C?4ENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHGPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. LWPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Mat

Simco Printing Rem,

Ddh~India

