IS 10106 ( ,Part 3/Set

5 ) : 1990

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

PACKAGINGCODE
PART 3 Section ANCILLARY 5 Twines MATERIALS and Cords

UDC

621'798'242 : OC6'76

Q BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110 002

S'ebruary

19991

Price Group 2

Packaging Codes Sectional Committee,

LMD 26

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 3/Set 5 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 8 May 1990, after the draft finalized by the Packaging Codes Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The Packaging Code is being issued in the following parts, each having one or more sections: Part Part Part Part Part Part Part 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Production packaging, Packaging materials, Ancillary materials, Packages, Packaging operations, Storage land transportation, Packaging machinery.

and

This standard ( Part 3/Set 5 ) of the packaging code deals with twines and cords used for packaging. Various types of packages are described in Part 4/Section 6 of the Code. Although a variety oftwines and cords are used for parcelling and packaging, this section is intended to provide general guidance for the selection and use of twines and cords for this purpose. In the preparation of this standard ( Part 3/Set 5 ), assistance has been derived from BS 1133 : Section 13 : 1954 "Twines and Cords for Packaging", issued by the British Standards Institution ( BSI ).

IS 10106 ( Part 3/Set

5 ) : 1990

Indian Standard

PACKAGINGCODE
PART 3 ANCILLARY 5 Twines MATERIALS and Cords Section 1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 3/&c 5 ) gives guidance on the types of twines and cords available for packaging and the purposes for which they may be used.

Colour of course may be affected proofing or other treatment is given.

if any rot

2 REFERENCES
2.1 The following lndian Standards

are necessary

adjuncts to this standard:
IS No. Title

3.1.1 For most packaging purposes any of the fibres will provide a sufficiently strong twine or cord, and the selection of any particular fibre is a matter largely of individual discretion and economics. Table 1 gives a general description of twines and cords commonly used for packaging. Twines and cords are usually specified by metres per kilogram weight or metres per 100 kg, sometimes termed "runnage" or "linear density". 3.2 Choice of Twine or Cord The Indian Standards listed under 2 may be consulted for breaking strengths and lengths perkilogram of various twines and cords suitable for packaging. 3-2.1 Twines or cords made from a fibre of low strength would need to be thicker and therefore yield less length per kilogram for a given breaking strength than a twine or cord made from a fibre of higher strength. On the other hand, if cost is not the main consideration, the appearance and finish of the thicker cord may make it more suitable for a particular usage. In selecting a twine or cord many factors have to be taken into account and it is not practicable in a general code of this kind to give specific information. The following paras will however provide a general guide to the packers for this purpose: a) Retail counter sales For parcelling goods sold over the counter ( such a retail store trade ) xid conveyed

1912 : 1984 1920 : 1987 2807 : 1981 2819 : 1983 3252 : 1987 5177 : 1985 7082 : 1973
3 TWINES 3.1 General

Country

revision )

jute

twine

( second

Hemp lines ( second revision ) Whipcords ( jirst Braided cotton
revision ) revision )

cord

(second

Shroud-laid
revision )

cotton and

line ( second ropes ( first

Jute

revision )

lines

Sisal lines
AND CORDS

The words `twines' and `cords' are used in this standard to refer to the normal commercial products made from cotton, hemp, flax, jute or sisal fibres all of which have their own individual characteristics of colour, strength and finish. Table 1
Description Twines

and Cords for Packaging

( Clause 3.1.1 ) Fibre Colour Unit Strength*

Cotton

White Made from tibre extracted from the cotton plant 20 A soft fine fibre extracted from the stem of the Dark grey, bluish green., 40 Flax brown or creamy whrte flax plant Dark or steel grey to This term covers a variety of soft fibres extract27 40 Hemp creamy white ed from the stem of hemp plants cultivated in Europe, India, North and South America Light brown to deep A soft fibre extracted from the stem of the plant 25130 Jute cream or slate grey cultivated in India and Pakistan Creamy white A fibre of firm texture derived from the plant 42 Sisal leaves of the agave species, cultivated principally in British, East Africa Translucent _A synthetic high tenacity twine generally regard 42 Polypropylene ed as a good~alte,.nattve to sisal. *The unit strengths tabulated are not intended to signify any actual breaking strength, but to give some rough for example, the first item would be guidance on relative values for twines or cords of equal length per kilogram; half the strength of the second or two thirds of the fourth.

1

IS 10106 ( Part 3/Set 5 ) : 1990 by the purchaser of the twine should have a breaking strength of four times the mass of the package concerned if the package Jf the packages is of a normal type. contain articles which exceed 160 kg/ma or have harsh or rough edges that may chafe or cut the twine, a safety factor of six to one is recommended. the sewing -twines should be proofed to a specification agreed between the purchaser and the manufacturer. Bales for export may also be roped, if necessary. 4 PARCELLING

4.1 The following recommendations shall be taken into account for the proper use of twine b) Road lransport and cord for parcelling. For goods intended for despatch by road transport where packages are not fre4.1.1 If a package contains more than one quently handled bgt are sent direct from article to be packed into a paper wrapping, the consignor to consignee, twine or cord articles should be tied or otherwise secured with should be used in accordance with the a twine of sufficient strength to obviate interior recommendations at ( a ) above. movement, as this is often the chief cause of bursting the outer wrapper. For this purpose c) Rail or sea transport .,it is suggested that the twine used should be of For goods intended for despatch by rail sufficient strength to enable the contents to be or ship where packages have to be handled lifted by it. many times, twine or cord should be used with a safety factor of six to one for 4.1.2 Every regard should be given to the nature packages of normal consistency. If the of the package. A parcel of iron castings, etc,. packages contain articles which exceed being of unusual solidity and having sharp 160 kg/mg, a safety factor of not less than edges which cause the fraying or chafing of the eight to one is recommended. twine or cord, should be packed with care, and judgement should be used in selecting a twine 4 Exposed storage or cord of sufficient strength to guarantee safe When packaging goods that may be transport. Sharp edges of packages around stored in the open and subject to weather which the twine or cord passes should always conditions, natural fibre twine should be be covered by some protective material, such as rot-proofed to a specification agreed to a pad of paperboard, waste paper, or felt. between the purchaser and the manuAppropriate safety factors as 4.1.3 The above recommendations facturer. have been given in ( a ) or ( c ) above should be based on the cord being used once around the adopted. If polypropylene twines are package in each direction. The length used used they should be U.V. stabilised to a should be in one piece and each crossing should level agreed between the purchaser and be knotted to prevent slipping. When the length the manufacturer. of package is three or more times the width or depth, whichever is the greater, two girth ties Baling e) should be used and additional ties should be While for most packaging purposes twines added for longer and irregularly shaped and cords with an `S' twist are used, packages. sewing twines for bales, etc,. should have a `Z' twist ( see Fig. 1 ). 4.1.4 To prevent kinking or tangling of a twine or cord, care should be taken to pull the twine Ordinary twines may be used for bales or cord the correct way from the ball. All twines used within the country, but for export or cords should be pulled from the centre of the ball, and if made with an `S' twist the twine or cord should leave the ball in a clockwise direction, and a `2' twist anti-clockwise ( see Fig. 1 ).
NOTE - A twioe or cord has `S' twist if, when it is held in a vertical position, the spirals conform to the slope of the central portion of a capital letter `s'. It has `Z' twist if the spirals slope in the same direction as that of a capital letter `Z'. Cross-Band Right Twist Twist Way Reverse Twist Anti-Clockwise `S' AND

Open-Band Left Twist Weft Way Ordinary Clockwise FIG.

1

`Z' TWISTS 2

4.1.5 Each problem must be considered on its merits and if particular difficulties are experienced the suppliers of the twines or cords should be consulted. A selection of typical knots that have been found useful in packaging is shown in Fig. 2 to 7.

IS 10106 ( Part 3/Set 5 ) : 1990 5 SEALS 5.1 The use of metal or plastic seals is advantageous in minimizing tampering and pilferage. Several types of proprietary seals are obtainable, most of which are easily and quickly applied to the twine or cord by a hand press; the seal manufacturer's instruction should be followed. Some transport authorities demand the use of seals on certain classes of goods.

FIG. 2

SLING KNOT TIED BACK ON ITSELF

FIG. 3

FOLLOW THROUGH KNOT

FIG. 4

REEF KNOT

FIG. 5

OPEN HAND KNOT

FIG. 6

SINGLE SHEETBEND OR WEAVERS KNOT

FIG. 7

CLOVEHITCH

Standard

Mark

Standards

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulationsmade thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the prochecked by BIS for conformity to ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Boreau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1985 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, typs or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. LMD 26 (905 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

~Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 lOOC2 Telephones: 331 01 31, 371 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road,

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone t 331 01 31 331 13 75

37 86 62 2 18 43 41 29 16

160036

MADRAS 600113

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheti ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

6 32 92 95

Printed

at Swatantra

Bharat

Press, Delhi, India

