( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 11315 ( Part 5 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR THE QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTIONS OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASSES
PART 5 WALL STRENGTH

Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee,
Chairman
DR BHAWANI SINGH

BDC 73
Roorkee

Representing University of Roorkee,

Members Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Roorkee Central Water and Power Research Station, D:~%;R ( CW & PRS ) Pune SHRI S. L. MOKHASHI ( Alternate > Central Soil and Materials Research Station, DIRECTOR New Delhi Karnataka Engineering Research Station, DIRECTOR( CHIEF ENGINEER) Krisbnarajasagara SHRI R. NARASIMHAIYENGAR ( Alfernate ) Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), DR A. K. DUBE Dhanbad ( Bihar ) Irrigation and Power Department, Amritsar SHRI P. S. GOSAL ( Punjab ) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd,.Bombay DR UDAY V. KULKARN~ Centra~~;;~tng Research Institute ( CSIR ), DR G. S. MEHROTRA ASSISTANTRESEARCHOFFICER SHR~ A. GHOSH ( Alternate SHRI M. D. NAIR ) Associated Instrument Manufacturers (India ) Pvt Ltd. New Delhi PROFT. S. NAGARAI ( Alternate ) Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SHRI P. L. NARULA Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHRI T. K. NATRAJAN New Delhi SHRI P. J. RAO ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi PROF T. RAMAMURTHI DR G. V. RAO ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright BUREAU OF INDIAN This publication is protected under thelndian reproduction in whole or in part by any means nublisher shall be deemed to be an infringement 1987 1 STANDARDS Copyright Act ( XIV of 1857 ) and except with written permission of the of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 11315 ( Part 5 ) -1987
( Continued

frompage

1) Representing Research Institute National Geophysical ( CSIR ), Hyderabad Indian Geotechnical Society, Delhi Government of Irrigation Department, Maharashtra, Nasik Centr;Ll;,oard of Irrigation and Power, New ) Irrigation Department, Government of Gujarat Director General, BIS (Ex-officio Member 1

Members DR Y. V. RAMANA DR G. V. RAO RESEARCHOFFICER ( MERI ) SECRETARY DIRECTOR(C) ( Alternate SHRI C. D. THAWE SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Clv Engg )

Secretary SHRI K. M. MATHUR Joint Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS

Rock Slope Engioeering, Fcundation on Rock and Rock Mass Improvement Subcommittee, BDC 73 : 4
Convener PROFL. S. SRIVASTAVA Members DR R. K. BHANDARI SHRI A. GHOSH ( Alternate SHR~ B. D. BALI~A ) CentrzhaMcal;rg Cemindia ) Jaiprakash Associates Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Institute ( CSIR 1, Central Road Research New Delhi Indian Institute ) Indian Institute of Techology, Kanpur Research Limited, Institute Bombay ( CSIR ), Company Centraazriletng Research Institute ( CSIR ). University of Roorkee, Roorkee

SHRI A. P. BA~ERJEE SHRI D. J. KET~CAR ( Akernate SHRI D. G. KADKADE SHRI R. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) SHRI T. K. NATARAJAN &RI P. J. RAO ( Alternate ) CR T. RAMAMURTHY DR K. Cr. SHARMA(Alternate DR Y UDHBIR

of Technology,

New Delhi

IS : 11315 ( Part 5 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR THE QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTIONS OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASSES
PART 5 WALL STRENGTH

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 5 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 January 1987, after the draft finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 In view of the advancement in the field of rock mechanics, a number of methods for assessing the strength characteristics of the rock and rock masses are being formulated by Rock Slope Engineering and Foundation on Rock and Rock Mass Improvement Subcommittee of Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee. The majority of rock masses, particularly those within a few hundred metres from the surface, behave as discontinuous. with thediscontinuities largely determining the mechauical behaviour. It is, therefore, essential that the structure of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described and quantified to have a complete and unified description of rock masses and discontinuities, and it may be possible to design engineering structures in rock with a minimum of expense in situ testing. Careful field descriptions will enhance the value of in situ tests that are performed, since the interpretation and extrapolation of results will be made more reliable. 0.3 Discontinuity is the general term for any mechanical discontinuity in a rock mass, along which the rock mass has zero or low tensile strength. It is the collective term for most types of joints, weak bedding planes, weak schistocity planes, weakness zones, shear zones and faults. The ten parameters selected for rock mass survey to describe discontinuities are orientation, spacing, persistance, roughness, wall strength, of sets, and block size. These aperture, filling, seepage, number parameters are also evaluated from the study of drill cores to obtain information on the discontinuities. 0.4 It is essential that both the structure of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described for determining the mechanic11 3

IS : 11315 ( Part 5 ) - 1987 behaviour. This Indian Standard covering various parameters to describe discontinuities in rock masses is being formulated in various parts each part covering one parameter. This part covers wall strength, The other parts covering other paramsters are also being formulated. 0.5 Wall strength describes the equivalent wall strength of the adjacent rock walls of a discontinuity. Wall strength mzy be lower than rock block strength due to weathering or alteration of the walls. Wall strength is in important compon&t of shear strength if rock walls are in contact. 0.6 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 5 ) covers for evaluation and _ the ^_ method description of compressive strength of the rock comprising the walls of a discontinuity in rock mass. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 19867 shall apply. 3. GENERAL 3.1 Thz compressive strength of the rock comprising the walls of a. discontinuity is a very important component of shear strength and deformability, especially if the walls are in direct rock to rock contact Slight shear displacement of individual as in the case of unfilled joints. joints caused by shear stresses within the rock mass often results in very small asperity contact areas and actual stresses locally approaching or exceeding the compressive strength of the rock wail material, hence the asperity damage. 3.2 Rock masses are frequently weathered near the surface, and are The weathering ( and sometimes altered by hydrothermal processes alteration ) generally affects the walls of discontinuities more than the interior of rock blocks. This results in a wall strength some fraction of what would be measured on the fresher rock found in the interior of the rock blocks, for example, that sampled by drill core. A description
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). iGlossary of terms and symbols relating to rock mechanics.

given in IS: 11X8-

4

IS : 11315 ( Part 5 ) - 1987

of the state of weathering or alteration, both for the rock material and for the rock mass is, therefore, an essential part of the description of wall strength. 3.3 There are two main results of weathering - one dominated by disintegration, the other by cherniwl decomposition including Generally, both mechanical and chemical effects act together, solution. but depending on climatic regime, one or other of these aspects may be Mechanical weathering results in opening of discontinuities, dominant. the formation of new discontinuities by rock fracture, the opening of grain boundaries, and the fracture or cleavage of individual mineral of the rock and grains. Chemical weathering results in discolouration leads to the eventual decomposition of silicate minerals to clay minerals; some minerals, notably quartz resist this action and may survive unchanged. Solution is an aspect of chemical weathering and is particularly important in the case of carbonate and saline minerals.
mechanical

3.4 The relatively thin `skin' of wall rock affects shear strength and deformability can be tested by means of simple index tests. The apparent uniaxial compressive strength can be estimated both from Schmidt hammer tests and from scratch and geological hammer tests, since the latter have been roughly calibrated against large body of test data. 3.5 Mineral coatings will affect the shear strength of discontinuities to a marked degree if the walls are planar and smooth. The type of mineral coatings should be described, where possible. Samples should be taken when in doubt. 3.6 Strength of rock walIs of a continuity in rock mass is governed by the state of weathering ( and alteration ) of the rock mass ( Table 1 > and rock maZeria/ (Table 2 ). Quantitative estimates of strength of rock can be made by manualindex tests ( Table 3 ) and Schmidt hammer tests ( Fig. 1 >. 3.6.1 Schmidt hammer test is recommended for obtaining estimates of wall strength for subsequent calculation of shear strength when utilizing the wall roughness coefficient ( JRC ) described in Part 4. 3.7 Equipment required for evaluation of wall strength in rock mass survey consist of geological hammer with one tapered point, strong pen knife or similar sharp tool, Schmidt hammer ( L type ) with conversion table ( table generally supplied by the manufacturer ) to correct for orientation and graph (see Fig. 1 ) to convert corrected rebound number to an estimate of uniaxial strength, and equipment for measuring dry density of small rock samples, for example, oven, balance, pyknometer, beaker, etc. 5

IS : 11315 ( Part 5 ) - 1987
TABLE 1 STATE OF WEATHERING OF ROCK ( Clause TERM Fresh Slightly weathered 3.6 ) GRADB perhaps surfaces I II DESCRIPTION No visible sign of rock material weathering: slight discolouration on major discontinuity MASS

Discolouration indicates weathering of rock material. All the rock material may be discoloured by weathering and may be somewhat weaker externally than in its fresh condition Less than half of the rock material is decomposed and/ or disintegrated to soil. Fresh or discoloured rock is present either as a continuous framework or as core stones More than half of the rock material is decomposed and/ or disintegrated to soil. Fresh or discoloured rock is present either as a discontinuous framework or as core stones All rock material is decomposed and/or disintegrated to soil. The original mass structure is still largely intact All rock material is converted to soil. The mass strutture and material fabric are destroyed. There is a large change in volume, but the soil has not been significantly transported

Moderately weathered Highly weathered Completely weathered RYzual

III

IV

V VI

TABLE 2 TERM Fresh Discoloured

STATE

OF WEATHERING ( Clause 3.6 ) DESCRIPTION

OF ROCK MATERIAL

Decomposed Disintegrated

No visible sign of weathering of the rock material The colour of the original fresh rock material is changed. The degree of change from the original colour should be indicated. If the colour change is confined to particular mineral constituents this should be mentioned The rock is weathered to the condition of a soil in which the original material fabric is still intact, but some or all of the mineral grains are decomposed The rock is weathered to the condition of a soil in which the, original fabric is still intact. The rock is friable, but the mineral grains are not decomposed usipg dls-

described above may be subdivided NOTE - The stages of weathering qualifying terms, for exampIT, ` slightly discoloured `, ' moderately , etc. coloured `, ` highly discoloured

6

IS : 11315 ( Part 5 ) - 1987

TABLE 3 GRADE

STRENGTH

OF ROCK BY MANUAL ( Clause 3.6 ) FIELD IDENTIFICATION

INDEX APPROXIMATE RANGE OF UNIAXIAL COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH (MPa) < 0.025 0.025-0.05 0~05-0~10 O*lO-0.25 0.25-0.50 > 0.50 0.25-l .O 1.0-5.0

DESCRIPTION

Sl s2 s3 54 SS S6 RO Rl

Very soft clay Soft clay Firm clay Stiff clay Very stiff clay Hard clay Extremely weak rock Very weak rock

Easily penetrated several inches by fist Easily penetrated several inches by thumb Can be penetrated several inches by thumb with moderate effort Readily indented by ithumb but penetrated only with great effort Readily indented by thumb-nail with difficulty by Indented thumb-nail Tndented by thumb-nail Crumbles under firm blows with point of geological hammer, can be peeled by a pocket knife Can be peeled by a pocket knife with difficulty, shallow indentations made by firm blow geological with point of hammer Cannot be scraped or peeled with a pocket knife, specimen can be fractured with single firm blow of geological hammer Specimen requires more than one blow of geological hammer to fracture it Specimen requires many blows of geological hammer to fracture it Specimen can only be chipped with geological hammer

R2

Weak rock

5.0-25

R3

M",do'c"k" strong

25-50

R4 R5 R6

Strong rock Ve;;;zong Ex:Tctely strong

50-100 loo-250 >250

NOTE -Grades Sl to S6 apply to cohesive soils, for example, clays, silty clays,. Discontland combinations of silts and clays with sand, generally slow draining. nuity wall strength will generally be characterized by grade RO to R6 ( rock ) while Sl to S6 ( clay ) will generally apply to filled discontinuities.

7

;fS : 11315 ( Part 5.) - 1987

AVERAGE STRENGTH

DISPERSION FOR MOST

OF

.._`.

: .`-

30
350 300 250 200

29
28 27 26 ,25 24 23 22 21 20 kN/m3

150

100 80

60 50 40

30

Ii

i.

i

HAMMER I

VERTICAL I I

DOWNiVARDS I I

0

10

20

30

LO

50

60

SCHMIDT HARDNESS
FIG.

(c ),

L-HAMMER

1 CORRELATION CHART FOR SCHMIDT (L) HAMMER RELATING ROCK DENSITY, COMPRESSIVESTRENGTH AND REBOUND NUMBER

8

IS : 11315 ( Part 5 ) - 1987 4. PROCEDURE 4.1 The grade of weathering ( or alteration ) of the r&k mass as a whole is described first. Table 1 gives the general terms and descriptions and may be modified to suit particular situations.

4.2 The grade of weathering ( or alteration ) of the rock material comprising of the walls of individual discontinuities or of the walls of a particular set of discontinuities (for example, an unfavourably orientated set of joints > should be described according to terms and descriptions shown in Table 2. by mapping
Distribution of weathering grades in a rock mass may be determined natural and artificial exposures. However, it should be borne in mind that isolated natural exposures of rock and excavations of limited extent are not necessarily representative of the whole rock mass, since weathering can be extremely variable. NOTE I-

all grades of weathering may not be sren in a given NOTE 2 - Furthermore, rock mass and in some cases a particular grade may be present to a very small extent. Distribution of various weathering grades of the rock material may be related to the porosity of the rock material and the presence of open discontinuities. In logging cores the distribution of weathering grades of the rock material may be recorded, but the distribution of weathering grades of the rock mass from which the cores were obtained can only be inferred. NOTE 3 - Rock masses which are weathered due to exposure to or infiltration from surface agents Phould be distinguished where possible from those that are However, in many altered as a result of infiltration of hydrothermal solutions. instances the effects of alteration are not easily distinguished from those brought about by weathering. NOTE 4 - An abundant class of rock materials, notably those with high clay content, are prone to swelling, weakenirg or disintegration when exposed to Special tests are short term weathering processes of wetting and drying nature. necessary to predict this aspect of mechanical performance.

The manual index tests detailed in Table 3 should be performed on the walls of discontinuities or on material representative of the walls. The choice and number of test locations will depend on the details required. The approximate range of strength for the walls of a critical set of joints may be sufficient. Alternatively, a single critical discontinuity may need to be characterized in details. The manual index tests can be performed on hand-sized pieces of freshly broken rock if the Alternatively, the results strength of intact rock bridges is of interest. of point load tests, if available, may be used to estimate the strength of the intact portions of any potential failure surface.
4.3 NOTE 1 - The manual index tests are preferred to conventional tests on carefully prepared rock cylinders because a very large number of discontinuities can be sampled, thereby giving a more representative picture of the condition of the walls. Furthermore, conventional tests cannot be applied to the thin skin of wall rock or mineral coatings that dominate the shear strength and deformability of the rock mass.

9

iS : 11315 ( Part 5 ) - 1987
NOTE 2 -The manual index tests for determining grades Sl to S6 can be replaced by more accurate assessment using a standard soil mechanics pocket penetrometer. This contains a stylus which is pressed into the sample at a constant rate. The maximum resistance can be read off a scale which is calibrated to [ This value is equal to show the maximum compressive strength of the sample. twice the undrained shear strength = * ( o1 - oy ) 1.

4.4 The Schmidt hammer is applied in a direction perpendicular to the discontinuity wall of interest. The rock surface should be tested under saturated conditions to give the most conservative result. If the surfaces are unavoidably dry, this fact should be reported in the results. The surface should be free of loose particles, at least under the hammer position. 4.4.1 If the impulse from the spring-loaded projectile of the Schmidt hammer is sufficient to move the surface being tested, the resulting rebound will be artificially low. Such test results can normally be heard, since there is a `drummy' sound These results should be ignored. For the above reason this field index test is unsuitable in a loose rock mass containing very closely spaced discontinuities. ( In such cases small block samples can be removed and tested when clamped rigidly to a heavy base. > 4.4.2 Each surface of interest should be tested a number of times to ensure a representative set of results. It is suggested that tests are performed in groups of 10 ( for example, 10 tests per discontinuity or 10 tests per unit area of a large critical d:scontinuity >, applying the hammer to a I;ew part of the surface before each impact. The five lowest readings of each group of 10 are discarded and the mean value (, r ) of the five highest readings is quoted. 4.4.3 The mean values of the Schmidt rebound ( r > and rock density ( Y ) fo: a given discontinuity are used to estimate the value of the joint wall compressive strength ( JCS ) using Fig. 1. 4.4.4 The Schmidt hammer test can be performed on the surfaces ofor on material obtained from freshly broken rock when the strength of the intact rock bridges ( CC > is of interest. Alternatively, the results of point load tests, if available, can be used to estimate the strength of the
intact portions of any potential failure surface.

4.4.5 Discontinuities with thin mineral coatings that appear quite persistent over a given surface and which would probably prevent initial rock to rock contact should be tested with the Schmidt hammer as above applyiilg the hammer to the surface of the mineral coating. Depending upon the thickness of the mineral coating and its hardness, the estimate In of JCS may or may fiat be relevant for estimation of shear strength. all such cases of mineral coatings, the minera!ogy should be described, for exam p'e, calcite, chlorite, talc, pyrite, graphite, kaolinite, etc Samples IQ

IS : 11315 ( Part 5 ) - 1987 should be taken when in doubt. An estimate of the area1 extent ofthe *coating ltl0 percent and the range of the thickness of the coating ( mm ) should be included.
NOTE1 - The Schmidt hammer rebound number ranges in practice from about 10 to 60. The lowest number applies to `weak' rocks ( uniaxial compressive strength oc < 20 MPa ), while the highest number applies to `very strong' and strong' `extremely rocks ( oc > ISOMPa ), `very weak' rocks and `extremely weak' rocks cannot be tested with the L-hammer. Manual index tests must therefore, be resorted to for rock weaker than 15-20 MPa.
NOTE 2 - For a given strength of surface, the rebound when the hammer is used vertically downwards ( rebound maximum when used vertically upwards. The correlation to vertical downwards tests only. The corrections given in applied when the hammer is used in other directions.

number is minimum against gravity ) and given in Fig. 1 applies the Table 4 should be

NOTE 3 - Block movement ( drumminess ) in closely jointed rock or crushing of loose grains are some of the reasons for unexoectedly low rebound numbers in a given set of results. Unexpectedly high readings are seldom obtained. The following two sets of actual results Illustrate the suggested method of obtaining a realistic mean value:

a) rough, planar iron-stained joints in granite 44, 36, 38, 44, 32, 44, 44,40, 34, 42 mean of highest 5: Y = 44 ( mean of 8 sets of 10 tests: Y = 43 ) b) rough, undulating calcite-coated joints in hornfels 23, 28, 30, 33, 28, 24, 24, 28, 30, 20 mean of highest 5: r = 29 (mean of 3 sets of 10 tests: Y = 30) NOTE 4- The Schmidt test is one of the few tests (with the exception of scratching tests ) which takes into account the mechanical strength of the thin b:ind of weathered wall material close to a discontinuity surface. Since it is this n:l:l material wliich (in combination with uorcg/?nesu ) controls the shear strength, it is of considerable importance as an index of rock quality. `Ihe joint wall compressive strmgth ( JCS ) is often as low as 25 percent of the adjacent intact rock strength ( c ) due to weathering effects. TABLE 4 CORRECTIONS HAMMER REBOUND
USED
REBOUND

(r ) WHEN THE HAMMER VERTICALLY DOWNWARDS
UPWARDS x=+90 x=+45 (_-._-__h---~ -1.8 -;8 -5.3 -6'6 -4.0 -6'2 --6.9 -4.3 -5.3 -3.3

FOR REDUCING

MEASURED

IS NOT

SCHMIDT

r

10
20

DOWN WARDS x=-90 x=-45 -_-_-h--_-~ I 0 -0.8 : -0 -0.9 8 : 0 -0.7 -0.6 -0.4

HORIZONTAL x=0 1;:; -3.1 -2.7 -2.2 -1.7

30 40 50 60

-11

IS : 11315 ( Part 5 ) - 1987 5. PRESENTATION ON RESULTS

5.1 The weathering grades of recognizable weathering domains in the rock mass should be recorded on simplified sketches and/or vertical sections, with a clear key indicating the different weathering grades I, II, III, etc. 5.1.1 The weathering grade of the rock material of individual disconti`joint set nuities or of specific discontinuity sets should be described, No. 1: majority of walls moderately discoloured, approximately 20percent fresh'. 5.2 The strength of the wall rock material of individual discontinuities or of specific discontinuity sets should be noted together with the assumed range of uniaxial compressive strength, `joint set No. 1: majority medium strong (R3, 25-50 MPa ), approximately 20 percent strong ( R4, 50-100 MPa)`. 5.2.1 Values that are pertinent to the discontinuity walls should be carefully distinguished from any values that might have been recorded for the material representing the fresher rock within the rock blocks. 5.3 The mean rebound ( r ) for the wall rock material of individual discontinuities or of specific discontinuity sets should be noted together zt&;F mean rock density ( Y ) and the estimate of wall strength (JCS) . One set of 10 results should be selected to show the typical range of rebound values. 5.3.1 Values that are pertinent to the discontinuity walls should be carefully distinguished from any values that might have been recorded for the material representing the fresher rock within the rock blocks.

12

