rJ*

-

`6KE-AFfl&%fEL)
IS 12826

wry

1,969,

( Part 3 ) : 1990 (Reaffirmed 1996)

Indian Standard

CODEOFPRACTICE FORORDERING, TESTING ANDACCEPTANCEOF INDUSTRIALFURNACES
PART'3 TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF INDUSTRIAL FUiiNACES

UDC

66'041 : 620'16

@ BIS

1990

BUREAU
MANAK D<cembcr

OF
BIIAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAt-IDIJR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAI-J 110002 %4FAK MARG Price Group 3

1990

Industrial

Fuel-Fired

Furnaces Sectional Committee,

MTD 26

FOREWORD
This

Indian Standard ( Part 3 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 22 February 1990, after the draft finalized by the Industrial Fuel-Fired Furnaces Sectional Committee had been apprcved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. Industrial furnaces for various applications including heat treatment are required to be designed After the purchaser has spelt out his requirements and and supplied for individual applications. the supplier has agreed to supply the furnaces of requisite characteristics, the need for acceptance testing of furnace arises. This part ( Part 3 ) of the code outlines the suppliers' obligations and the purchasers' in making arrangements for testing. This code is being prepared in following acceptance testing of the industrial furnaces: three parts to facilitate the ordering, obligations supply and

Part 1 Purchaser's data sheet for ordering of industrial furnaces Part 2 Supplier's data sheet for the supply of industrial furnaces Part 3 Testing and acceptance cf industrial furnaces

AMENDMENT NO. 1 JUNE 2011 TO IS 12826 (PART 3) : 1989 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR ORDERING, TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF INDUSTRIAL FURNACES
PART 3 TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF INDUSTRIAL FURNACES (Page 2, clause 7.1.2, line 1) -- Substitute `Batch type furnaces' for `discontinuous'. [Page 3, clause 9.3.1(c)] -- Substitute `Moisture percentage' for `Humidity'. [Page 3, clause 9.3.1(d)] -- Add the following after 9.3.1(d): e) Viscosity.

(MTD 26)
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

IS 12826 ( Part 3 ) : 1990

Indian Standard

CODEOFPRACTICEFORORDERING, TESTINGANDACCEPTANCEOF INDUSTRIALFURNACES
PART 3 TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF INDUSTRIAL FURNACES

1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 3 ) covers the provisions of supplier's obligations, purchaser's obligations and the agreements for performance testing of industrial furnaces and details of various tests to be carried out. 2 REFERENCES
2.1 The

d) Supply plants and materials in accordance with the requirements laid down in the order within the specified tolerance, if any.

4 Achieve the operation,

Indian Standards listed necessary adjuncts to this standard: IS No.
Title

below

are

thermal and/or technological and productives, both for quality and quantity, according to the contract, assuming in each case, the responsibility of the functioning itself (achieving the temperature, the atmosphere and the movements of the materials in the established succession and time, yields and consumptions).

8849 : 1978

Glossary of terms relating fuel-fired industrial furnaces Recommendations rating mance furnaces for of

to

f) Assume also technological

9180 : 1979

perforfuel-fired

responsibility on product quality based on specified conditions and to the extent, these are agreed upon in the contract. If required, the site. deliver the materials or direct and at the send

d

3 TERMINOLOGY 3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS 8849 : 1978 shall apply. 4 GENERAL 4.1 The supplier and the on delivery schedules of and the schedules for facilities by the purchaser and commissioning of the 5 SUPPLIER'S purchaser shall agree plant and equipment provision of various essential for correction furnaces/system.

h) If

required, carry out installation (assembly).

3 If required, provide assistance
k) Unless

own staff for starting the plant.

OBLIGATIONS the responsibilities

otherwise agreed upon, remove from the site at own responsibility and expense all materials, machinery and equipment and leave it clean after completion of work, in any case within 30 days from the request received from the purchaser. of the supplier

5.1 The supplier shall have to provide the following:

5.2 The details of obligations are given in Annex A. 6 PURCHASER'S

a) Lay down the programme of delivery of drawings, designs, etc, required for carrying out the work thst has to be done by the purchaser; making ready the machinery and materials, the deliveries and the stages of progress of the work. b) Supply dr:lwings/details/instruction for the work of laying the foundation, construction of any other facility required to be provided by the purchaser and for providing connections for utility services, etc, as may be agreed upon in the contract for the purpose of getting ready for the furnace or the plant. c) Give instructions for the working and maintenance of the plant. 1

OBLIGATIONS

6.1 The purchaser shall have the responsibilities to meet the schedules of completion of various works at the factory before the deliveries and during the various points of supplies as agreed to before the supplies are made. Such work should include finalization of general layout of the plant/accessories, routing of cab/es and utility pipings, alterations/shifting of existing plants/accessories, if required, for the above purpose. 6.2 Before the deliveries from the supplier and during erection, the purchaser shall provide all the facilities to the supplier or his agent for erection, commissioning of the furnace or the

IS 12826 ( Part 3 ) : 1990 system as may be agreed upon Following details shall be observed the contract. in particular: 2) Pressure tests, tightness ). ) ( both

cl

a) Make available on schedule the land and the location for the plant in a condition suitable for carrying out the work;

Tests for leak ( pressure outward and inward ); 1) Gas tightness

( hermeticity

b)

Complete schedule;

the

foundation

work

on

2) Distribution and circuits of operating fluids ( atmosphere, cooling, etc ). 3) Hydraulic circuits, oil dynamic and pneumatic circuits. d) Functional mechanisms: balance etc. tests of machines range, pumping, circuits and power, noise,

Complete c>

on schedule all the preparations for starting the work and may also, include approval of drawings/details, carrying out of stage inspection, if required, within the agreed time schedule. For starting adjusting the testing of the that is available all plant, make required by the supplier as per agreement on schedule; care of guarding and maintaining the site as provided in the contract. FOR TESTING

1) For blowers: pressure,
and stability,

d)

2)

Take e>

7 AGREEMENTS 7.1 Partial Testing

Fo, mechanisms: operation of the doors, loading and unloadings, feed, movement and positioning of the materials, movement of the trollies, various mechanisms, testing the regularity of vibrations, velocity, absorbed power, frictions, interference.

The supply is subjected to test for checking the proper functioning of the plant and in regard to the guarantees as laid down in the contract. 7.1.1 The test shall be carried out after the necessary period of setting up the furnace which shall be specified for each contract. For continuous furnaces, the test shall be carried out in stable working regime of production for a period that shall be laid down in the order according to the characteristics of the plant. 7.1.2 For discontinuous furnaces, include at least one work cycle. the test shall

3) For controls and regulations: checking circuits/lines, of control/regulation calibration of instruments/apparatus and regulation response, proper intervention of alarms and safety devices, automatic and sequential operation of accessories, as may be required. 4) For protection and safety of the plant and the personnel: devices against excess loading, lightning strikes, earthing, explosion doors ( hatches ) protection against accidents due to falling of things and persons and crushing, moving parts, radiation and flame. 9.2 Inspection Tests after the furnace and upon the period. the tests should

7.1.3 Specific requirements and guarantee can be agreed to for the no load working and working under reduced load and for the transient states of working. 8 PATENTS 8.1 The supplier shall assume the full bility for the procedures, equipment, and material covered by patents. 9 TESTING 9.1 Preliminary Operations of construction tests carried out responsidevices

Inspection test shall be started is installed and commissioned expiry of specified stabilization Time schedule for conducting be specified in the contract.

Recommendations for performance rating of fuel-fired furnaces ( IS 9180 should also supplement the recommendations made under this clause ). 9.2.1 As a rule, the following shall be verified: heat, tolc-

These include the verifications and supply and the functional before starting the plant. 9.1.1 Thcsc may include:

under a) The stability of the structure the nature, amount and functional rance of deformations; of working b) The regularity the furnace and the control systems; c) The production 4 The temperature and e) The consumption 2 capacity; and figures. the thermal

a) Verification of consistency and conformity to the contract as also the assecsment of dimensional tolerances ( see Annex B >; b) Tests of strength: 1) Static load tests and verification settlement of foundations, of the

under heat of and regulating

cycle;

IS 12826 ( Part 3 ) : 1990

9.2.2 It
following contract:

shall furthermore
parameters are

be

verified

if the
in the

specified

9.3.1 For fuel fires furnaces, meters shall be checked: a) Type b) Composition,

the following

para-

of fuel and density, and heating values.

a) The atmosphere; b) The times of starting, stopping; and e) The etc. 9.2.3 technological results, stabilization and

c) Humidity, d) Lower

heat balances,

and upper

Tests on Continuous Furnaces

9.3.2 In addition to parameters specified in 9.3.1 for gas and liquid fuzls, the following parameters shall also be checked: a) Temperature, b) Relative pressure before the burner, and c) Maximum and minimum pressure the guarantee can be maintained. 9.4 Test of Material Inspection to be Tested at which

Inspection shall be carried out under normal treating the stabilized operating conditions, Normally, a materials specified in the contract. reference chai-ge material/dimension should be specified in the contract for conducting the Duration of the test shall be agreed tests. upon in the contract. The following parameters shall be determined: a) The production capacity;

in the Furnace

b) The temperature at all the characteristic points of the furnaces and all the other thermal cycle data laid down in the contract and in any case, necessary for ascertaining that the furnace complies with the conditions agreed upon; c) The average hourly and maximum consumption and the cqpsumptions per unit of the product; d) If provided, the data indicated under (a), (b) and (c) of 9.2.2 and that may be necessary for technological verification of the furnace. 9.2.4 Tests on Discontinuous Furnaces

It is necessary to check and verify exactly the following geometrical, mechanical and thermal properties of the material which is charged in the furnace during tests: a) Form and quality of the material; b) Dimensions ( length, width, thickness and section ), unit mass and, for the bulk material, bulk density ( apparant density ); c) Temperature loading; and d) Humidity. 9.5 Test of Material Treated in the Inspection of the material when

It is necessary to exactly test and verify the following geometrical, mechanical and thermal characteristic of the material treated in the inspection:

The inspection shall as a rule be carried out in at least one normal working cycle functioning in the conditions and treating the materials as provided in the contract. The following parameters shall be determined: a) The production capacity;

a) Temperature

of the output and, if necessary, below the core );

( superficial shell in the

b) The temperature of the characteristic point of the furnace and where provided, those of the material and the other temperatures which are in any case necessary for verification of the thermic cycle as function of time; c) The consumptions for normal cycle and those for unit of the material produced; d) If provided, the data indicated at (a), (b) and (c) of 9.2.2 and that may be necessary for the technological verification of the furnace. 9.3 Tests for Energy Sources

b) Technological and c) Quality ( classification etc >; and d) Various

properties of the product; uniformity of the product rejection, in selection, ( oxidation, etc ).

propertics

9.6 Test Procedure The inspection test shall be c:lrried out under the direction and responsibility of the supplier in the presence of the purchaser. If provided in the contract, the supplier shall atso carrv out the inspection under the direction of the inspection agency. 9.7 Inspection Report

It is necessary to check and verify the characterFollowing istics of the energy sources used, parameters shall be checked. 3

A report shall be pr,eparcd for all the tests carried out. The results of the inspection and comparison with the contract spccifiu:ltions shall be given in the :epo .t. The report shall bc countersigned by botll the p::t tics/rep:escntativc of inspection agency.

IS 12826(Part3): 1990

10 ACCEPTANCE 10.1Acceptance Tests
The acceptance tests shall be carried out on the complete and working furnace and can be identified fully or partly with the inspection tests. 10.1.1 If acceptance tests, separate from inspections tests are provided these shall be specified in the contract which should indicate the time schedule for carrying out the acceptante tests after the inspection tests. 10.1.2 The acceptan:: test3 shall b: carried

out with the same methods tests.

as the inspection

`OS2 Aim Of Acceptance Tests The characteristics of the furnace specified in the contract shall b:: verified. Gznerally these are the same as indicated in 9.2. 10.3 Documents The acceptance of furnace shall be indicated in a written declarations issued by the purchaser on the applicable of th: supplier cz;tifying thst the tests were satisf%tory.

ANNEX A ( Clause 5.2 )
OBLIGATIONS OF THE SUPPLIER A-l When the construction is done by the purchaser, the supplier is responsible for the project and assume also the responsibility for the execution, assembly, quality and endurance of the materials supplied and those prescribed and acquired as per these specifications provided the suppliers instructions for doing the assembly work are observed and the supplier supervises as per contract the construction ao.d starting of the furnace employing his expertise for this During the course of execution of the purpose. work the supplier has the right to suggest some alternations and variations to the project which constitute improvements. A-2 If the construction is the responsibility of the supplier any changes to the programme should be agreed to in advance between the parties. A-2.1 The contract includes the services of the experts connected with the assembly, the furnace and insulation for utilizing the materials constituting the walls and the insulation for protection, unless these are specifically excluded from the contract. A-2.2 As a rule, the service of technicians is also included for the supervision and direction of the assembly work, for m:tking ready the installation or plant and for thz assistance starting trials and inspection tests. to the

A-2.3 It mzy also be agreed to take the services of the personnel of the supplier for instructing the personnel of the purchaser for a determined period. A-3 Whenever the supplier provides the supply and execution of the refractory linings clearly specified in the order, the purchaser can ask him to contact the company which has been entrusted with the construction of the supporting structures. A-3.1 The purchaser can ask the supplier to send the drawings of the lining that are required for the maintenance and the first acceptance procedure. A-4 In the case of complete supply the supplier shall be fully and exclusively responsible for all that is required for the construction, the lining and the finishing of the furnace ready for the purpose and not specifically stipulated in the contract as falling within the responsibility of the purchaser. A-5 The supplier shall constantly keep the purchaser informed of the name of the site manager responsible for the work.

IS 12826 ( Part 3 ) :,1990

ANNEX [ Chm
DIMENSIONAL B-l DIMENSION OF THE FOUNDATIONS AND METALLIC STRUCTURES REINFORCED CONCRETE, ETC D-l.1 Tolerences, to be indicated on drawings, can be provided particularly in cases where the structures are supplied by a third party and specially for the support plane levels for which, negative tolerances are required in general, ( planes lower than the nominal level ). B-2 DIMENSIONS AND PASSAG!S AND FLUIDS B-2.1 If it the project tolerances be agreed section ). OF THE LABORATORIES OF THE MATEKdALS

B ]

9.1.1 (a)

TOLERANCES agreement ( transverse dimensions and straightness of the axis of tunnel type furnaces ). B-3 THICKNESS, OF REFRACTORY COMMON WALLS AND INSULATIONS B-3.1 Wails AND

Unless otherwise agreed upon, the wall shall have the nominal struc:ure as per the design ( number of heads, nominal dimensions of the bricks ) and the tolerances resulting from the sum of the tolerances on the joints and bricks are applicable. B-3.2 Insulalion upon only dimensions positive shall be

is very essential not to fall short of ( design ) dimensions, only positive shall be allowed within the limits to upon ( furnace with chamber, pipe

Unless otherwise agreed tolerances on the design allowed. B-4 MECHANICAL

B-2.2 If the mating of the outline of the hearth with that of the charge is decisive, either plus, or plus-minus tolerances can be provided as per

TESTS

B-4.1 Unless otherwise agreed upon the tolerances given in the design shall be applicable.

Standard Mark
Standards Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the proto ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

