**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13819 (1993): Articifial insemination guns [FAD 5: 
Livestock Feeds^ Equipment and Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS13&I9:T^93 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 

c 

Indian Standard 

ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION GUNS — 
SPECIFICATION 



UDC 636082-453-5 



® BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

August \99l Price GroDp 2 



Animal Reproduction Equipment and System Sectional Committee, FADC 41 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Animal Reproduction Equipment and Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Food and Agricuhure Division Council. 

Artificial insemination using frozen semen technology for genetic improvement of livestock 
population at a faster rate is being practised in the country. The artificial insemination guns are 
being widely used to inseminate the breedable animals with frozen semen. 

For the purpose of [deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be 
rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )\ 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded oflf value should be the same as that of 
the specified value in this standard. 



IS 13819*: 1993 



Indian Standard 



ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION GUNS - 
SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

This standard prescribes the material, dimensions 
and other requirements for artificial insemina- 
tion guns for inseminating semen. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard: 

IS No. Title 

1570 Schedule of wrought steels: 

( Part 5 ) : 1985 Part 5 Stainless and heat 
resisting steels ( second 
revision ) 

7328 : 1974 High density polyethylene 

materials for moulding and 
extrusion 

11800 : 1986 Artificial vagina for bovines 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3,1 For the purpose of this standard, the follow- 
ing definitions shall apply. 

3.1.1 Anterior End 

The end of the gun which is carried inside the 
genital organ. 

3.1.2 Posterior End 

The thicker end carrying plunger for the insemi- 
nation gun, 

3.L3 Barrel 

The hollow tubular structure for easy passage 
of the plunger and also for providing support to 
the straw. 

3.1.4 Lumen 

The hollow tubular hole of the barrel for 
artificial insemination gun. 

3.1.5 Plunger 

It works as a piston for pushing the factory 
plug of straw forward during insemination. 

3.1.6 Piston Type Plunger 

The plunger which pushes the sealing ball of 
open end type straw during insemination. 



3.1.7 RingI Adopter 

It tightens and holds the sheath over the insemi- 
nation gun. 

NOTE — The terms defined above are primarily 
related to guns for medium and mini types except 3*3 
in which case the word ring is used for medium and 
mini types of guns and adopter for open end type of 
guns. 

4 TYPES 

The insemination guns shall be of the following 
types: 

Type I Medium 

Type II Mini 

Type III Open end 

5 MATERIAL 

The barrel and plunger of the insemination gunis 
shall be made of stainless steel conforming to 
grade 04 Cr 19 Ni 9 of IS 1570 ( Part 5 ) : 1985. 
The ring adopter shall be made of plastic ( see 
IS 7328 : 1974) or tefflon. 

6 DIMENSIONS 

The dimensions of the medium, mini and open 
end insemination guns shall be as given in 
Fig. 1 and Fig. 3 respectively. The inner 
diameter of the Type I and Type II guns shall 
be 2*6 mm and 1*6 mm respectively. 

7 OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

7.1 The posterior end of the barrel shall be in 
the form of a ring. The posterior end of the 
plunger shall be attached with a disc for better 
grip during insemination. 

7.2 The plunger shall have the desired flexibility 
without changing its shape during operation. 

7.3 Artificial insemination guns shall withstand 
temperature of 115°C for 30 minutes. 

7.4 There ishall not be any rust formation on 
the artificial insemination guns and shall be free 
from corrosion. 

7.5 The assembly shall be such that the plunger 
is completely removable from the barrel. 

7.6 The finish of the gun shall be smooth and 
free from surface defects such as pits and cuts 
visible to the naked eye. 



1 



3S> 




Cfi 









BARREL 



2-5. 



At 



^^8^' 



2-5 



PLUNGER 
All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Medium Type Gun 



IS 13819 : 1993 




PLUNGER 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 2 Mini Type Gun 



8 TESTS 

8.1 Thermal Shock Test 

The barrel and the plunger together with 
permanently attached fittings, if any, shall be 
kept at room temperature and suddenly plunged 
in boiling water for not less than 30 seconds, 
following which they shall be removed and 
rapidly immersed in water at 20°C. No 
fracture shall occur, 

3.2 Corrosion Test 

The removable parts shall be taken apart from' 
the gun and the dismantled gun shall be sub- 
jected successively to the following treatments: 

a) Autoclaved in steam at IIS^C for half an 
hour, 

b) Immersed in boiling distilled water for 
half an hour, and 

c) Immersed in boiling 0'9 percent saline 
solution in distilled water. 

No part of the gun shall show signs of rusting 
after the above treatments. The gun shall 
function satisfactorily when re-assembled at 
room temperature. 



9 PACKING 

The artificial insemination guns shall be packed 
as agreed to between the purchaser and the 
supplier. 

10 MARKING 

Ea^h pack of artificial insemination gun shall be 
marked legibly and indelibly with the following 
information: 

a) Name of the material, 

b) Indication of the source of manufacture, 

c) Type, and 

d) Batch or code number. 

11 SAMPLING 

For the purpose of ascertaining the conformity 
of the artificial insemination guns in a consign- 
ment to the requirements of this standard, the 
scale of sampling and criteria for conformity 
shall be as prescribed in Annex A of 
IS 11800 : 1986. 



IS 13819 : 1993 



-N- 



115^-05 



Ar 



475 t -5 



tt 



-V 



2-5 



N 




ADAPTER 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig, 3 Open End Type Gun 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
prodmcts covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



