IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010

Hkkjrh; ekud

m�ke �f"k O;ogkj jhfr;ksa dh vis{kk,� -- HkkjrxSi
Hkkx
1

Qly vk/kkfjr

Indian Standard REQUIREMENTS FOR GOOD AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES -- IndiaGAP
PART 1 CROP BASE

ICS 65.020.01

� BIS 2010

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

October 2010

Price Group 10

Agricultural Systems and Management Sectional Committee, FAD 22

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 1) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Agricultural Systems and Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. Considerable milestones have been reached in productivity of farm produce in the country. Concerns about food safety and quality, environmental protection, worker safety and welfare have also gained importance. Thus, it is desirable to set up control and compliance systems for various kinds of farm produce covering horticulture, floriculture, food grains, aquaculture, livestock, poultry, etc. In this context, it is necessary to pay attention to the quality of production practices requiring minute attention at different aspects of production, storage, handling and distribution. There are different systems and standards available for control measures for processing of food meant for human consumption and feeds for animals producing food for human consumption. The areas where appropriate control measures need to be strengthened are farms producing raw material such as food grains, fruits and vegetables, floriculture produce, aquaculture produce, livestock products, etc, to ensure sustained supply of produce of the desirable quality. Although grade standards on size, shape, colour and local preferences are available for most of the agricultural produce marketed and consumed in India, their quality in terms of maturity standards, residues of pesticides and other contaminants, microbial loads, etc, have not been adequately covered. Good agricultural practices (GAP) have a bearing on these parameters. In other words, a farm producing raw material for direct consumption or for further processing and following GAP would have an advantage in terms of safety and quality over the other farms. Thus, these practices would add value to the produce. In India, agricultural practices are highly localized occupations and display a lot of variability in cultural practices and varietal preferences across regions. Further, with the opening up of the world market, there is a flow of trade in the agricultural products. It is, therefore, necessary to define and assign certain common minimum standards to facilitate trade in these products and to win the confidence of the consumers within the country and outside. Such standards envisaging focused approach for implementing good agricultural practices, traceability, etc, through appropriate infrastructure, record keeping and monitoring would reap following broad benefits: a) b) c) d) Development of basic infrastructure at the field level; Build up culture for good agricultural practices by the farmers; Uniform approach across farms regardless of their sizes; Increased awareness among the farmers as well as the consumers about the need for consumption of good quality and safe food; e) Traceability through complete integration of food chain; f) Improvement in the environment as well as soil fertility; g) Worker safety and welfare; h) Reputation in the international market as a producer of good quality and safe produce; and j) Over coming the Technical Barriers to Trade (TBTs). With this in view this standard has been formulated to standardize crop based agricultural practices in India keeping in mind the best of international practices and suiting the needs of the Indian farmer. Keeping global trade of agricultural produce in perspective the control points in this standard have been aligned with GlobalGAP but the compliance criteria are based on Indian practices. It has been designed in a manner that facilitates benchmarking with similar documents at international level, if the need arises to give it an international dimension. (Continued on third cover)

(Continued from second cover) This standard is first in a series of Indian Standards on good agricultural practices to be developed. The other parts would cover livestock based and aquaculture based good agricultural practices. This standard takes into account not only the quality and safety of the crop obtained from an unit area but also the care and attention gone into integrating pre-harvest practices like soil and water management, nutrient management and pest management, harvesting, post-harvest handling, packaging, storage and other logistics. The objective is to ensure food safety, occupational health/safety/welfare, and wherever possible animal welfare. The entire operation is also intended to make farming practices environment friendly. In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from the draft document prepared by Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA).
NOTE -- The standards given in Annex B may be read to facilitate the implementation of this standard and are for guidance purpose only.

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010

Indian Standard REQUIREMENTS FOR GOOD AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES -- IndiaGAP
PART 1 CROP BASE
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part 1) covers the control points and compliance criteria necessary to be followed by the producers (individual growers and/or members of a grower group) of crops. 1.2 This standard covers the following products in fresh form for direct human consumption or for further processing or for feed for animals producing food for human consumption: a) b) c) d) e) Fruits and vegetables; Food grains; Plantation crops; Spices and condiments; and Oilseeds and nuts. 3.4 Hazard -- A biological, chemical, physical agent in, or condition of, food with the potential to cause an adverse health effect. 3.5 Individual Grower -- A person/organization legally responsible for on farm production, who retains ownership of all the produce covered in the IndiaGAP licence. 3.6 Inspection -- An examination of all agricultural practices in order to verify compliance to requirements specified in this standard. 3.7 Water, Irrigation -- Water which is artificially applied in the process of irrigation. It does not include precipitation. 3.8 Water, Potable -- Water which does not contain objectionable pollution, contamination, minerals, or infection, and is considered satisfactory for domestic consumption. 3.9 Produce -- The material recovered from harvesting of a crop. 3.10 Product -- Processed and value added produce. 3.11 Record -- Document showing objective evidence of the tasks performed and results achieved. 3.12 Self-Inspection -- Internal inspection of the registered product crop carried out by the grower on his/her farm using control points and compliance criteria. 3.13 Traceability -- The ability to trace the history, use or location of a product (that is, the origin of materials and parts, processes applied to the product, or its distribution and placement after delivery) by means of a record. 3.14 Worker -- Any person on the farm that has been contracted to carry out a task. This includes farm owners and managers. 3.15 Inorganic Fertilizer -- Commercial chemical fertilizer. 3.16 Grower Group -- A recognized group of growers applying for certification with an internal procedure and internal control of all the members registered to the IndiaGAP requirements, which and complying the requirements as specified in this standard. 1

2 REFERENCES The following standards contain provisions, which through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standard indicated below: IS No. 11624 : 1986 IS/ISO/IEC 17025 : 2005 Title Guidelines for the quality of irrigation water General requirements for the competence of testing and calibration laboratories (first revision)

3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 3.1 Good Agricultural Practices -- Practices that address environmental, economic and social sustainability for on-farm processes, and result in safe and quality food and non-food agricultural products. 3.2 Applicant Grower/Grower Group -- Individual/ organization that has applied for certification to IndiaGAP certification body. 3.3 Pesticide -- Plant protection products such as insecticides, fungicides, weedicides, etc.

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 3.17 Field -- Separate unit of land within a farm. 3.18 Farm -- A farm is an agricultural production unit or group of agricultural production units; covered by same operational procedures, farm management. 3.19 Environment -- Surroundings in which an activity takes place including air, water, land, natural resources, flora, fauna, humans, and their interrelation. 3.20 Customer -- A customer is anyone who purchases products or services from a supplier. 3.21 Crop Rotation -- The practice of growing different crops in succession on the same land according to pre-defined plan. 3.22 Certification -- All actions leading to the issuance of an IndiaGAP licence. 3.23 Crop -- Plants cultivated or organisms grown and/or harvested for economic purpose. 4 CONTROL POINTS AND COMPLIANCE CRITERIA 4.1 Control points and compliance criteria required to be followed by the applicant producer (individual grower and/or member of a grower group) as well as by the certification body for independent verification of the agricultural practices that have gone into the production of the produce are given in Annex A. In addition, the applicant producer (individual grower and/or member of a grower group) shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable statutory and regulatory requirements. 4.2 These criteria are marked as `Major' or `Minor' or `Reco'. The criteria marked as `Major' have a definite effect on the safety and quality of the produce and shall, therefore, be complied with, or shall give adequate assurance about the safety and quality of the produce. The criteria marked as `Minor', though have a bearing on quality, are those which, if implemented, would provide an advantage to the assessment for IndiaGAP certification. The criteria marked as `Reco', are those, which though may not have direct bearing on safety and quality of produce but may have other benefits to the producer and are recommended for implementation and are advisory in nature. 4.3 For the purpose of verification, a graded pattern given below shall be followed for grant of IndiaGAP licence:

Category of Licence (1) IndiaGAP-A IndiaGAP-B IndiaGAP-C

Compliance of Major Requirements in Percent (2) 100 100 100

Compliance of Minor Requirements in Percent (3) 90 80 75

5 BIS INDIAGAP CERTIFICATION BIS IndiaGAP certification shall be as prescribed under the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and Rules and Regulations framed thereunder. The details of the conditions under which the licence may be granted to producer (individual grower and/or member of a grower group) may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

2

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010

ANNEX A (Clause 4.1)
CONTROL POINTS AND COMPLIANCE CRITERIA Clause No. A-1 Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria

A-1.1

SITE RECORD AND TRACEABILITY Traceability facilitates the withdrawal of foods and enables customers to be provided with targeted and accurate information concerning implicated products. Major IndiaGAP registered Verify that each registered grower, Identification and produce shall be traceable society, farm and produce has been Traceability back to and trackable given a Code No. and a package of from the registered farm practice to be followed for accurate (and other relevant trace-back of the produce. registered areas) where it Verify that there is a documented has been grown. identification and traceability system that allows IndiaGAP registered product to be traced back to the registered farm or, in a farmer group, to the registered farms of the group, and tracked forward to the immediate customer. Harvest information shall link a batch to the production records or the farms of specific producers. Produce handling shall also be covered, if applicable.
NOTE -- This clause covers traceability system of the product grown on the farm to and back to the immediate customer. The first traceability starts with the registration/identification number given to the farm. Next traceability is plot and batch identification.

A-1.2

Farm Location

A-1.3

Farm Layout

Minor Survey No./Part-Survey No., village, tehsil district, state where the farm is located along with total area under cultivation and the area under IndiaGAP certification shall be specified. Minor Fields/plots and structures shall be identified on the layout map of the farm.

Verify that complete identity of the area of production has been recorded including the area under certification and total area of the farm.

A-1.4

Vicinity of Production Major Location of the field with special reference to Area to Potential Risk vicinity to brick kilns, Source chemical or other industries, rivers, canals, other water sources, hill rocks, forests, pastures and reclaimed land shall be specified and measures shall be in place to check contamination.

Verify that there is a layout map displayed on the farm with identified fields/plots, storage and other utility structures. Examine the vicinity to find out the micro-climate of the area, which affects the productivity, safety and quality of the agricultural produce and verify measures taken to minimize contamination.

3

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. A-2 Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria

A-2.1

A-2.2

A-3 A-3.1

A-3.2

A-3.3

A-3.4

A-3.5

A-3.6

LAND AND SOIL MANAGEMENT Soil is the basis of all agricultural production, and the conversation and improvement of this valuable resource is essential. Good soil husbandry ensures long-term fertility of soil, aids yield and profitability. Land Capability Reco The land should be Verify that class of land has been classified based on decided based on prevailing land Classification and topography, texture and capability classification systems of the Soil Mapping structure of soil, gradient, appropriate authority. Verify that the surroundings, etc. type of soil is identified for each site Soil maps should be based on a soil profile or soil analysis or local (regional) cartographic soil prepared for the farm. type map. Minor Soil health shall be deter- Verify that the soil is ideally suited Soil Health mined based on physical, for the crop, based on soil reaction chemical composition and (E.C., pH), soil nutrient status, etc. soil profile observation. Refer soil analysis reports. GROWER RECORD Important details of farming practices should be recorded and records kept. Reco Records relevant for the Verify, if the production activities are Type of Farming type of farming, that is taken up on co-operative basis or as a cooperative, contract, lease tenant or self-cultivation or on contract farming, individual farmer, basis or by a public/Governmental group farming activity, agency. Verify relevant records. public/Governmental agencies should be maintained. Minor Grower's accomplishment Verify that farmer or the person Capability in farming, technical responsible for managing the farm is background in crop well versed in crop production production, the skills through formal education or acquired and knowledge experience. Verify, if the farmer is support available shall be getting technical know-how from Government or any other competent documented. organization or individuals. Minor The cropping systems and Verify that cropping systems and Cropping Plans farming systems shall be farming systems (crop rotation, inter correctly planned, evalu- cropping, mixed cropping, etc) are ated and documented, for correctly planned and properly the next 18 months. documented and evaluated for potential hazards. Major Records on crop Verify that farm records and Maintenance of production, sequence crop- cultivation sheets are maintained for Records ping, crop rotations, crop- the crop under evaluation for the ping systems shall be current and previous growing seasons maintained for the cropped in the corresponding field for a minimum period of six months for area under evaluation. new applicants. Cropping pattern of particular farms and crop history of particular plots are needed. Minor All records requested Verify that the producers keep up to Retention Period of during the inspection shall date records for a minimum of two Records be accessible and shall be years from the date of first inspection, kept for a minimum period unless legally required to do so for a of two years, unless a longer period. longer period is stated in specific requirement. Major The farmer/society/co- Verify that self-evaluation based on Internal Evaluation 4

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. Item IndiaGAP Requirements operative body shall undertake internal selfinspection on scheduling of crop production practices and shall exercise necessary supervision in their adoption. Major Effective corrective actions shall be taken as a result of internal selfinspections. Level Compliance Criteria applicable criteria is conducted annually or seasonally during crop cycle/pruning cycle.

A-3.7

Corrective Actions

Verify, validate, implement and check documentation of all corrective actions.

A-4

A-4.1 A-4.1.1

A-4.1.2

A-4.1.3

SEEDS AND PLANTING MATERIALS The choice of seeds and planting material plays an important role in the production process and by using the correct varieties can help reduce the number of fertilizer and plant protection product applications. The choice of seeds and planting material is a pre condition of good plant growth and product quality. Seeds Type of Seeds Used Major Varieties of seeds Verify that strains, varieties, released recommended by the State by the SAUs/NRCs/other Government Agriculture Universities organizations/Government approved (SAUs)/National Research organizations or hybrid seeds by registered seed Centres (NRCs)/other produced Government organizations/ companies in India are used. If GM Government approved seeds are used, necessary GEAC, organizations shall be used. approval to be verified. Necessary If hybrid seeds are used the documentation shall be preserved for brand name and if the specified period. Genetically Modified (GM) crops are used, the Genetic Engineering Approval Committee (GEAC) number, permitting its usage, along with evidence of the source of the seeds shall be recorded. Quality of Seeds Minor The seeds shall have any Verify claim on seed packet, special quality with regarding freedom from and/or reference to freedom from resistance/tolerance to known pests and/or resistance/tolerance and diseases endemic to the area. to pests/diseases, nutritional Verify, if any special / biochemical quality of the nutritional/biochemical qualities are produce, germination rate, ascribed to the produce. Necessary expiry date, physical or any documentation shall be maintained to verify any claim. other characteristics. Seed Treatment Major The seeds, if so, shall be Verify, if treated seeds are supplied treated with approved by the seed company or the grower fungicides/pesticides. himself undertook the treatment. Treated seeds shall be Verify the records for information on properly identified to avoid seed treatment, chemicals used and accidental use in feed or adequacy of time lag between food. Hazardous chemicals treatment and sowing. Verify that carrying residues to the treated seeds are properly identified to produce shall not be used avoid accidental use in feed or food. for seed treatment. In case, colour coating is used for such identification of treated seeds, verify that only approved colours/dyes

5

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria and chemical/physical agents have been used. Verify, if the plantation in the case of crops is grown from seedlings or vegetatively propagated material for stability in the quality of the produce. Necessary documentation shall be maintained to verify the source and the claim.

A-4.2 A-4.2.1

A-4.2.2

A-4.2.3

A-4.2.4

A-4.2.5

A-4.2.6

Planting Material Planting Material Used Major The seedlings, saplings, in the Crops graft buds and cuttings shall be procured from an approved source. If they have any special quality with reference to freedom from and/or resistance/ tolerance to pests/diseases, nutritional/biochemical quality of the produce, physical or any other characteristics, necessary documentation shall be available to verify the claim. Quality of the Scion Minor The grower shall be aware Material Used for of the scion used and its Grafting/Budding source and qualities and about its susceptibility to pests and diseases. Quality of the Clones Minor The grower shall be aware Used or Hybrid of the clones or hybrid Combination combinations from which the scion material is obtained for propagation and its merits, if any. Quality of Rootstock Major The rootstock recomUsed mended by SAUs/NRCs/ other Government organizations/ Government approved organizations shall be used for propagation and it shall be appropriate for the situation and the quality of the produce desired. Rootstock Production Minor The rootstock material shall propagated by be recommended technology of SAUs / NRCs / other Government organizations/ Government approved organizations. Rootstock Treatment Minor The use of seed/annual Records rootstocks treatments shall be recorded.

Verify that the scion material is obtained from a recognized/reliable pedigree orchard or source.

In the case of clonal propagation, record shall be available. If the scion is of hybrid origin, it shall be a decedent of the original hybrid source.

Verify that the rootstock employed is a recommended one for the tract. Necessary documentation shall be maintained to verify the claim.

For uniformity in quality, verify if the rootstock is propagated vegetatively. In case it is sexually propagated see for variability in the quality of the produce.

When the seed or annual rootstock has been treated by the producer, verify that there are records with the name of the product(s) used and its target(s) (pests and/or diseases). If the seed has been treated for preservation purposes by the supplier, evidence of the chemicals used shall be kept (maintaining records/seed packages, etc).

6

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. A-5 A-5.1 Item NURSERY Nursery Preparation Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria Verify for quality control systems, namely, raised seedbeds, soil solarization, application of insecticides, drenching soil surface with fungicides, etc. Necessary documentation shall be maintained to verify the claim.

A-5.2

Nursery Protection

A-5.3

GM Crops

A-5.4

A-6 A-6.1

A-6.2

Verify that the suggestions of GEAC are carried out in letter and spirit right from the nursery stage. Necessary documentation shall be maintained to verify the claim. Verify the records for appropriate age Scion-Stock and growth of stock and scion used Compatibility and the percentage graft taken in the nursery and visible compatibility. Verify that the scion-stock is compatible and the trees are vigorous and productive. GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS (GMO) NOT APPLICABLE IF NO GENETICALLY MODIFIED VARIETIES ARE USED Legal Compliance of Major The planting of or trial Verify that the registered farm or with GMOs shall comply group of registered farms have a copy GMOs with all applicable of the legislation applicable in the legislation in the country country of production and comply of production. accordingly. Records shall be kept of the specific modification and/or the unique identifier. Specific husbandry and management advice shall be obtained. Minor Documentation shall be If GMO cultivars and/or products Documentation of available when the derived from genetic modification are GMOs producer is growing used, verify that documented records genetically modified of planting, use or production of GMO organisms. cultivars and/or products derived from genetic modification are available.

Minor The recommended technology both in primary and secondary nursery, as applicable, shall be followed in raising the seedlings in the open or under protected conditions. The source of technology shall be documented. Minor The preventive measures shall be taken against pests and diseases. Crop protection treatments applied in the nursery or during plant propagation shall be recorded. A record of approved products and treatment methodology used during seedling growth in the nursery, shall be maintained. Major Adequate precautions shall be taken in the propagation of GM crops as suggested by the GEAC. Reco The selection of root stock and scion should be appropriate and graft should be compatible.

Verify that the planting material is protected against pests and diseases in the nursery before release. Necessary documentation shall be maintained to verify the claim.

7

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. A-6.3 Item Communication of GMOs Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria Documented evidence communication shall be provided. of

A-6.4

Handling Plan for GMOs

A-6.5

Segregation of GMO Crops

Major The producer shall inform their direct clients of the GMO status of the product. Major There shall be a plan for handling GM material (crops and trials) setting out strategies to minimize contamination risks, such as accidental mixing of adjacent non-GM crops and maintaining product integrity. Major GMO crops shall be stored separately from other crops to avoid adventitious mixing.

There shall be a written plan that explains how GM material (crops and trials) are handled and stored to minimize risk of contamination with conventional material.

Visual assessment shall be made of genetically modified (GMO) crops storage for integrity and identification.

A-7 A-7.1

CULTURAL PRACTICES Soil Preparation Reco The preparation of the soil for growing crop should be according to norms set out by the NRCs/SAUs/other Government organizations/ Government approved organizations or as per the standard practices. Reco Techniques that improve or maintain soil structure, soil solarization and avoid soil compaction and erosion should be used. Verify that the soil can be brought to good tilth and the planting and cultivation of crops is across the slope and along the contour and the soil depth is adequate to hold the root system of crops.

A-7.2

Soil Maintenance

A-7.3

Weeding

Major For weed control, approved weedicides or mechanical appliances shall be used or weeds shall be removed manually. Records of practices adopted for adequate weed control shall be maintained.

A-7.4

Field Cultivation

Reco Field cultivation techniques to reduce the possibility of soil erosion should be used.

Techniques applied should be appropriate for the land. Verify the inter-cultural practices followed and the interval between each to ensure sufficient soil aeration and avoid compaction of topsoil and erosion. Verify that the interspaces are free from weeds and signs of soil compaction. Verify, if any pre-emergent and postemergent weedicides are applied. Verify, if bullock drawn or mechanical weeders or human labour is used for weeding. Verify that the interspaces are free from weed and soil compaction. Verify records of practices adopted for adequate weed control. Only optimum/recommended doses and spray schedule of recommended weedicides shall be adopted. Verify that there is visual evidence of practices such as mulching and/or cross line techniques on slopes and/or drains and/or sowing grass or green fertilizers, trees and bushes on borders of sites, etc, for preventing soil erosion.

8

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. A-8 A-8.1 Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria Verify that the sowing of seeds or seedling planting is as per recommendations made by competent organization or NRCs/SAUs. Records of sowing/planting method, rate and date shall be kept and be available.

A-8.2

A-8.3

SOWING/PLANTING/TRANSPLANTING Method of Crop Minor The sowing of seeds or seedling planting shall be Planting as per recommendations to avoid soiling of the produce, to have better photosynthesis, to reduce soil erosion and to maintain appropriate level of moisture. The producer shall keep records on sowing/planting methods, sowing planting rate, sowing planting date. Plant Density/Plant Reco The plant density/plant population should be adePopulation quate as per the recommendations of SAUs/NRCs/ other Govern-ment organizations/ Government approved organizations. Facilitation of Inter- Reco Inter-cultural operations should be carried out cultural Operations effectively.

Verify that density/plant maintained.

recommended population

plant is

A-9 A-9.1 A-9.1.1

A-9.1.2

A-9.1.3

A-9.1.4

Verify that planting method facilitates intercultural operations in the rows to put down weed growth and farming soil mulch and aerating the root system. PLANT NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT/FERTILIZER USE Organic Manures Method of Organic Minor Methods of organic Verify that recommended methods of Manure Preparation manure preparation re- composting are followed for reducing commended by SAUs/ the contamination of toxic material NRCs/other Government (plastic, chemicals, etc). Verify that organizations/Government the nutrient content is as per approved organizations guidelines given by the national bioshall be followed. fertilizer production centres/ Fertilizer Control Order (FCO). (Verify the analysis report). Soil Enrichment Minor The soils shall be enriched Verify that farmyard manure/comwith adequate organic post/shed/poultry manures are friable matter. The organic and fully decomposed. Usage of cow manure shall be of desired urine as manure is allowed. Verify quality. that sheep and poultry manure if being used are adequately decomposed and are devoid of harmful microorganisms. (Verify the analysis report). Nutrient in Organic Reco The nutrient contribution An analysis report shall be available, Fertilizer of organic fertilizer which takes into account the contents applications should be of N.P.K. nutrients in organic taken into account. fertilizer applied. Green Manures Reco The green manures should Verify soil analysis data to see that be incorporated into the these manures release weak acids and soil to improve soil health. the available acid-soluble nutrients to the crop and maintain crop health.

9

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. A-9.1.5 Item Bio-fertilizers Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria

A-9.1.6

Minor Bio-fertilizers approved Verify that the applications of bioby technically competent fertilizers (microbial) are in the source shall be applied to recommended list and they have the crop. positive effect on the soil fertility status and up take of nutrients. Ban on Human Sewage Major The use of human sewage Verify that no human sewage sludge Sludge sludge shall be banned on is used on the farm. the farm. Ban on Raw Municipal/ Major The use of raw municipal/ Industrial Sludge industrial sludge shall be banned on the farm. Others Minor Any other organic manure added to the soil shall be decomposed and free from raw material. Inorganic Fertilizers/Nutrients Balanced Use of Major The doses shall be in tune Nutrients with the soil test crop response studies and/ recommendations of SAUs/ NRCs/other Government organizations/ Government approved organizations for the crop. The fertilizers shall contain desirable/ approved proportion of major plant nutrients nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium. Micro-nutrients Major The crop requirement of micro-nutrients shall be adequately provided. Compounds being used for micro-nutrients shall contain heavy metals under permissible limit. Application of Minor The major/minor nutrients Nutrients shall be applied through recommended placement practices at appropriate stages of crop growth. Foliar sprays of nutrients shall be done as per standard recommendations. Verify that raw municipal/industrial sludge is not used on the farm. Verify that any organic matter used is well decomposed and free from bad odour and raw materials.

A-9.1.7

A-9.1.8

A-9.2 A-9.2.1

Verify the soil test reports, verify that the proportion and quantity of major nutrients applied are adequate for the size of the crop expected, based on soil fertility status and crop response.

A-9.2.2

Verify the soil test reports/leaf test reports/water test reports and verify that the micro-nutrient requirement of the crop is met with, based on symptomatic study and quality of the produce.

A-9.2.3

A-9.2.4

A-9.2.5

Verify that the fertilizers were placed at appropriate depth in the soil for easy access to root system. If they are applied through fertigation verify that the fertilizers are soluble and are of accepted quality. Records shall be available that producer has given consideration to nutritional needs of the crop, soil fertility and residual nutrients on the farm. Competence of the Reco The grower should Verify documentation demonstrating Grower demonstrate her/his awareness of the grower in competence to determine fertilizer/nutrient management. the type and quantity of fertilizers/nutrients being used and its application. Record of Applications Minor All applications of soil Verify the time and stage of and foliar fertilizers, both application of fertilizers with inorganic, organic and reference to crop growth and

10

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. Item IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria bio-fertilizers shall be development. Record of applications recorded. demonstrating field, orchard, greenhouse reference, dates of application, applied fertilizer types, applied quantities and method of application shall be available for inspection. Minor Fertilizer application Verify maintenance and calibration machinery/equipment shall records of fertilizer application be kept in a condition equipment. recommended by the supplier. Minor Pesticides, organic, bio and inorganic fertilizers shall be stored separately with proper identification and security. Inspect to verify that different fertilizers are stored at appropriate places of storage to avoid crosscontamination or contamination of surroundings and farm produce.
NOTE -- The minimum requirement is to prevent cross contamination between fertilizers and plant protection products by the use of a physical barrier. If fertilizers that are applied together with Plant Protection Products (that is micro-nutrients or foliar fertilizers) are packed in a sealed container it can be stored with plant protection products.

Level

A-9.2.6

Fertilizer Equipment

A-9.2.7 A-9.2.7.1

Fertilizer Storage Fertilizer storage

A-9.2.7.2

Reduction in risk of Minor Inorganic fertilizers shall contamination of water be stored in an appropriate manner, which reduces the risk of contamination of water courses.

The covered area should be suitable to protect all inorganic fertilizers, that is powders, granules or liquids, from atmospheric influences like sunlight, frost and rain. Based on risk assessment (fertilizer type, weather conditions, temporary storage), plastic coverage could be acceptable. Storage cannot be directly on the soil. It is allowed to store lime and gypsum in the field for a day or two before spreading. Inorganic fertilizers, that is powders, granules or liquids, are stored in an area that is free from waste, does not constitute a breeding place for rodents, and where spillage and leakage is cleared away. The storage area for all inorganic fertilizers, that is powders, granules or liquids, is well ventilated and free from rainwater or heavy condensation. No storage directly on the soil. Verify that all inorganic fertilizers, that is powders, granules or liquids are stored in a manner which poses minimum risk of contamination to water sources, that is liquid fertilizer stores shall be surrounded by an impermeable barrier (according to

11

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria national and local legislation, or to contain a capacity to 110 percent of the volume of the largest container if there is no applicable legislation), and consideration has been given to the proximity to water courses and flood risks, etc. Organic fertilizers, stored on the farm shall be stored in a designated area. Verify that appropriate measures have been taken to prevent contamination of surface water (such as concrete foundation and walls, or specially built leak proof container, etc) or they are stored at least 25 m from surface water bodies in particular. Verify that fertilizers have not been stored with farm produce harvested fresh or dry, as applicable.

A-9.2.7.3

Reduction in risk of contamination of environment

Minor Organic fertilizers shall be stored in an appropriate manner, which reduces the risk of contamination of the environment.

A-9.2.7.4

Segregation from produce

A-9.2.8

Major Inorganic and organic fertilizers shall be stored separate from farm produce harvested fresh or dry, as applicable. Cleaning Agents and Minor All cleaning agents, Lubricants lubricants, other chemicals and spare parts used for fertilizer/nutrient application machinery shall be stored separately and securely. Used items shall be disposed off properly.

Inspect to verify that different cleaning agents, lubricants, other chemicals and spare parts used for fertilizer, nutrient application machinery are stored separately and securely at appropriate places of storage to avoid cross contamination or contamination of surroundings and farm produce. Verify that used cleaning agents, lubricants, other chemicals and spare parts used for fertilizer, nutrient application machinery are disposed off properly to avoid health hazards.

A-10

A-10.1

A-10.2 A-10.2.1

A-10.2.2

IRRIGATION/FERTIGATION Water is a scarce natural resource and irrigation should be triggered by appropriate forecasting and by technical equipment allowing for efficient use of irrigation water. that the prescription Water Requirements Major The water requirements Verify for the crop shall be for irrigation intervals/quantities is worked out scientifically. based on recommendations of SAUs/NRCs/other Government organizations/Government approved organizations or evapo-transpiration studies. Irrigation/Fertigation Method Method of Irrigation/ Minor The producer shall use The idea is to avoid wasting water. Fertigation efficient method of Verify that the irrigation/fertigation irrigation/fertigation. system used is the most efficient available for the crop and accepted as such within good agricultural practice. Water Optimization Reco There should be a water Verify that a documented plan is plan to available which outlines the steps and management optimize water usage and actions to be taken to implement the reduce waste. management plan.

12

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. A-10.2.3 Item Record of Irrigation/ Fertigation Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria

A-10.3 A-10.3.1

A-10.3.2

A-10.3.3

A-10.3.4

A-10.3.5

A-10.4

A-10.5

A-10.6

Minor Records of irrigation/ Verify that records are kept which fertigation water usage indicate the date and volume per shall be maintained. water meter or per irrigation unit. If the producer works with irrigation programmes, the calculated and actual irrigated water shall be written down in the records. Quality of Irrigation Water Quality of Water for Major The water shall be of good Irrigation water shall conform to Irrigation quality, free from excess IS 11624 (Verify the water analysis carbonates, bicarbonates, report). chlorides, etc. Risk Assessment Reco A risk assessment for The risk assessment should consider Against Contamination irrigation/fertigation water potential microbial, chemical or of Irrigation Water pollution should be done. physical pollution of all sources of irrigation/fertigation water. Part of the risk assessment should consider the irrigation method and the crop, frequency of analysis, sources of water, the resources and susceptibility for pollutants and drain water of the sources and the environment. Frequency of Analysis Reco Irrigation water should be Verify that the water analysis is analyzed at a frequency in carried out at a frequency according to line with the risk the results of the risk assessment, assessment. which takes the characteristics of the crop into account. Suitability of Reco The analysis should be Results from appropriate laboratories, Laboratory carried out by a suitable capable of performing microbiological analyses as per the laboratory. requirement of IS/ISO/IEC 17025 level, or equivalent standard, should be available. Action on Adverse Reco Any adverse results Verify that records are available of Results should be acted upon. what actions have been taken and what the results are so far. Minor The source shall be Verify the irrigation water source for Source of Water dependable for assured its sustainability. supply under normal conditions during rain free period. Water Harvesting Reco Rain water harvesting and Verify the water harvesting techniques other water conservation used by the farmer. Verify other water and Conservation techniques should be conservation and application techniques practiced by the farmer. like staggered trenches, contour and leader drains, drip and sprinkler irrigation, etc. used by the farmer. Minor The farmer shall maintain Verify maintenance and flow control Maintenance of irrigation equipment as of irrigation equipment. Irrigation/Fertigation per guidelines provided by Equipment the manufacturer.

13

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. A-10.7 Item Ban on Untreated Sewage Water/ Industrial Waste Water Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria Verify that untreated sewage water/industrial waste water is not used for irrigation/fertigation. Where treated sewage water/industrial waste water is used, verify that water quality complies with the WHO published Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater and Excreta in Agriculture and Aquaculture, 1989. Also, when there is doubt, if water is coming from a possibly polluted source (because of a village upstream, etc) the grower shall demonstrate through analysis that the water complies with the WHO guideline requirements or the local legislation for irrigation water. Verify the analysis report. Inspect to verify that adequate measures such as trenches and bunds are taken to prevent the entry of contaminated water.

Major The use of untreated sewage water/industrial waste water for irrigation/ fertigation shall be banned.

A-10.8

A-11 A-11.1

A-11.2

A-11.3

A-12 A-12.1 A-12.1.1

Prevention of Water Major The farmer shall take adequate measures to from Undesirable prevent flow of water into Sources the fields from undesirable sources like municipal land-fill areas, hospital and industry waste dump areas, etc. DRAINAGE SYSTEM (APPLICABLE IF THERE IS A REQUIREMENT FOR DRAINAGE) Minor Studies on soil permeability Verify the permeability status of the Permeability and and run off of rainwater soil to assess leaching of nutrients or Runoff shall be done for each plot flocculation of soil particles. Verify and the soil flocculation that the soils are appropriate for the studies shall be done. type of irrigation. Minor Facilities for removal of Verify that drainage channels are in Drainage Systems excess water, over possession for taking out storm waters ground or underground and underground drainage channels shall exist. for heavy soils where soil moisture inundation occurs. Reco Facilities to collect Verify that there are adequate Drain Water underground drain water drainage facilities under the soil Collection and into a low-lying pond surface in the case of vegetable crops Analysis should be there. Analysis and subsoil in the case of fruit crops. of drain water should be Verify the efficiency of subsoil carried out periodically drainage. Analyse the drain water for and recorded. the leached nutrients. CROP PROTECTION Pest Control List of Pests/Diseases Major The common pests and Verify the occurrence of the pests and in the Area diseases endemic to the diseases in the area and their Economic area and those that Threshold Level (ETL) based on occurred on the crop SAUs/NRCs/State Departments/other organizations/Governduring the past three crop Government seasons shall be listed out. ment approved organizations.

14

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. A-12.2 Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria

A-12.2.1

A-12.2.1.1

A-12.2.1.2

A-12.2.2

A-12.2.2.1

A-12.2.2.2

Integrated Pest Management (IPM) Integrated Pest Management (IPM) involves the careful consideration of all available pest control techniques and the subsequent integration of appropriate measures that discourage the development of pest populations, and keeps plant protection products and other interventions to levels that are economically justified and reduce or minimize risks to human health and the environment. Preventive IPM Minor The preventive IPM prac- Verify, if the grower is aware of the Measures tices suggested for IPM practices suggested by endemic pests and SAUs/NRCs/State Departments/other diseases shall be followed. Government organizations/ Government approved organizations. If she/he is aware, verify the records for action taken. Soil treatment Minor Soil treatment, suggested Verify that summer ploughing and by SAUs/NRCs/the State destroyal of crop residues are carried Departments/other Govern- out at the appropriate time. Verify that ment organizations/Govern- proper crop rotation as per the prement approved organi- defined plan or any other suggested zations, for endemic pests practices like soil solarization for and diseases shall be nursery beds, use of organic followed. amendments in field, etc, are followed. Cultural practices Minor Appropriate cultural prac- Verify, if recommended intercrops, tices for preventing the catch crops, trap crops, etc, were build up of pests and raised. Verify, if pheromone traps and diseases shall be followed. other suggested preventive measures including crop rotations, ploughing, use of resistant varieties, proper spacing, removal of alternate host, roughing, proper irrigation and nutrient management, etc, were adopted. Verify, if soil biocides were used. IPM Control Practices Major The recommended IPM Verify the records demonstrating that control practices shall be the grower is following the IPM followed. practices suggested by SAUs/NRCs/ State Departments/other Government organizations/ Government approved organizations. Use of mechanical Minor The recommended mecha- Verify, if mechanical collection of big methods nical methods for control larvae, removal of affected plant of pests and diseases shall parts, use of suitable light traps, insect be followed. baits, barrier trenches and visual examination of planting materials for the crop organized. Use of biological Minor The biological methods Verify, if bird perches, use of neem methods and bio control measures based products, predators, parasites, as recommended by the Nuclear Polyhedrosis Virus (NPV) SAUs/NRCs/State Depart- and similar bio-control measures ments/other Government including antagonistic fungi and plant organizations/Government growth promoter regulating subapproved organizations stances (PGPR's) are adopted. shall be followed.

15

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria Verify the record of plant protection chemicals sprayed, their dosage, date and time of application. Verify records pertaining to date of manufacture and expiry for chemicals used and spore load for bio-control agents. Verify that no banned pesticides were used. Verify that preharvest intervals are followed as per label on the chemicals purchased or as recommended by Government owned crop specific NRCs or SAUs/ other Government organizations/Government approved organizations.

A-12.2.2.3 Use of CIB approved Major Chemicals cleared for use chemicals by the Central Insecticides Board or recommended by Government owned crop specific NRCs or SAUs actively involved in these products shall be applied. Specified pre-harvest intervals shall be followed.

A-12.3

A-12.3.1

A-12.3.2

A-12.3.3

A-12.3.4

A-12.3.5

Plant Protection Products In situations where pest attack will adversely affect the economic value of a crop, it may be necessary to intervene with specific pest control methods, including Plant Protection Products (PPP). The correct use, handling and storage of plant protection products are essential. Appropriateness of Minor The plant protection Verify that the chemical applied against Chemical chemical applied shall be target pest/disease is as per the appropriate for the target recommendation of the label/SAUs/ pest/disease. The current NRCs/other Government organizations/ list of approved chemicals Government approved organizations for the crop shall be concerned with the crop. Verify that the available with the grower. current list of approved chemicals for the crop is available with the grower. Awareness of Banned Major The farmer shall be aware Verify that the documented plant Chemicals of the banned chemicals protection product application records and there shall be a confirm that no plant protection process that prevents product that have been used within the chemicals that are banned last 12 months on the crops grown in the target country from under IndiaGAP destined for sale has being used on crops been prohibited by the target country. destined for sale in that country. Appropriate Dosage Major Correct doses shall be Verify the label recommendation for applied at appropriate the product to justify the dosage stage of pest/disease. adopted. Anti-resistance Label Minor Anti-resistance label When the level of a pest, disease or Recommendation recommendations shall be weed requires repeated controls in the followed to maintain the crops, verify that there is evidence that effectiveness of available anti-resistance recommendations plant protection products. (where legal and effective alternatives are available) are followed, if specified by the product label. Label Instructions on Minor When including mixing plant Facilities, appropriate Mixing of Plant protection products, the measuring equipment, shall be Protection Products correct handling and adequate for mixing plant protection filling procedures shall be products, so that the correct handling followed as stated on the and filling procedures, as stated on the label. label, can be followed.

16

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. A-12.3.6 Item Competence Grower of Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria Verify documentation demonstrating awareness of the grower in the application and management of crop protection chemicals.

A-12.3.7

the Minor The grower shall demonstrate competence to determine the type, active ingredient of the pesticide and quantity of crop protection chemicals being used and its application. Method of Application Major Appropriate method and timings of application shall be followed.

A-12.3.8

Pre-harvest Intervals Major The registered pre-harvest (Waiting Period) intervals prescribed by Central Insecticide Board (CIB) or post-harvest intervals approved by relevant Government agencies shall be observed.

A-12.3.9

Record of Applications Major All chemical pesticides applied shall be correctly recorded.

A-12.3.10 Disposal of Surplus Application Mix

Minor Surplus application mix or tank washings shall be disposed of according to national or local law, where it exists.

Verify whether granular applications to soil were made or foliar sprays or dusts applied on the crop. Verify that the method and timings of application is appropriate for the stage of the crop and the target pest/disease against which it was applied. The producer shall demonstrate that all pre-harvest intervals have been observed for plant protection products applied to the crops, through the use of clear documented procedures such as plant protection product application records and crop harvest dates from treated locations. Specifically in continuous harvesting situations, verify that systems are in place in the field, orchard or greenhouse, for example warning signs, time of application, etc, to ensure compliance with all pre-harvest intervals. Verify the record of chemical pesticides applied on the crop, the date of application, mode of application, the location of application, the dose, the application equipment and operator. Verify that surplus application mix or tank washings are disposed of according to the national or local legislation.
NOTE -- This refers to disposal of surplus of any spray material left after use. This clause requires compliance of any national/regional requirements of disposal. In its absence, the material may be disposed by applying over untreated part of the crop subject to not exceeding the recommended dose or to designated fallow land, wherever legally permissible.

A-12.4 A-12.4.1

Application Equipment Equipment Used Major The appropriate equipment shall be used for spraying, dusting, soil application to achieve desired droplet size, uniformity and application rate.

Verify that proper sprayers or applicators are used depending on the stage and size of crop and target pest. Verify that the sprayers and application equipment are properly marked for identification.

17

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. A-12.4.2 Item Condition Equipment of Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria Verify that the nozzles and emitters are in good condition to obtain desired droplet size in spray of the pesticides. Look into the equipment maintenance records and verify its operation in the field. Verify the calibration records.

A-12.4.3

the Major The plant protection equipment used for spraying and dusting crops shall be maintained in good condition and shall be calibrated as per requirements or the manufacturer's guidelines. Spray equipments shall be cleaned before and after application of pesticides. Storage of Crop Reco Crop protection Protection Equipment equipments should be properly stored in secure areas. Plant Protection Product Residue Analysis Residue Analysis Major A residue analysis of the plant protection product on the produce shall be made at the time of harvest. The correct sampling procedures shall be followed.

Verify that the plant protection equipments used for spraying and dusting crops are stored in appropriate and secure condition recommended by the manufacturer. Verify that residue analysis was done on crop samples before harvest, as per the applicable/recommended method of sampling and analysis. The relevant records need to be verified. Verify that documentary evidence exists demonstrating compliance with applicable sampling procedures. Sampling can be carried out by the laboratory approved by National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) or by the grower provided the procedure is adhered to. The producer or the producer's customer shall have available a list of current applicable MRLs for the market(s) where produce is intended to be traded in (whether domestic or international).

A-12.5 A-12.5.1

A-12.5.2

Knowledge of MRL of Target Market

A-12.5.3

Major The producer (or the producer's customer) shall be able to demonstrate information regarding the market where the producer is intending to trade produce, and the Maximum Residue Level (MRL) of that market. Maximum Residue Level Major Action shall be taken to (MRL) meet the MRLs of the market the producer is intending to trade his produce in. In the event of residues exceeding the specified MRL values, a pre-harvest plan shall be in place to control it.

Where the MRLs of the market the producer is intending to trade his produce in are stricter than those of the country of production, verify that the producer or the producer's customer can demonstrate that during the production cycle these MRLs have been taken into account (that is modification where necessary of plant protection product application regime and/or use of produce residue testing results). Look for a documented procedure and planned action to be taken where the residue levels have exceeded the MRL value.

18

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. A-12.5.4 Item Lab Accreditation Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria

A-12.6 A-12.6.1 A-12.6.1.1

A-12.6.1.2

A-12.6.1.3

A-12.6.2 A-12.6.2.1

Major The laboratory conducting Verify that the laboratory is the residue analysis shall accredited/recognized by a national be an accredited one. body for compliance as per IS/ISO/IEC 17025 or equivalent standard covering National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) accreditation for the applicable scope of testing. Verify valid accreditation/recognition certificates. Storage and Handling of Plant Protection Products Storage of Plant Protection Products Storage Major Crop protection products Verify that the crop protection shall be stored as per products are stored separately in a applicable regulations or as well-lit, fire resistant, well-ventilated per labelled instructions. room on non-absorbent shelving in a Only the authorized sound, secure and protected area away competent personnel shall from dwellings, cattle sheds and farm manage the storage areas. produce storage areas and all other biological materials, with appropriate sign boards in appropriate languages. Verify relevant records and labels. Verify that all the plant protection products that are liquid formulations are stored on shelving, which is never above those products that are powder or granular formulations. Inventory records plant protection Verify that a stock inventory which Minor The product inventory shall be indicates the contents (type and documented and shall be quantity) of the store is available and readily available. it is updated at least every 3 months. Quantity refers to how many bags, bottles, etc, not on milligram or centilitre basis. Packaging plant protection Verify that all the plant protection Major All products shall be stored in products that are currently in the store their original package. are kept in the original containers and packs, in the case of breakage only, the new package shall contain all the information of the original label. Handling of Plant Protection Products Handling Major The crop protection Verify that the person handling the products shall be handled plant protection products is trained appropriately and as per and that he has all the necessary standard norms controlling gadgets to wear while handling them. spillage hazards. Only the Verify that documented procedure is authorized personnel shall in place and followed to handle handle the chemicals. spillage and suitable chemicals and equipment are provided at appropriate places.

19

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria Verify that all workers who are in contact with plant protection products are voluntarily submitted to health checks annually. These health checks should comply with national, regional or local codes of practice and use of results respect the legality of disclosure of personal data. Verify that there are clear documented procedures, which regulate all the reentry intervals of persons after plant protection products are applied to the crops according to the label instructions. Where no re-entry information is available on the label, there are no specific requirements. Verify documentation (for example plant protection products application records) demonstrating that all reentry intervals for plant protection products applied to the crops have been monitored. An accident procedure shall visually display the basic steps of primary accident care and shall is accessible by all persons within 10 m of the plant protection product/chemical storage facilities and designated mixing areas. Verify that all plant protection product/chemical storage facilities and all filling/mixing areas present on the farm have eye wash capability, a source of clean water no more than 10 m distant, a complete first aid kit and a clear accident procedure with emergency contact telephone numbers or basic steps of primary accident care, all permanently and clearly signed. Verify that all workers and operators wear protective clothing during handling and application of chemicals. Verify that the clothing are cleaned after use and stored separately to avoid contamination of the produce and from chemicals. Verify that the plant protection product store is provided with measuring devices and mixing equipment for safe handling of chemicals.

A-12.6.2.2 Health check of workers

Reco All workers who have contact with plant protection products should be submitted voluntarily to annual health checks.

A-12.6.2.3 Procedures for re-entry Major Procedures shall be there of persons for dealing with re-entry of persons on the farm after application of plant protection products. Have the recommended re-entry times shall be monitored. A-12.6.2.4 Monitoring of re-entry Minor The recommended times entry times shall monitored. rebe

A-12.6.2.5 Accident procedures

Minor The accident procedure shall be evident within10 m of the plant protection product/chemical storage facilities. Minor Facilities shall be there to deal with accidental operator contamination.

A-12.6.2.6 Prevention accidental contamination

A-12.6.2.7 Protective clothing

Major The protective clothing shall be kept separately and shall be cleaned after every application.

A-12.7

Measuring and Mixing Major The farm shall possess appropriate measuring Equipment devices and mixing equipment and containers for preparing the desired plant protection products.

20

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. A-12.8 Item Storage of Empty Containers Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria

A-12.9

A-13 A-13.1

A-13.2

A-14 A-14.1

A-14.2

Minor Empty containers shall be Verify that there is a designated kept secure until disposal secure store point for all empty plant is possible. protection product containers prior to disposal that is isolated from the crop and packaging materials that is permanently signed and with physically restricted access for persons and fauna. Disposal of Empty Major Empty containers and Verify that prescribed procedures are obsolete plant protection followed. Verify record of disposal of Containers and Obsoproducts shall be disposed obsolete chemicals. lete Plant Protection off according to the Verify that there is evidence that Products applicable laws and empty plant protection product procedures and necessary containers have not been or currently records shall be maintained. are not being re-used for anything Re-use of empty plant other than containing and transporting protection product of the identical product as stated on containers for purposes the original label. other than containing and transporting of the identical product shall be avoided. CROP MATURITY maturity Verify the sampling records where the Maturity Standards Major Prescribed standards for the crops maturity of crops evaluated before shall be followed before harvesting. Colour changes of rind, harvesting. density, pedicel condition and other maturity parameters to be verified to assess, if these are harvested at correct stage of maturity for internal use or export. Minor The prescribed quality Verify the record, where quality Quality Parameters parameters shall be parameters of non-climactric crops accomplished at the time meant for processing are recorded at of harvest. the time of harvest to decide if the harvesting is done at appropriate stage of maturity of the produce. HARVESTING Method of Crop Minor The crop harvesting shall In case mechanically harvested once be carried out manually or over, verify that the machinery Harvesting mechanically. The entire employed is suitable for the purpose and crop shall be harvested in the material graded as per size and a single lot or at different maturity. In the case of hand harvesting, stages depending upon the verify that the workers are trained for size of the farm and the harvest at uniform stage of maturity maturity levels of the as per the guidelines recommended by produce. NRCs/ SAUs/other Government organization/Government approved organizations. Verify Reco Suitable appliances should that approved/recommended Appliances Used be used for harvesting to appliances are used for harvesting the avoid damage. crop. Verify the condition of the appliances for suitable and safe operation and hygiene.

21

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. A-14.3 Hygiene Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria

A-14.4

A-15 A-15.1

A-15.2

A-15.3

A-15.4

A-15.5

Major Hygiene procedures shall Verify adoption of hygiene be implemented for procedures for harvesting, handling harvesting the produce. and transportation of harvested produce in the farm or to the storage/processing area. Verify the cleanliness of crates and carrier vehicles. Minor Farm workers shall have Verify that clean water for washing Workplace Hygiene access to clean water, and toilet facility is accessible to the toilets and washing place in farm workers within 1 000 m from the vicinity of their work. their place of work. POST-HARVEST HANDLING Major Facilities shall be available Verify that a packaging shed is Collection and for assembling of harvested available and if adequate numbers of Assembling of produce in a clean shaded crates and containers are available for Harvested Produce place on the farm. exclusive use of the harvested Exclusive containers shall produce. Verify that the packaging be available for handling of shed or assembling centre is clean and harvested produce. the floor is washable and has a slope to avoid water logging. Cleaning and Pre- Major Cleaning of the harvested Verify that the cleaning of produce is produce shall be done by done, if necessary, using clean water cooling the recommended methods. containing approved cleaning agents. If required, clean water Verify records to confirm that preshall be available for cooling of the produce is done at cleaning the produce and recommended temperature and for pre-cooling. humidity and for the recommended duration after harvesting. Major All approved/recommend- Verify that approved/ recommended Post-harvest ed post-harvest treatments post-harvest treatment is given to the Treatment shall be given and produce. Verify the records or postrecorded. harvest process sheets, to assess if any post-harvest treatment was given, to increase the shelf life of the produce and verify that it is an approved treatment. Minor The product shall be Verify that graders and associated Post-harvest graded, either by using equipment are available for standard Grading/Sorting mechanical graders or grading. manually. Disposal of Waste Major All substandard produce Verify that the substandard and and all waste materials unusable produce and all waste Produce shall be kept away from the materials are cleared out of the graded graded produce and shall be produce and given a safe disposal. suitably disposed off. PACKAGING Packaging Materials Major Packaging materials shall be used in accordance with the recommended specifications, if any or as per the approved hygiene standards and shall have adequate holding strength. Primary packaging materials shall be of food grade quality. 22 Verify that recommended packaging materials with proper padding, ventilation and holding strength only are utilized for packaging the produce. Verify that the packaging material can withstand wear and tear during transportation. Verify that primary packaging materials are of food grade.

A-16 A-16.1

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. A-16.2 Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria Verify that all the packages are suitably fastened and labelled. Verify that proper coding (for example, bar codes) is done, for identity and traceback. Verify that appropriate procedure for identification and relevant records are maintained. Check the pallets for compactness and suitability for loading into trucks or containers for shipment. Verify that workers are trained for palletisation.

Labelling and Coding Major The packages shall be properly labelled and coded . for unique identification and traceability.

A-16.3

A-16.4

A-17 A-17.1

Minor The packages shall be suitably palleted and loaded in the trucks/ containers, as applicable. The workers shall be trained for palletisation. Cool Store Handling Major The packages/pallets shall be shifted to the cold store (Applicable for Fruits for stabilization of and Vegetables Only) temperature before loading into refrigerated/insulated containers. LOADING AND TRANSPORT Minor The palleted packages Loading shall be marked suitably for proper handling and loading into the trucks and containers. Palletisation/ Stacking Road Transport Major The vehicle/truck for carrying the cargo by road to destination shall be suitably cleaned and hygienic and shall be covered and ventilated.

Verify that the packages are kept in cold store before loading into refrigerated/insulated containers.

A-17.2

Verify that the packages/pallets are marked to indicate proper handling, loading the material into trucks/ containers. Verify that the necessary handling instructions are marked on the pallets. Verify that suitably cleaned and hygienic transport carriage with necessary padding and ventilation is used for transporting the produce.

A-18 A-18.1

A-18.1.1

A-18.1.2

GENERAL Worker Health, Safety and Welfare Human resource is key to the safe and efficient operation of any farm. Farm staff, contractors as well as the producers themselves should ensure the quality of the produce and for environmental protection. Education and training will help to achieve sustainable achievement of this goal and to build up this social capital. This section is intended to ensure safe practice in the work place and that all workers understand, and are competent to perform their duties; are provided with proper equipment to allow them to work safely; and that, in the event of accidents, proper and timely assistance can be obtained. Working Conditions Minor The recommended working Verify the working conditions of farm conditions for farm and and other operating personnel for other operating personnel suitability as per the recommended like dust free environment, guidelines. etc, shall be practiced. Protective Clothing Major The workers shall be Verify that suitable clothing, head gear, and Gadgets provided with necessary aprons, gloves, shoes, eye glasses are protective clothing, shoes provided to crop protection workers and other gadgets in tune and sticks, lights, gum boots etc, to with the functions assigned watch and ward personnel. Verify the to them. records and physically audit the condition, number and suitability of safety gadgets according to the recommended practices.

23

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. A-18.1.3 Item Personal Health Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria Verify that workers who come into contact with produce in the course of their work have a medical examination prior to employment, if the official agency having jurisdiction acting on medical advice, considers that this is necessary, whether because of epidemiological considerations or the medical history of the worker. Verify that medical examination of workers is periodically carried out as and when clinically or epidemiologically indicated. Verify that there is a training record for workers on use of farm equipment, chemicals, safety measures, different farm operations, first aid and basic hygiene.

Major The workers shall be medically examined. The workers with infections diseases, skin infection and open lesion or any other source of microbial contamination shall be excluded from working in farm.

A-18.1.4

Training of Workers

A-18.1.5

First Aid

Major All workers shall be formally trained on operating farm equipments, application of chemicals, use of protective clothing, basic hygiene and first aid treatment. Major First aid boxes and a person for trained handling first aid shall be available in the vicinity of work. Minor Necessary signs, boards and instructions in suitable/ local language indicating hazards shall be put up at appropriate places. Minor Physical hazards, for example, paper, plastic, metal, glass and wood residues shall be properly handled. Major All electrical installations on the farm and other working areas shall have adequate safety measures. Minor Suitable barriers and arrangements shall be there to prevent stray dogs, cattle and other intruders polluting the farm or premises. Major A member of the management shall be identified responsible for workers' health, safety and welfare matters. Reco Instructions on the safety issues for visitors should be displayed on the farm.

A-18.1.6

Warning Signs

Verify that a first aid box and a trained person for handling first aid are available on the farm, storage, handling or processing area. Verify the content and use records of the first aid treatment. Verify that necessary signs, boards and instructions in suitable/local language indicating hazards put up at appropriate places. Look for appropriate steps are in place for handling of plastic, metal, glass and wood residues.

A-18.1.7

A-18.1.8

Handling of Physical Hazards, for example, Paper, Plastic, Metal, Glass and Wood Residues Electrical Installations

Verify that all electrical installations on the farm and other working areas have adequate safety measures. Verify the security arrangements against trespass of cattle, pets and other intruders considered hazardous for the health of the workers and sanitary requirements. Look for the policy and documents regarding workers' health, safety and welfare matters.

A-18.2

Prevention of Stray Cattle, Pets and Intruders

A-18.3

Workers' Welfare

A-18.4

Visitors' Safety

Verify that there are any communications and procedures displayed regarding safety of visitors.

24

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 Clause No. A-19 Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria

A-19.1

A-19.2

A-20

A-20.1

A-21 A-21.1

ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES Farming and environment are inseparably linked. Managing wildlife and landscape is of great importance; enhancement of species as well as structural diversity of land and landscape features will benefit the abundance and diversity of flora and fauna. Wildlife Conservation Reco A conservation manage- Verify that a plan for conservation of ment plan should be wildlife has been established, either Policy established (either indivi- for an individual farm or on a dually or on a regional common basis. basis). that the operations Environmental Safety Minor The farming activities Verify shall be environment- on the farm are friendly and compatible not hazardous to the flora and fauna, with the principles of the reservoirs, sanctuaries around and sustainable agriculture examine its impact on the surrounding and wild life conservation microclimate. policy of the state. COMPLAINT PROCEDURE Management of complaints will lead to a better system and compliance with the IndiaGAP requirements. Redress System and Major A complaint form relating Verify that a complaint form is to issues of compliance available along with a complaint log Procedures shall be available. The register. Verify that a suitable complaints' procedure procedure for expeditious disposal of shall ensure that the complaints is established with complaints are adequately clear identification of personnel recorded, studied and involved and a complaint log register followed up including a is maintained. record of actions taken. PRODUCT RECALL PROCEDURE Major All producers shall have a Verify that all producers have a Product Recall documented recall pro- documented procedure which Procedure cedure to manage the identifies the type of event that may withdrawal of registered result in a withdrawal, persons products from the market. responsible for taking decisions on the possible withdrawal of product, the mechanism for notifying customers and the certification body (if a sanction was not issued by the certification body and the producer or group recalled the products out of free will) and methods of reconciling stock. The procedure shall be tested annually to ensure that it is sufficient.

25

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010

ANNEX B (Foreword)
LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS WHICH FACILITATE IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS STANDARD IS No. 609 : 1955 Title IS No. Title

Code of practice for improvement of existing structures used or intended to be used for foodgrain storage 2491 : 1998 Food hygiene -- General principles -- Code of practice (second revision) 4015 : 1998 Guide for handling cases of pesticide poisoning (first revision) 5503 General requirements for silos for grain storage: (Part 1) : 1969 Constructional requirements (Part 2) : 1969 Grain handling equipment and accessories 5686 : 1970 Code of practice for handling and storage of oilseeds 5985 : 1985 Code of practice for handling and storage of bagged fertilizers (first revision) 6028 : 2002/ Green bananas -- Guide to storage ISO 931 : 1980 and transport (second revision) 6151 Storage management code: (Part 2) : 1971 General care in handling and storage of agricultural produce and inputs (Part 3) : 1976 Specific care in handling and storage of agricultural produce and inputs 6399 : 1971 Code of practice for construction of coffee seed storage structures 6669 : 2001/ Apples -- Guide to cold storage (first ISO 1212 : 1995 revision) 6670 : 1972 Guide for storage of potatoes 7191 : 2001/ Tomatoes -- Guide to cold storage ISO 5524 : 1991 and refrigerated transport ( first revision) 7192 : 1974 Guide for storage of citrus fruits 7247 Code of practice for fumigation of agricultural produce: (Part 1) : 1974 Methyl bromide (Part 3) : 1974 Aluminium phosphide (Part 4) : 1975 Ethylene dichloride and carbon tetrachloride mixture (Part 5) : 1985 General requirements 7252 : 1974 Guide for testing of physical conditions in cold stores 7730 : 1975 Guide for storage of pears 7731 : 1975/ Guide for storage of peaches ISO 873 : 1980 8453 : 1977 Code of practice for construction of polyethylene embedded earthen bins for bulk storage of food grains 9303 : 1979 Guide for cold storage of table grapes 26

9304 : 1979 Guide for storage of mangoes 9311 : 2001/ Onions -- Guide to storage (first ISO 1673 : 1991 revision) 9696 : 1980 Code of practice for installation of farm drainage tile or pipe system 9979 : 1981 Code for design and laying of mineral filters for tile drain system 10017 : 1981 Code of practice for construction of cocoa beans storage structures 10317 : 1982 Guide for evaluation of soil properties relevant to irrigation 10500 : 1991 Drinking water 10808 : 1984 Code of practice for installation, operation and maintenance of hydraulic rams 10907 : 1984 Code for design of farm drainage tile or pipe system 11494 : 1986 Code for construction and maintenance of surface farm drainage systems 11495 : 1986 Code for design of surface farm drainage system 11538 : 1986 Code of practice for design and installation of farm drainage pumping plant 11711 : 1986 Recommended criteria for adoptability of different irrigation methods 11816 Storage of cereals and pulses: (Part 1) : 1986/ General consideration of keeping ISO6322/1 : cereals 1981 (Part 2) : 1986/ Essential requirements ISO 6322/2 : 1981 (Part 3) : 1986/ Control of attack by vertebrate and ISO 6322-3 : invertebrate animals 1989 11965 : 1987/ Round-headed cabbage -- Storage in ISO 6000 : the open 1981 11966 : 1997/ Garlic -- Guide to cold storage (first ISO 6663 : revision) 1995 11977 : 1987/ Green bananas -- Ripening ISO 3959 : condition 1977 13062 : 1991 Irrigation equipment and systems -- Evaluation of field irrigation efficiencies -- Guidelines

IS 15930 (Part 1) : 2010 IS No. 13939 : 1994 Title Farm drainage -- Intercepter drains for steep hill slopes under plantation crops -- Guidelines for laying Farm drainage system -- Performance evaluation of horizontal sub-surface drainage -- Guidelines Code of practice for application of blue green algae as bio-fertilizer in soil Prevention and treatment of blockage problem in drip irrigation system -- Code of practice Irrigation equipment -- Design, installation and operation of sprinkler irrigation system -- Code of practice IS No. 15000 : 1998 Title Food hygiene -- Hazard analysis and critical control point (HACCP) -- System and guidelines for its application Guidelines for storage and transportation of bamboo shoot Food safety management systems -- Requirements for any organization in the food chain Food safety management systems -- Requirements for bodies providing audit and certification of food safety management systems Food safety management systems -- Guidance on the application of ISO 22000 : 2005

14632 : 1999

15691 : 2006 IS/ISO 22000 : 2005 IS/ISO/TS 22003 : 2007

14634 : 1998 14791 : 2000

14792 : 2000

IS/ISO/TS 22004 : 2005

27

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act , 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 22 (1949).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in Regional Offices: Central Eastern : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Telephones

{ { {

{

2323 7617 2323 3841

2337 8499, 2337 8561 2337 8626, 2337 9120

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western Branches: : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

{

60 3843 60 9285

2254 1216, 2254 1442 2254 2519, 2254 2315

2832 9295, 2832 7858 2832 7891, 2832 7892

AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Laser Typeset by Sunshine Graphics

