NAT HIAF IS 17380 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


aaa — ma Tata aT Aie A 
garan uga ht Reat 
utar At farfir 


Textiles — Test Method for 
Permeation Testing of Protective 
Ensembles with Nerve Agents 
or Simulants 


ICS 13.340.10 


© BIS 2020 


anda HIS St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, 4$ freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2020 Price Group 7 


Textiles Protective Clothing Sectional Committee, TXD 32 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Textiles 
Protective Clothing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


Weapons of mass destruction mainly chemical weapons, used in First World War are still being deployed actively 
in acts of terrorism worldwide. Chemical weapon agent (CWA) is a chemical substance whose toxic properties 
are used to kill, injure or incapacitate human beings. About 70 different chemicals have been used or stockpiled 
as chemical weapon agents during the 20" century. These agents may be in liquid, gas, solid or aerosolized state. 


CWAs are classified in different categories based on their characteristics for example, toxicity, persistency or 
volatility, chemical structures and mechanism of action. In terms of physiological effects CWAs are classified 
into nerve agents, blistering agents, blood agents, choking agents, riot controlling agents, psychomimetic agents 
and toxins. Among all, nerve agents are considered to be most toxic due to their mechanism of affecting human 
nervous system, high persistency and low LD50. 


Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), seated at The Hague, Netherlands has administered 
Chemical Weapon Convention (CWC) on the prohibition of the development, production, stockpiling, use of 
chemical weapons and their destruction. At present globally, 193 states parties are signatory and obligatory of 
CWC including India. 


Despite implementation of CWC, technologies to deal with the illegitimate use of chemical weapons are always 
sought for. These technologies belong to mainly three categories, detection, protection and decontamination of 
CWAs. Once detected, protection from chemical warfare agents is the main challenge for the military as well as 
civil population. Extensive research has been explored for the development of protective gears against CWAs 
through various R and D programs. Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO), Govt. of India 
has indigenously developed a number of protection technologies which include nuclear, biological and chemical 
(NBC) protective suit, boots, gloves, mask, NBC filters for individual as well as for collective protection from 
exposure of CWAs. A number of Indian industries are involved in the activities related to development and 
manufacture of such protective gears specially required for the Indian Armed Forces. During and after development 
of any protective gear technology, a stringent evaluation is the foremost requirement to finalize an efficient, long 
lasting and cost effective technology. 


Defence Research and Development Establishment (DRDE), Gwalior, India under the umbrella of DRDO is the 
only agency in India having OPCW declared Schedule 1 facility to synthesize and use CWAs for medical and 
protective purposes, therefore DRDE has the mandate to establish test and evaluation facilities for the technologies 
related to detection, protection and decontamination against CWAs. In this context, a facility to evaluate the 
materials used in protective gears for the permeation of nerve agents or simulants has been established at DRDE, 
Gwalior. The facility and the standard would be beneficial to the R and D organizations, testing agencies and 
industries for the comparison and suitability of materials to be used in various protection technologies depending 
upon their specific requirements. 


In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the ‘Test Operations procedure 
(TOP) 08-2-501A, Permeation testing of materials with chemical agents or simulants (swatch testing)’ performed 
by U.S. Army Dugway Proving Ground. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 17380 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


TEXTILES — TEST METHOD FOR PERMEATION 
TESTING OF PROTECTIVE ENSEMBLES WITH 
NERVE AGENTS OR SIMULANTS 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies the requirements for test 
equipment and procedures for conducting tests to 
estimate the permeation of nerve agents or nerve agent 
simulants in liquid and vapour form through swatches 
of materials. Such nerve agents include sarin (GB), 
soman (GD), tabun (GA), cyclosarin (GF) and VX. The 
following standardization methods are described in this 
standard: 


1.1.1 Liquid Challenge/Vapour Permeation (L/V) — 
A quantitative test for L/V permeation of liquid nerve 
agent/ simulant through a swatch. This test method has 
three test cell configurations: 


a) convective flow, 
b) dual flow, and 
C) static diffusion. 


1.1.2 Vapour Challenge/Vapour Permeation (V/V) — 
A quantitative test for V/V permeation of nerve agent/ 
simulant vapours challenge through a swatch. This test 
method has two cell configurations: 


a) convective flow, and 
b) dual flow. 


1.2 The swatch materials are separated into three 
general categories: 


a) air permeable, 
b) air semipermeable, and 


c) air impermeable. 


Each of these material types shall also be single 
layered or multilayered composites and inert, sorptive, 
or reactive. Swatches shall be taken from clothing or 
equipment that is new, pre-treated in the laboratory, or 
previously subjected to periods of wear under varying 
conditions of field use, storage, and/or environmental 
exposure, including simulated exposure. Swatches 
may also be taken from manufacturing sources, or a 
sample from a formulation that may be used for the 
manufacture of protective clothing or equipment. 


2 SIGNIFICANCE AND USE 


2.1 Application of the procedures in this standard 
can provide relative ranking or material screening 


information about the ability of candidate materials to 
resist nerve agent permeation. 


2.2 Swatch testing is a required part of acquisition 
testing for the test and evaluation process. In addition, 
swatch testing can be employed as a quality control 
(QC) measure for production lot testing or surveillance 
testing of stored equipment. 


3 LIMITATIONS 


3.1 The procedures in this standard are not sufficient to 
assess the ability of whole ensembles made from tested 
materials to protect the wearer. These procedures are 
designed to be used as part of an overall assessment 
program, evaluating the material performance, 
manufacturing, and integration with other pieces of the 
protective ensemble. 


3.2 Results obtained by using these swatch test 
procedures cannot be correlated with specific medical 
or toxicological values or whole system performance 
values, and therefore cannot express an absolute 
protection value. 


3.3 The data obtained by these procedures cannot be 
correlated with specific field conditions. 


3.4 The swatch test cell described in this standard has 
a limited ability to test swatches with seams and/or 
closures. The swatch test cells can only be used to test 
materials that can be properly sealed irrespective of 
their thickness. 


4 REFERENCES 


The standard listed below contains provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


6359 : 1971 Method for conditioning of textiles 


IS 17380 : 2020 


5 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


5.1 Air Permeable Materials — The materials which 
have air permeability > 100 cm*/min/cm? measured 
using standard method. 


5.2 Breakthrough Concentration — Cumulative 
concentration of nerve agent/ simulant permeated 
through swatch sample over a period of test duration. 


5.3 Impermeable Materials — The materials which 
have air permeability < 20 cm?/min/cm? measured 
using standard method. 


5.4 Nerve Agent — A liquid, solid, gaseous, or 
vapour chemical warfare agent used to inflict lethal or 
incapacitating casualties by affecting nervous system. 


5.5 Nerve Agent Simulant — A nontoxic or less toxic 
substance used to replicate physical characteristics of a 
nerve agent. 


5.6 Protective Ensemble — The combination 
of protective clothing with respiratory protective 
equipment, hoods, helmets, gloves, boots, 
communication systems, cooling devices and other 
accessories which are necessary to protect the wearer 
from a potential hazard when worn together. 


5.7 Semi Permeable Materials — The materials which 
have air permeability > 20 cm?/min/cm? but < 100 cm?/ 
min/cm? measured using standard method. 


6 FACILITIES AND APPARATUS 


6.1 Facilities 


Facilities, apparatus and safety procedures used for 
swatch testing with nerve agent/simulant are strictly 
controlled as per regulations and guidelines of statutory 
body. 


Item Requirement 
Chemical laboratory | Shall have following: 
and nerve — agent/ a) secure storage of nerve 
simulant storage agents/simulants ^ at 
facility 


sub-zero temperature, 
b) emergency response 
provisions, and 
c) hazardous waste 
storage and disposal. 


Swatch test conditions | Shall have ability to control 
temperature, relative 
humidity (RH), and airflow. 
Data system shall be able to 


record the test conditions. 


Shall have decontamination 
material and equipment 
for the decontamination of 
used sample/equipment. 


Decontamination 


6.2 Instrumentation 


6.2.1 Test Cell 


For all the cell configurations for L/V and V/V 
permeation testing, sealed and unassembled views of 
test cell have been given in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. 


Fic. 1 SEALED VIEW or TEST CELL 


6.2.2 Other Instruments 


Upper body 


O - Ring#4 


Test sample 


O - Ring#2 


O - Ring#1 


Lower body 


Fic. 2 UNASSEMBLED VIEW OF TEST CELL 


IS 17380 : 2020 


Compression plate 


Sample support plate 


samples (ug) 


(HPLC), liquid chromatograph (LC)/flame 
photometric detector (FPD)/flame ionization 
detector (FID), mass spectrometer (MS)/ 


spectrophotometer, or equivalent 


Parameter Measuring Device Permissible Error 
of Measurement 
Air temperature (5° to 49°C) Thermocouple or other comparable device + 1.0°C 
Relative humidity (20 to | Humidity probe or other comparable device + 5 percent 
90 percent) 
Airflow (0.1 to 5 L/min) Flowmeter/mass flow controller or other + 5 percent 
comparable device 
Differential pressure (AP) Pressure gauge or other comparable device + ] percent 
Chemical vapour permeation | Bubblers, Real Time (RT)/Non Real Time (NRT) + 15 percent 
sampling (test specific) monitoring system, solid sorbent tubes (SSTs), or 
equivalent glass vials with non-adsorbent lid liner 
Liquid nerve agent/simulant (g/m?) | Control coupon, analytical balance, and gas + 15 percent 
chromatograph (GC)/gas chromatograph mass 
spectrometer (GC-MS) 
Chemical analysis of permeation | GC, high performance liquid chromatograph | X 15 percent of 


calibration standard 


Nerve agent/simulant vapour 
challenge concentration (10 to 
100 mg/m?) 


Vapour generation assembly for toxic chemicals as 
per Fig. 3 


15 percent of 
target concentration 


IS 17380 : 2020 


= 


Nitrogen/air line 


Moisture trap and hydrocarbon trap 


Flowmeter/ rotameter 


Heater 


Syringe pump 


Two way solenoid valve 


Waste line 


T-shaped joint for dilution 


Solou Inl nyt AINN 


Humidity detector 


= 
© 


Needle valve 


— 
= 


Needle valve 


— 
N 


Flowmeter/ rotameter 


Fic. 3 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF TEST APPARATUS FOR GENERATING NERVE AGENT/ 
SIMULANT STANDARD VAPOURS 


6.3 Supplies 


6.3.1 QC Swatches — Control swatches demonstrate 
control of all parameters affecting test results across 
trials and test programs, and verify that the analysis was 
not affected by the presence of positive and negative 
interferents. Each trial shall have two sets of control 
swatches, positive and negative. Positive control 
swatches shall be contaminated with the challenge 


chemical, and negative control swatches shall not be 
contaminated. 


6.3.1.1 At least one positive control is required per trial. 
The positive control shall havea well defined permeation 
profile. For dual flow tests, it is recommended that 
neoprene sheet with thickness of 0.015 + 0.005 inch 
and durometer hardness > 40 A shall be used to get 
repeatable and consistent results. 


6.3.1.2 The negative control swatch shall be neoprene 
(the same as the positive control material), with the 
option of an uncontaminated test swatch. 


6.3.2 Samplers 
6.3.2.1 Bubbler 


A bubbler is a cumulative sampler. A collection solvent 
having good solubility for the chemical vapour to be 
sampled is placed in the bubbler. Generally, 10 ml of 
solvent is used. During operation, air is drawn through 
the bubbler at a fixed, known flow rate and any chemical 
vapour in the air dissolves in the collection solvent. 
Before testing, the collection efficiency of the bubbler 
and the selected collection solvent for the chemical 
sampled shall be determined at the airflow rate, relative 
humidity (RH), and temperature to be used for testing. 
The stability of the solvent shall be known so that post 
collection loss by decomposition can be avoided by 
establishing storage conditions and a maximum storage 
time. At the completion of each prescribed sampling 
period, each bubbler shall be replaced with a fresh 
bubbler. An aliquot of the collection fluid from the used 
bubbler shall be analyzed to determine the amount ofthe 
chemical collected. There is usually a sufficient sample 
volume to perform a repeat analysis. If the initial value 
obtained appears questionable, it needs to be verified, 
or need to be diluted to bring its concentration into 
the range of the analytical method used, however, the 
sensitivity of the analysis may be limited by dilution of 
the analyte. Testers shall be aware that water condenses 
in bubblers. Under certain conditions, the water may 
react with the dissolved analyte, such reaction may 
impair quantification of the analyte. 


6.3.2.2 Solid sorbent tubes (SST) 


SSTs are cumulative samplers. SSTs are either metal 
(stainless steel is preferred) or glass tubes that contain a 
small quantity of a solid sorbent material. This sampler 
is aspirated for a prescribed period of time in a manner 
similar to bubblers. Following the prescribed sampling 
period, the SST shall be replaced with a fresh tube and 
the used one analyzed to determine the amount of the 
chemical collected. As with the bubbler, the results 
obtained by the SST are averages over the sampling 
period. 


6.3.2.2.1 The analysis is done conventionally by 
thermally desorbing the chemical from the tube into 
a GC set up to measure the chemical. The major 
advantage of the SST is that it has a higher sensitivity 
than the bubbler because the entire sample (rather 
than just a portion) is analysed at once. This is also 
a disadvantage because no portion of the collected 
sample is reserved in case reanalysis is needed. Care 
shall be taken to ensure that the sorptive capacity of 
the solid sorbent is not exceeded during the sampling 
period. Frequently, if the thermal desorption step is not 


IS 17380 : 2020 


completed properly, it leads to a low estimate of the 
amount of the chemical collected. Also if special care 
is not taken to ensure the tube is completely purged and 
cleaned before the next use, there may be carryover 
of challenge chemical to the next use of the tube. As 
a precaution to prevent carryover, all SSTs shall be 
identified by number, and used tubes shall be cleaned 
by simultaneously heating them and purging them with 
nitrogen. Each individual tube shall be subjected to the 
GC analysis procedure to demonstrate that it is blank 
(free of chemical contaminants) before being stored in 
a sealed, contaminant free glass jar until the next use. 


6.3.2.2.2 Alternatively, the solid sorbent can be 
extracted with an appropriate solvent and the extract 
analyzed. This reduces the sensitivity but obviates 
problems arising from one shot thermal desorption. 


6.3.2.3 Non realtime (NRT) and real time (RT) samplers 


NRT and RT samplers are automated analytical 
instruments that sample and analyze the effluent from 
the swatch sampling ports either continuously (for 
RT samplers) or at set intervals that are less than 15 
min apart (for NRT samplers). The advantage of these 
systems (over bubblers and SSTs) is that permeation 
curves can be constructed from the data. From these 
data (permeation curves), other permeation details 
like breakthrough time and steady state permeation 
can be determined which provide additional indicators 
of material performance. The disadvantage is that 
calibration checks are required before and after each 
trial to ensure that the system remains in calibration for 
the duration of the trial. 


6.3.3 Reagents 


All the reagents used shall be of analytical grade and of 
purity more than 95 percent. 


6.3.4 Flexible Tubing 


Connections between cells, samplers, airflow 
controllers, manifolds etc. shall be made with flexible 
tubing, when appropriate. All tubings used to conduct 
air that could contain chemical vapour shall have low 
tendency to absorb the chemical. Tubings made from 
fluorinated polymers are suitable. In all cases, minimum 
necessary length of tubing shall be used. 


7 REQUIRED TEST CONDITIONS 


7.1 Nerve agent/simulant permeation testing requires 
the proper handling and use of chemical agents. Such 
testing is strictly controlled by regulations of Chemical 
Weapons Convention (CWC) and CWC Act, 2000. 


7.2 Throughout testing, primary emphasis shall be 
on the safety of the fixture operators and other test 
personnel. Swatch testing with nerve agent shall be 
performed in an OPCW declared and approved facility. 


IS 17380 : 2020 


7.3 For tests involving nerve agents or simulants, 
qualified and trained operators and standard equipment 
shall be used. Laboratory technicians shall receive 
appropriate system operating training before testing 
begins. 


7.4 The required test capabilities shall have ability 
to provide an oil free, conditioned airflow to the test 
cells at a rate ranging from 0.1 to 5 litre/min. The flow 
reading shall be accurate to within + 5 percent. 


7.5 It is recommended that the test fixture shall be able 
to provide temperature control in the range from 5? to 
49°C. The temperature measurement shall be accurate 
to within + 1.0°C. 


7.6 It is recommended that the fixture be able to provide 
humidity control in the range from 20 to 90 percent 
relative humidity (non-condensing). The relative 
humidity (RH) measurement shall be accurate to within 
+ 5 percent. 


7.7 Controlled concentration of agent vapour in the 
range from 10 mg/m? to 100 mg/m? with tolerance of 
+ 15 percent to the swatch challenge airflow (for V/V 
tests) is required. 


7.8 The swatch test cell shall be designed to support the 
swatch with an airtight seal. The cell shall also provide 
access for airflow through the swatch (if applicable) 
and shall minimize loss of chemical agent vapours. 


7.9 Test Cell Configurations 


A description of various test cell configurations used 
in the testing along with discussion on the airflow 
permeability requirements for the convective flow 
cell configurations has been illustrated. A brief outline 
of the test methods and their applicability is given in 
Table 1. 


7.9.1 L/V Testing 
The L/V test method has three test cell configurations. 
7.9.1.1 L/V static diffusion mode 


This is used to test material's ability to resist permeation 
by nerve agent under static mode. No air stream is 
passed across the top ofthe swatch. A clean air stream is 
drawn across the bottom of the swatch sample. As there 
is no stream of air across the top of swatch keeping 
the challenge static and less likely to evapourate. 
(see Fig. 4 ) 


Table 1 Swatch Test Methods and Applicability 
( Clause 7.9 ) 


SI Test Method Use with Material 
No. Types 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) L/V 
a) Convective flow mode Air permeable 
Semipermeable 
b) Dual flow mode Air permeable 
Semipermeable 
Impermeable 


c) Static diffusion mode Air permeable 
Semipermeable 
Impermeable 
i V/V 

a) Convective flow mode Air permeable 


Semipermeable 


b) Dual flow mode 


Air permeable 
Semipermeable 


Impermeable 


Fic. 4 Test CELL CONFIGURATION IN L/V Static FLow MODE 


7.9.1.2 L/V dual flow mode 


This 1s used to test material's ability to resist permeation 
by nerve agent under dynamic mode. A stream of 
controlled and conditioned air is drawn across the top 
of a swatch challenged with droplets of nerve agent/ 
simulant. A clean air stream is drawn across the bottom 
of the swatch sample. The stream of air across the top 
causes the agent challenge to evapourate over the time 
( see Fig. 5 ). 


7.9.1.3 L/V convective flow mode 


This is used to test material's ability to resist penetration 
by a stream of control and conditioned liquid agent/ 
simulant laden air. This mode can be used to test only air 
permeable or semipermeable materials (materials with 
an air permeability of > 20 cm?/min/cmr?). A stream of 
controlled and conditioned air is drawn through the test 
swatch. The test is performed by controlling the flow 
rate of the air through the swatch and maintaining the 
AP at 24.9 + 3.7 Pascal (or 0.19 + 0.03 mm Hg) across 
the top of the swatch (see Fig. 6). 


7.9.2 V/V Testing 
The V/V test method has two test cell configurations. 


7.9.2.1 V/V dual flow mode 


This mode is used to test any material's relative ability 
to resist permeation by a stream of control and 
conditioned agent vapours laden air that is drawn 
across the top of the swatch while a stream of clean air 
is drawn across the underside of the swatch (see Fig. 5). 


IS 17380 : 2020 


7.9.2.2 V/V convective flow mode 


This mode is used to evaluate the capacity of air 
permeable and semipermeable protective materials 
(materials with an air permeability >20 cm*/min/cm?) 
to remove or intercept nerve agent/simulant. In this 
test, conditioned and controlled agent vapours laden air 
is drawn through a test swatch. There is no separate 
sampling airflow for this configuration because the air 
passes though the swatch and to the sampler or detector 
( see Fig. 6). 


8 TEST PROCEDURES 
8.1 Receipt Inspection 


8.1.1 All test/swatch items shall undergo a receipt 
inspection. Both sides of each test item, piece of 
material, or swatch shall be inspected for rips, tears, 
stains, pinholes, and other damage using visual 
inspection or light transmission methods. Any abnormal 
characteristics of the swatches shall be noted. Surfaces 
shall be inspected for foreign materials like dust, mud, 
grease or markings. Foreign materials shall be removed 
by brushing or vacuuming. Wherever feasible, a 
photographic record shall be made of all damaged test 
items/swatches. 


8.1.2 Each test item shall be given a unique test item 
control number. These numbers shall be used for the 
identification of each test item throughout the test 
process. 


Fic. 5 Test CELL CONFIGURATION IN L/V DUAL FLow AND V/V DuaL FLow Mope 


IS 17380 : 2020 


Fic. 6 Test CELL CONFIGURATION ON L/V CONVECTIVE AND V/V CONVECTIVE FLow MODE 


8.1.3 Swatches/ test items shall be prepared and stored 
until needed for trials in a clean, environmentally 
controlled storage location. 


8.1.4 Once individual received or cut swatches are 
stored for testing, each shall be placed in a sealable 
plastic bag labelled with unique test identification 
number. 


8.2 Calibration and Standardization 


Most chemical analytical equipment (for example, 
GCs, LCs, etc.) shall be calibrated by following the 
general chemical analytical calibration guidelines. 


8.3 Nerve Agents/ Simulants 


8.3.1 The purity of the chemical agents used shall be 
known and recorded as test data. Single agents used 
for swatch testing shall be at least 95 percent pure. In 
case of simulant, a simulant to agent correlation shall 
be documented. 


8.3.2 The nerve agents used for testing are GB, GA, 
GD, GF and VX. 


8.4 Swatch Pretreatment 


If swatch pretreatments are used, the pretreatment 
process shall be conducted before the swatches are 
assembled into the test cells. 


NOTE — Ifswatches are pretreated, no swatch preconditioning 
shall be conducted. 


8.5 Sampling/Analytical System 


8.5.1 Bubblers shall be filled with the solvent specified 
in the program planning document using a calibrated 
dispenser and the top and side covered and sealed with 
Parafilm™ or an equivalent material, until ready for 
use. Bubbler collection efficiency at the temperature, 
flow rate, and humidity of the test environment shall be 
demonstrated as well as the analyte stability. 


8.5.2 SSTs shall be clean of interferents. The capacity 
of the SST sorbent shall not be exceeded, and SSTs 
shall be free of any residual adsorbed. 


8.5.3 RT and NRT monitors shall be calibrated before 
use. In addition, a calibration or QC check shall be 
done before and after testing to verify that the system 
remains in calibration for the test duration. 


8.6 Test Cell Assembly and Sealing (L/V or V/V 
Testing) 


8.6.1 The test cell shall be configured for the appropriate 
test mode. See Fig. | to Fig. 5 for the cell configurations 
for the different modes. 


8.6.2 An O-ring shall be placed on the lower body of 
the test cell. This will be O-ring # 1. 


8.6.3 The sample support plate shall be placed on 
O-ring#1, and a second O-ring (O-ring# 2) shall be 
placed in the groove on the sample support plate. 


8.6.4 The swatch shall be removed from the storage 
container and placed in the depression in the sample 
support plate. O-ring 3 shall be placed over the swatch. 


8.6.5 O-ring#4 shall be placed in the upper body of the 
test cell, and the compression plate shall be positioned 
over O-ring# 4. 


8.6.6 The upper body shall be inverted and aligned with 
the lower body. 


8.6.7 Using the four cell lugs, the cell halves (upper and 
lower bodies) shall be clamped together to seal the cell. 


8.6.8 Cell seal checking shall be performed using an 
appropriate method. 


8.7 Test Setup 


8.7.1 Laboratory hood operation shall be verified. The 
test assemblies or fixtures shall be set up in chemical 
fume hoods. 


8.7.2 The fixture relative humidity (RH) system shall 
be verified as functioning and delivering the correct 
RH, as specified in the test plan. The temperature shall 
be within permissible error margins, as specified in 
the test plan. Optionally, an environmental chamber 
shall be used if the temperature and RH of the 
laboratory room air do not meet test requirements. 
The environmental chamber shall be installed in the 
chemical fume hood, and the chamber shall be set for 
the test temperature and RH specified in the planning 
documents. 


8.7.3 The airflow shall be verified as being +5 percent 
of the target airflow, as specified in the test plan. 


8.7.4 The stabilization of the environmental conditions 
for the test shall be verified. 


8.7.5 The cell holder(s) and the manifolds shall be 
installed in the chemical fume hood or environmental 
chamber and prepared to receive the loaded test cells. 


8.7.6 Continuous air monitoring system, or equivalent 
RT/NRT instrument, shall be installed. If bubblers are 
used, they shall be filled with the proper collection 
solvent using a calibrated repipetter or equivalent 
device. The collection solvent shall incorporate an 
internal standard so that adjustments can be made 
for solvent evapouration/water condensation during 
sampling. If SSTs are used, they shall be purchased 
prefilled with the appropriate sorbent or prepared for 
reuse. The absence of any residual chemical shall be 
verified by GC analysis. 


8.8 L/V and V/V Test Cell Installation and Swatch 
Preconditioning 


8.8.1 For L/V convective flow mode, the upper pressure 
monitoring line shall be connected to the cell tower, and 


IS 17380 : 2020 


the lower pressure monitoring line shall be connected 
to the pressure monitoring port. 


8.8.2 The sampler sidearm shall be inserted into the 
bottom effluent port. For dual flow test cells, the top 
effluent port shall be connected to waste line. 


8.8.3 The supply air manifold shall be connected to the 
air inlet port(s) located on the test cell. There is one air 
inlet port on the convective and static flow test cells and 
two air inlet ports on the dual flow test cell. 


8.8.4 The sampler sidearm shall be connected to the 
mass flow controller/ flow meter using flexible tubing. 


8.8.5 Test environmental conditions shall be established. 
Usually the test temperature shall be 32 + 2?C and the 
test RH shall be 50 + 5 percent (see IS 6359), but this 
can vary depending upon test requirements. 


8.8.6 The airflow or AP (depending on the test cell 
configuration) shall be maintained as specified in Table 
3 for 30 min. 


8.8.7 For liquid nerve agent/ simulant challenges, the 
test cells shall be removed from the test assembly 
immediately before it is applied. For vapours 
challenges, the cells shall remain in the test fixture. 


8.9 Nerve Agent Challenge and Swatch Trial 
Initiation 


8.9.1 Vapour Challenges for V/V Testing 


Consolidated parameters for V/V swatch testing have 
been given in Table 2. 


8.9.1.1 The vapour challenge concentration shall 
be verified by an appropriate RT/NRT monitor. The 
effluent from the vapour generator shall be routed to 
the waste air until the challenge concentration for the 
trial has stabilized. 


8.9.1.2 V/V trial initiation 


When conditioning of the swatches is complete (if 
required) and the vapour challenge has been verified 
to be at the correct concentration, the vapour challenge 
shall be routed to the test cells and the swatch trial shall 
commence. When the trial starts, the control system 
shall be monitored to ensure that the airflow and other 
conditions remain constant for each test cell, as detailed 
in the planning documents. The start and stop times 
shall be recorded. 


8.9.2 Liquid Challenges for L/V Testing 


Consolidated parameters for L/V swatch testing have 
been given in Table 3. 


8.9.2.1 10 mg challenge volume shall be applied to a 
swatch with a 10 cm? exposed area to achieve a 10 g/m? 
contamination density. 


IS 17380 : 2020 


Table 2 Test Parameters for Vapour Challenge/ 
Vapour Penetration (V/V) Swatch Testing 


( Clause 8.9.1) 


SI Parameter Standard 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Convective-flow rate, litre/min (0.25 to 4) + 5 percent 
ii) Dual flow rate 
a) Top, litre/min (0.25 to 4) + 5 percent 
b) Bottom, litre/min 0.30 + 5 percent 
iii) Concentration of VX, GD, GB, (10 to 100) + 10 percent 
GF, GA, mg/m? 
iv) Agent purity > 95 percent 
v) Temperature 32.0 + 2.0°C 
vi) Relative humidity (RH) (20 to 80) + 5 percent 
vii) Test duration 
a) Convective flow 6 to 24h 
b) Dual flow 6 to 24h 
viii) Positive control material (PCM) Standard material's 
swatch with known 
permeation under 
controlled conditions for 
convective/dual flow 
ix) | Negative control material (NCM) Same as PCM but no 


contaminated air flow 


8.9.2.1.1 Neat nerve agent/simulant 


The recommended pattern consists of eight 1 uL droplets 
evenly spaced around a 2.54 cm diameter circle on the 
upper swatch surface and two 1 uL droplets placed 0.81 
cm apart in the centre of the swatch (see Fig. 7A). This 
will provide the required 10 mg challenge on a swatch 
that has a 10 cm? exposed area. 


8.9.2.1.2 Thickened nerve agent 


For thickened nerve agent, two 5 uL droplets shall be 
placed 0.81 cm apart, equidistant from the centre of the 
upper swatch surface (see Fig. 7B). This will provide 
the required 10 mg challenge on a swatch that has a 10 
cm? exposed area. 


8.9.2.1.3 If refrigerated agent is used, the agent shall 
be brought to room temperature so that it shall have the 
proper viscosity. 


8.9.2.1.4 A quality check shall be conducted to verify 
the challenge level delivered by the spiking method. 
Verification shall be performed gravimetrically as well 
as with GC or wet chemistry procedures. 


8.9.3 L/V Trial Initiation 


After each swatch cell is challenged, the trial shall 
be initiated by turning on the airflow/pressure control 


10 


at the cells. When the trial starts, the control system 
shall be monitored to ensure that the airflow and other 
conditions remain constant for each test cell, as detailed 
in the planning documents. Critical time points shall be 
collected for all samples: 


a) When each swatch is contaminated (spike time); 
b) When the airflow/pressure 1s turned on; 
c) When the airflow/pressure 1s turned off; 


d) The spike to trial start time, which is the time that 
elapses from the spiking of the first swatch until 
the trial begins, shall be recorded. Every effort 
shall be made to minimize the spike to trial start 
time and to maintain consistent times between 
trials and test programs because variations in 
these times can cause variability in permeation 
data. Starting cells individually or in small groups 
can assist in minimizing spike to trial start time; 
and 


The start and stop times for each cell shall be 
recorded. 


Table 3 Test Parameters for Liquid Challenge/ 
Vapour Penetration (L/V) Swatch Testing 


( Clauses 8.8.6 and 8.9.2 ) 


SI Parameter Standard 
No. 
Q) (2) (3) 
i)  Convective-flow rate Flow required to achieve 
a differential pressure 
(P) of 24.9 + 3.7 Pa 
ii) Dual flow rate 
a) Top, litre/min 0.25 + 5 percent 
b) Bottom, litre/min 0.30 + 5 percent 
iil) Static diffusion Rate 
a) Top, litre/min 0.0 
b) Bottom, litre/min 0.30 + 5 percent 
iv) Number and volume of drops 
a) VX, GD, GB, GA Ten 1 uL drops 
b) TGD Two 5 uL drops 
V) Agent purity 7 95 percent 
vi) Temperature 32.0 + 2.0°C 
vii) Relative humidity (RH) (20 to 80) + 5 percent 
vii) Length of test 
a) Convective flow 8 to 24h 
b) Dual flow 8 to 24h 
ix) Positive control material (PCM) Neoprene for dual/static 
flow 
X) | Negative control material Same as PCM with no 


contamination 


8.10 Sampling System Monitoring During Trial 
Execution 


8.10.1 The environmental parameters and flow rates 
of the test equipment shall be monitored to ensure that 
they stay within the specified tolerance ranges for the 
duration of the trial. Environmental parameters shall be 
recorded. 


8.10.2 Sampling System Monitoring 
8.10.2.1 SSTs 


At the end of each sampling interval, one sampler 
at a time shall be changed by first disconnecting the 
vacuum line and disconnecting the test cell connection. 
The used sampler shall be replaced with a fresh one by 
first connecting the fresh sampler to the test cell and 
then to the vacuum line. 


8.10.2.2 RT/NRT systems 


At the beginning, middle, and end of each trial, the 
calibration of the sampling system shall be checked to 
ensure that accurate data are being generated for the 
duration of the trial. 


8.11 Trial End and Sampling System Collection 
Procedures 


8.11.1 7rial End 


Trial end shall be declared when the trial time has 
elapsed, a breakthrough event has occurred, or the test 


1 pl NA/simulant 
Droplet 


Fig. 7A 


IS 17380 : 2020 


plan determined breakthrough concentration has been 
achieved. The trial shall be terminated along with data 
collection. 


8.11.2 Sampling System Collection Procedures 
8.11.2.1 Bubblers 


As soon as possible following each bubbler change 
interval and at the end of the trial, two aliquots of 
the collection solvent from each bubbler shall be 
transferred to pre labelled sample vials. Using a new 
pipette for each bubbler, one operator shall transfer an 
aliquot of solvent from the bubbler to each duplicate 
vial. The vials shall be capped, transfer the vials to 
the analytical laboratory for analysis. Samples and 
bubblers shall be stored at temperatures between 0° 
and 4°C when not in use. Bubblers shall be cleaned as 
per local SOPs provided the method does not expose 
the bubblers to decontaminants or interferents, such as 
phosphate based detergents. 


8.11.2.2 SSTs 


Samples shall be analyzed as soon as possible via 
thermal desorption or solvent extraction and analysis. 
SSTs shall be stored at temperatures between 0° and 
4°C when not in use. Extraction procedures for SSTs 
shall be conducted IAW local SOPs or program 
specific planning documents. Any SSTs reused shall be 
thermally desorbed and verified clean of analyte after 
analysis or solvent extraction. 


5 pl thickened NA/simulant 
Droplet 


Fig. 7B 


Fic. 7A PLACEMENT OF NERVE AGENT/ STIMULANT ON L/V TESTING, 


Fic. 7B PLACEMENT OF THICKENED NERVE AGENT/SIMULANT ON L/V TESTING 


Fic. 7 Top SCHEMATIC VIEW OF SWATCHES 


IS 17380 : 2020 


8.11.2.3 RT/NRT systems 


A final calibration check of the sampling system shall 
be conducted to ensure that accurate data are generated 
for the duration of the trial. 


8.12 Test Cell Cleanup and Swatch Disposal 


8.12.1 The setup shall be powered off and the test 
cells shall be removed from the test assembly after 
the completion of each trial. Each cell shall be 
disassembled, one at a time. 


8.12.2 Each test swatch shall be removed and inspected 
for obvious abnormalities. It is recommended that a 
digital picture be taken after each test to indicate the 
interaction of the agent drop(s) with the swatch. Results 
of the inspection shall be recorded. 


8.12.3 The test swatch and O-rings shall be placed in a 
decontamination solution for 24 h before disposal. 


8.12.4 Each component of the test cell shall be 
thoroughly rinsed with acetone to remove any residual 
chemicals. All remnants of the test cell labels shall be 
removed. The cells shall be air dried for 24 h before 
being reused. 


8.13 Initial Data Review 


The senior test person shall review all of the data 
obtained for consistency and acceptability during 
trial execution or as soon as possible after the test. 
Specifically, the following items shall be reviewed: 


a) The agent challenge QC check shall be reviewed 
to ensure the target challenge concentration was 
met, if applicable. 


b 


wm 


The analytical results for each sampling period 
shall be reviewed to determine whether the results 
obtained on replicate test swatches are reasonable 
and consistent. 


c 


— 


The analytical results for positive control swatches 
shall be reviewed to determine if the swatches 
remained within control limits. 


d 


— 


The negative control swatches shall be reviewed 
to determine if breakthrough occurred in their 
test cells. The purpose of negative controls is 
also to determine if there is an issue with the test 
processes. As an example, samples could come 
back showing contamination if there is cross- 
contamination somewhere in the system. 


9 CALCULATIONS 


9.1 Nerve Agent/ Simulant Permeation in L/V 
Swatch Testing 


Amount of Nerve agent/ simulant (ug) initially on the 
swatch = A, 


12 


Permeated amount calculated from the bottom part of 
test cell = A, 


Permeation Efficiency = (4,- 4,)/A, x 100 % 
9.2 Nerve Agent/Simulant Permeation in V/V 
Swatch Testing 
Cumulative permeated concentration of nerve agent/ 
simulant (mg. min/m*) 
=MxT/V 


Where, 
M= Amount of agent permeated (mg), 
T= Time duration of permeation test (min), and 


V= Total volume of contaminated air passed 
through the swatch. 


10 REPORT 


10.1 State that the test was conducted as directed in 
relevant Indian Standard. 


10.2 Provide a description of the ensemble evaluated, 
including: 
a) The identification and type of each swatch 
element, including the manufacturer name, 
primary materials of construction; 


b) The sizes of the element from which swatch is 
taken for evaluation; and 

c) Any specific conditioning or pretreatments that 
the swatch elements were subjected to prior to 
testing. 


10.3 Describe the conditions or any deviations from the 
test method, including: 

a) Configuration of test cell; 

b) The time length of the test conducted; and 


c) The challenge concentration in V/V challenge 
test and challenge contaminated density in L/V 
challenge test. 


10.4 Agent purity analyses results. 


10.5 Provide test results for the ensemble evaluated, 
including: 
a) Amount of penetrated nerve agent/simulant 


through swatch or cumulative concentration of 
agent/simulant; 


b) Results of negative and positive control; and 


c) Any specific observations of swatch failure 
based on cracks or seam or malfunctioning 
components. 


IS 17380 : 2020 


11 PRECISION AND BIAS 11.2 Bias 
11.1 Precision No information can be presented on the bias for the 
` procedure in this test method because no test sample 


It is not practical to specify the precision of the having an accepted reference value is available at this 
procedures in this test method because test involves time. 

various parameters using test subjects. Factors related 

to the fit and functioning of the test sample will affect 

test method precision. 


13 


IS 17380 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Textiles Protective Clothing Sectional Committee, TXD 32 


Organization 


Northern India Textile Research Association, Ghaziabad 


E.I. DU Pont India Private Limited, Gurugram 


Aeronav Industrial Safety Appliances, Noida 
Arvind Limited, Gandhinagar 


Border Security Force, New Delhi 


Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 


Central Reserve Police Force, New Delhi 


Centre for Fire Explosive and Environment Safety, 
New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Defence Bioengineering & Electromedical Laboratory, 
Bengaluru 


Defence Institute of Physiology & Allied Sciences 
(DIPAS), DRDO , Delhi 


Defence Materials and Stores Research & Development 
Establishment, Kanpur 


Delhi Fire Service, New Delhi 


Department of Jute & Fibre Technology, Institute of Jute 
Technology, Kolkata 


Directorate General Fire Services, Civil Defence & Home 
Guards, Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 
DSM Dyneema Limited, Mumbai 


Fire Retardant Association of India, New Delhi 


Foremost Technico Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


14 


Representative(s) 


Dn AniNDAM Basu (Chairman) 
Dn M. S. Parmar (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ JHAVER 
SHRIMATI VEDIKA KAPooR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP HORA 


SHRI SATYAPRIYA DASH 
SHRI RanuL Dev Mat (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH CHANDRA 
SHRI TARUN Ravi (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. CHATURVEDI 
SHRI RAVINDRA KuMAR MEEL (Alternate) 


SHRI RANDHIR KUMAR JHA 
SHRI PARTHA S. Sanu (Alternate) 


Dn R. P. SINGH 
SHRI MAHIPAL MEENA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUVENDU MAHAPATRA 


Dn T. M. KOTRESH 
Dn Vinotu. P (Alternate) 


Suri M. PAL 
SHRI T. CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


Dr ANURAG SRIVASTAVA 
Dn K. K. Gupta (Alternate I) 
SHRI A. S. PARIHAR (Alternate IT) 


SHRI ATUL GARG 
Suni VIPIN KENTAL (Alternate) 


Pnor (Dr) A. K. SAMANTA 
Pnor D. Das (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. SHAMI 


SHRI MAHENDRA SINGH 
Suri P. De (Alternate) 


SHRI HARSH WARDHAN SHARMA 
SHRI RAKESH GAIKwaD (Alternate) 


Suri P. V. MURALI MOHAN 


SHRI ViNAY KHANNA 
SHRI PRAKASH KHANNA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


IS 17380 : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 


Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai DR ANUP RAKSHIT 
SHRI BASANT Lonia (Alternate) 


Intertek India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram SHRI HEMANT PARAB 
SHRI SUNDAR KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Indo-Tibetan Border Police, New Delhi SHRI PRAKASH DANGWAL 
SHRI RAHUL (Alternate) 


JCT Limited, Phagwara Suri K. S. DHILLON 
SHRI ARWINDER SINGH (Alternate) 
Kusumgar Corporates Pvt Ltd, Mumbai SHRI YOGESH K. KUSUMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 
Star Wire (India) Ltd , Faridabad REPRESENTATIVE 
MIDHANI, Hyderabad CoL ASHWANI KUMAR 
MKU Ltd, Kanpur SHRI VAIBHAV GUPTA 
Suni Raj Par (Alternate) 
NBC Eqpt Wing, Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune Suri B. G. SHINDE 
Lt Cor R. S. JHINKWAN (Alternate) 
NSG, New Delhi Suni PREM VisHWAS 
Occupational Safety, Health and Chemical Hazard MEMBER SECRETARY 
Committee (CHD 08), Bureau of Indian Standards, 
New Delhi 
Ordnance Clothing Factory, Avadi SHRI V MATHIVANAN 


SHRI SHANMUGAM B. (Alternate) 


Office of Textile Commissioner, Mumbai SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
SHRI SANJAY CHARAK (Alternate) 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate, Noida SHRI DEVENDRA M. MAHAJAN 

SHRI HARENDRA Y ApAv (Alternate) 
RDSO, Lucknow REPRESENTATIVE 
Reliance Industries Limited, New Delhi SHRI M. S. VERMA 

SHRI VuAY GARG (Alternate) 
SGS India Pvt. Ltd, Chennai SHRIMATI ANITHA JEYARAJ 

Dn KARTHIKEYAN K. (Alternate) 
SMPP Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI ASHISH KANSAL 


Dn S. C. Kansat (Alternate) 


System 5S Private Limited, Chennai SHRI SUDHIR TAKKER 
SHRIMATI BHAVNA SR TAKKAR (Alternate) 


TATA Advanced Materials Limited, Bengaluru SHRI NARESH CHANDRA SHARMA 
SHRI BASAVARAJ ANGADI (Alternate) 


Terminal Ballistics Research Laboratory, Chandigarh SHRIMATI Ipsita BISWAS 
DR DEBARATI BHATTACHARJEE (Alternate) 


Teijin India Private Limited, Gurugram SHRI PRIYARPAN SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI Ravi Kumar (Alternate) 


15 


IS 17380 : 2020 


Organization 


Tex Corporation Limited, Gurugram 
Textiles Committee, New Delhi 


TUV Rheinland India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
In Personal Capacity 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI Vay TOLEY 
SHRI SANJAY AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PARVEJ AHMED 
Suri V. K. R. Macuirasu (Alternate) 


SHRI CHARAN SINGH 
Dr V. K. KOTHARI 


SHRI A. K. Bera, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 
SHRI J. K. GUPTA 
Scientist ‘D’ (TXD), BIS 


16 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 32 (14500). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


