( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985

Indian Standard
GUIDE ON MAINTAINABILITY
PART 5 MAINTAINABILITY THE DESIGN Reliability

OF EQUIPMENT
STUDIES PHASE DURING

of Electronic and Electrical Components Sectional Committee, LTDC 3
Indian Institute

and

Equipment

Chrrirmrrn
PROF S.SAMPATH Members

Represeniing of Technology,

Kanpur

ADDWIONALDIRECTOK, STANDARDS Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) (S&Tl.RDSO ' JOINT`~IREC.I~R, STANDARDS ( S & T )-III, RDSO ( AZfernate ) SHRI S. P. BHATIKAR All India Radio, New Delhi

SHKI J. C. %)OD ( Alternate) DR K. CHANDRA National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI CHAKANJITSINGH Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Hyderabad' SHRI R. PAKTHASARATHY( Alternate) DR P. K. DUTTA Peico Electronics and Electricals Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. NARAYANAN ( Alternate ) SHRI B. P. GHOSH National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. C. MUKHERIEE ( Alternate ) SHRI A. P. GLJPTA Instrumentation Ltd, Kota SHRI I. S. SULAKH ( Alternate )
SHRI R. K. JAYADEV SHRI HARDEV SINGH ( Alternate SHRI M. S. KAMATH Overseas Communication Indian Electrical Bombay Services, Bombay

)

Manufacturers*

Association,

SHRI T. C. GOSALLA ( Alternate ) BRIG L. G. KETKAR Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-CAL V. K. KHANNA ( Alternate ) Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers' SHRI S. P. KULKARNI Association, Bombay SHI~IS. M. KHURSALE ( Alternate ) SHR~ LAKSHM~NAKAYANA Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI V. MUTHAIAH ( Alternate )

( Continued on page 2 ) 0 Copyright 1986 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

1s : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985 ( Continued from page 1 )
Members
SHR~K. M. MANKAD SHRI B. BHASKAR RAO ( Al/ernate SHRID. C. MEHTA SHRIR. V. ISRANI( Alternate ) SHRIH. V. MEHTA SHRI S. RAMALINGAM( Alternate ) DR K. B. MISRA Electronics

Representing
Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad New Delhi

)

Directorate

General of Civil Aviation,

Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi In personal capacity ( Department of EIecfrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur )

SHRI K. R. ANANDAKUMARAN NAIR Lucas-TVS Ltd, Madras SHR~C. RANGANATHAN( Alternate ) Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay SHRI D. V. PBTKAR SHRI A. K. BABAR ( Alternate ) Bh ara t Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. S. K. PRASAD SHRI N. DHANSEKHAKAN ( Afternate ) ISRO Satellite Centre ( ISAC ), Bangalore SHRI K. RAMG~PAL SHRI SIHARAN DE ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI P. K. SHUKLA SHRI P. K. JAIN( Alternute ) Directorate of Technical . Development and SHRI R. S~MASUNDAKAM P~ox$;i..o ( AIR ), ( Muustry of Dcfenca ), SHRI R. N. SHAHMA( Alternate 1 ' Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi SHRXH. C. TEWARI SHRID. P. SINHA( Alternate ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi DR R. P. WADHWA SHRI E. G. NAGARAJAN( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ufic~o Member ) SHRIN. SRINIVASAN Director ( Electronics ) ( Secretary )

Study

of Statistical

Problems

of Reliability

of Electronic

and

Electrical Items Subcommittee,
Convener
DR P. K. Du~~A

LTDC 3 : 1

Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay

Members
Ministry of Defer-m ( DGI ) SHRI ASAD AHMED MAJ RAJAN MANNIL ( Alternate ) EME Directorate, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi Lr-COL P. S. BHA~A MAJ A. PONNUCHAMY( Alternate ) Telecommunication Research Centre, New Delhi SHRI N. C. MISHRA SHRI T. S. KUPPUSWAMI ( Alternate ) Indian Statistical Institute, Hyderabad SHRI V. NARAYANA Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. S. K. PRASAD Electroe;~De~;gronal Test Laboratory ( North ), SHRI J. S. RAJU
SHRI S. MITICA( Alternate ) SHRI K. RAM#PAL SHRI P. K. SHUKLA SHRIP. K. JAIN( Alternate )

ISRO Satellite Centre ( ISAC ), Bangalore Ministry of Defense ( R & D )

2

IS : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985

Indian Standard
GUIDE ON MAlNTAINABILITY OF EQUIPMENT
PART 5 MAINTAINABILTIY THE DESIGN STUDIES PHASE DURING

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian

Standard ( Part 5 > was adopted by the Tndian Standards Institution on 6 June 1985, after the draft finalized by the Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council.

0.2 This guide is intended to make recommendations for the standardization of maintainability practices and to stimulate ideas in the maintainability field, Organizations acquiring items will find the guide useful in assisting them in defining maintainability requirements and associated Item suppliers will benefit from use of the Guide, gaining programmes. an understanding of the requirements for achieving and verifying maintainability objectives. 0.3 The present standard is intended to be Part 5 of the Guide on Maintainability. Final publication of the complete series is expected to take a few years; but since each Part is able to make a contribution to the needs of other IS1 Technical Committees, it has been decided to circulate each as it is prepared, when all are completed a combined standard will be published. 0.3.1 Tentative titles for other Parts to this series are: Part Part Part Part Part Part Introduction to maintainability Maintainability requirements in specifications and contracts Maintainability programme Tests and diagnostic procedures Maintainability verification Collection, analysis and presentation of data related to maintainability Part 8 Information required from maintainability studies for maintenance support planning 3 1 2 3 4 6 7

IS : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985 0.4 In preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the IEC document 56 ( Secretariat ) 185 Guide on Maintainability of Equipment, Section 5 Maintainability Studies during the Design Phase issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC ).

0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on reliability of electronic and electrical comnonents and eauiDment. A list of standards _~. published so far in this series is given on page-228:

1. SCOPE 1.1 This guide describes the different aspects of maintainability during the design and how to conduct such studies.

studies

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, terms and definitions IS : 1885 ( Part 39 ) - 1979* and IS : 7690-1975t shall apply. 3. GENERAL 3.1 Maintainability studies should be developed and integrated with the design process to meet the stated system operational requirements. To assure that these requirements are met, maintainability studies shall be carried out during all phases of design and their results shall provide input to design decision making. maintainability studies in the preliminary and detailed design phases and their relation to other maintainability and maintenance support tasks which are described in other parts of this guide. The selected maintainability and design studies are described. Maintainability considerations in design reviews are alsa included. 3.3 The object of maintainability studies is to:
3.2 This guide outlines

as given in

4 support design decisions;

b) predict the quantitative maintainability characteristics 9

of the item; and identify changes lo the item design or the requirements, or both, to meet operational requirements within the given constraints.

*Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part 39 Reliability of electronic and electrical items
( first revision ).

fMathematica1 guide to the terms and definitions for reliability of electronic equipment and components ( or parts ) used therein.

4

Is:%92(Part5)-1985 4. MAINTAINABILITY STUDIES IN THE DESIGN PROCESS 4.1 Introdaction 4.1.1 Maintainability &dies are a part of the maintainability programme intended to assure that the delivered item meets its maintainability requirements. They should be planned and performed by the supplier of an item, even when they are not contractually specified. 4.1.2 Maintainability analysis, an integral part of maintainability studies is a process which translates operational requirements into the detailed qualitative and quantitative maintainability requirements and design criteria. Maintainability analysis provides inputs to the design process and results in the following documentation: a) Specific maintainability requirements to be met in the design; b) Design guidelines and checklists to assure that the required maintainability features are included in the design; and c) A summary of basic maintenance functions and support requirements. Maintainability analyses are involved in iterative design trade-off studies, a number of which may be required before tlie optimum design is related. They shall also be used to evaluate the degree of achievement of the maintainability design requirement. 4.1.3 In order to achieve the lowest life cycle costs a maintenance The concept should be developed in parallel with the design, optimization. maintenance concept is a general description of a plan for system maintence support in the operational environment. It establishes the scope and purposes methods of repair at each time of maintenance and identifies the personnel resources required. It provides for the practical basis for design, layout and packaging of the item and its list equipment. 4.1.4 Achievement of operational requirements including maintainability requirements in design within usual constraints of schedules and costs is a responsibility of the designer. In or&er to satisfy these requirements, maintainability shall be specified at the beginning of design process and necessary maintainability studies shall be performed during the design process. The extent and depth of these studies shall be dictated by the needs which depend on degree of complexity and required safety, availability and reliability levels. 4.2 Maintainability and Analysis

Figure 1 is an example of how maintainability studies in design and their sequences relate to design tasks. Design is an iterative process and 5

IS : %92 ( Part 5 ) - 1985

r -__-_____j~~ I
UTlLlZ4TlON 4N0 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUlREMENTS J I PRELIMINARV SYSTEM DESIGN LOEVELOPMEM DESIGN 4LTERND;TIVES PRELIMINARY DESIGN -

-1
I
`i

I
PERFORUANCE AV4ILABILITV, RELIABILITV,MAINTAINABILITV REOUlREMENlS I I PRELIMINARY MPIINTIIN4EILIlV ANALVSlS M FUNCTIONAL OIpGRI\M -

1
SYSTEM CONSTRAINTS SCHEDULE .COST, MAINTENANCE POLICY ETC. I I MAINTENANCE ANALYSIS MAINTENANCE CONCEPT SUPPOW. --f-i

:
so E I _a

p I 1 I I I

M 4LLOCATION.M FEASIBILITV ESlIH4TION I PRELIhWARV MAINTAINABILITY AN4LV.W pCONTINUED

I SYSTEM EVALUATION -_ TRAOE-OFF STUDIES

I M4INTENANCE ANALYSIS CONTINUED SUPPORT

k 2 Iz z!!! 2: ILO I

_

SYSTEM SELECTION

~FINITION SYSTEM PRODUCTION I MAINT4lNAf3ILI~V OEMONSTR4lKIN I I 1

.& IMPLEMEN-

tdANlJF&2lLxIMc AND FUNCTlONAL TESTING

*TEST h SUPPORl EQ. MT. .SPAl?E P4RTS *PERSONNEL h TRAINING lTECHNIIXL OATA

1
MAINTENANCE CONSlOERATl0k-c

t

FIG. 1 DESIGNPROCESS

6

IS:%92(PartS)-1985 each task provides input to those tasks which follow and also to those which are being carried out in parallel. An essential input to maintainability studies are the outputs from reliability studies which are not included in this standard. Figure 1 also shows the relationship between maintainability studies and maintenance support tasks which are carried out in parallel. These tasks arc described in detail in IS : 9692 ( Part 8 )*. 4.2.1 Prerequisirs - An important prerequisite for maintainability studies is the existence of maintainability requirements. These requirements may either be specified in the contract by the customer as outlined in IS : 9692 ( Part 2 1 - 1980f or in terms of operational requirements which must be translated into specific functional, performance, reliability, maintainability and safety requirements before they can be interpreted in terms of design tasks. Maintainability requirements shall be clearly defined in qualitative and quantitative terms to allow proper planning and implementation of design. 4.2.2 Funcfional Analysis - In performing maintainability analysis, it is convenient to describe the item in the form of a functional level diagram. The functional level breakdown of the item is determined by dividing it into its various physical sub-divisions ( levels ) beginning with the highest level and continuing down to levels at which faults can be localized and sub-iteLms replaced, repaired or adjusted. The functional analysis provides a description of major item functions and defines the equipment arrangement concept. Identification of design provisions for maintainability may be made. Sub-items which are repairable by replacement and those which are not replaceable may be indicated. Fault localization, isolation and test points are also indicated on this diagram. An example of a functional level maintainability diagram is given in Fig. 2. 4.2.3 Maintainability Feasibility Estimation - In the design prccess, there are a number of decision points where it is necessary to evaluate the feasibility of alternative approaches before election of one of them. In the early design phase of an item there will be insufficient information to provide a detailed prediction to confirm compliance with specified maintainability requirements before proceeding with the detailed design. Therefore a simplified procedure for the gross prediction of maintainability which is mainly based on the past experience shall be used. Maintainability data from previous designs can be used and correlated to new design characteristics and maintenance conditions. Only the dominant corrective and preventive maintenance tasks should be identified and their durations estimated. Outputs of the feasibility analysis can be used to evaluate *Guide on maintainability of equipment: Part 8 Information required from maintainability studies for maintenance support planning ( under preparation ).
tGmde on maintainability specifications and contracts. of equipments Part 2 Maintainability requirements in

7

IS:%92(Part5)-1985

A
A A

test (checkout ) points, at which the performance of an item is tested. localization points, at which the faulty item of an equipment is determined. isolation points, at which the faulty item of au equipment is identified and isolated. replaceable item. non-replaceable item.
FIG. 2 FUNCTIONAL LEVEL MAINTAINABILITY DIAGRAM

0

0

8

JS : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985

system design, including the alternatives. Feasibility analysis may also indicate that system maintainability requirements cannot be met within the specified constraints and should be changed. system 4.2.4 Maintainability Allocation - The process of translating maintainability requirements to lower functional levels is called maintainability allocation. It is an iterative process and must be initiated in the early design phase, when the allocation procedure can only be carried through the higher levels of sub-division due to limited information in this stage. Re-iteration and allocation down to lower levels shall take place, as detailed design becomes available. 4.2.4.1 The firsr stage of maintainability allocation requires that a breakdown of the system shall be made down to the required functional level of detail. This can be done via a functional level diagram as described in 4.2.2. In the preliminary stages it may not be possible to go down to the required depth but as more detailed information becomes available the process shall be continued. A very important part of this process is that the maintainability engineer will require an estimate of the reliability of each item which he identifies in the functional level diagram. Without this he cannot proceed any further. Thus it is necessary for the reliability and maintainability engineer to establish a close liaison from the outset and use the same functional level diagram. 4.2.4.2 The second stage is the allocation of a maintainability characteristic for each identified item using the best information available of its design and its environment. Two cases can occur: a) For new designs with unknown inherent characteristios, the allocation shall be based on the relative complexity of the units involved. The measure of complexity can in many cases be taken to be the unit failure rate. b) If the design has evolved from an earlier one, the allocation shall be based on previous experience and identify areas for improvement when necessary. Basic allocation parameters are :

a) Mean active repair time ( MART ), eventually further subdivided into diagnosis time, restoration time and check out time. b) Mean active preventive maintenance time, and c) The ratio: maintenance man hours ( MMH )/operating hours ( OH ). Allocation of logistic supply time and administrative also be made when required. 9 delay time can

IS : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985
4.2.4.3 The third stage is a feasibility study of the maintainability characteristic allocation of each identified item in the functional diagram ( Fig. 2 ). When it is not considered possible to meet the allocation then the following courses are open:

a) Improvement of the maintainability characteristic by re-design ( better diagnosis, access, modularization, facilities, etc ). Reallocation subject to the overah system requirement being met, b) Decrease in failure rates through reliability improvement, c) As a last resort a reconsideration of system requirements. An example Appendix A. of a maintainability allocation is described in the

4.2.5 Maintainability Prediction - Maintainability Prediction is the process of assessing, by analytical means, the maintainability features of an item, and of calculating its quantitative maintainability characteristics, using a defined maintainability analytical model including stated maintenance support conditions. Maintainability prediction should be performed at the required milestones to provide : design

a) Assessment whether allocated maintainability requirements can be met, and whether the necessary maintenance support is available to meet operational requirements. b) identification of any areas where modifications or a change of design is necessary. These inputs provide management with the assurance that the design is progressing satisfactorily and indicate where redirection of design effort and changes in design are required. Within each analytical loop, the steps illustrated taken. in Fig. 3 shall be

analytical model 4.2.5.1 Maintainability model - An appropriate reflecting the maintainability features and relationships of the item under consideration shall be developed. The model shall be based on the functional level maintainability diagram ( Fig. 2 j described earlier and shall determine the mathematical rules for combining the maintainability values of its different elements under given constraints. Normally, simple analytical models will be preferred, however, in certain cases, a higher degree of sophistication can be necessary. Appendix B gives an example of a more sophisticated analytical method. 10

IS : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985

ANALYTICAL

MPINTENANCE

MAlNlENAkCE

UAINTAINABILRY

FIG. 3 BASISSTEPSIN MAINTAINABILITY PREDICTIONS 4.2.5.2 Maintenance tasks and intervals - The maintainability prediction shall consider corrective maintenance, preventive maintenance, and maintenance service tasks, according to their respective contributions to the overall maintenance expenditure. Inputs to corrective maintenance considerations will be provided by reliability analysis : the EMEA ( see 4.2 ) identifies possible defect events and restoration tasks; mean times between corrective maintenance are determined by corresponding defect rates. Preventive maintenance considerations will be based on the maintenance plan which identifies the preventive maintenance tasks and the corresponding intervals in terms of operational times or cycles. Maintenance service tasks such as replenishment, lubrication, etc, shall be included into corrective of preventive maintenance tasks, depending upon the special case under consideration. 4.2.5.3 Maintenance task time analysis - Maintenance tasks identified according to 4.2.5.2 can be decomposed into active task elements, technical delays, and support task elements, such as positioning of test equipment, facilities, etc. The times needed to carry out individual task elements shall be estimated, based on historical data or previous experience, and put together in accordance with the structure of the relevant maintenance 11

IS : %92 ( Part 5 ) - 1985 tasks. Maintenance task times obtained mented along with their elements. by this analysis shall be docu-

4.2.5.4 Maintainability parameter assessment - Based on the iniormation established in accordance with 4.2.5.1 to 4.2.5.3 the maintainability achievements of the design can be quantitatively assessed. Dependent on the maintainability requirements for the design under consideration, the maintainability prediction will take into account all relevant maintenance actions separately or in combination. The maintainability parameter used for the prediction shall be the same as for the maintainability allocation. It will be calculated by applying the analytical maintainability model to the relevant task frequency and task time data. 4.2.6 Trade-off Studies - The trade-off study is a technique of decision making where several alternatives are evaluated, considering systematically and adequately all important related factors prior to making the selection of an optimum alternative. Maintainability trade-off analyses are used to determine the relative advantages of one design alternative and associated maintenance concept over the other. In the preliminary design, trade-off evaluations are concerned with high level system parameters, such as performance, availability, reliability, maintainability and life cycle costs. In the detailed design of specific lower level item, lower level parameters, such as accessibility, test and support equipment, packaging spare parts, etc, should be considered. 4.2.6.1 Trade-off studies are usually accomplished in the following four steps:

4 Definition of the problem: a specific problem to be solved and
specific factors to be considered are described;

b> Identification of feasible alternatives: first list all possible solutions, 4

and then select only those which appear acceptable from the total system point of view; Selection of evaluation criteria: parameters which are to be employed in the evaluation process shall be selected and rated according to relevance and degree of importance. Parameter weighting factors may be used to facilitate evaluation; and Evaluation process which can be divided into the following tasks:

4

1) Data acquisition, 2) Model building and analysis, and
3) Decision.
12

IS : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985 4.2.6.2 In performing trade-off studies care shall be taken to eliminate personal bias and to validate data and results of the analysis. Sensitivity analysis is useful in determining how sensitive are the results to variations in input parameters.

4.2.6.3 Life cycle cost ( LCC ) is one of the most important parameters to be considered in trade-off studies. An LCC study from maintainability point of view is an evaluation of the cost of a system/item acquisition and maintenance and support ( life cycle costs ) relative to corresponding combination of mamtainabtlity characteristics and maintenance concept. During the design evaluation process, LCC studies are performed to select the optimum combination of design features which will jointly satisfy operation requirements at the lowest life cycle costs. 4.2.6.4 The trade-off including LCC studies and other studies provide input in system evaluation and optimization which results in the selection of optimum reference design. 4.2.7 Failure Mode `and Effects Analysis ( FMEA ) 4.2.7.1 FMEA is a method of reliability analysis intended to identify the way of occurence and the causes of all possible item failures. The basic steps in performing an FMEA are: a) b) c) d) e) f) definition of item performance requirements, system breakdown into functional elements, identification of failure modes and effects, identification of failure conditions, description of failure detection features of design, and listing of basic maintenance actions for correction of failures.

FMEA provides an input to maintainability predictions by identification of failure modes, their frequency and the subsequent maintenance action required. It also facilitates the allocation process. FMEA also serves as a basis for design and location of condition monitoring and fault sensing devices and development of automatic test and diagnostic procedures to minimize corrective maintenance downtime.

13

IS;%92(Part5)-1985

APPENDIX ( Clause 4.2.4.3 )

A

EXAMPLE OF MAINTAINABILITY ALLOCATION A-l. An item consisting of k replaceable/repairable sub-items shall meet a maintainability requirement expressed in terms of an overall figure, for example, the items' mean active repair time ( MART ). In accordance with 4.2.4, the following cases occcur when allocating MART targets to the sub items: a) New design: the allocation is based on the relative complexity of the sub-items which, in the absence of other measures, shall be represented by the sub-items failure rates. Thus for sub-item i:

For k sub-items

b) Partially new design: previous sub-items. Then for sub-item j:
M =MiXbnrhr-XZ:niAIiU~ I (k - l)njhj

knowledge
,j-I+

available

for 1 < k

i , .. . . . . , k

c) Previous knowledge available for all of the k sub-items, that is, subitem i is expected to show MART MS. Then

is calculated.

For @ c M, the initial maintainability requirement is met; for 3? > M, further improvements in accordance with 4.2.4 are necessary to meet the initial maintainability requirement. A-2. NUMERICAL EXAMPLE Let the functional level diagram be as given in Fig. 4. The allocation process is assisted by the use of a Table 1 as given below: 14

IS : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985

FIG. 4 FUNCTIONAL LEVELDIAGRAM

TABLE
SUB-ITEM QUANTITY
TyPe FAILURE UT@

1 ALLOCATION TABLE
TOTAL FAILURE RATE CASE B

Y

Y

A

---Total

CB

: 1

1.71 1.71 8X "o:zz ____-_______------_-_-2'73

0.27 !:Z7

0.48 0.5 1.0

;:: 1'0

a) Case A
MA = 0.5 . -$

= 0.27
0.47

Mp0.5.+&
MC = 0.5 . g

= 7.6

b) Case B -

Based on previous knowledge, it is assumed M, = l-5 MO = I.0

Thus

M
A

=

0.5 x 2.73 - 0.5 x 0.26 I.71

1.0 x 0.06

= 0.48

c) Case C -

Based on previous knowledge, it is expected

Ma = 0.4 MB = 0.5 iuo 3 I.0 15

IS : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985 Thus M M= 0.4 x 1.71 + 0.5 x 0.26 + 1.0 x 0.06 2.73 0.45 Af

APPENDIX ( &use
MAINTENANCE R-l. PURPOSE

B

4.2.5.1 )
METHOD

TREE PREDICTION

OF THE METHOD

B-l.1 Evaluation of the maintainability characteristics of a sub-item, taking into account the maintenance policy and reviewed reliability data, can be performed by the `Maintenance Tree Prediction Method'. This method can also be useful for trade-offs at the design stage. R-l.2 Active repair time prediction includes the following steps: a) Divide the maintenance sequence of the item into elementary tasks, b) Define the logical or the most efficient sequence of these elementary tasks to ensure a successful completion, c) Assign to each elementary task a duration, and d) Consider the contribution of each part of the item to the item failure rate. Maintenance trees are a most useful way of representing a sequence of elementary tasks. R-2. MAINTENANCE TREE CHARACTERISTICS

R-2.1 A maintenance tree is a graphic pattern of a complete maintenance operation ( preventative or corrective ) giving qualitative and quantitative information on how to carry out maintenance tasks. R-2.2 A maintenance tree consists of several branches, each representing a different failure pattern and hence a corresponding sequence of elementary tasks. The number of branches will depend upon the breakdown of the item and.the level of maintenance. In a maintenance tree, elementary tasks are grouped into three major phases: 16

IS : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985 a) Diagnosis phase ( failure confirmation and localization ). This phase includes several elementary tasks of two types: 1) tasks not leading to a decision, and 2) conditional tests which lead to the decision branch of the maintenance tree. b) Restoration phase ( isolation, disassembly, c) Check-out phase. R-2.3 Figure 5 gives the breakdown of the item Z and Fig. 6 gives an example of the first level maintenance tree of this item.

to follow

a definite

exchange, re-assembly ).

FIG.

5 BREAKDOWNOF THE ITEMZ AT THEFIRSTMAINTBNANCE LEVEL

B-3. REQUIREMENTS ~3.1 The construction of a maintenance tree requires the maintainability engineer to work closely with the design engineers and with the user. B-3.2 The following will be required: a) when the qualitative maintainability requirements are needed, the maintainability engineer will define the elementary tasks, in accordance with the maintenance and support policy or with specific user requirements. 17

Is : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985
DEFINITIONS OF TASKS:

4

CONOITIONAL

TEST

TASK WITHOUT OECISION

BAD I

I
EXCHANGE PART 5

I

NOTB 1 - Each task can be divided into several elementary tasks ,jn accordance with the maintenance policy or the customer requirements. NOTE 2 - Orderof conditional tests takes into account the following assumption: AB > AA > xc

FIG. 6 EXAMPLE OF A MAINTENANCE TREE OF THE ITEMZ

b) when quantitative maintainability requirements are needed, the maintainability engineer will define the elementary tasks and evaluate when Active Repair Time distributions. B-4. EVALUATION OF ACTIVE REPAIR TIME DISTRIBUTIONS BY MEANS OF ` MAINTENANCE TREE PREDiCTION METHOD '
B-4.1 Simple Process B-4.1.1 Purpose -

The

simple

process
18

allows

the

maintainability

IS:%92(Part5)-1985

engineer to obtain quickly approximate values of the distribution meters of the active repair time of the item.
B-4.1.1.1 This process will only be used when:

para-

a) the maintainability engineer goes through the first evaluation cycle; b) the confidence in the input data may have a large influence on the active repair time distribution ( reliability data; and maintenance and support policy data or design data ), and c) the number of parts in the item breakdown is five or more,
B-4.1.2 Procedure - First, the maintainability engineer assigns to each elementary task, a single value which could be the mean of different predicted values.

a) Mean active repair time of each part of the item - Mean active repair time of each part of the item is the sum of durations of all elementary tasks which have to be performed to ensure successful completion of the maintenance tasks. b) Active repair time distribution of the item - If A6is the failure rate of Part 5 and A is the item failure rate, the contribuion of Part 5 to the failure rate of the item will be:

The bar chart and the distribution of the active repair time of the item Z (see Fig. 7 and 8) will be obtained by taking into account the contribution of each part to the failure rate of the item. c) Prediction of mean and variance of the active repair time distribution - For an item composed of N parts, the mean and the variance of active repair time distribution are given by the following formula:
N xz c Ar ARTi --

i=l

A

02 _;

i= 1

c[

N

$-(ART,-XI]2

B-4.2 Standard Process -

Instead

of allocating 19

a single value to each

IS : 9692( Part 5 ) - 1985

elementary task, the maintainability distribution.

engineer assigns to each task a time

I

PARTS

3

ACTIVE

REPAIR

TIME

FIG. 7 BAR CHART OF ACTIVE REPAIRTIMEOF THE ITEMZ

B-4.2.1 Active Repair Time Distribution of the Parts - The maintainability engineer carries out a simulation by picking out random values from the distribution of each elementary task which has to be performed to ensure successful completion of maintenance tasks. For each iteration, random values obtained are summed. All of the iterations applied to a given part give the active repair time distribution of this part. Figure 9 illustrates the distributions of the active repair times of the five parts of the item I. The number of iterations for each part should not be smaller than 50. B-4.2.2 Active Repair Time Distribution of the Item - To obtain the active repair time distribution of the item, the maintainability engineer performs another simulation, taking into account the active repair time distribution of each part and its failure rate. 20

IS : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985

I

I

IT,5 1

PARTS

3

ACTIVE REf'Ak

T&E

FIG. 8 DISTRIBUTION OFACTIVE REPAIR TIMEOFTHEITFBI B-4.2.2.1 The active repair time distribution of the item is calculated by selecting a number of values from the active repair time distribution of each part taking into account its failure rate.

The number of random values from the active repair of Part 5 will be:

time distribution

Where n is the total number of iterations and should not be smaller than _ 30. B-4.2.2.2 Evaluation of the active repair time distribution of the whole of the item represented by a maintenance tree composed of a number of elementary tasks included in each branch, should be accomplished in accordance with the same procedure. 21

IS : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985

1)

I

I

IIntII

I

-

ACTIVE

REPAIR

TIME

FIG. 9 ACTIVE REPAIR TIME DISTRIBUTIONSOF THE PARTS OF THE ITEM 1
B-5.
RECOMM.ENDATI~NS

FOR

MAINTENANCE

TREE

CONSTRUCTION B-5.0 The construction

of maintenance tree shall be taken into account the fact that the number of elementary tasks introduced should be as small as possible.
B-5.1 Major and Minor Links of a Chain B-5.1.1 In the diagnosis phase, it is necessary to find first the most efficient conditional test taking into account results from preceding tests.

B-5.1.2 The block diagram of the sub-item can appear as a chain structure including a certain number of links ( see Fig. 10 ). Each link can appear as `major' or `minor'. A test at a major link provides information 22

Is : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985

Assumption X3 > X4 > ~2 > 11 10A Example of a Sue-item Chain Structure

1 OB Maintenance

Tree

Assumption : X3-2 > 113-l~3.3 1OC Breakdown of the Part 3 Introducing A Minor Link: Part 3'3

FIG. 10 BLWK DIGRAMAND MAINTENANCE TREE- Con&.
OD all the sub-item characteristics. A test at a minor link providix informa-

tion at only some sub-item characteristics. should be checked out first.
B-5.2 Reliability Interaction

Consequently,

major

links

B-5.2.1 Use of failure rates will help to identify an efficient sequence of ,conditional tests as illustrated in Fig. 10. 23

IS:9692(PIrt5)-1985

0
0 C'l

represents the entire restoration tasks
represents the entire check-out tasks tests of the part i

means conditional

1 OD From Previous Maintenance

Tree

FIG. 10 BLOCKDIAGRAM ANDMAINTENANCE `I&E
B-5.3 Conditional Test Interaction

B-5.3.1 An example of a chain structure is shown in Fig. 11 where the failure rates and the times of elementary tasks are similar for all parts. The first maintenance tree shows that the number of elementary tasks possible is not minimized. Therefore, in the second case, a dichotomy process has been applied to give as small a number as possible of elementary tasks in each branch of the tree. Norss - Restoration and check-out tasks are not represented in this example.
CZ" means conditional tests of the part i. B-5.4 Interaction of Elementary Task Times -When

an requires a long time compared with others, one should try task as late as possible in a branch. The reason for this is risk of degrading maintainability by introducing this unnecessary branches. B-6. OPTIMIZATION

elementary to introduce to minimize long time

task this the into

B-6.0 Figure 12 shows an example where the active repair time distribution required has not been reached. 24

IS : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985
OUT

11 A Example
START

of a Sub-item

Chain Structure

mFp2
11 B Unbalanced Maintenance Tree

1 IC

Maintenance

Tree with

Dichotomy

Process

FIG. 11 CHAIN STRUCTURE AND MAINTENANCE TREE For each point of the distribution curve which is greater than the corresponding required value, the optimization can be performed by applymg the following steps. B-6.1 Maintenance Tree Review - First, one has to review the maintenance tree taking into account each branch for which the risk of an unacceptable time is high and amending the tree where improvement can be made. B-6.2 Trade-off at the Item Design Level - This step is taken only when the requirements cannot be met after the maintenance tree review. B-6.2.1 The trade-off at the sub-item design level includes the following steps: a) Consider successively, and in order, each point of the distribution curve which is greater than the corresponding required value. The

25

IS : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985 order is based on the difference between the required and the assessed value, taking first the point which is characterized by the largest difference;

b) Pick up all the branches of the maintenance tree which are connected 4
to this point; Classify elementary tasks included in these branches present a risk of degrading the maintainability; which may

-

PART

1

PART

3

Simple Process Procedure ART, ART, = ( T,T~ + Tx, -

"
P4RT L RL `RL CL

-

TCL

ART 5

+ TOTS > + ( Txa I+

(To, 1

( z Tcr,,x + 2 TR,,= + I Tck,x )

i

j

k

OF'TIM
Optimization Procedure

ART, ART4 ARTY ART,

= = = =

T, T, r T8 -+ NewToTi,, I TI 1New TR],X + Design trade of

ART, = T,

1 New Tax

ETC

12A Example of a Maintenance Tree
FIG. 12 ACTIVE REPAIRTIMEOPTIMIZATION - Contd.

26

IS : 9692 ( Part 5 ) - 1985

ACTIVE

REPAIR

TIME (ART)-

12B Active Repair Time Distribution

Compared with the Requirement

FIG. 12 ACTIVEREPAIRTIME OPTIMIZATION of times for some elementary tasks by d) Consider the reduction re-designing in order that the sum of reductions will be equal to the difference between the required and the assessed values; e) Evaluate thecost impact of these changes at the design level; f) Changes which may be feasible, require evaluation to determine a new set of assessed values; g) The same process will be used for other points of the curve with decreasing values of differences; and h) The optimization process is completed when the assessed values show that the requirements have been met.

27

INDIAN ON

STANDARDS

RELIABILITY OF ELECTRONIC AND ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT IS: 1885 ( Part 39 )-1979 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 39 Reliability of electronic electrical items (first revision ) for type approval and sampling procedures and

2612-1965 Recommendation components

for electronic

7354 Guide on reliability of electronic and electrical items: 7354 ( Part 1 )-1975 Part 1 Preliminary 7354 ( Part 2 )-1975 Part 2 Managerial 7354 ( Part 3 )-I975 Part 3 Presentation electrical components ( or parts ) reliability considerations aspects of reliability of reliability data on electronic and

7354 ( Part 4 )-1974 Part 4 Collection of reliability, availability data from field performance

and maintainability

7354 ( Part 5 )-1975 Part 5 Inclusion of lot-by-lot and periodic inspection procedures in specifications for electronic and electrical components ( or parts ) 7354 (Part 6 )-1983 Part 6 Inclusion of reliability components ( or parts ) (first revision ) clauses into specifications reliability for

7690-1975 Mathematical guide to the terms and definitions for equipment and components ( or parts ) used therein 8161 Guide for equipment 8161 (Part reliability testing: and procedures

of electronic

1 )-1976 Part I Principles

8161 ( Part 5 )-1981 Part 5 Compliance

test plans for success ratio failure rate assumption time

8161 ( Part 6 )-1983 Part 6 Tests for validity of a constant

8161 ( Part 7 )-1977 Part 7 Compliance test plans for failure rate and mean between failures assuming constant failure rate 8161 ( Part 9 )-1983 Part 9 Flow chart describing of reliability tests 9185 Endurance preparations

for and execution

( life ) test for electronic and electrical components: endurance

9185 ( Part 1 )-1979 Part 1 Thermal endurance 9185 ( Part 2 )-I 979 Part 2 Mechanical 9692 Guide on maintainability 9692 ( Part 2 l-1980 Part contracts of equipment: to maintainability requirements programme in specifications and 2 Maintainability 9186-1979 Guide for screening of electronic and electrical items

9692 ( Part 1 )-I980 Part 1 Introduction

9692 ( Part 3 )-I981 Part 3 Maintainabilily

2s

