(Reaffirmed 1999)

IS I 8548 - 1977

Indian Standard
TEST CODE FOR POWER-OPERATED HYDRAULIC SPRAYER
Crop Protection
Chairman SHRI C.S. SRIDHMUN Members SHRI R. K. ACARWAL SHRI R. C. GOEL ( Alternate ) DR S. N. BANERJEE SHRI S. K. Das ( Alternate ) SHRI B. S. BHATNAGAR Department of Agriculture, Pradesh, Lucknow Government of Uttar

Equipment

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

AFDC

43

Indian Council of Agricultural

Research, New Delhi

Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & and Agriculture Storage ( Ministry of Irrigation ), Faridabad Punjab State Co-operative Supply Federation Ltd, Chandigarh N. Das & Sons Pvt Ltd, Calcutta & Marketing

SHRI N. D. DAS SHRI B. N. BANERJEE( Alternate ) Mechanical Engineering Research & Development SHRI C. L. GARG Organization ( CSlR), Ludhiana SHRI S. D. GARG ( Alternate ) Tractor Training & Testing Station (Ministry of SHRI 0. S. GUPTA Agriculture & Irrigation ), Budni SENIORTEST ENCIEEER( Alternate ) State Farms Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI R. K. GUPTA Tocklai Experimental Station of Tea Research DR N. K. JAIN Association, Jorhat SHRI D. N. BARBORA ( Alternate ) Shaw Wallace & Co Ltd, Madras &RI P. J. LAVENDER SHRI A. SELVARAJ ( Alternate) The Sigma Steel Industries (Regd ), Ludhiana &RI KRISHAN KUMAR MANGAI. SHRI JAGDISH CHANDER ( Alternate ) American Spring & Pressing Works Ltd, Bombay SHRI L. M. PATEL SHRI S. L. PATEL ( Alternate ) Defence Materials and Stores Research and DevelopDR N. P. RAO ment Establishment ( Ministry of Defence), Kanpur SHRI L. M. PARTHAS~RATHY ( Alternate) Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi SHRI P. RAMDAS SHRI M. MASEEH ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 )

@ Copyright 1978
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the In&n Coprright Act (XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 8548 - 1977 ( Continuedfrom page
Members
SHRI 0. 1)

Repsenting Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi Training Institute, Central Plant Protection Hyderabad Directorate General of Technical Development ( Ministry of Industry ), New Delhi Corporation Ltd, Agro-Industries Gujarat Ahmadabad Allied_Industrial Traders, Lucknow Indian Agricultural Research Institute New Delhi Punjab Agriculture University, Ludhiana ( ICAR ),

D. SANCAR

Smx V. Cl. S. SASTRY
SHRI

R. N. SINGH

SHRI RAJENDRA SIN~HVI DR R. K. GOHIL ( Alternate) SHXI D. D. SINHA DR B. S. SIROHI

DR S. R. VERMA DR C. P. SINGH ( Alternate ) National Institute of Communicable Diseases, Delhi DR B. L. WATTAL SHRI V. N. BHATNAGAR ( Alternate ) Department of Agriculture, Government of Tamil SHRI ALFRED WILLIAM Nadu, Madras Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&FEio Member ) SHRI T. PURNANANDAM, Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ) Secretary
SHRI R. N. SHARMA Assistant Director ( Agri & Food),

ISI

iS : 85484977

Indian Standard
TEST CODE FOR POWER-OPERATED HYDRAULIC SPRAYER
0. FORE WO-RD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 July 1977, after the draft finalized by the-crop Protection Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 In order to save the crop from pests, the application of pesticides has increased considerably. Power-operated sprayers are increasingly used for this purpose and are being manufactured in large numbers in the country. The power-operated sprayers are based on either hydraulic or pneumatic energy for atomizing and spraying of liquid. An Indian Standard IS : 7593 ( Part I )-1975* has already been published to cover the requireIn case of hydraulic sprayers, ments of knapsack type pneumatic sprayer. it was felt that at first instance a test code should be prepared and at later stage, a specification should be evolved on the basis of data obtained. This test code is being issued to help in evaluating objectively the performance and durability of such sprayers. 0.3 While finalizing this standard, importance for droplet size of the spray was felt by the could not be included at the moment for want was, therefore, decided that as and when the will be incorporated. 0.4 In the preparation following: of including method of test Committee. However, this of sufficient information. It details are available, this test

of this standard, assistance has been taken from the

ISO/TC 23/SC 6 N 11 Agricultural sprayers -- Method of performance testing. International Organization for Standardization. Equipment for vector control. World Health Organization. 0.5 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960t.
tRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ) .

*Specification for-power-operated pneumaticsprayer-cum-duster : Part I Knapsack type. 3

IS : 8548 - 1977 1. SCOPE 1.1 This durability
standard prescribes methods for testing of power-operated hydrau lit sprayer. of performance and

2. TERMINOLOGY

2.0 For the purpose

of this standard,

the following

definitions

shall apply. is built up by electric by a

2.1 Hydraulic Sprayer - A sprayer in which the pressure the direct action of the pump on the liquid spray material. 2.2 Power-Operated Sprayer motor, engine or tractor. A sprayer operated

by

an

2.3 Spray Pattern - The area and shape of spray deposit produced spray nozzle at a given distance from the nozzle orifice. 2.4 Spray Angle the spray pattern. The angle subtended -

at the final orifice by the edges of The A rectangular triangular form with form an

2.5 Rectangular Distribution Curve even spray deposit across the width. 2.6 Triangular Distribution regularly to peak in the centre. Curve

raising and

2.7 Row Angle -The angle between the nozzle pointing the nozzle pointing backward when fitted on a boom. 3. SELECTION AND RUNNING IN

forward

3.1 Selection - The sprayer shall be selected at random ( see IS : 4905The sprayer 1968" ) by the testing authority from the production series. shall be complete with its usual accessories and in a condition generally offered for sale. 3.1.1 The manufacturer shall supply the details of the specification of the sprayer consisting of the items given in Appendix A as well as any further data required to carry out the tests. The manufacturer shall also supply all literature, such as operational, maintenance and service manuals, parts catalogues, and tools normally supplied along with the sprayer. 3.2 Running In -The sprayer shall be run in by the manufacturer before the start of actual test under his responsibility in collaboration with The the testing authority and in accordance with his usual instructions. manufacturer may make adjustments during the period of running in. The period of running in and any adjustments made during this period shall be reported.
*Methods for random sampling.

4

IS : 8548 - 1977
4. TESTS 4.1 General Tests

a) Checking of specifications b) Checking of material 4.2 Short-Run
Tests

( see 5.1),

and

( see 5.2 ).

a) Spraying performance 2) Spray distribution i) Spray pattern,

( see 6.1 ): (see 6.1.2 );

1) Discharge rate ( see 6.1.1 );

ii) Working width ( swath ) of nozzle and boom, and iii) Spray angle and row angle; b) Pump efficiency ( see 6.2 ) ; c) Agitation performance ( see 6.3 ); d) Pressure adjustment ( see 6.4 ): 1) Pressure fluctuation; and 2) Pressure drop; e) h/lechanical vibration ( see 6.5 ) ; and f) Visual observations ( see 6.6 ). 4.3 Long-Run
Tests

a) Wear of nozzles ( see 7.1),

and

b) Visual observations ( see 7.2 ) . 5. GENERAL
5.1 Checking TESTS of Specifications -The

manufacturer Appendix A.

shall

be

checked

and

specifications given by the reported on the form given in

5.2 Checking of Material -The material of construction of different component of the sprayer shall be observed and reported on the form given in Appendix B. 6. SHORT-RUN
TESTS

6.0 While conducting the short-run tests the ambient conditions shall be recorded. The ambient temperature shall be not more than 35�C.

5

I9 : 8548 - 1977 6.1 Spraying Performance 6.1.1 Discharge Rate 6.1.1.1 The discharge rate per minute shall be measured at maximum and minimum working pressures, specified by the manufacturer, by suitably collecting the test liquid from the nozzle. The discharge rate shall be measured in at least four equal steps between the lowest and the highest pressure. In case the pressure values are not specified, the maximum pressure shall be not more than 500 kPa and minimum not less than 50 kPa. During the test period, the pressure shall be kept constant and the deviations, if any, shall be kept within h2.5 percent. The tank shall be filled full with clean water. The prime mover shall be operated at a speed specified by the manufacturer. The spray shall be directed for a period timed by stop-watch, into a receiving vessel so designed as to collect the whole of the spray from the nozzle. The measuring period should be at least 60 seconds with an accuracy of measurement of 1 second. The collected liquid from each nozzle shall be measured with an accuracy of f 2.5 percent. 6.1.1.2 At each pressure minimum of four times. setting, the test shall be repeated for a

6.1.1.3 The average value of discharge for each nozzle for each test pressure shall be obtained and recorded as litres per minute. The sum of the discharge of all the nozzles used in a sprayer shall give the discharge rate of the sprayer. 6.1.1.4 If one or more of the nozzles vary by more than f 5 percent from the average value of the set, this should be stated in the report. If the deviation is more than 10 percent, another test shall be carried out with a new set of tip or disc of nozzle or with a complete new nozzle. 6.1.1.5 The data shall be recorded according to item (3) of Appendix C as well as graphically illustrated in case of multiple nozzles. 6.1.2 Spray Distribution For nozzle - The patternator ( see Fig. 1 ) normally consists of 16 channels each 25 & 0.25 mm wide and of any convenient length provided that it encompasses the area of the spray. The number of channels may be increased or decreased so that the whole of the spray falls within the patternator. The channels lead the liquid directly to the measuring tube having a bore not more than 24 mm and be long enough to hold minimum of 200 ml of test liquid. The depth of the channels shall be 6

6.1.2.1

a) Apparatus

1) Putternator

IS : 854% - 1977
at least 100 mm to avoid rebound of spray droplets. The top edge of the trough dividers shall be sharp ( tapered to not more than 0.25 mm width on the top edge ) and straight in the horizontal plane, so that no point along with edge lies more than 1 mm from the straight line joining the corresponding points at each end. The top edges of the dividers shall be positioned so that when a straight edge is laid across the full width of the front and back of the troughs no edge lies more than 1 mm below this. Each divider shall be straight in the vertical plane to within f 0.25 mm,

TROUGHS

DRAINING

HOLES

_.
rF'Rf:;SURC GAUGE

,,/-

=PRAY NOZZLE OR TIP

SUPPLY

l-TEST AND

TUBE TUBES

RACK '

NOTE`adjuitment

This is a suggested form are left t6 the individual.

only.

Final

details,

such

as provision

of height

FIG. 1 PATTERNATOR FOR SPRAY DISTRIBUTION TEST 7

IS : 8548- 1974
2) A compressed air supply or small pump giving a steady output, with a liquid supply line from a reservoir of capacity of two litres or more. 3) A constant pressure regulator and a pressure close to the nozzle as possible. 4) Means of holding the nozzle at the correct facilities for adjustments. gauge situated as

height

with required tube can be achieved, and

5) A test-tube rack so made that the collecting inserted in the Bow when constant flow has been retracted after a predetermined period.

b) During the test, the nozzle shall be placed in such a manner that the longest axis is at right angle to the channel edges of the The axis of the nozzle shall be placed vertically in patternator. The height the middle of the centre channel at correct height. above the trough divider shall be 100, 200, 300, 400 and 500 mm.

4

The test place shall be protected from draught and the reservoir shall be filled to any convenient level with clean water. The The compressed air supply shall be adjusted to required pressure. nozzle shall be given a preliminary run until a constant flow rate from the patternator has been achieved. When this condition has reached, the water supply shall be started at specified discharge rate and the receiving tubes shall be inserted under the patternator.

d) As soon as the amount collected in any of the measuring tubes has reached 180 ml, collection is discontinued taking care that no water from the patternator falls into any of the measuring tubes. e) The volume of the water in each measuring tube shall be determined and a graph prepared by plotting the volume of water in each of the tube against its position in the patternator ( see Fig. 2 and3). f) The test shall be conducted pressures. at maximum and minimum working

g) The working width ( the distance between the outer edges of the outermost channels which at the working pressure received 50 percent or more of the largest quantity of liquid collected from any one channel ) in millimetres shall be measured for each of the 100, 200, 300,400 and 500 mm nozzle height. h) The spray angle for each nozzle shall be ca!culated on the basis of working width and nozzle height, and shall be stated in whole degrees. 8

IS : 8548

n

1977

6.1.2.2 For boom
a) One of the outer section of the booms shall be nlaccd horizontallv 2nd at right angle to the channel edges of (he patternator [ s& 6.1.2.1(a) 1. If the section has an uneven number of nozzles, the middle nozzle should be placed above the centre channel and in case of even number, the middle point of the distance between two The middle nozzles should be placed above the centre channel. highest and lowest boom height should be as specified by the The largest value should be attained in six stages manufacturer. If no by increasing preferably 50 or 100 mm the lowest height. recommended boom heights are stated, the heights should be 250, 300, 350,400,450 and 500 mm above the channel edges. The operations given under 6.1.2.1(c) and 6.1.2.1(d) shall be b) conducted. The test shall be conducted at lowest and highest working pressure and for each of the six boom heights [ see 6.1.2.2 (a) I. The volume of the water in each measuring tube shall be determined and the graph prepared by plotting the volume of water The in each of the tube against its position in the patternator. coefficient of variation is also calculated and illustrated as a function of boom height for each of nozzles and at various testing pressures.

4

The nozzle row angle shall be measured with an accuracy of & O-5" and shall be given as the largest angle downwards between the axis of any two nozzles projected on a plane at right angle to the axis of the spray boom. The spacing of the nozzle along the axis of the spray boom shall be measured with an accuracy off 1 mm. data shall be recorded according to item (4) of

4

6.1.2.3 The Appendix C.

6.2 Pump Efficiency 6.2.1 A dynamometer shall be fitted between the prime mover and the main shaft of the sprayer. The dynamometer shall be so fitted that there is no appreciable angularity at the joints, The angularity if present shall not exceed 7". In case of electric motor, energy meter should be fitted. A pressure gauge at discharge port shall also be connected (see Fig. 4 ). 6.2.2 The sprayer shall be operated at specified speed and at four pressure stages covering maximum and minimum. The spray shall be collected in receiving vessel for a period of 60 f 1 seconds. The dynamometer or energy meter reading and pressure gauge reading shall also be taken during the collection of liquid. The amount of liquid collected shall be measured with an accuracy of rf 2.5 percent, 10

is : 8548 - 1974 8.1.3 6n the basis of above information, power and pump efficiency shall be calculated. 6.2.4 power required, hydraulic

The data shall be recorded according to item (5) of Appendix C.

ITTING PRESSURE

POINT

OF

GAUGE

OVERFLOW

PIPE

CONNECTED FLOWMETER

SSURE SUCTION PIPE WATER TANK

GAUGE

NOTE -This

is a suggested form only.

FIG. 4

FLOWDIAGRAMFOR POWER MEASUREMENT

6.3 Agitation Performance 6.3.1 For the test, 2 kg of tracing material consisting of 90 percent wettable sulphur powder having grain size in at least one-third of the powder between 5 and 40 p.m and in the rest less than 5 pm, is used. It shall be suspended in about 2'5 litres of water per kilogram of sulphur. The mixture of sulphur and water shall be left for 2 hours and then agitated until it is like a soup. The spray liquid is then added while agitating the mixture. 6.3.2 One litre of test liquid should be tapped and the initial concentration shall be determined by means of evaporation. 6.3.3 Mixing Time -After the addition of the tracing material the test liquid shall be left for 2 hours. The test shall be carried out at specified revolutions and at a working pressure of 500 kPa & 2.5 percent without discharge of liquid through the nozzles passage. Samples of the liquid shall be tapped immediately after the operating device. A total of 10 samples shall be tapped at intervals of 30 seconds. The first collection shall be made after 30 seconds of the start. The concentration of the samples collected shall be given in a table or illustrated graphically as a function of time. 11

6.3.4 EJectiveness of Agitation - The testing shall be started after a period of mixing (see 6.3.3 ) which ensures that the spraying liquid is as homogeneous as possible. 6.3.4.1 The sprayer shall be operated at its specified revolution and pressure by discharging the total content of the tank with all nozzles open. When 10 percent of the liquid is discharged, a sample shall be tapped from randomly chosen nozzle except from the one at the tip of the boom. At intervals of 10 percent, samples shall be tapped from the same nozzle until the tank is empty. The concentration of the samples collected shall be given in a table or illustrated graphically as a function of time. -6.3.4.2 At the -end of the test, the sulphur deposit in tank shall be collected and shall be reported as percentage of quantity originally added. 6.3.5 The observations shall be recorded Appendix C or illustrated graphically. 6.4 Pressure Adjustment according to item (6) of

6.4.1 The sprayer fitted with pressure gauge shall be operated at four stages of pressure covering the minimum and maximum, and at specified speed for minimum of 30 minutes, At every pressure setting, the fluctuation of the pressure shall be recorded. The pressure drop when the sprayer is discharging 90 percent of suction volume under the total overflow operation ( the operation by utilizing total volume of discharge in the arrangement of getting it back through overflow pipe) shall be recorded. The ratio between the decreased pressure and normal pressure expressed as percentage shall be reported. 6.4.2 The air pressure chamber shall be tested separately at a pressure 2.5 times the normal working pressure or J-5 times the maximum working pressure whichever is more for a minimum of 30 seconds, to see the pressure resistance of the chamber. 6.4.3 The observations Appendix C. shall be recorded according to item (7) of

6.5 Mechanical Vibration -The amplitude of vibration of various components of the sprayer shall be measured at rated speed of the prime mover after mounting the sprayer. The maximum amplitude of vibration shall be measured in horizontal and vertical position of the accelerometer and should be represented in micrometre for horizontal displacement ( HD ) and vertical displacement ( VD ). The data shall Abe reported according to item ( 8 ) of Appendix C. 6.6 Visual Observations - During and after short-run test, the sprayer shall be visually examined. The observations given in item (9) of Appendix C shall be made and recorded. 12

its t 8548 - 19f7 5. L6Ni: RtJN *EST

7.1 The sprayer shall be operated at specified normal working pressure and speed continuously for a period of minimum 50 hours. The discharge from the nozzle shall be collected for a period of 15 minutes after 15 minutes of running for the first time. After first collection, subsequent collection of the discharge shall be done for the period of 15 minutes after every 8 hours run. The variation in discharge from first collection to last would give the percentage wear of nozzle. 7.2 During (see 6.6). the operation, the sprayer shall also be examined visually

7.3 The observations shall be recorded in Appendix D.

APPENDIX
(Clauses
SPECIFICATION

A
SHEET

3.1.1 and 5.1 )
To BE FILLED IN BY ~,_~~~~h~~_~~~~ Manufacturer Testing Authority

1. General a) Make b) Model c) Type d) Serial number e) Manufacturer 2. Prime Mover a) Make b) Type c) Model Ed) Power rating e) Country of origin 3. Cylinder a) Number b) Disposition 13

To BE FILLED IN RY `Manufacturer c) Bore/stroke d) Capacity e) Compression ratio f) Cylinder lining 4. Fuel and Ignition System a) Fuel feed b) Carburettor c) Ignition d) Magneto contact breaker point gap e) Size of spark plug f) Electrode gap of spark plug g) Capacity of fuel tank h) Ignition timing 5. Air Cleaner a) Type b) Location 6. Lubrication a) Type b) Ratio of petrol & mixing oil c) Grade of mixing oil 7. Cooling System a) Type b) Blower 8. Type of Starting System 9. Tank a) Size b) Capacity c) Method of mounting d) Maximum sustained pressure without leakage e) Safe pressure for spraying operation 14 Testing Autharity-

-tS: 8548 - 1977 To BE FILLEDIN BY ~--____h__---_-_ Manufacturer 10. Frame a) Type b) Diameter of pipe 11. Blower Assembly Testing Authority

a) Type of impeller b) Diameter of impeller c) Number of vanes d) Details of drive e) Capacity, ms/s f) Air velocity at rated engine speed, m/s 12. Air Deflector a) Type b) Length of deflection hose c) Ease of adjustment 13. Agitating Device

a) Location b) Type c) Method of working d) Method of pressure regulation 14. Nozzle a) Type b) Size of nozzle and discharge .NO%ZlC .No. 1 2 3 Dischargtz

4 5
15

IS t 8548 - 1979
To BE FILLED IN BY r_---_-h-_--__~ Manufacturer Testing Authority -15. Mounting Arrangement 16. Accessories ( for Operator's Safety Against Pesticides ) 17. Overall Dimensions a) Length (with hose ) b) Length ( without hose ) c) Width d) Height 18. Total Mass a) With all accessories and without fuel and chemical b) With all accessories and fuel and chemical tank full .NOTE .. ^...1 - The item which is not applicable while hlhng.
NOTE 2 If any other items are provided in a particular

sprayershouldbe crossed

their

detail shouldbe filled io.

IS : 8548- 1977

APPENDIX ( Clause 5.2 )
DATA SHEET -

B

MATERIAL OF CONSTRUCTION

SL No.
(1) i) ii) iii) iv) v) vi) vii) viii) ix) x)

NAME OF COMPONENT (2) Pump
Spray Boom Lances Nozzle Nozzle body cap tank

MATERIAL (3)

Nozzle disc and tip Swirl core Frame Others

Testing

Engineer

17

l!3 : 8548 - 1977

APPENDIX `( Chses

%

6.1.1.5, 6.1.2.3, 6.2.4, 6.3.5, 6.4.3,6.5 and 6.6.)
DATA SHEET SHORT RUN TESTS

1. Date 2. Atmospheric Conditions

a) Temperature b) Relative humidity c) Pressure
3. Discharge Rate

Specijied Speed, Working Pressure, Test
NO.

Discharge from Each
.Nozzle,

rev/min

kPa

mljmin -

I 4verage
1

I

Total

Ldischarge

Xscharge

--

( (1)

--

(2)

(3) 1 2 3 4 5

.-

l'

( --_

(10)

Average

4. Spray Distribution

-

a) Number of channels in patternator b) Slope of patternator c) Data for nozzle 18

18:8548-1977
Working Pressure, kPa

I Yeight of
.Nozzle, mm Quantity of Liquid from J 7Vo&e at Channels, ml ___- 1 2

.Percentage of

; argest Quan1ity of Liquid

Vo rking Width, mm

Angle, degrees

@ray

Collected

-(2)

r .-

-

.-

:31 (4, - . __ -

.' -

I\(

3

:tc
- _

i
(7)

n -

ii - _ -

(8)

(9)

100
200 300 400 500

I

d) Test Data for Boom Working Pressure, kPa Boom Height, mm Quantity of Liquid c Yollected,from Each .Nozzle at Channels, ml Coejicient of Variation of Distribution of Each Nozzle

_-

-

Working IWidth, mm

Spray Angle, degrees

- -2 etc

1

-_
(3,

L

-_

(1)

(2) 250 300 350 400 450 500

.- -

-...-

(4)

_-

(6)

(7)
.-

(8)

-

(9)

-

-

19

h3 : 8548 - 1947 5. Data Pump Efficiency
Test
.NO.

Pressure Gauge Reading

Energy Speed, Meter OI rev/ min Dynamo. meter Reading

Required Power,

Discharge,

I/min

kW

Hydraulic Power, kW

Pump E$iciency,

percent

_(11

(2) ~-

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)
_-

(8)

-

1) f-4
3) 4) 6. Data for Agitation

a) Initial b) Mixing

concentration time and effectiveness ,-.--__Concentration Sample 80.

1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

10 c) Quantity of tracing material remains 20 in tank after operation

IS : 8548 - 1977

7. Data for Pressure Adjustment
a) Observations Working Pressure Fluctuation Range Pressure Drop Ratio

b) Resistant 8.

of pressure -

yes or no.

Mechanical Vibration
a) Make of the meter b) Type c) Type of Accelerometer d) Observations Sl No. Location of the Accelerometer Horizontal Displacement, pm (3) Vertical Displacement, (4)

pm

(1) 11 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7) 8) 9) 10) 11) 12) 13) 14) Cylinder Flange

(2) head of the carburettor ( carburettor cable end tickler housing flange foundation nuts bolts

Spark plug Air intake Choke lever Accelerator Carburettor Engine Magneto Exhaust Engine

)

bell housing

Base frame Blower housing Bolts fixing the air outlet pipe 21

IS : 8548 - 1979

Sl Jvo.

Location of the Accelerometer

Hori<ontal Displacement, pm (3)

Vertical Displacement, pm (4)

(1) 15) 16) 17)

(2) Fuel cock Tank mounting bracket Back rest i) Front ii) Rear Accelerator knob Delivery hose clamps i) Front ii) Rear
Observations

18) 19)

9. Visual

4 Easiness of transporting b) Easiness of operating Cl Proper tightness of fasteners 4 Any marked vibration e) Any undue knocking or rattling f 1 Any leakage of liquid or oil 9) Any deformation or breakdown h) Marked wear of any component

sound

3

Any other observations

Testing Engineer

IS : 8548 - 1977

APPENDIX ( Clause 7.3 )
DATA SHEET 1. Total Running Time 2. Quantity of The Liquid Collected a) First collection b) Second collection c) Third collection d) Fourth collection e) Fifth collection f) Sixth collection g) Last collection LONG

D

RUN TEST

3. Percentage Variation of Discharge from First to Last Collection 4, Visual Observations (see 9 of Appendix C ).

Testing Engineer

23

INTERNATIONAL
Base Unlts Quantity Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary Quantity Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units Units

SYSTEM
Unit metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

OF UNITS
Symbol m kg 1 K cd mol

( 81' UNITS)

Unit radian steradlan

Symbol rad sr

Quantity Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Pressure, stress

Unit newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens Pascal

Sythbol M J W Wb T Hz S Pa

Con vets/on 1 N = 0~101 972 kgf 1 J - 1 N.m 1 W = 1 J/s 1 Wb = I V.s 1 T = 1 Wb/m' 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-l) 1 S = 1 A/V 1 Pa = 1 N/m'

