IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 is0 10993-4 : 1992

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Indian Standard
BIOLOGICAL EVALUATION OF MEDICAL DEVICES
PART 14 SELECTION OF TESTS FOR INTERACTIONS WITH BLOOD

UDC 615.[46/.47]. 076 : 616.15

0

BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

June

1994

Price Group 8'

Medical Instruments

and Disposables Sectional Committee, MHD 12

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard (Part 14) which is identical with IS0 10993-4 : 1992 `Biological evaluatron ot medical devices - Part 4 : Selection of tests for interactions with blood', issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, on the recommendation of the Medical Instruments and Disposables Sectional Committee and approval of the Medical Equipment and Hospital Planning Division Council. The selection and evaluation of any material or device intended for use in humans requires a structured programme of assessment. To give assurance that the final product will perform as intended and bc safe for human use, the programme should include a biological evaluation, which should be planned and carried out by knowledgeable and experienced individuals capable of making informed decisions based en the advantages and disadvantages of various materials and test procedures available. Thi:; standard lays down the principles and guidelines governing the biologicai evaluation of interactrons of medical devrces with blood. The text of the IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: Wherever the words `International `Indian Standard'. In this standard, the following the following: Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as Standards are referred to. Read in their respective place, Indian Standard IS 12572 (Part 1) : 1994 Biological evaluation of medical devices: Part 1 Guidance on selection of tests (first revision) Degree of Correspondence Identical

International

International Standard IS0 10993-l : 1992 Biological evaluation of medical devices Part 1 : Guidance on selection of tests

Annexes A, B and C of this standard are for information only. IS 12572 consists of the following parts, under the general title `Guide for evaluation OfmedicaldeviCes for biological hazards? Part 1 Part 2 Part 3 Part 4 Part 5 Part 6 Part 7 Part Guidance on selection of tests (first revision) Animal welfare requirements Method of testing by tissue implantation Method of test for systemic toxicity : medical devices Method of test for intracutaneous Assessment of acute toxicity of extracts from

reactivity of extracts from medical devices in rabbits of extracts

Method of test for systemic toxicity : Assessment of pyrogenicity from medical devices Methods of test for sensitization delayed contact dermatitis

: Assessment of potential of medical devices to produce

a

Methods of test for skin irritation of extracts from medical devices Method of test for skin irritation by solid medical devices (Continued on third cover)

Part 9

IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 IS0 10993-4 : 1992

Indian Standard
BlOLOGlCAL EVALUATION OF MEDICAL DEVICES
PART 14 SELECTION OF TESTS FOR INTERACTIONS WITH BLOOD

1

Scope

This part of IS0 10993 gives guidance to agencies, manufacturers, research laboratories and others for evaluating the interactions of medical devices with blood. It describes: a) a classification of medical and dental devices that are intended for use in contact with blood, based on the intended use and duration of contact as defined in IS0 10993-I;

the standard indicated below. Members of EC and IS0 maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. IS0 10993-l : 1992, Biological evaluation of medical devices - Part 1: Guidance on selection of tests.

3

Definitions

b) the fundamental

principles governing the evaluation of the interaction of devices with blood;

For the purposes of this part of IS0 10993, the definitions given in IS0 10993-l and the following definitions apply. 3.1 blood/device interaction: Any interaction between blood or any component of blood and a device resulting in effects on the blood, or on any organ or tissue or on the device. Such effects may or may not have clinically significant or undesirable consequences. 3.2 ex viva: Term applied to test systems that shunt blood directly from a human subject or test animal into a test chamber. If using an animal model, the blood may be shunted directly back into the animal (recirculating) or collected into test tubes for evaluation (single pass). In either case, the test chamber is located outside the body.

cl the rationale for structured selection of tests, together with the principles and scientific these tests. basis of

Detailed requirements for testing cannot be specified because of the limitations in knowledge and precision of tests for interactions of devices with blood.

2

Normative

reference

The following standard contains provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this part of IS0 10993. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this part of IS0 10993 are encouraged to investigate the possbilrty of applying the most recent editton of

4

Abbreviations
used in the
of this part of IS0 10993.

Table 1 provides a list of abbreviations
context

IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 IS0 10993-4 : 1992

Table 1 Abbreviatlon Meaning

Abbreviations

z$ C3a, C5a D-Dimer ECMO E.M. FDP FPA FI +2 iC3b IL-1 IVC MRI PAC-1 PET PF-4 Kr RIA S-l 2 sc5b-9 TAT TCC &F

Product of alternate pathway complement activation Beta..thromboglobulin Product of classical pathway complement activation (active) complement split products from C3 and C5 Specific fibrin degradation products (F XIII cross-linked fibrin) Extracorporeal membrane oxygenator Electron microscopy Fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products Fibrinopeptide A Prothrombin activation fragment 1 + 2 Product of central C complement activation Interleukin-1 Inferior vena cava Magnetic resonance imaging Monoclonal antibody which recognizes the activated form of platelet surface glycoprotein Ilb/llla Positron emission tomography Platelet factor 4 Prothrombin time Partial thromboplastin time Radioimmuno ssay Monoclonal a ibody which recognizes the alpha granule membrane component GMP140 exposed during the plat % let release reaction Product of terminal pathway complement activation Thrombin-antithrombin complex Terminal complement complex Thrombin time von Willebrand factor

5

Devices contacting blood
are categorized in

devices

for the collection

of blood,

Devices contacting blood IS0 10993-l :1992, clause 5.

davices for the storage and administration of blood and blood products (e.g. tubing, needles and bags).

5.1

Non-contact

devices

(See subclause An example

5.1 .l of IS0 10993-1:1992.) devices.

is in vitro diagnostic

5.2.2 External communicating devices in contact blood 5.1.3c) of with circulating [see IS0 10993-I :I9921 include but are not limited to
cardiopulmonary extracorporeal haemodialysis bypass, membrane equipment, apheresis of specific equipment, substances from oxygenators,

5.2

External

communicating

devices

(See subclause

5.1.3 of IS0 10993-1:1992.)

These are devices that contact the circulating blood and serve as a conduit Into the vascular system. Examples include but are not limited to those in 5.2.1 and 5.2.2. 5.2.1 External communicating devices that serve as an indirect blood path [see subclause 5.1.3a) of IS0 10993-l : 19921 include but are not limited to cannulae, extension sets. 2

donor and therapeutic devices blood, for absorption

interventional percutaneous temporan/

cardiology circulatory

and vascular support

devices,

systems,

pacemaker

electrodes.

IS 12572 (Part 14): 1994 IS0 10993-4 : 1992

5.3

Implant

devices

These are devices (see 5.1.4 of IS0 10993-l :1992) that are placed largely or entirely within the vascular system. Examples include but are not limited to mechanical or tissue heart valves, prosthetic or tissue vascular grafts, circulatory support devices (ventricular-assist devices, artificial hearts, intra-aortic balloon pumps), inferior vena cava filters, stents, arteriovenous shunts,

6.1.3 Testing of materials which are candidates to be components of a device should be conducted for screening purposes. However, such tests do not serve as a substitute for the requirement that the complete device be tested under conditions which simulate clinical application. 6.1.4 Tests which do not simulate the conditions of a device during use may not predict accurately the nature of the blood/device interactions which may occur during clinical applications. For example, some short-term in vitro or ex viva tests are poor predictors of long-term in viva blood/device interactions [223, ~231. 6.1.5 It follows from the above that devices whose intended use is ex viva (external communicating) should be tested ex viva and devices whose intended use is in viva (implants) should be tested in vivo in an animal model under conditions simulating where possible clinical use. 6.1.6 In vitro tests are regarded as useful in screening external communicating devices or implants but may not be accurate predictors of blood/device interactions occurring upon prolonged or repeated exposure or permanent contact (see 6.3.2). Devices intended for non-contact use only do not require evaluation of blood/device interactions. Devices which come into very brief contact with circulating blood (e.g. lancets, hypodermic needles, capillary tubes) generally do not require blood/devce interaction testing. 6.1.7 The two recommendations in 6.1.5 and 6.1.6, together with clause 5, serve as a guide for the selection of tests listed in 6.2.1. 6.1.8 Disposable `3boratory equipment used for the collection of blood and performance of in vifro tests on blood should be validated to ascertain that there is no significant interference with the test being performed. This can be conducted by performing tests on reference standards and comparing resuI,,s with those obtained by a clinically approved technique.
6.1.9 If tests are selected in the manner described and testing is conducted under conditions which simulate clinical applications, the results of such testing have the greatest probability of predicting clinical performance of devices. However, species differences and other focrors may limit the predictability of any test. Because of species differences in blood reactivity, human blood should be used where possible. When animal models are necessary, for example for evaluation of devices used for prolonged or repeated exposure or permanent contact, species differences in blood reactivity should be considered. Blood values and reacttvity between humans and non-human prrmates are very similar 1231. 3

blood monitors, internal drug delivery catheters, pacemaker electrodes, intravascular lungs). membrane oxygenators (artificial

6

Tests

6.1

General recommendations

8.1.1 Where possible, tests should use an appropriate model or system which simulates the geometry and conditions of contact of the device with blood during clinical applications, including duration of contact, temperature, sterile conditicn and flow conditions. For devices of defined geometry such as vascular grafts of varying lengths, the relation of surface area (length) to test results should be evaluated.

The selected methods and parameters should be in accordance with the current state of the art.
NOTE 1 Only blood-contacting parts should be tested

6.1.2 Controls shall be used unless their omission can be justified. Where possible, testing should include a device already in clinical use or wellcharacterized reference materials. Several materials and configurations are available (see IS0 10993-12 C71)-

6.1.10

Reference materials used should include negative and positive controls. All materials tested should meet all quality control and quality assurance procedures of the manufacturer and test laboratory and should be identified as to source, manufacturer, grade and type

IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 IS0 10993-4 : 1992

NOTE 2 The use of non-human primates for blood compatibility and medical device testing is prohibited by EC law (86/906/EEC) and some national laws.

Table 5: Table 6:

Implant devices Implant devices -

Level 1
Level 2 optional

However, the use of species other than non-human primates such as the pig, calf or sheep may also yield satisfactory results. The canine model has been found useful in the pre-clinical evaluation of prosthetic vascular grafts [43]. Because species differences may be significant (for example platelet adhesion, thrombosis, [17] and haemolysis tends to occur more readily in the canine species than in the human), all results of animal studies should be interpreted with caution. 6.1.11 The use of anticoagulants should be avoided unless the device is designed to perform in their presence. The choice and concentration of anticoagulant used influence blood/device interactions. Devices that are used with anticoagulants shall be assessed using anticoagulants in the range of concentrations used clinically. 6.1.12 Minor modifications in a clinically accepted device may cause significant changes in its clinical functions, Examples of such modifications include changes in design, changes in surface or bulk chemical composition of materials and changes in texture, porosity or other properties of vascular grafts. Therefore the effect of such changes on blood/device interactions shall be considered for clinical significance. 6.1.13 A sufficient number of tests including suitable controls shall be performed to permit statistical evaluation of the data. The variability in some test methods requires that those tests be repeated a sufficient number of times to determine significance. In addition repeated studies over an extended period of blood/device contact provide information about the time-dependence of the interactions. A statistician should be consulted in the early stages of experimental design.

Level 1 and level 2 tests are classified into five categories based on the primary process or system being measured: a) thrombosis, b) coagulation, c) platelets and platelet functions,

d) haematology, e) immunology. Select one or more test method(s) from each category of level 1 tests (tables 2, 3 and 5), in order to obtain the maximum information about the spectrum of reactions initiated when a device contacts blood. Additional testing from level 2 (tables 4 and 6) is optional. The principles and scientific basis for these tests are presented in annex B. 6.2.1 .l Non-contact devices

Two levels of tests are presented.

These devices generally do not require blood/device interaction testing. Disposable test kits should be validated to rule out interference of materials with test accuracy. 6.2.1.2 External communicating devices

The external communicating devices and their test methods are listed in tables 2 to 4. These test methods are recommended for devices intended for limited (LI, < 24 h) and prolonged or repeated (WI, 24 h to 30 days) exposure. See also 6.1.6. 6.2.1.3
Implant devices

6.2 6.2.1

Test

methods
tests for interactions with blood of

The implant devices and their test methods are listed in tables 5 and 6. These test methods are recommended for devices intended for prolonged or repeated (PR, 24 h to 30 days) exposure or permanent contact (PC, > 30 days). 6.2.2 Indications and limitation+

Recommended

devices and materials Recommended type of device: Table 2:

tests are organized

on the basis of the

External communicating devices Level 1 - blood path, indirect External communicating devices Level 1 - circulating blood External communicating Level 2 - opttonal devices

-

Table 3: Table 4:

-

4

Table7 gives a list of commercially available assays validated for use with human blood and tables 2 to 6 present a list of tests. Level 1 tests, which shall be considered, are relatively sample for general use in evaluating the interactions of materials and devices with blood. Level 2 tests are more sophisticated, require special expertise in performance and rnterpretatron, and are regarded as optional. In both categories, strict attention to technical detail is required. RlAs are available for human blood testing but are not generally

IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 IS0 10993-4 : 1992

available for other species. The human test kits usually do not cross-react with other species except for some non-human primates. Care should be taken when designing test systems to ensure that one is actually measuring activation due to the test material and not an artifact of the system. Discrepancies in evaluating blood/device interactions may occur because of inadequate materials characterization or inappropriate handling before blood tests are performed. For example the studies may have relied on only one type of test or may have permitted the introduction of foreign material unrelated to the material or device under test. Materials to be used in a low flow (venous) environment may interact with blood quite differently when used in high flow (arterial) situations. Changes in design and/or flow conditions can alter the apparent in viva haemocompatibility of a material.

of conditions, including improper blood collection. Tests to verify normal platelet reactivity are usually performed with an aggregometer. Platelet preparations with reduced reactivity are easily detected using this method, but hyperreactive platelets are not normally detected. Platelet aggregation tests can be modified (by appropriately reducing the concentration of platelets or aggregating agents) to determine if platelets become hyperreactive following exposure to a material or device.

6.3.1.2

Coagulation tests

6.3
6.3.1

Types of tests
In vitro tests

Variables that should be considered when using in vitro test methods include haematocrit, anticoagulants, sample collection, sample age, aeration and pH, temperature, sequence of test versus control studies, surface-to-volume ratio, and fluid dynamic conditions (especially wall shear rate). Tests should be performed with minimal delay, usually within 4 h, since some properties of blood change rapidly following col!ection. 6.3.1 .l Platelet tests

Coagulation methods are based on the use of native (fresh, non-anticoagulated) whole blood, anticoagulated whole blood (usually titrated), platelet-rich plasma or platelet-poor plasma. Since most of the standard coagulation assays are designed to detect clinical coagulation disorders which result in delayed clotting or excessive bleeding, the protocols for evaluating blood/device interactions should be modified appropriately to evaluate accelerated coagulation induced by biomaterials. Reagents for tests based on the activated partial thromboplastin time include an activator such as kaolin, celite, or ellagic acid. Reagents with such activators should be avoided because they tend to mask the acceleration of coagulation which materials and devices cause. The material to be tested serves as the activator; controls (without the material) should be included. Blood is exposed to test materials either in a static chamber such as a parallel plate cell or in a closedloop system where the inner surface of the tubing is the test material. After a predetermined contact time with the test surface, tests of the surface and blood can be conducted. Level 1 Blood path, indirect (see 5.2.1) Comments
Light microscopy can be replaced by scanning E.M. if the nature of the material presents technical problems for light microscopy.

Blood collection techniques should be reproducible. Platelets can become hyperreactive under a variety

Table 2 Test category Thrombosis

External communicating Method

devices -

Light microscopy (adhered platelets, leucocytes, aggregates, erythrocytes, fibrin, etc.)

Coagulation Platelets Haematology

Pll

(non-activated) count count and differential; haemoglobin) Haemolysis is regarded as an especially significant screening test to perform in this category because of its measurement of red blood cell membrane fragility in contact with materials and devices The method used should be one of the normative standard test metr80ds for haemolysls A panel including the last four tests encompasses the various complement actlvatlon pathways. --

Platelet

Leucocyte haemolysis

(plasma

Immunology

C3a, C5a, TCC, Bb, rC3b, C4d. SC5b-9

5

IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 IS0 10993.3 : 1992

Table 3 Test category
Thrombosis

External communicating Method

devices -

Le`Vel 1 -

Circulating blood (see 5.22) Comments

Per cent occlusion; flow reduction; gravrmetric analysis (thrombus mass); ltght microscopy (adhered platelets, leucocytes, aggregates, erythrocytes, fibrin, etc.); pressure drop across device

Light microscopy can be replaced by scanning E.M. if the nature of the material presents technical problems for light microscopy. Pressure drop not recommended tended for PR (see 6.2.1.2). for devices in-

Coagulation Platelets

PTT (non-activated) Platelet count; platelet aggregation; template bleeding time

Haematology

Leucocyte count and differential; haemolysis (plasma haemoglobin)

Haemolysis is regarded as an especially significant screening test to perform in this category because of its measurement of red blood cell membrane fragility in contact with materials and devices. The method used should be one of the normative standard test methods for haemolysis. A panel including the last four tests encompass the various complement activation pathways.

Immunology

C3a, C5a, TCC, Bb, iC3b, C4d, SC5b-9

Table 4 Test category
Thrombosis

External communicating Method

devices -

Level 2 -

optional Comments -

Scanning E.M. (platelet adhesion and aggregation; platelet and leucocyte morphology; fibrin) Specific coagulation factor assays. FPA, D-dimer, Ft + a, PAC-?, S-l 2, TAT

Coagulation

Platelets

PF-4, j%TG; thromboxane

82;

gamma imaging of radiolabelled platelets lttlnlabelled platelet survival Haematology Reticulocyte count; activation specific release products of peripheral blood cells (i.e. granulocytes) IL-l and other cytokines; detection of messenger-RNA specific for cytokines
I
I

ltlln-labelling 6.2.1.2).

is recommended

for PR only (see

Recommended

for PR only (see 6.2.1.2).

Immunology 1

..-

IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 IS0 10993-4 : 1992

Table 5 Test category Thrombosrs Per cent occlusion; flow reduction; Met hod

Implant devices -

evel 1 (see 6.3)
Comments

autopsy of device (gross and microscopic); autopsy of distal organs (gross and microscopic) Coagulation Pll (non-activated), PT, TT; FDP

plasma fibrinogen, Platelets Platelet count; platelet aggregation Haematology

Leucocyte count and differential; haemolysis (plasma haemoglobin)

Haemolysis is regarded as an especrally significant screening test to perform in this category because of its measurement of red blood cell membrane fragility in contac? with materials and devices. The method used should be one of the normative standard test methods for haemolysis. A panel including the last four tests encompassses the various complement activation pathways.

Immunology

C3a. C5a. TCC. Bb, iC3b. C4b, SC5b-9

Table 6 Test category

Implant dovices -

Level 2 -

optional Comments

Method
Scannning E.M.; angiography

___.
Thrombosis

I

I

Coagulation

Specific coagulation factor assays; FPA, D-dimer, F, + 2, PAC-1, S-l 2. TAT -

Platelets

tttln-labelled thromboxane

platelet survival PF-4, 9-TG 82;

gamma imaging of radiolabelled platelets Haematology Reticulocyte count; activation specific release products of peripheral blood cells (i.e. granulocytes) IL-l and other cytokines; detection of messenger-RNA specific for cytokines

Immunology

6.3.2

Ex vivo tests

Ex WC tests should be performed when the intended Lse of the device is ex viva, for example an external communlcatrng device, EX vivo testing may also be useful when the Intended use IS rn vivo, for example an Implant such as a vascular graft Such use should not however substitute for an implant test.

Ex vivo test systems are available for monitoring platelet adhesron. ernbolr generatron, fibrinogen depositron. thrombus mass, white cell adhesion, platelet consumption, and platelet activation [ 171, L27]. [43]. Blood flow-rates can be measured with either Doppler or electromagnetic flow probes. Alterations in flowrates may indicate the extent and course of thrombus deposition and embolizatlon

IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 IS0 10993-4 : 1992

Many ex viva test systems use radiolabelled blood components to monitor blood/device interactions. Radiolabelled platelets and fibrinogen are the most commonly labelled components of blood. Alteration of platelet reactivity by the labelllng procedure can be minimized by strict attention to technical detail [20],

~211.~321.
Advantages of ex viva tests over in vitro tests are that flowing native blood is used (thus eliminating artifacts caused by anticoagulants as well as providing physiological flow conditions), several materials can be evaluated since the chambers can be changed, and it is possible to monitor some events in real time. Some disadvantages include variability in blood flow from one experiment to another, variable blood reactivity from one animal to the other, and the usually relatively short time intervals that can be evaluated. Positive and negative controls using the same animal are recommended in this regard. 6.3.3 In vivo tests

per cent occlusion and thrombus mass are determined after the device is removed. The tendency of thrombi formed on a device to embolize to distal organs should be assessed by a careful gross as well as microscopic examinatron of organs downstream from the device. The kidneys are especially prone to trap thrombl which have embollzed from devrces rmplanted upstream from the renal artenes (for example ventricular-assist devices, artificial hearts, aortlc prosthetic grafts) [16]. Methods to evaluate m vwo performance without termrnatlng the expenment are available. Arteriograms are used to determine graft patency or thrombus deposition on devices. Radioimaging can be used to monitor platelet deposition at various time periods In VIVO; platelet survival and consumptron can be used of blood/devce InteractIons and Indicators as passlvatlon due to neorntrma formation or protein adsorption. In some m vwo test systems the material's propertres may not be major determinants of the blood/device !nteractions. Flow parameters, compliance. porosq and implant design may tie more`important than blood compattbrllty of the matenal itself. As an example, low flow-rate systems may give substantrally different results when compared to the same material evaluated In a high flow-rate system. In such cases, test system performance m vwo should carry more importance than rn wtro test results

In v/i/o testing involves implanting the material or device in animals. Vascular patches vascular grafts, prosthetic rings, heart valves and `circulatory-assist devices are examples of configurations used in in vivo testing. In wvo tests are usually designed to examine haemocompatibility over a period longer than 24 h. Patency (of a conduit) is the most common measure of success or failure for most in viva exneriments. The

8

IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 IS0 10993-4 : 1992.

Table 7 Commercially available assays for platelet, coagulation, fibrinolytic and complement factors Factor Plasmlnogen Types of assay Colorimetrrc Fiuorogerw Chromogenic, fluorogenic Chromogenic Chromogenic Chromogenic Chromogenic Fluorogenic RIA, ELISA Chromogenic B-TG Thromboxane 82 -actor VIII-VWF -actor IX Factor IXa Factor X Factor Xa Factor XII Factor Xlla FPA c3,, c5, Bb, iC3b, C4d, SC5b-9 TCC TPT IL.-?
F-1t 2

Antrthrombrn III Protein C Protean S Antiplasnin Prekal!ikrein Kalllkrern PF-4

RIA, ELISA R!A. ELISA

/ Chromogenic; clotting time
Chromogenic; clotting time Fluorogenic Chromogenic; clotting time Fluorogenic Chromogenrc; clotting time Fluorogenic RIA, ELISA RIA ELBA ELISA AIA, EL ISA Rlk, ELISA RIA. ELISA HIA, ELISA

IJ-dirnsr

NOTE - These assays have beer! validated for human use. Validation of their accuracy for other species sheil be determined prior to use.

IS 12572 (Part 14): 1994 ISO lOQ93-4:1992

Annex A

(informative)
Evaluation
A.1 A.l.l General

of cardiovascular
considerations

devices and prostheses

during in viva function

e) injury to cells and tissues adjacent to the device;

f) intimal hyperplasia or accumulation of other tissue
on or adjacent to the device, resulting in reduced flow or affecting other functions of the device;

This annex provides background for selecting tests to evaluate the interactions of cardiovascular devices with blood. Subclause 6.2.1 contains a complete list of recommended (level 1) and optional (levei 2) tests for evaluating blood/device interactions of the three categories of devices: non-contact, external communicating, and implant.

g) adhesion and growth of bacteria or other Infectious
agents to or near the device.

A.1.3 Procedures used to evaluate cardiovascular
devices in animals are essentially the same as those employed in the clinical setting. However, animal models permit continuous device monitoring and systematic controlled study of important variables. A.1.4 The test protocols recommended follow certain general guidelines. Thrombosis, thromboembolism, bleeding and infection are the major deterrents to the use and further development of advanced cardiovascular prostheses. For devices with limited blood exposure (< 24 h), Important measurements are related to the acute extent of vanatron of haematologrc, haemodynamic and performance variables, gross thrombus formation and possrble embolism. With prolonged or repeated exposure, or permanent contact (> 24 h), emphasis is placed on serial measurement techniques that may yield rnformatron regarding the time course of thrombosis and thromboembolrsm. the consumption of circulating blood components, the development of intimal hyperplasia and infection. In both of the above exposure and contact categories, assessment of haemolysis is Important. Thrombus formation may be greatly influenced by surgical technique, vanable time-dependent thrombolytic and embolic phenomena, superimposed device rnfectrons and possible alterations in exposed surfaces, for example rntimal hyperplasia and endothellalization The consequences of the interaction of artrfrcral surfaces wrth the blood may range from gross throm hosts and embolization to subtle effects such as accelerated consumption of haemostatrc elements, the latter may be compensated or lead to deplerton i>f platelets cr plasma coagulation factors.

A.1.2 The following
interactions

classification of blood/device is provided as background.

A.1.2.1 Interactions which mainly affect the device and which may or may not have an undesirable effect on the subject are as follows: a) adsorption of plasma proteins, lipids, calcium or other substances from the blood onto the surface of the device; or absorption of such substances into the device; b) adhesion of platelets, leucocytes or etythrocytes onto the surface of the device, or absorption of their components into the device: c) formation of pseudointima or tissue capsule on the surface of the device; d) alterations in mechanical and other properties the device.
A.1.2.2

of

Interactions which have a potentially undesirable effect on the animal or human are as follows:

al activation

of platelets, leucocytes or other cells, or activation of the coagulation fibrinolytic, complement, or other pathways, including immuno(immunosuppressron, toxicity Immunopoten tiation, immunomodulation);

b) formation of thrombi on the device surface; c) embolization of thrombotic or other material from the device's luminal surface to another site within the circulation; d) injury to circulating blood ceils resultrng In anaemia, haemolysis, leucopenia, thrombocytopenra or altered function of blood cells;
10

A.l.5 Disturbances of organ functron may occur due to blood/device rnteractron. For instance kidney func tion and pulmonary function may be affected by actlvated blood coagulation and pla!elet/leucocyte/ complement interactions.

IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 IS0 10993-4: 1992

Platelet survival and plasma levels of the plateletspecific proteins PF-4 and f%TG may reflect the extent of platelet activation in viva (and perhaps risk of thromboembolism) even in the absence of significantly elevated rates of platelet consumption. The template bleeding time is an index of in vivo platelet function; a prolonged value suggests thrombocytopenia or a qualitative platelet disorder, such as may occur during cardiopulmonary bypass [28]. Measurements of FPA may indicate activation of intrinsic coagulation. Localization of thrombotic material by radionuclide imaging techniques using radiolabelled platelets has been demonstrated in studies of vascular grafts, valve prostheses, and other devices, both implants and externally communicating devices [20], [21], [36]. In addition, duplex scanning and a careful examination of the explanted device can provide very useful information [37], [38]. A.1.6 The choice of an animal model may be restricted by size requirements, the availability of certain species and cost. It is critical that the investigators be mindful of the physiological differences and similarities of the species chosen with those of the human, particularly those relating to coagulation, platelet functions and fibrinolysis, and the response to pharmacological agents such as anaesthetics, anticoagulants, thrombolytic and antiplatelet agents, and antibiotics. Because of species differences in reactivity and variable responses to different devices, data obtained from a single species should be interpreted with caution. Non-human primates such as baboons bear a close similarity in haematologic values, blood coagulation mechanism and cardiovascular system to the human [27]. An additional advantage of a nonhuman primate is that many of the immunologic probes for thrombosis developed for humans are suitable for use in other primates. These probes include PF-4, P-TG, FPA, TAT, and F, +*. The dog is a commonly used species and has provided useful information; however, device-related thrombosis in the dog tends to occur more readily than in the human, a difference which can be viewed as an advantage when evaluating this complication. The pig is generally regarded as a suitable animal model because of its haematologic and cardiovascular similarities to the human. The effect of the surgical implant procedure on results should be kept in mind and appropriate controls included.

cells or clotting factors. Cannulae, like other indirect blood path devices (5.2.11, generally require less testing than devices in circulating blood (6.2.1.2).

A.3

Catheters

and guidewires

Most of the tests considered under cannulae are relevant to the study of catheters and guidewires. The location or placement of catheters in the arterial or venous system can have a major effect on blood/device interactions. It is advised that simultaneous control studies be performed using a contralateral artery or vein. Care should be taken not to strip off thrombus upon catheter withdrawal. In situ evaluation may permit assessment of the extent to which intimal or entrance site injuries contributed to the thrombotic process. Kinetic studies with radiolabelled blood constituents are recommended only with chronic catheters, but may be useful for imaging thrombus accumulation in viva. Angiography and Doppler blond flow measurements may also be useful.

A.4 Extracorporeal oxygenators, haemodialyrers, therapeutic apheresis equipment, and devices for absorption specific substances from blood

of

The haemostatic response to cardiopulmonary bypass may be significant and acute. Many variables such as use of blood suction, composition of blood pump priming fluid, hypothermia, blood contact with air and time of exposure influence test values. Emboli in outflow lines may be detected by the periodic placement of blood filters ex vivo, or the use of ultrasonic radiation or other non-invasive techniques. Thrombus accumulation can be indirectly assessed during bypass by monitoring performance factors such as pressure drop across the oxygenator and oxygen rate. transfer An acquired transient platelet dysfunction associated with selective alpha granule release has been observed in patients on cardiopulmonary and other particularly bypass [28]; the template bleeding time tests of platelet function and release are useful.

A.2

Cannulae

Complement activation IS cailsed by both haemodralyzers and cardtopulmonary bypass apparatus. Clindtally significant pulmonary leucostasts and lung injury with dysfunction may result. For these reasons, it is useful to quantify complement activation with these devices. ,Therapeutic apheresls equrprnent and devices for ahsorptron of specific substances from the blood, because of their high surface-to-volume ratio, can potential!y activate complement, coagulation, platelet pathways. Examination of and leucocyte blood/devrce Interactions should follow the same principles as for extracorporeal oxygenators and hae-

Csnnulae are typically inserted into one or more major blood vessels to provide repeated blood access They are also used during cardiopulmonary bypass and other procedures. They may be tested acutely or chronically and are commonly studied as arteriovenous (AV) shunts. The use of cannulae appears to induce little alteration in the levels of circulating blood
11

modialyzers.

IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 IS0 10993-4: 1992

A.5

Ventricular-assist

devices

These devices may induce considerable alteration in various blood components. Factors contributing to such effects include the large foreign surface area to which blood is exposed, the high flow regimes and the regions of disturbed flow such as turbulence or separated flow. Tests of such devices may include measurements of haemolysis, platelet and fibrinogen concentration, platelet survival, complement activation, and close monitoring of liver, renal, pulmonary and central nervous system function. A detailed pathologic examination at surgical retrieval is an important component of the evaluation C373, [38].

Measurements of platelet survival and aggregation, blood tests of thrombosis and haemolysis, pressure and flow measurements, and autopsy of the valve and adjacent tissues are also recommended.

A.7

Vascular grafts

A.6

Heart valve prostheses
hydrodynamic of prosthetic

Invasive, ncn-invasive and in vitro studies are important in the assessment valves.

2D and M mode echocardiography makes use of ultrasonic radiation to form images of the heart. Reflections from materials with different acoustic impedances are received and processed to form an image. The structure of prosthetic valves can be examined, Mechanical prostheses emit strong echo signals and the movement of the occluder can usually be clearly imaged. However the quality of the image may depend upon the particular valve being examined. Echocardiography may also be useful in the aasessment of function of tissue-derived valve prostheses. Vegetations, clots and evidence of thickening of the valve leaflets ere elucidated. Using conventional and colour flow Doppler echocardiognphy, regurgitation can be identified and semiquantified.

Both porous and non-porous materials can be implanted at various locations in the arterial or venous system. The choice of implantation site is determined largely by the intended use for the prosthesis. Patency of a given graft is enhanced by larger diameter and shorter length. A rule of thumb for grafts less than 4 mm ID is that the length should exceed the diameter by a factor of 10 (Le., 40 mm for a 4 mm graft) for a valid model. Patency can be documented by palpation of distal pulses in some locations and by periodic angiography. Wltrascnic radiation, MRI, and PET may also be useful. Results of serial radiolabelled platelet imaging studies correlate with the area of non-endothelialized graft surface in baboons [27]. Radiolabelled platelets facilitate non-invasive imaging of mural thrombotic accumulations. Serial measurements of platelet count, platelet release constituents, fibrinogen/fibrin degradation products and activated coagulation species also are recommended. Autopsy of the graft and adjacent vascular segments for morphometric studies of endothelial integrity and proliferative response can provide valuable information.

A.8

WC filters and sttents

These devices can be studied by angiography and ultrasonic radiation. Other techniques useful for vascular graft evaluation (see A.71 are appropriate here as well.

12

IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 IS0 10993-4 : 1992

Annex B (informative) Laboratory
B.l General

tests: principles and scientific basis
B.2
E3.2.1

Thrombosis Per cent occlusion

The principles and scientrfic basis of the tests listed in 6.2.1 are described here. Detailed methods are found in standard texts of laboratory medrcrne and clinrcal pathology. References [14] to [39] and C41J to [443 describe tests which may be useful In the evaluation of blood/device interactlons. Because of both biological variability and technical limitations, the accuracy of many of these tests is limited. When possible, the tests should be repeated a sufficient number of times to determine the significance of the results.

B-1.1

Per cent occlusion is visuaily quarrtrfred after a device has been in use and has been retnoved. This is a measure of the severity of the thrombotlc process in a conduit. Lack of occlusion does rat necessarrly eliminate the existence of a thrombotic process, since thrombi may have embolized or been dislodged before per cent occlusion is measured. Occlusion may be caused not only by thrombosrs but also by intimal hyperplasia, especially at perianastomotic sites in vascular grafts; microscopic examination is required to identify the nature of the occlusrve process. 8.2.2

Flow reduction

8.1.2 In order for tests to be of use in the in v/tro evaluation of blood/device interactions, anttcoagulated blood or plasma collected from normal human subjects or experimental animals should first be exposed to the matenal or device under standardized conditions including time, temperature and flow. An aliquot of the exposed blood or plasma is then tested shortly after exposure. Conditions of exposure should be based on the intended use of the device. One proposed set of conditions is as follows: a) time of exposure: b) temperature: c) flow: not less than 15 mm;

Flow (rate or volume) is measured after J penod of use Measurements may be perforrned either during use, or before and after use. Rationale and interpretation are the same as 8.2.1 B.2.3

Gravimetric

analysis

(thrombus

mass)

This is conducted after removal of the device from the in-use position. Rationale and interpretation are as for 8.2 1. B.2.4

Light microscopy

37 "C; Intended use of the device; exposure. By this technique, informatton can be obtained regarding the density of cells, cellular aggregates and frbrrn adherent %o matenalt;, as well as the geograplric drstrihutk: of these denkits an ttle materials or deL'ICE: Thn method is s2,?7i--qilantit-,tIve B.2.5

to simulate

d) start of test: within

15 mm following

However, the appropriate conditions depend or? the device or material being tested and its intended enduse.

Pressure

drop across device

8.1.3 When eva!uating externally ccmm~inlcatlng devices and implant devrces whi!o in therr rn-usr pas ition, blood IS co!tected into an ailtlccJ&jUiaPt and tnc test is performed as described wlthout a prior exposure stage. The tests are classified into five categories, as defined in 6.2.1, accordrng to the process or system being tested: thrombosis, coagulation, platelets and platelet functions, haematology and immunology.

B.2.6

Scanning

E.M.

H~tio:vile and ir;terpretatluri aff a tru2 Si'lrm~ as 8.2 4 Ths method has the advantagc: over B :' 4 of provioIRK groarer detail about fine strlJc.t:lre oi components being exarnned. Quantitative :(?!Kius1ons require suftlcent rep!icate determtrlatront~ to establish degree :3t reproducibilrty.

IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 IS0 10993-4 : 1992

B.2.7

Autopsy

of device

This method is of great importance in evaluating the biological responses to implanted devices. The distribution, size and microscopic nature of cellular deposits can best be determined by a careful and detailed autopsy. Proposed procedures have been published [37], [38].

This test measures prothrombin and accessory factors. In the presence of tissue thromboplastin, the clotting time depends on the concentrations of prothrombin, factor V, factor VII and factor X (assuming

fibrinogen, fibrinolytic and anticoagulant activtty to be normal). A prolonged prothrombrn time generally indicates a deficiency of prothrombin or factor V, VII, X or fibrinogen. This test is useful for evaluatrng Implant devices only. B.3.3 Thrombin Time UT1

B.2.8

Autopsy

of distal organs

The rationale is to examine for distal effects of implanted devices. These effects include thromboembolism, infection and embolization of components of the device.

B.2.9

Angiography

The thrombin time [35] is the time required for plasma to clot when a solution of thrombin is added The thrombin time is prolonged with a deficiency in fibrinogen (below 100 mg/dl), qualitative abnormalit!es in fibrinogen and elevated levels of FDP or heparin

The test is useful for evaluating implant devices only.
B.3.4

is used to determine patency or degree of narrowing of a graft or other conduit and to detect thrombus deposition on devices during their in VMJ performance. This method

Fibrinogen

B.3 B.3.1

Coagulation Partial Thromboplastin Time (PlT)

Dysfibrinogenemia, afibrinogenemia and hypofibnnogenemia cause prolonged PT, PTT and TT results [18]. The screening test most sensitive to fibrinogen deficiency is the TT. If the exact level of fibrinogen is needed, a commercially available modified TT is recommended. The test is useful for evaluating implant devices only. 8.3.5 Fibrinogen products (FDPI and fibrin degradation

The partial thromboplastin time [35] is the clotting time of recalcified &rated plasma on the addition of partial thromboplastin. Partial thromboplastin is a phospholrprd suspension usually extracted from tissue thromboplastin, the homogenate from mammalian brain or lung. Shortening of the PTT following contact with a material under standard conditions indicates activation of the contact phase of blood coagulation. A prolonged PTT suggests a deficiency in any of the plasma coagulation factors I (fibrinogen), II (prothrombin), V, VIII, IX, X, XI, or XII, b*Jt not VII or XIII. Heparin and other anticoagulants also cause a prolonged PTT. Partial thromboplastin reagents using various activatrng substances such as kaolin or celite are commercially available. Using these reagents, the test is called the activated partial thromboplastrn time (APTT). Tha
APTT is of no value in the in virro evaluation of blood/device interactions because tr?e activating substances mask any actlvatlon caused by tne device or

There are several commercially available test kits for rmmunoassay of FDP [18]. Purified fragments D and E are administered to laboratory animals, which re,. spond with production of specific immunoglobulrns. The immunoglobulins are harvested, extracted, and
purified to yield specific antisera at controlled concentrations. A suspension of latex particles is coated with the anti-FDP globulin standardized to be sensitrve to FDPs at 2 pg/ml. It is important to bear in mind that such immunoassays may be of no value when used with the blood of some antmal specres. Normal physiologrcal frbnnclysis yrelds the f~T'li-`- " Y, C, D and E in concentrations below 2 pgjril' nl plasma. The normally low level of FDPs IS rna~n?a~nt~o by the low rate of the degradation reactIon sncl rl F$ high rate of clearance of FDPs !rorC ti:e ::I:<`ij!~~:I,:1' Pathoicgic degradation of frC;.i, drrti i~t)r~::o~~~~, ;I ;r; su!t of Increased plasminogen aciivatlo;`, YIP'-~C ! [I:.' of 2 ug/ml to 40 pgjml or more ?`!\c tc,e,t :`: I;.`:`,;; !r>f eva!uatlng implant devices on :'

its component niatenals.
B.3.2

Prothrombin

Time (PTI

Blood is mixed with a measured amcunt of ci?rale and the plasma IS obtaned by cen?rifugatton [35j, This test is based on having an optlrnurn cqncentration of calcrum eons and an excess of thronlboplastrn, the oniy variable being the concentratton of prothrornbln and accessory factors in a carefully measured volume of plasma. Oxalate IS not recommended as the anticoagulant because factor V IS less stable rn this sollution and the PT may t~~cor-rlt! prolonged a~ a result.

B.3.6

Specific

coagulation

factor assays

Slgnrflcant reductron (e g. to less than W% cf :iit norma! or contra! level) of coagulation factors foliow Ing exposure of blood to a material or dev~c+ lJ!~:!~~i
standard rorlditic,r!:; sugqe?ts a~:r'ci-?t.?t~=ri t
`I\: ' g,`r

I

IS0

IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 10993-4 : 1992

tion of those factors other mechanisms. 8.3.7 FPA,

by adsorptron,

coagulation

or

D-dimer,

Fl + 2, TAT

Elevated levels of FPA, D-dimer, or F1 + 2 indicate activation of the coagulation mechanrsm. Elevated TAT complexes indicate activation of blood coagulation and formation of a complex between thrombin being generated and circulating antithrombin.

increased FDP or certain drugs (e.g. aspirin, nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs). It is important to bear in mind that platelet aggregation using some agents varies or may be absent in some animal species. Spontaneous platelet aggregation, occurring In the absence of added agonists, is an abnormal condition indicating activation of platelets.

8.4.3

Blood cell adhesion

8.4 B.4.1

Platelets Platelet

and platelet count

functions

Blood cell adhesion [3i] is a measure of the bloodcompatibility of a material: the fewer blood cells adhere, the more blood-compatible is the surface. Various methods have been designed to measure the adhesion of cells to surfaces. Most of these methods are based on the observation that a certain proportion of platelets are removed from normal whole blood as a result of passage through a column of glass beads under controlled conditions of flow or pressure. This principle has been adapted to the quantification of the adhesion of other blood cells to polymers coated on glass beads. By such a method it has been reported [31] that adhesion of canine species peripheral lymphocytes and polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMNs) to beads coated with poly(hydroxyethyl methacrylate) (PHEMA) is lower than to beads coated with polystyrene and certain other polymers. Isolated lymphocytes and PMNs were used in this study. An alternative method is the direct counting of platelets adherent to a test surface. Following exposure to blood or platelet-rich plasma under standardized conditions, the test surface is rinsed to remove non-adherent cells, fixed and prepared for erther light or scanning electron microscopy. The number of adherent platelets per unit area is directly counted and their morphology (e.g. amount of spreading, degree of aggregate formation) is recorded. Alternatively, platelets prelabelled with 510 or IllIn may be used [303.

[44] because

to determine the platelet count [18], of the key role of platelets rn preventing bleeding. A srgnrficant drop in platelet count of blood exposed to a device may be caused by platelet adhesion, platelet aggregation, platelet sequestration (for example in the spleen), or blood coagulation on materials or devices. A reduction in platelet count during use ot an implanted device may also be caused by accelerated destruction or removal of platelets from the circulation.

It is important

B.4.1.l

Manual platelet count

Platelet counts are performed manually in some clinical laboratories despite the wide availability of highly accurate platelet counting instruments (B.4.1.2). B.4.1.2 Automated platelet count using whole blood or platelet-rich plasma Automated platelet counts may be performed using either well mixed whole blood or platelet-rich plasma (PRP). The use of whole blood is preferred because using PRP may yield inaccurate results. Instrument counts are made on a greater number of particles than manual counts. Consequently, the coefficient of variation for automated counts may be as small as 4 %. whereas the best achievable for the phase microscope manual count is 11 %. Most instruments also contain circurtty that distinguishes between platelets and small nonblological particles, eliminating the need for visual recognition and differentiation of debris from olatelets B.4.2

B.4.4

Template

bleeding

time

Platelet

aggregation

Platelet aggregation [35] is induced by adding aggregating agents to PRP that is being stirred contrnually is.g. ADP, epinephnne, collagen, thrombin, etc i As the platelets aggregate, the plasma becomes procjressrvely clearer. An optical system (aggregometer) IS used to detect the <change in light transmission and a recorder graphicall$ displays the variations in light !ransmisslon from the baseline setting. Delayed or reduced platelet aggregatron may be caused by platelet activation and release of granular contents, 15

The commercial availability of a sterile disposable de. vice for producing a skin incisron of standard depth and length under standard conditions has significantly Improved the reproducibility and value of this test, A prolonged result indicates reduced platelet function or reduced platelet count; the latter can be determined separately (B.4.1) A prolonged bleeding time combrned with a normal platelet count has been observed rn association with some external communrlimited with catrng devrces exposure (e g. cardiopulmonary bypass) 1281. The test IS suitable for use wrth some exr:errrrr?ntal anlrl,a::;. 8.45 Gamma platelets

imaging

of radiolabelled

l-l?<.t /\' ..' ;iafT.">a emission
u5L31 " " ., [ drpose

of ttlln enables r20], [27J. This method

it to be enables

IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 so 10993-4 : 1992

the localization and quantification of platelets deposited in a device, The technique is useful for external communicating as well as implant devices

B.5.2

Haemolysis

B.4.6

Platelet

lifespan

(survival)

This is regarded as an especially significant screening test because an elevated plasma haemoglobin level, which if properly performed indicates haemolysis, reflects red blood cell membrane fragility in contact with materials and devices, B.5.3

Platelets are obtained from the patient's blood and are labelled with s1Cr or IllIn 1201, [21], [32]. Both these agents label platelets of all ages present in the sampre, do not elute excessrvely- from the platelets and are not taken up by other cells or reused during thrombopoiesis. Indium-1 11 has the advantage of being a high gamma emitter, requiring the labelling of fewer platelets and enabling surface body countrng to assess localized platelet deposrtron to be combrned with the lifespan study. A reduced platelet lrfespan indicates accelerated removal from the circulation by immune, thrombotic or other processes.

Reticulocyte

count

An elevated reticulocyte count indicates increased production of red blood cells in the bone marrow. This may be in response to reduced red blood cell mass caused by chronic biood loss (bleeding), haemolysis or other mechanisms.

B.6
B.4.7 PAC-1

Immunology C3a, C5a, TCC, Bb, iC3b, C4d, SC5b-9

and S-12
B.6.1 recognize Elevated levels of any of these complement components indicate activation of the complement system. Some materials activate complement, and activated complement components in turn activate leucocytes, causing them to aggregate and be sequestered in the lungs.

These are monoclonal antibodies which different epitopes of activated platelets.

B.5
8.5.1

Haematology Leucocyte count and differential

B.6.2
The use of certain devices may cause leucocyte activation, aggregation and removal from the crrculation; a reduced leucocyte count may suggest the existence of such events. An increased leucocyte count may indicate a bacterial infection. A shift in the differential distribution of leucocytes (e.g. granulocytes, lymphocytes, monocytes) may also suggest an infection.

IL-1 and other cytokines

Elevated levels of some cytokines have been observed following contact of some materials with blood or tissues. Cytokines play a major role in regulating the inflammatory response by controlling the growth of fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells and endothelial cells.

IS 12572 (Part 14): 1994 IS0 10993-4: 1992

Annex C (informative) Bibliography
C.l International Standards
/mp/ants heitstechnische gberwachung Anforderungen, und Kennzeichnung. Materiel Prfifung,

iI11 is0 5840: 1989.

Cardiovascular Ca/d/ac valve prostheses. Cardiac pacemakers.

Cl31 NF 90-300:1981,
Oxyg&ateurs.

m&dico-chirurgical

-

PI

IS0 5841-1.1989, Part 7: lmplanrable

pacemakers

-

r31 IS0 5841.3:1992.

Cardiac pacemakers Part 3: Low-profile connectors (IS-I) for plantable pacemakers.

im-

c.3

Scientific

papers

c41 IS0

7198-l :-I', Cardiovascular imp/ants Tubular vascular prostheses - Part 7: Synthetic vascular prostheses.

Cl41 BOSCH, T., SCHMIDT. B., BLUMENSTEIN, M. and GURLAND, H.J., Thrombogenicity markers in clinical and ex viva assessment of membrane biocompatibility. Contr Nephrol, 59: 90-98,
1987.

c51 IS0

7198.2.--.I) Cardiovascular implaflts Tubular vascular prostheses Part 2: Sterile vascular prostheses of biological origin Specification and methods of test.
and arri-

ac;ivation pro.. Cl51 CHENOWETH, D.E., Complement duced by biomaterials. Trans Am Sot Artif /nt Organs 32: 226-232, 1986. Cl61 BURNS. G.L., PANTALOS, G.M. and OLSEN, D.B., The calf as a model for thromboembolic events with the total artificial heart. Trans Am Sot Artif lnt Organs 33: 398-403, 1907. D.J. and GRASEL, T.G., Cl71 COOPER, S.L.;FABRIZIUS, Methods of assessment of thrombosis ex vivo. In: Leonard E.F., Turitto V.T., and Vroman L.(Eds): Blood in contact with natural and artificial surfaces. Ann N.Y. Acad Sciences 516: 572-585. 1987. Cl81 Cornveau,
Haemostasls 3ra tory.

CSI IS0 7199:- `), Cardiovascular implants ficial organs - Blood-gas exchangers. L71 IS0

10993-I2:---l), Biological evaluation of medical devices - Parr 12: Sample preparation and reference materials.

c.2

National

standards
CVP3-1981,
Cardiac valve pros-

C81ANSI/MM1
theses

D.M.

and

Fritsma,

G.A.

(Eds):

PI ANSI/MM1
theses.

VP20-1986,

Vascuiar

graft

pros-

and thrombosis in the clinical labJ.B. Llpplncott. Philadelphia, 1988,

443 pp, Cl91 DAWD?,
biood van,

IlO1 ASTM 1'11 BS

F 756-67,

ment of henJO/yfK

Standard practice for assessproperties of materials

S et al. (Eds.1, Test procedures for the compatib//uty of b/omater:a/s. In prepa-a-

1992 M.K., Methods of assessment of E F , Turitto VJ.
in contact Ann N Y with Acad

5736-l 1 :I 990, Evaluation of med/ca/ dewces for biological hazards - Part 11' Method of test for haemolysis.

PO1 DWANJEE, thrombosis

LIPI

DIN 58 36 1-4: 1980, Transfusionsbehaltnlsse und Zubehdr, Blutbeutel aus Kunststoffen, Sicher-

In VIVO. In: Leonard Biood and Vroman L. (Eds) natural and arr:f/cia/ surfaces. Sciences. 516' tA~571. 1987

1) To be publlshed

17

IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 IS0 10993-4: 1992

[21] DEWANJEE, M.K., KAPADVANJWALA, M. and SANCHEZ, A., Quantitation of comparative thrombogenicity of dog, pig, and human platelets in a hemodialyzer. Am Sot Artif Int Organs Journal 38: 88-90, 1992. [22] DIDISHEIM, P., DEWANJEE, M.K., FRISK, C.S., KAYE, M.P. and FASS, D.N., Animal models for predicting clinical performance of biomaterials for cardiovascular use. In: Boretos J.W. and Eden M. (Ed& Contemporary Biomaterials, Noyes Publications, Park Ridge, NJ, USA, pp. 132-l 79, 1984. DIDISHEIM, P., DEWANJEE, M.K., KAYE, M.P.. FRISK, C.S., FASS, D.N., TIRREL?, M.V. and ZOLLMAN, P.E., Nonpredictability of long-term /n viva response from short-term in vitro or ex viva blood/material interactions. Trams Am Sot Artif
Int Organs 30: 370-376, [24] 1984.

platelet dysfunction associated with selective alpha granule release. Blood 56: 824-834, 1980. [29] Harker L.A., Ratner B.D. and Didisheim P. (Eds):
C8fdiOV8SCU/8r Biomaferials 8nd Biocompatibility. Supplement to Cafdiovascu/8r Pathology.

Elsevier, New York, in press 1992. [30] KARWATH, R., SCH~~RER,M. and WOLF, H., Measurement of platelet adhesiveness onto artificial surfaces using Cr-51 and In-l 11 labelled platelets. Studia Biophysics 731: 117-123, 1989. KATAOKA, K., MAEDA, ti., NISHIMURA, T. NITADORI, Y., TSURUTA., T., AKAIKE, T. and SAKURAI, Y., Estimation of cell adhesion on polymer surfaces with the use of "column method". J Biomed Mat Res 14: 817-823,
1980.

[23]

[31]

DIDISHEIM, P., OLSEN, D.B., FARRAR, D.J., PORTNER, P.M., GRIFFITH, B.P., PENNINGTON, D.G., JOIST, J.H., SCHOEN,J.F., GRISTINA, A.G. and ANDERSON,J.M., Infections and thromboembolism with implantable cardiovascular devices. Trans Am Sot Artif Int Org8ns 35: 54-70,
1989.

[32]

KAY,

L.A.

fssenti8ls

of

H8emOSt8sis

and

Thrombosis.

Churchill

Livingstone,

Edinburgh,

1988, ,290 pp. [33] LEWIS, J.L., SWEENEY, J., BALDINI, L., FRIE[)LAND, G.H. and SALZMAN, E.W., Assessment of thromboresistance of intravenous cannuiae by 125 l-fibrinogen scanning. J Blamed Mat Rcs 79. 99, 1985.

[25]

DIDISHEIM. P., STROPP, J.Q., BOROWICK. J.H. and GRABOWSKI. E.F., Species differences in platelet adhesion to biomaterials: investigation by a two-stage technique, Trans Am Artif Int Organs 2: 124-l 32, 1979.
Guidelines for blood/materi8/ interactions. Re-

[26]

~343 MAHIOUT, A., MEINHOLD, H., JORRES,A., KRIEG, R., KESSEL,M., TRETZEL, J. and BAURMEISTER, u Ex vivo model for preclinical evaluation of dialyzers containing new membranes. L/fe Support Systems 3: suppl 1. 448-452, 1985. [35] MIALE, J.B., L8bOf8fOw medune hematology. Sixth edition, CV Mosby, St. Louis. 1982. PALATIANX, G.M., DEWANJEE, M.K. and ROBINSON, R.P. et al, Quantitation of platelet loss with Indium-1 11 labelled platelets in a hollow. fiber membrane oxygenator and arterm filter
during extracorporeal Trans Am Sot Art/f clrcularlon m a pig mod@ Int Organs 35: 667-670,

port of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute Working Group, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, National Institutes of Health. NIH Put-& cation No. 85-2185, revised September 1985. Available from Biomaterials Program, Devrces and Technology Branch, Division of Heart and Vascular Diseases, NHLBI, 312 Federal Bullding, 7550 Wisconsin Avenue, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA; phone 301-496-l 586. FAX 301-480-6282. [27] HPIRKER, LA., KELLY,A.B. and HANSON,S.R , Experimental arterial thrombosis in nonhuman primates. Ci~culalion 83. S~~~:c,llamont /I/. 41-55. 1991. HARKER, L.A., MALPASS, T.W , BH~NSOI`J,H.E., HESSEL, E.A. II and SuctiTEA, S j,, Mechantsm of abnormal bleeding tn patients undergc!ng cardiopulmonary bypass. Acquired trarjsierlt

[36]

1989. 1377 SCHOEN, F.J , ANDERSOF~. J M , DIDISYEI*~I, P J.J., GHIS~II:JA. A G , HAUASAKI, If arid SIMMONS, R.L.. Ventricular assist device (?/AD! pathology analyses. guIdelInes for clm~a, St!J(j les. J Applred Materiak 1' 49-56, 1930
DOBBiPi5.

[28]

18

IS 12572 (Part 14) : 1994 IS0 10993-4: 1992

devices,

pp 369-396. Philadelphia, 1989.

W.B.

Saunders

Co.,

[42]

[393 SPENCER, P.C.. SCHMIDT, B., SAMTLEBEN, W., BOSCH, T. and GURLAND, H.J., Ex vivo model of hemodialysis membrane biocompatibllity. Trans Am Sot Artif Int Organs 31: 495498, 1985. [40] Biocompatibility Guidance for Medical Prepared by toxicology sub-group of the Tripartite Subcommittee on medical devices,
Tripartife Devices. September [41] 1986.

WHITE, R.A., Diagnosis and therapy of emergent vascular diseases In: Shoemaker, W.C., Ayres, S., Holbrook, P.R. and Thompson, W.L., Textbook of critical care, second edition. W.B.

Saunders, Philadelphia, 1989, pp. 447-452.
1431 ZINGG, W., IP, W.F., SEFTON, M.V. and MANCER. K., A chronic arteriovenous shunt for the testing of biomaterials and devices in dogs. Life Support Systems 4: 221-229, 1986. [44] WHO/LAB/88.3, Recommended methods for the visual determination of white cell and platelet count, S.M. Lewis, H.M. Rowan and F. Kubota. J. C/in. Pathol. 43: 1990 932-936.

WARD, R.A., SCHMIDT, EL, BLUMENSTEIN. M. and GURLAND, H.J., Evaluation of phagocytic cell function in an ex viva model of hemodialysis. Kidney International 37.' 776-782, 1990.

19

(Continued form second cover) Part 10 Part 11 Part 12 Part 13 Part 14 Methods of tests for dental materials Methods of tests for eye irritation Tests for cytotoxicity: Tests for geno-toxicity, invifro methods (underpreparation) carcinogenecity .

and reproductive toxicity

Selection of tests for interactions with blood

Subsequent parts will deal with the other relevant aspects of biological testing. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requrrement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysrs, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of srgniticant places retarned in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified valut? in this standard.

Bureau of Indian Standdrds BIS is a s:atutory institution established under tht: Brireau cffndian Standards Act, I986 to promote marking and quality certificatioo of harmonious d:rvelopment of the activities of standardlzltlon, goods and attending to connected matters In the country. Copyrigh( RIS hai; thr copyright of ;?I1 its publications. No p?rt of these publications may be reproduced in in wrirlng OF B(S. This does not preclude the free use, in sny forlr. without the ptlor permission such as symbolc and sizes, type or the cou~\e of Implemcntmg the standard, of necessar!' details. grade desrpnatlonr. Enqulrlcs relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publlcatlon ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards when necessary and amendments, if aoy, are revlewcd periodically and revised, Users of Indkan Standards should ascertain that they are in tims ln tliIle. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent latest amendments or edition. following reference :

Indian Standards are issued from possession of the to BIS pving the

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of lssuc Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters :

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Maoak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Marg,

New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all OfFices ) Telephone

Regional
Central

Offices : Manak

:

NEW Eastern

Bhavan, 9 Bahadur DELHI 110002

Shah

Zafar

Marg t 331 01 13 31 73

: l/14 C.I.T. Scneme VII M, V.I.P. CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446. : C.I T. Campus, Sector

Road,

Maniktola 37 86 62 160036 53 38 43 41 29 16

Northern Southern

35-C, CHANDIGARH

IV Cross Road,

M.%T)RAS 60fi113

6 32 92 95 Branches : AHMAL)-2H~l). i+\NCALORII. BlIOP:\L. BHUBANESHWAK. C'C)IMBATOR~.:.. FARIDABAI'J. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI HYL)EKAt!4U J FIIPLJR. );4NPUR. P.$TNA. TH:KUVANANTHAPlJKAM.

