IS 12257~( Part 5 ) : 1996

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard

PNEUMATICMEASUREMENT
PART 5 GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND DEFINITIONS

ICS 01.040.27

0 BIS 1996

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

December

1996

Price Group

5

Engineering

Metrology Sectional Committee, LM 05

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 5) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Engineering Metrology Sectional Committee had been approved by the Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The standard aims at rationalizing the terminology by choosing suitable terms so as to eliminate the confusion arising from the use of different terms by different manufacturers. It provides the user of pneumatic measurement equipment with an unambiguous means for communicating their requirements to manufacturers. This standard is one of series of Indian Standards on pneumatic published standard are: Part 1 Part 2 Part 3 Part 4 Pneumatic measurement measurement. The other parts of the

General information on principles and methods features of instruments working in high pressure range

Pneumatic measurement-Design

Pneumatic measurement - Parameters of instruments working on high pressure Pneumatic measurement - General information and examples of application

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from BS 4358 : 1968 `Glossary of terms used in air gauging' published by British Standards Institution (BSI).

IS 12257 ( Part 5 ) : 1996

Indian Standard

PNEUMATIC
PART 5 GLOSSARY
1 SCOPE

MEASUREMENT
OF TERMS AND DEFINITIONS

This standard (Part 5) covers the various technical terms and definitions used in pneumatic measurement.
2 TERMS AND-DEFJNITIONS 2.1 Pneumatic Measurement (Air Gauging)

its internal and external diameters, when the section is circular; the external and internal length and breadth when the section is rectangular. 2.9 Land Width The terminating wall thickness of an open jet. 2.10 Jet Recession The amount by which anopen jet is recessed behind the outer surface of the measuring head.
NOTE -Recession a) b) It protects fulfils two objects the jet from mechanical

A precise measuring

techniyuc, using air drawn from a compressed air supply, which can be employed to measure size or, to check form or position.
2.2 Pneumatic hleasurement System

:
damage, distance and between

It maintains the essential minimum the jet and the work being measured.

Measuring equipment employing pneumatic measurement based on the determination of flow or pressure and comprising a pneumatic gauge unit and one or more measuring heads. 2.3 Pneumatic
Measurement (Flow) System

2.11

Contact Gauging Igement

A gauging element fitted with a stylus which contacts the work being measured. 2.12 Matched Gauging Elements Gauging elements which have matched pneumatic characteristics so that they may be used in combination in a single measuring circuit. 2.13 Asymmetry Error The error which may arise when the work being measured is asymmetrically disposed between gauging elements which are combined in one measuring circuit. This is the apparent change in bore sizes resulting from movement of the plug body in the hole along the line of the jets. 2.14 Air Escape Duct
An air passage, for example, a groove or hole, which

Pneumatic measurement determination of flow. 2.4 Pneumatic

system based upon the
(Pressure) System

Measurement

Pneumatic measurement system based upon the determination of pressure. 2.5 I'neumatic Measurement
Unit

That part of the pneumatic measurement system which displays the measured sizes or providesvisual or audible signals or converts the measurements into signals for automatic operations. 2.6 Measuring
Head

That part of the pneumatic measurement system which contains the gauging clement(s) and which is presented to the work, or micet3er.m.
2.7 Gauging Element

provides an easy final escape to atmosphere which has emerged from a gauging element. 2.15 Control Orifice (Control Jet)

of air

The element in the measuring head which detects dimensional change and provides the response which enables the pneumatic measurement system to measure that change. The gauging element may be an open jet or a contact gauging clement. 2.8 Open Jet A gauging element in the form of a jet of circular or rectangular section which does not contact the work being measured. The parameters of a jet are

The restriction used in pneumatic measurement (pressure) systems. In association with the gauging elements, the control orifice determines the magnification of the system. 2.16 Supgly Pressure The pressure of the supply from which the pneumatic measurement systems draws its air.

IS 12257 ( fart 5 ) : 1996 2.17 Air Filter

2.26 Magnification
The ratio of the movement of the indicator index to

A device for cleaning the air supply to the pneumatic measurement system and which, ideally, removes all liquid and solid particles. 2.18 Operating Pressure The constant pressure at which the pneumatic measurement system is operated. 2.19 Operating Pressure Indicator A pressure measuring instrument which registers the operating pressure and which is usually fitted to the pneumatic measurement unit. 2.20 Pressure Regulator

the dimensional change which produces it, both being expressed in terms of the same unit of length. 2.27 Ranging The process of adjusting pneumatic measurement system so that the movement of the indicator index conforms to a pre-established scale at two or more points, so that pneumatic measurement system has a s'pecified magnification. 2.28 Measuring Range The range of sizes (minimum to maximum) which the pneumatic measurement system is dcsigncd to measure and over which the indicating device is graduated. 2.29 Magnification Control

A device which keeps the operating pressure constant irrespective of pressure changes in the supply line and of changes of air flow in the pneumatic measurement system itself. 2.21 Intermediate Pressure
(Back Pressure)

In pneumatic measurement (pressure) systems, the pressure between the control orifice and the measuring head. 2.22 Simple Pressure Measurement Measurement of the intermediate pressure in relation to the ambient atmospheric pressure or to the operating pressure as datum. 2.23 Differential Pressure Measurement

The control which enables the magnification of the pneumaticmeasurement system IO be adjusted Loa specified value.
NUI'E - This control with setting standards. will normally bc used in association

2.30 Setting Standard
A standard of appropriate

form and of established size used for setting up the pneumatic mcasurement system so that its reading represents true size.
NOTE - Two setting standards, one to provide a reading near the lower limit of the measuring range and the other a reading near the upper limit, enable both magnification and datum to be set. Asingle setting standard allows the datum to be set when ranging has already been done.

Measurement of the intermediate pressure in relation to a pre-set fixed pressure obtained from a branch circuit having the same operating pressure as the measuring circuit. This fixed pressure is adjusted to be approximately equal to the intermediate pressure at the mid-point of the measuring range. 2.24 Null-Balance Pressure Measurement Measurement of the intermediate pressure by a self-balancing system which brings the pressure in a secondary chamber to equality with the pressure being measured by means of a pressure regulating mechanism fitted with an appropriate indicating device.
NOTE - The terms defined in 2.22, 2.23 and 2.24 setve to distinguish between the different methods currently used in pneumatic measurement (pressure) systems for measuring the intermediate pressure.

2.31 Transducer A device which converts a measuring signal cxpressed in terms of one physical quantity into an equivalent signal expressed in terms of another physical quantity. 2.32 Differential Pneumatic Measurement A technique whereby two individual measurements are combined so as to display their difference on a single indicator. 2.33 In-Process Gauging Gauging carried out during processing, for cxample, measurement of a workpiece whilst it is being machined. 2.34 Post-Process Gauging

2.25

Datum

(Zero) Setting Control

The control which enables the indicator reading to be set to a datum, for example, zero.
NOTE - This control with a setting standard. will normally be used in association

Gauging carried out immediately after processing, for example, measurement of a workpiece immcdiately after it has been machined. 2

IS 12257 ( Part 5 ) : 1996 3 MEASURING HFADS MEASUREMENT FOR DIMENSIONAL 3.6 Multi-Dimension Pneumatic Plug Gauge

The terms and definitions given in this clause relate

to measuring heads used for the measurement of length, internal diameter and external diameter. The terms relating to measuring heads for inspecting form and position are given in Annex A. 3.1 Pneumatic
A measuring Measurement Probe

Pneumatic plug gauge for the simultaneous measurement of two or more spaced diameters which may be of equal or of different size. 3.7 Special Pneumatic Plug Gauge Pneumatic~plug gauges generally conforming to the basic defini~tion but particularly designed for specific applications 3.8 Pneumatic
Ring Gauge

head for general use fitted with a single gauging element which may be an open jet or a contact gauging element. When two or more are used in one measuring~circuit, the gauging elements must he matched. 3.2 Pneumatic
Plug Gauge

which is passed the cylindrical work to be measured and which is fitted with one or more pairs of gauging elements. The gauging elements may be open jets or contact gauging elements. 3.8.2 The pneumatic ring gauge is of fixed size and can be used to measure only diameters lying within its measuring range as specified by the manufacturer. 3.8.3 For the measurement of single diameter the pneumatic ring gauge is fitted with two gauging elements arranged diametrically. 3.8.4 By relative rotation and translation of the shaft within the ring gauge the position of the diameter measured can be varied both in azimuth and along the axis. 3.8.5 For the measurement of average diameter the pneumatic ring gauge is ~filted with an even number of gauging elements four or more, spaced equally around the circumference. 3.9 Through-Shaft Pneumatic Ring Gauge

3.8.1 A ring gauge through

3.2.1 A plug gauge which can be inserted into the

bore to be measured and which is fitted with one or more pairs of gauging elements. The gauging elcments may be open jets or contact gauging elcments. 3.2.2 The pneumatic plug gauge is of fixed size and can be used to measure only diameters lying within its measuring range as specified by the manufacturer. 3.2.3 For the measurement of single diameter the pneumatic plug gauge is fitted with two gauging elements arranged diametrically. 3.2.4 By rotation and translation of the plugwithin the bore, the position of the diameter measured can be varied both in azimuth and depth. 3.2.5 For the measurement of average diameter, the pneumatic plug gauge is fitted with an even number of gauging elements, four or more, spaced equally around the circumference. 3.3 Through-Bore
Pneumatic Plug Gauge

Pneumatic ring gauge for measuring plain cylindrical work. Since the work can be passed right through the ring gauge the longitudinal position of the gauging elements is not of primary importance. 3.10 Close-to-Shoulder Pneumatic Ring Gauge

Pneumatic plug gauge for measuring through bores. Since the gauge can be passed right through the bore, the longitudinal position of the gauging elements is not of primary importance. 3.4 Blind Bore Pneumatic
Plug Gauge

Pneumatic ring gauge for measuring shouldered shafts. The gauging elements are placed so as to permit measurements to be made as close as possible to the shoulder. 3.11 Multi-Dimension Pneumatic Ring Gauge

Pneumatic plug gauge for measuring blind bores. The gauging elements are placed so as to permit measurements to be made as close as possible to the bottom of the bore. 3.5 Shouldered-Bore Pneumatic Plug Gauge

Pneumatic ring gauge for the simultaneous measurement of two or more spaced diameters which may be of equal or different size. 3.12 Special Pneumatic
Ring Gauge

Pneumatic plug gauge for measuring shouldered holes. The gauging elements are placed so as to permit measurements to be made as close as possible to the shoulder. 3

Pneumatic ring gauges generally conforming to the basic definition but particularly designed for specific applications.

IS 12257 ( Part 5 ) : 1996 3.13 Pneumatic Calliper Gauge 3.14 Multi-Dimension Gauge Hand Pneumatic Calliper

Acalliper gauge for the measurement of cylindrical work. It has one or two gauging elements, which may be open jets or contact gauging elements. The pneumatic calliper gauge is designed to measure a single diameter and cannot conveniently be used to measure average diameter. By relative rotation and translation of the gauge and the work, the position of the diameter measured can be varied both in azimuth and along the axis.

A hand pneumatic calliper gauge, normally of-fixed size, designed for simultaneous measurement of two or more diameters of equal or different size.
3.15 Special Hand Pneumatic Calliper Gauge

Pneumatic calliper gauges for hand use conforming generally to the basic definition but particularly designed for specific-applications.

IS 12257 ( Part 5 ) : 1996

ANNEX A

(Clause 3)
TERMS RELATING TO MEASURING HEADS FOR INSPECTING FORM AND POSITION

1

Ovality

PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 2 gauging elements 1 measuring circuit

2

Ovality

PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 4 gauging elements in 2 pairs spaced at right angles 2 measuring circuits

3

Ovality

4

m

PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 2n gauging elements in pairs equally spaced in one plane lz measuring circuits

3-point Lobing

PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 3 gauging elements 1 measuring circuit

5

5-point Lobing

PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE a) 3 gauging elements b) 5 gauging elements 1 measuring circui 1

G

Taper *?_

PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 2 gauging elements 1.measuring circuit

7

Taper 11

PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 4 gauging elements in 2 pairs suitably spaced along axis 2 measuring circuits

IS 12257 ( Part 5 ) : 1996

8

Variation of diameter along axis

PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 2n gauging elements in n pairs suitably spaced along axis II measuring circuits

-

9

Ovality

PNEUMATIC RING GAUGE 2 gauging elements 1 measuring circuit

10

3-point Lobing

PNEUMATIC RING GAUGE 3 gauging elcmcnts 1 measuring circuit

11

j-point Lobing

PNEUMATIC RING GAUGE a) 3 gauging elements b) 5 gauging elements 1 measuring circuit

12

Taper"?

PNEUMATIC RlNG GAUGE 2 gauging elements 1 measuring circuit

13 Taper? PNEUMATIC RING GAUGE 4 gauging elements in 2 pairs suitably spaced along axis 2 measuring circuits

14 Variation of diameter along axk PNEUMATIC RING GAUGE 2n gauging elements suitably spaced along axis y1measuring

IS 12257( Part 5 ) : 1996
- 5
r

-

raper*+

1 !WND CALLIPER GAUGE 1 or 2 gauging elements 1 measuring circuit

-

6

Variation 1f liameter dong axis

MULTI-DIMENSION CALLIPER GAUGE 2n gauging elements r measuring circuits

HAND-

.7 Variation If liameter along axis FIXTURE MOUNTING PNEUMATIC CALLIPER GAUGE a) Non-floating b) Floating 2n gauging elements 1 measuring circuit in each calliper

18 Ovality 01 Lobing VEE GAUGE 1 gauging element 1 measuring circuit

19 Straightness PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE

4 gauging elements in common axial plane 1 measuring circuit 20 Straightness PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 4 gauging elements in common axial plane, centre pair disposec to suit component conditions 1 measuring circuit

21 Straightness PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 3 gauging elements in commor axial plane 2 measuring circuits

7

IS 12257 ( Part 5 ) : 1996
-

22

Straightness

PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 1 gauging element 1 measuring circuit

23 Straightness PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 1 gauging element 1 measuring circuit

24 Straightness WE BLOCK WITH GAUGING ELEMENTS II gauging elements n measuring circuit

25 Parallelism of 2 holes 4 gauging elements in 2 pairs measuring thickness of material between holes 2 measuring circuits

Parallelism of 2 holes

S gauging elements in 2 sets of 4 giving compensation for diameter variation 2 measuring circuits

27 Concentricity of 2 inside diameters 1 gauging element 2 measuring circuits

28 Concentricity of 2 inside diameters 2 gauging elements 1 measuring circuits End face of component is datum and must be square to axis

IS 12257 ( Part 5 ) : 1996 !9

Zoncenricity of I inside diameters

1 gauging elements in 2 pairs ;iving compensation for diameter variation 2 measuring circuits End face of component is datum Ind must be square to axis

)O

Concentri:ity outside to inside diameter

2 gauging elements material thickness 1 measuring circuit

measuring

-

1

Squareness bore to face

2 gauging elements 1 measuring circuit

12

Squareness?_ bore to face

4 gauging elements in 2 pairs giving compensation for diameter variation 2 measuring circuit

33

Squareness i Reference square with 1 gauging element 1 measuring cirucit

34

Centre distance of 2 holes

35

Centre distance shaft to hole

1

4 gauging elements in 2 pairs giving compensation diameter variation 2 measuring circuits

fo I

4 gauging elements in 2 pairs giving compensation diameter variation 2 measuring circuits

fo r

IS 12257 ( Part 5 ) : 1996

6 gauging elements giving com-

pensation for diameter variation 2 measuring circuits

1 gauging element 1 measuring circuits

PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 4 gauging elements in 2 pairs 2 measuring circuits

TAPERED PNEUMATIC RING GAUGE 4 cauging elements in 2 pairs 2 measuring circuits

NOTb - Measuring heaas ror inspecting for taper which are marked with an asterisk (*) may also be used to determine variation of diameter along with axis. Those marked with (t) should be used with necessary caution whek'inspecting shafts or holes in the rare cases in which the pattern of diameter variation rclabzs with denth.

10

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS ,has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Stundrrrds Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmedwhen such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. LM 05 ( 0148 ).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 0131,323 83 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone { 323 76 38 41 17

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern
: l/14 C. LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

{ 337 84 86 99,337 26,337 85 9120 61

CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A CHANDIGARH 160022 { 60 38 20 43 25 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 { 235 02 15 16,235 19,235 04 23 42 15 Western
: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

MUMBAI 400093

832 92 95,832 78 58 832 78 91,832 78 92

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAI-PUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. -THIRUVANANTHAPURAhl Printed at Printograph, New Delhi (India)

