IS 13161

( Part 6 ) : 1991

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

hdian Standard

SHIPBUILDING - NOISE LEVELS ONBOARD SHIPS
PART 6 GUIDELINES FOR CONTROLLING NOISE EXPOSURE

UDC 629.12 : 628.517.2

0 BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

-OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

December

1991

Price Group 2

Shipbuilding

Sectional

Committee, 9

TED 17

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Shipbuilding Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council ( TEDC ). This Indian Standard is a part of the series of standards on noise levels onboard ships. The other parts are: Part 1 Glossary of terms Part 2 Measurement Part 3 Maximum noise levels Part 4 Noise exposure limits Part 5 Requirement for protection The purpose of this standard to noise in order to: is to specify noise levels and to device means to reduce exposure

a) Provide for safe working conditions by giving consideration to the need for speech communication and for hearing audible alarms, and to an environment where clearheaded decisions can be made in control stations, navigation and radio spaces and manned machinery spaces; b) Protect the seafarer from excessive noise levels which may give rise to a noise-inducted hearing loss; and c) Provide the seafarer with an acceptable degree of comfort in rest, recreation and other spaces and also to provide conditions for recuperation from the effects of exposure to high noise levels. This standard is intended as a guide and it may not be possible to implement all nor any of the measures recommended on all ships. Therefore, it also does not cover detailed technical information needed for putting constructional noise control measure into effect, or for deciding measures appropriate in particular circumstances. In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from Publication No. 814 82.05~ "Noise levels on board ships" issued by International Maritime Organization ( IMO ).

IS 13161 ( Part 6 ) : 1991

Indian Standard

SHIPBUILDING - NOISE LEVELS ONBOARD SHIPS
PART 1 SCOPE 6 GUIDELINES FOR CONTROLLING NOISE EXPOSURE 3.5 When designing efficient and economic measures for noise control of machinery installation in existing ships, the measurement of sound produced in terms of A-weighted sound level may need to be supplemented by so-me form of frequency analysis.

This standard ( Part 6 ) specifies guidelines for noise reduction onboard ships to comply with the recommended limits given in IS 13161 ( Part 3 ) : 1991 and IS 13161 ( Part 4 ) : 1991 of this standard. These guidelines are intended for use during design and construction of ships. 2 REFERENCES The following Indian standards adjuncts to this standard. IS No. Title are important

4 ISOLATION

OF SOURCES

OF NOISE

4.1 Where practicable any engines or machinery producing noise levels in excess of the limits set out in4 of IS 13161 (Part 3): 1991 shall be installed in compartments which do not require continuous attendance (~see also 8.1 of this standard ). 4.2 Accommodation shall be sited both horizontally and vertically as far away as is practicable from sources of noise such as propellers and propulsion machinery. 4.3 Machinery casings shall where practicable, be arranged outside superstructures and deckhouses containing accommodation spaces. Where this is not feasible, passageways shall be arranged between the casings and accommodation spaces, if practicable. 4.4 Consideration shall be given, where practicable to the placing of accommodation spaces in deckhouses and not in superstructures extending to the ship's side. 4.5 Consideration may also be given where applicable to the separation of accommodation spaces from machinery spaces by unoccupied spaces, sanitary and washing rooms. 4.6 Suitable partitions, bulkheads, decks, may be needed to prevent the spread of noise. It is important that these be of correct construction and location in relation to the source of noise and the frequencies of the noise to be attenuated. 4.7 Where a space, such as machinery spaces, is being divided into noisy ( not continually manned ) and less noisy ( capable of being continually manned ) spaces, it is preferable to have complete separation. 1

Shipbuilding - Noise 13161 levels ( Part 3 ) : 1991 onboard ships : Part 3 Maximum noise levels 13161 Shipbuilding - Noise leve 1s ( Part 4 ) : 1991 onboard ships - Part 4 Noise exposure limits 3 GENERAL
3.1 Design and construction

of noise control measures shall be supervised by persons skilled in noise control techniques. 3.2 In applying noise control measures, care shall be taken to ensure that rules and regulations concerning ship structure accommodation and other safety matters are not infringed and the use of sound reduction materials shall not introduce fire or health hazards. 3.3 The need for noise control shall be taken into account at the design stage when deciding which of different designs of engines and machinery are to be installed, the method of installation and the siting of machinery in relation to other spaces and the acoustic insulation and siting of the accommodation spaces. 3.4 It is mostlprobable that noise originating from machinery and propellers reaching the accommodation and other spaces outside the machinery spaces will be of the structure-borne type.

IS 13161( Part 6 ) : 1991
NOTE - In these cases it may be necessary to ensure the supervision of the plant by installing alarms in the less noisy compartments and to arrange means of escape so that seafarers may leave these compartments without danger.

8 ENCLOSURE

OF THE OPERATOR desirable or watch reducing see 4.1 ).

4.8 It may be advisable to provide sound absorbing material in certain spaces in order to prevent increase of noise level due to reflection from partitions, bulkheads, decks, etc.

8.1 In most machinery spaces -it is and advisable to protect operating keeping seafarers by providing a sound contorl room or other similar space (

5 EXHAUST -AND INTAKE Si1;ENCING
5.1 Exhaust

systems from internal combustion engines, air intake system to machinery spaces, accommodation spaces and other shall be so arranged that the inflow `or discharge orifices are remote from places frequented by seafarers. or attenuators shall be fitted when

8.2 In continuously manned machinery spaces of small ships and of existing ships where noise levels are in excess of 85 dB (A), it is desirable to provide a noise refuge at the control station or manoeuvring platform where the watchke,eper might be expected to spend the major part of the time. ;P;pE;TROLS IN ACCOMMODATION

5.2 Silencers necessary.

5.3 To minimize accommodation noise levels it is normally necessary to isolate exhaust systems and certain pipe work and duct work from casings, bulkheads, etc. 6 MACHINERY ENCLOSURE

9.1 To reduce noise levels in accommodation spaces it may be necessary to consider the isolation of deckhouse containing such spaces from the remaining structure of the ship by resilient mountings. 9.2 Consideration may also be given to the provision of flexible connections to bulkheads, linings and ceilings and the installation of floating floors within accommodation spaces. 9.3 The provision of curtains to side scuttles and windows and the use of carpets within accommodation spaces assists in absorbing noise. 10 SELECTION OF MACHINERY

6.1 In continuously manned spaces or spaces where seafarers might reasonably be expected to spend lengthy periods of time on maintenance or overhaul work, and where separation as detailed in 4 is not practicable, consideration may have to be given to the fitting of sound insulating enclosures or partial enclosures to engines or machinery producing sound pressure levels in excess of the limits set out in 4 of IS 13161 ( Part 3 ) : 1991. by engines or machinery installed in spaces as in 6.1 above falls within the criteria of 3.2.1 and zone A of Pig. 1 in IS 13161 ( Part 4 ) : 1991, it is essential that noise reduction measures are provided. 6.3 When sound insulation enclosures are fitted, it is important that they entirely enclose the noise source. 7 REDUCTION BODY
7.1 To reduce 6.2 Where the noise level produced

10.1 The noise produced by each items of machinery to be fitted needs to be taken into account at the design stage. It may be possible to control noise by using a machine producing less airborne, fluid-borne or structure-borne noise. shall supply information on the noise produced by their machinery and also provide recommended methods of installation in order to keep noise levels to a minimum. 11 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE
10.2 Manufacturers

OF

NOISE

IN

THE

AFT

the noise influence in the aft body of the ship, especially to the accommodation spaces, consideration may be given to noise emission problems during the design procedures relating to the aft body propeller, etc. 2

All items of machinery, equipment and associated working spaces shall be regularly inspected with respect to noise by a-competent person. In case such inspections reveal defects in the means for noise control, or other defects causing excessive noise, these shall be rectified as soon as practicable.

IS 13161( Part 6 ) : 1991 12 VIBRATION ISOLATION 12.1 Where necessary, supported on correctly resilient mountings. machines designed shall be and fitted silencers produces unacceptable noise levels in accommodation spaces or on the navigating bridge, resilient mountings shal1 be fitted. 12.3 When sound insulating enclosures are fitted it is desirable that the machine shall -be resiliently mounted and that all pipe, trunk and cable connections to it be flexible.

sound from structure-borne 12.2 Where auxiliary machinery, compressors, hydraulic units, generating sets, vents, exhaust pipes and

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of the Indian Standards, Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bareau of Indian Standards

established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to BIS is a statutory institution promote harmonious development of the activrties of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Director Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the or grade designations. Publications ), BIS.
Revision ol' lndian Standards .

if Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary land amendments, any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in may be possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot I No. TED 17 ( 901 )

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters
:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

New Delhi 110002 Telegrams (Common
: Manaksanstha

to

all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan,

NEW DELHI

9 Bahadur 110002

Shah Zafar Marg

I 311 01 31 331 13 75 37 86 62 53 38 43 235 02 16 6 32 92 95

Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS
: Manakalaya,

160036 600113

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri BOMBAY 400093

( East )

Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, PARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR,

:

;i

Printed

at Printwell

Printers,

Aligarh,

India

