IS 13703 ( Part 4 ) : 1993 IEC Pub 269-4 ( 1980 ) [ Superseding IS 9224 ( Part 4 ) ]

( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR VOLTAGES
PART 4 SUPPLEMENTARY PROTECTION

FOR LOW-VOLTAGE FUSES NOT EXCEEDING 1000 V AC

OR1500VDC
REQUIREMENTS FOR FUSE LINKS FOR THE OF SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES

UDC

621.316*923*027+3 : 621,382

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 11 ZAFAR MARG

NEW June 1993

IS 13703 ( Part 4 ) : 1993 IEC Pub 269-4 ( 1980 )

Indian Standard

SPECIFICATIONFOR LOW-VOLTAGE FUSES FORVOLTAGESNOTEXCEEDING1000VAC OR1500VDC
PART 4 SUPPLEMENTARY PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR FUSE LINKS OF SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES FOR THE

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard ( Part 4 ) which is identical with IEC Pub 269-4 ( 1980 ), issued by the International E!ectrotechnical Commission ( IEC ) is being brought out to align the requirements for LV fuses with the corresponding requirements at the IEC level. The text of the IEC Standard has been considered and approved by ET 39, Fuses Sectional Committee of BIS as suitable for publication as Indian Standard; superseding the contents of IS 9224 ( Part 4 ) which covered requirements of LV fuses suitable for the protection of semiconductor devices. CROSS REFERENCES In this Indian Standard, the following respective place the following: International Standard ( ZEC ) 147-O ( 1966 ) 7 269-l ( 1868 ) 269-2A ( 1978 ) ] 269-3A ( 1978 ) International Standard ( IS0 ) 3 ( 1973 ) International Standards are referred to. Read in their

Indian Standard IS 3700 Now replaced by later versions at the IEC level identical with Part 1 of this stan.dard IS 1076

1

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS 13703 ( Part 4 ) : 1993
IEC Pub269-4(1980)

CONTENTS
Pa0e

EXPLANATORY NOTE
Clause

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

1. General .......................................... 1.1 Scope ............................................ 1.2 Object ............................................
2. Definitions.

. ...

5 5 5 6 6 6 6 6 7 7 8 8 8 8 8 8

2.2

General terms

............................................ ........................................

3. Standard conditions for operation in service .......................... 3.2 Temperature inside an enclosure .............................. 3.5 Voltage ............................................ ........................................... 3.6 Current.

3.7 3.9 5.1 5.2 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.8 5.9 6.2 7.3 7.4 7.5 7.6 7.7 7.12 7.13 8.1 8.3 8.4 8.5 8.6 8.7

Frequency, power factor and time constant Breaking capacity .......................................

........................

5. Characteristics

of fuses ...................................... Summary of characteristics ................................. Rated voltage ........................................ Rated frequency ....................................... Rated power loss ...................................... Time/current characteristics, conventional currents and overload curves ............................... Cut-off and Z?l characteristics ................................. Arc voltage characteristics ............................................. Markings on fuse-links ........................

........

9

10 11 11
11

6. Markings

.......... .......... ........... ........... ........... ........... ........... ........... ........... ........... ........... ........... ........... ........... ........... ...........

7. Standard conditions

................... for construction Temperature rise and power loss ................... ............................... Operation Breaking capacity ........................... Cut-off characteristics ......................... ........................... 12t characteristics ...................... Arc voltage characteristics Special operating conditions .....................

11 11 12 12 12 12 12 12 13 13 14 15 17 19 21 22
. . . . .

8. Tests..

.. : ................................ ................................ General Verification of temperature-rise limits and power loss. ....... ....................... Verification of operation Verification of the breaking capacity ................. Verification of cut-off characteristics ................. Verification of the Pi characteristics and arc voltage characteristics

FIGURES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ........... APPENDIX A APPENDIX B

Guide for the co-ordination

of fuse-links with semiconductor

devices

24

-

Survey on information to be supplied by the manufacturer in his literature (catalogue) for a fuse designed for the protection of semiconductor devices . .

32

3

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

Is 13703 ( Part 4) : 1993 IEC Pub269-4(1980)

EXPLANATORY NOTE

In view of the fact that this recommendation should be read together with I EC Publication 269-1, Low-voltage Fuses, Part I : General Requirements, the numbering of its clauses and subclauses and tables is made to correspond to the latter.

1.

General

Fuse-links for the protection of semiconductor devices shall comply with all requirements of I EC Publication 269-1, if not otherwise indicated hereinafter, and shall also comply with the supplementary requirements laid down below.

1.1

Scope These supplementary requirements apply to fuse-links for application in equipment containing semiconductor devices for circuits up to 1 000 V a.c. or circuits of nominal voltages up to I 500 V d.c. and also, in so far as they are applicable, for circuits of higher nominal voltages.
Notes 1. 2. Such fuse-links are commonly referred to as "semiconductor fuse-links". In most cases, a part of the associated equipment serves the purpose of a fuse-base. Owing to the great variety of equipment, no general rules can be given; the suitability of the associated equipment to serve as a fuse-base shall be subject to agreement between the manufacturer and the user. However, if separate fuse-bases or fuse-holders are used, they shall comply with the appropriate requirements of Part I.

1.2

Object

The object of these supplementary requirements is to establish the characteristics of semi-. conductor fuse-links in such a way that they can be replaced by other fuse-links having the same characteristics provided that their dimensions are identical. For this purpose, they present in particular: 1.2.1 The characteristics of fuse-links with reference to: a) b) cl d) e) 1.2.2 their their their their their rated values: current, voltage, power loss; arc voltage limits; temperature rises in normal service; time/current characteristics; cut-off characteristics and their 12t characteristics.

Type tests for verification of the characteristics of fuse-links.

( IEC page Y )

Is 13703 ( Part 4 ) : 1993 lEC Pub269-4.(1980) 1.2.3 1.2.4 The markings on fuse-links. Availability and presentation of technical data.

.2. 2.2

Definitions General terms Semiconductor device (according to I EC Publication 147-0, Essential Ratings and Characteristics of Semiconductor Devices and General Principles of Measuring Methods, Fart 0: General and Terminology). A divice whose essential characteristics semiconductor. are due to the flow of charge carriers within a

2.2.10

2.2. I 1

Local air conditions of the micro-climate surrounding a fuse in an enclosure with other

The conditions equipment.
NOW.-

The local air conditions include such factors as heat radiation and air motion.

2.2.12

Semiconductor fuse-link A current-limiting fuse-link capable of breaking under specific conditions any current value not exceeding the rated breaking capacity which persists for a time sufficient to melt the fuseelement(s) (see Sub-clause 7.4.3).

3. 3.2

Standard conditions for operation in service Temperature inside an enclosure Since the rated values of the fuse-links are based on specified conditions that do not always correspond to those prevailing at the point of installation, including the local air conditions, the user may have to consult the manufacturer concerning the possible need for re-rating.

3.5 3.5. I

Voltage Rated voltage For a.c., the rated voltage of a fuse-link is related to the applied voltage. It is based on the r.m.s. value of a sinusoidal a.c. voltage: it is further assumed that the applied voltage retains the same value throughout the operation of the fuse-link. All tests to verify the ratings are based on this assumption.
.Y,I/~ In many applications, the applied voltage will be sufficiently close to the sinusoidal form for the significant part of the operating time. but there are many cases where this condition is not satisfied.

The performance of a fuse-link subjected to a non-sinusoidal e\;~luated by comparing, for the first approximation, the arithmetic sinusoidal and sinusoidal applied voltages.

applied voltage can be mean values of the non-

1EC page 1I )

6

Is13703(Part4):1993 IEC Pub269.4(1980)
For d.c., the rated voltage of a fuse-link mean value. of When d.c. is obtained
5To

is related to the applied a.c.. the ripple

by rectifying

is based on the is assumed not to cause a
voltage. It

variation

more than

above or 9"o below the mean \-alue.

3.5.2

Applied voltage in service Under service conditions, the applied voltage is that voltage which, in the fault circuit, causes the current to increase to such proportions that the fuse-link will operate. For a.c., consequently, the value of the applied voltage in a single-phase a.c. circuit is usually identical to the power-frequency recovery voltage. For all cases other than the sinusoidal a.c. voltage, it is necessary to know the applied voltage as a function of time. For a unidirectional voltage, the important values are:
-

the average value over the entire period of the operation of the fuse-link, and the instantaneous value near the end of the arcing period. the same as the mean

For d.c., the value of the applied voltage is usually approximately recqvery voltage.

3.6

Current The rat4 current of a semiconductor current at rated frequency. fuse-link is based on the r.m.s. value of a sinusoidal a.c.

For d.c., the r.m.s. value of current is assumed not to exceed the r.m.s. value based on a sinusoidal a.c. current at rated frequency.
Note. The thermal response time of the fuse-element may be so short that is cannot be assumed that operation under conditions which deviate much from sinusoidal current can, be estimated on the basis of the r.m.s. current alone. This is so, in`particular, at lower frequency values and.when the current presents salient peaks separated by appreciable intervals of insignificant current, for example in the case of frequency converters and traction applications.

3.7 3.7. I

Frequency, powerfactor and time constant Frequency The rated frequency refers to the frequencv of the sinusoidal current and voltage that form the basis of the type tests.
Note. In particular, where service frequency deviates significantly from rated frequency, the manufacturer should be consulted.

3.7.2

Power.factor The power factor is not lower than that shown in Table VIIIA of Part I appropriate to the value of prospective current.

7

( IEC page 13 )

IS 13703 ( Part 4) : 1993 IEC Fub269-4(1980) 3.1.3 Time constant (r) For d.c., the time constants expected Table VIIIB.
Note. -

in practice are considered

to correspond

to those in

Some service conditions may be found which exceed the specified performance shown in the table as regards time constant. In such a case a design of fuse-link which has been tested and marked accordingly should be used or the suitability of such a fuse-link be subject to agreement between the manufacturer and user.

3.9

Breaking capacity For a.c., the rated breaking capacity is based on type tests performed in a circuit containing only linear impedance and with a constant sinusoidal applied voltage of rated frequency. For d.c., the rated breaking capacity is based on type tests performed only linear inductance and resistance with mean applied voltage.
Note. -

in a circuit containing

The addition in practical applications of non-linear impedances and unidirectional voltage components may significantly influence the breaking severity either in a favourable or unfavourable direction.

5. 5.1

Characteristics of fuses Summary of characteristics For the fuse-link

5.1.2

al Rated voltage (see Sub-clause 5.2). W Rated current (see Sub-clause 5.3.2 of Part 1). 4 Kind of current or rated frequency (see Sub-clause 5.4).

4 ;
gl h) i)
5.2

Rated power loss (see Sub-clause 5.5). Rated time/current characteristics (see Sub-clause 5.6.1). Rated breaking capacity (see Sub-clause 5.7 of Part 1). Cut-off characteristics (see Sub-clause 5.8.1). 12t characteristics (see Sub-clause 5.8.2). Arc voltage limits (see &b-clause 5.9).

Rated voltage For rated voltages above 660 V, the values shall be selected from the R5 series or, where not possible, from the RlO series of IS0 Recommendation R3.
Note. For d.c., standard values of rated voltage are not specified.

5.4

Rated frequency The rated frequency is that frequency to which the performance data are related.

5.5

Rated power loss The rated power loss of a fuse-link is the value of power loss at the rated current of the fuselink. The rated power loss is based on a local ambient air temperature of 20 "C to 25 "C and other conditions specified in Sub-clause 7;3.

( IEC page 15 )

IS li703 ( Part 4 ) : 1993 IEC Pub269-4(1980)

The manufacturer shall, in addition, indicate the power loss as a function of current for a range of 50% to 100% of the rated current or for 50%, 63%, 80% and 100% of the rated current.
NOICIn cases where the resistance of the fuse-link is of interest, this resistance should be determined functional relation between the power loss and the associated value of current. from the

5.6 5.6.1

Time/current characteristics, conventional currents and overload curves Time/current characteristics The time/current characteristics of a fuse-link vary according to its design and also, for a given fuse-link, depend on the ambient temperature and the cooling conditions. The manufacturer shall provide time/current characteristics based on an ambient temperature of 20 "C to 25 "C in accordance with the conditions specified in Sub-clause 8.3. The time/ current characteristics of intetest are the pre-arcing characteristic and operating characteristics having voltage as a parameter. The time/current characteristics are stated for rated frequency. For d.c., they are stated for time constants according to Table VIIIB. For some applications, and in particular for the higher values of prospective current (shorter times) the same information may be presented in the form of I*t characteristics. It is recommended that in this region, t2t characteristics shall be given as an alternative or in addition.

5.6.1.I

Pre-arcing time/current characteristic a.c.

For a.~., the pre-arcing time/current characteristic shall be based on a symmetrical current of a stated value of frequency (rated frequency).
NOW.-

This is of particular importance for the range of time between about IO cycles of rated frequency and a time so short that the heating is truly adiabatic.

For d.c., the pre-arcing time/current characteristic is of particular significance for times exceeding 15 T for the relevant circuit, and is identical to the a.c. pre-arcing time/current characteristic in this zone.
Notes I. -

Because of the wide range of circuit time constants likely to be experienced in service, the information for times shorter than I5 r is conveniently,expressed as a pre-arcing I21 characteristic. The value of I5 r has been chosen to avoid the effects which different rates of rise of current have on the pre-arcing time/current characteristic at shorter times.

2. -

5.6.1.2

Operating time/current characteristics

The operating time/current characteristics shall be given with applied voltage as a parameter and for a stated power factor value. In principle, they shall be based on the moment of current initiation that leads to the highest operating 12t value (see Sub-clause 8.7). The voltage parameters shall include at least lO$J%,50% and 25% of rated voltage. For d.c., the operating time/current characteristics are not applicable significant for times in excess of 15 r (see Sub-clause 5.6.1. I). because they are not

( TEC

page 17 )

IS 13703 ( Part 4) : 1993 IEC Pub269-4(1980) 56.3

Overload curves for semiconductor fuse-links Verified overload capability

5.6.3.1

The manufacturer shall indicate sets of co-ordinate points along the time/current characteristic (see Sub-clause 5.6.1) for which the overload capability has been verified in accordance with the procedure indicated in Sub-clause 8.4.3.4. The number and the location of the sets capability shall be verified are to be selected at ordinates for the verification of the overload 0.01 s to 60 s. Further sets of the co-ordinate between manufacturer and user. 5.6.3.2 Conventional overload curve of co-ordinate points for which the discretion of the manufacturer. capability shall be selected within points may be added according the overload The time cothe range of to agreement

The conventional overload curve is formed of straight-line sections emanating from the co-ordinate points of verified overload capability. From each set of co-ordinate points, two lines are drawn :
-

one from the verified point and following points of constant values of current towards shorter times; e the other from the verified point and following points of constant values of Z*t towards longer times. rated current, form the conventional

These line sections, ending at the line representing overload curve (see Figure 1, page 43).
Note. -

For practical applications, a few points of verified overload capability are sufficient. As the number of points of verified overload capability increases, the conventional overload curve becomes more precise.

5.8 5.8.1

Cut-off and I*t characteristics Cut-off characteristics The manufacturer shall provide the cut-off characteristics which shall be given according to the example shown in Figure 2 of Part 1 in a double logarithmic presentation with the prospective current as abcissa and if necessary with applied voltage as a parameter. For ac., the cut-off characteristics shall represent the highest values of current likely to be experienced in service. They shall refer to the conditions corresponding to the test conditions of this standard, for example given voltage, frequency and power-factor values. The cut-off characteristics are verified by the tests specified in Sub-clause 8.6.

For d.c., the cut-off characteristics shall represent the highest values of current likely to be experienced in service in circuits having a time constant of 15 ms to 20 ms. These values will be exceeded in circuits of smaller time constants. The manufacturer shall provide the relevant information to enable the determination of these higher cut-off characteristics.
Note. The

cut-off characteristic varies with the circuit time constant. The manufacturer shall provide the relevant information to enable these variations to be determined at least for time constants of 5 ms and IO ms.

( IEC page 19 )

10

IS 13703 ( Part 4) : 1993 IEC Pub269-4(1980) 58.2 5.8.2.1
12t characteristics

he-arcing

12t characteristic shall be based on a symmetrical a.c. current at a

For a.c., the pre-arcing t2t characteristic stated ,frequency value (rated frequency). For d.c., the pre-arcing 12t characteristics constant of 15 ms to 20 ms.
No/e. -

shall be based on r.m.s. d.c. current .at a time

For certain fuses the pre-arcing of I21 characteristic varies with circuit time constant. The manufacturer shall provide the relevant information to enable these variations to be determined at least for time constants of 5msand IOms.

5.8.2.2

Operating 12t characteristics

For a.c., the operating 12t characteristics shall be given with applied voltage as a parameter and for a stated power-factor value. In principle, they shall be based on that moment of current initiation that leads to the highest operating Z2t value (see Sub-clause 8.7). The voltage parameters shall include at least lOO%, 50% and 25% of rated voltage. For d.c., the operating Z2t characteristics shall be given with the applied voltage as a parameter and for a time constant of 15 ms to 20 ms. The voltage parameters shall include at least 100% and 50% rated voltage. It is permitted to determine the operating Z2t characteristics at the lower voltages from tests in accordance with Table VIIIB.

5.9

Arc voltage characteristics Arc voltage characteristics provided by the manufacturer shall give the highest (peak) value of arc voltage as a function of the applied voltage of the circuit in which the fuse-link is inserted and, in the case of a.c., for power factors as stated in Table VIIIC and, in the case of d.c., at time constants of 15 ms to 20 ms.

6. 6.2

Markings Markings on fuse-links Name of the manufacturer or trade mark by which he may be readily identified. Catalogue number or type designation in sufficient detail to make it possible to obtain all relevant information from the manufacturer.
It is customary to indicate as an additional marking rated voltage and rated current.

Note. -

7. 7.3

Standard conditions for construction Temperature rise and power loss Fuse-links shall be so designed and proportioned Sub-clause 8.3, the rated current without exceeding:
-

as to carry, when tested in accordance

with

the temperature-rise limit of the hottest upper metal part of the fuse-link indicated by the manufacturer or otherwise specified (see Figure 2, page 44); the power loss at rated current indicated by the manufacturer.

-

11

( IEC page 21)

IS 13703 ( Part 4 ) : 1993 IEC Pub269-4(1980)

7.4

Operation

1 A.3

Semiconductor fuse-links The fuse-link shall be so designed as to carry continuously current (see Sub-clause 8.4.3.5). any value of current up to its rated

The fuse-link shall operate and break the current for any current value not exceeding the rated breaking capacity which persists for a time sufficient to melt the fuse-element(s) but not exceeding 30 s.
Notes 1. By agreement between manufacturer and user, shorter times may be chosen for special applications.

2. -

Semiconductor fuse-links intended to give additional protection against overload shall also comply with the relevant requirements for general purpose fuse-links.

1.5

Breaking capacity A fuse-link shall be capable of breaking, at a voltage not exceeding the voltage specified in Sub-clause 8.5, any circuit having a prospective current between the current which causes melting of the fuse-element(s) in a time corresponding to Sub-clause 7.4.3 and the rated breaking capacity -

for a.c.: at power factors not lower than those in Table VIIIA appropriate to the value of the prospective current; for d.c.: at time constants not greater than 15 ms to 20 ms appropriate to the value of the prospective current.

7.6

Cut-off characteristics The values of cut-off currents measured as specified in Sub-clause 8.6 shall not exceed the values stated by the manufacturer (see Sub-clause 5.8. I).

7.7

12t characteristics

The values of operating 12t determined as described in Sub-clause 8.7 shall not exceed those stated by the manufacturer. The values of pre-arcing 12t determined as described in Sub-clause 8.7 shall be not less than the values stated (see Sub-clauses 5.8.2.1 and 5.8.2.2).

7.12

Arc voltage characteristics The arc voltage values, measured as described stated by the manufacturer (see Sub-clause 5.9). in Sub-clause 8.7.3, shall not exceed those

7.13

Special operating conditions Special operating conditions, such as high value of gravitational agreement between manufacturer and user. force, shall be subject to

( IEC page 23 )

12

IS 13703 ( Part 4 ) : 1993 IEC Pub 269 -4 ( 1980 ) 8. 8. I Tests

General Arrangement of the fuse-link

8. I .4

The fuse-link shall be mounted open in surroundings free from draughts and, unless otherwise specified, in a vertical position (see Sub-clause 8.3.1 and Figure 2, page 44). 8.1.5 8.1.5.1 Testing of fuse-links Qpe tests

The type tests on fuse-links are listed in Table IVA. The internal resistance of all fuse-links shall be determined and recorded in the test report(s).
.

TABLE IVA

List of complete tests on semiconductor fuse-links

Test according to sub-clause

Number of fuse-links to be tested

8.3 Temperature rise and power loss 8.4.3.5 Verification of rated current
For a.~.: 8.5 No.

2a No. 2 No. I 8.6 No. 10 No. No. No. No. 9 8 7 6

Breaking capacity 1) Breaking capacity I) Breaking capacity 1) Operating characteristics tests?) Operating characteristics tests?) Operating characteristics test?) Operating characteristics test ?I Operating characteristics test21

.

I 3 3 2

8.4.3.4 Verification of overload capability')
For d.c.

:

8.5 No. 12a Breaking capacity and operating characteristics No. I2 Breaking capacity and operating characteristics No. I I Breaking capacity and operating characteristics

I

1) Valid also for pre-arcing characteristics if ambient air temperature is between 20 "C and 25 "C. 2) The tests are valid for cut-off, 121 arc voltage and pre-arcing characteristics. 3) The number of points at which the overload capability is verified should be at the manufacturer's discretion.

13

( IEC page 25 )

IS 13703 ( Part 4 ) : 1993 IEC Pub269-4(1980) 8. I.5.2 rvpe tesl exemptions ,fGr j&e-links
Fuse-links Sub-clause having intermediate

of'u homogeneous

.serie.v

values of rated current in a homogeneous

series are exempted of to the

from type tests if the fuse-link tests indicated in Table IVB.

of the largest rated current has been tested to the requirements has been submitted

8.1.5.1 and if the fuse-link' of the smaJlest rated current

No/e. -

The conditions

of the homogeneous

series for semiconductor

fu\e-links

are still under consideration.

TABLE IV9

Tests on semiconductor fuse-links of the smallest rated current of a homogeneous sen'es
I

Number Tests according to sub-clause of fuse-links to be tested

8.3

Temperature

rise and power loss

I

For ax:
8.6.2 No. 6 Operating characteristics tests 2

For d.c. :
8.6.2 No. I

I

Operating

characteristics

test

3

The values of test current

are specified

in Table

VIIIB.

8.3

Verification of temperature-rise limits and power loss Arrangement of the fuse-link Only one fuse-link shall be used for the test. The fuse-link shall be mounted vertically in the conventional test arrangement shown in Figure 2, page 44. The current density of the copper conductors forming part of the conventional test arrangement shall be not less than 1 A/mm2 and not more than 1.6 A/mm2, these values being based on the rated current of the fuse-link. The ratio of width to thickness of these conductors shall not exceed 10 for current ratings less than 200 A; 5 for current ratings 200 A and above. The ambient air temperature during this test shall be between + 10 PC and + 30 "C.

8.3.1

When conducting the temperature-rise tests, the cross-sectional areas of the conductors connecting the conventional test arrangement to the supply are of importance. The crosssectional area shall be selected in accordance with Table VI of Part 1, excluding Note I, and the conductors shall be at least 1 m long.

( IEC

page 27 )

14

IS 13703 ( Part 4 ) : 1993 IEC Pub 269 - 4 ( 1980 )

For fuse-links intended to be used in separate fuse-bases, the test may be performed in these fuse-bases with conductors according to Table VI of Part I ; in other cases, the test shall be performed in the manner described in these requirements. For special fuse-links or special applications that cannot be accommodated in the conventional test arrangement, or for which this test arrangement is not applicable, special tests shall be performed according to the manufacturer's instructions and all pertinent data shall be recorded in the test report.
8.3.4

Te.st method Temperature rise and power loss

8.3.4. I and 8.3.4.2

The power loss test shall be made successively at least at 50% and at 100% of rated current at rated frequency. It is permissible to make the test at any value of voltage.

8.3.4.3

Test duration

The test shall be continued at each value of current until steady state is reached but without exceeding the conventional time specified in Table VI I of Part I.

8.3.5

Acceptability

oftest results

The temperature rise and the power loss of the fuse-link shall not exceed the values specified by the manufacturer. After the tests, the fuse-link shall not have significantly changed its characteristics.
No/e. A measurement conformity of the resistance (see Sub-clause 8.

I S.1)

before

and

after

the test gives an indication

of

with these requirements.

8.4 8.4. I

Verification

ofoperation

Arrangement offuse-link The arrangement of the fuse-link for the verification Sub-clauses 8. I .4 and 8.3. I. of operation shall be as described in

X.4.3
8.43. I

Test method and acceptability qf test results Time/current characteristics

As far as applicable, the time/current characteristics given by the manufacturer may be verified on the basis of the results obtained from the oscillographic records taken during the performance of the tests, according to Sub-clauses 8.5, 8.6 and 8.7. From the relevant oscillograms, the values of the actual pre-arcing time shall be determined from the instant of closing the circuit until the instant when the voltage measurement shows the beginning of the arc and shall be expressed in the form of virtual time. The actual operating time shall be determined from the instant of closing the circuit until the circuit is definitely hroken and shall be expressed in the form of virtual time.

15

( IEC page 29 )

IS13703 ( Part4):1993 IEC Pub269-4(1980)

For a.c., prospective currents leading to actual pre-arcing time values of less than ten cycles of rated frequency and up to current values where the melting is adiabatic, the current shall be initiated in such a manner that the prospective current will be symmetrical.

For d.c., the time/current characteristics than I5 t for the relevant circuit.

determined

for a.c. are applicable

for times longer

When for the fuse-links of a homogeneous series (see Sub-clause 8.1.5.2) the complete test according to Sub-clause 8.5 is made only on the fuse-link having the largest rated current, it shall be sufficient to verify only the pre-arcing time for the fuse-link having the smallest rated current. Pre-arcing time/current characteristics can be determined at any convenient voltage value and on any linear circuit. Tests to determine operating time/current characteristics require the proper voltage values and circuit characteristics.

8.4.3.2

Operation of indicating devices and strikers, if any of indicating devices or strikers shall be

The characteristics and verification of characteristics subject to agreement between manufacturer and user.

8.4.3.4

Verification of overload capability One fuse-link is tested under the same test conditions as indicated in Sub-clause 8.3. I.

It is subjected to 100 load cycles, each cycle having a total duration of 0.2 times the conventional time, the "on" period with a current value and a duration corresponding to the co-ordinates of the overload capability to be verified, the "off' period forming the rest of the cycle. The conventional time is that specified for general-purpose fuse-links in Table VII of Part I.

After this test, the fuse-link shall not have significantly clause 8.35).
Note. -

changed its characteristics

(see Sub-

These tests are deemed to verify the overload capability of the fuse on d.c. for pre-arcing times greater than IS 5 for the relevant circuit.

X.4.3.5

Verification of rated current The fuse-link is tested under the same test canditions as indicated in Sub-clause 8.3. I.

It is subjected to 100 test cycles, each consisting of an "on" period of 0.1 times the conventional time as specified in Table VII of Part I at rated current and an "off' period of the same duration. After this test, the fuse-link shall not have changed its characteristics (see Sub-clause $3.5).

.li~ttp.-

A measurement of the resistance (see Sub-clause 8.1.5.1) before and after the test gives an indication conformity with these test conditions.

of

( IEC lxige 31 )

16

IS13703 ( Part4):1993 IEC Pub269-4(1980) 8.5 8.5. I Verification of'the breaking capacity Arrangement ofthe,firse In addition to the conditions of Sub-clauses 8. I .4 and 8.3. I, the following applies: For breaking tests, the fuse-link shall be mounted in a manner resembling its practical use, in particular with respect to the location of the conductors. In cases where the fuse-link can be used rigidly supported at one end only, it shall be so mounted for the test. Fuse-links intended to be always rigidly supported at both ends shall be so tested.

8.5.3

Measuring instruments Sub-clause 8.5.3 of Part I applies and is completed by the following note:
Now. The determination of Izf characteristics, arc voltage and cut-off current is very critical and special measuring techniques are necessary.

8.5.5

Test method

8.5.5.1 In order to verify that the fuse-link satisfies the conditions of Sub-clause 7.5, tests No. I to No. 2a as described below shall be made-unless otherwise specified-with the values stated in Table VIIIA (see Sub-clause 8.5.2) for each of these tests. Tests No. I and No. 2 For each of these tests, three fuse-links shall be tested in succession. If, during test No. I, the requirements of test No. 2 are met on one or more tests, then these tests need not be repeated as part of test No. 2. Test No. 2ajbr ax. and test No. 12a,for d.c. For a.c., the values of test current are specified in Table VIIIA. For d.c., the values of test current are specified in Table VIIIB. For a.c. tests, the closing of the circuit in relation to the passage of the applied voltage through zero may be effected at any instant.

8.5.5.2 -

For one of the tests No. 2 and for test No. 2a, the recovery voltage shall be maintained at a of the rated voltage for at least:

value of 100% $:+

30 s after the operation for fuse-links not containing organic material; 5 min after the operation in all other cases. after I5 s if the switching time

Switching over to another source of supply is permitted (interval without voltage) does not exceed 0. I s.

For all other tests the recovery voltage shall be maintained at the same value for I5 s after the operation of the fuse.

17

(IEC page 3? >

IS 13703 ( Part 4 ) : 1993 lEC Pub 269- 4 ( 1980)
TABLE

VllIA
tests for a.c.

Values for breaking-capacity

Tests a&ording to Sub-clause 85.5. I

No. I Power frequency recovery voltage **

No. 2

No. 2a

+5%* 110% of the rated voltage _oV 0

Prospective test current

II

Iz

I2a

Tolerance on current

+ 10% - 0%

Not applicable

Power factor

Where II is equal to or less than 20 kA: 0.' to 0.3 where /I is greater than 20 kA: 0.1 to 0.2

0.3 to 0.5

Making angle after voltage zero

Not applicable

o +20' -0"

Not specified

Initiation of arcing after voltage zero * **
I,

65" to 90'

Not applicable

The positive tolerance may be exceeded with the manufacturer's consent. For single-phase circuits, the r.m.s. value of the applied voltage is for all practical purposes equal to the r.m.s. value of the power frequency recovery voltage.

= current which is used in the designation of the rated breaking capacity I2 = current which shall be chosen in such a manner that the test is made at conditions which approximate those giving maximum arc energy

Note. -

The condition may be deemed to be satisfied if the current at the beginning of arcing (instantaneous value) has reached a value between 0.6fi and 0.753 times the prospective current (r.m.s. value of the a.c. component). As a guide for practical application, the value of current 12may be found between three and four times the current which corresponds to a pre-arcing time of one half-cycle of rated frequency on the time/ current characteristic.

I2a

=

current which leads to a pre-arcing time of I to I.5 times the value corresponding with the manufacturer's consent, the upper limit may be exceeded

to Sub-clause 7.4.3, except that,

L
83.8 Acceptability of test results

Fuse-links shall be deemed not to comply with this standard if, during the tests, one or more of the following failures occur: ignition of the fuse-link excluding any paper labels or the like used as indicating devices; mechanical damage to the conventional mechanical damage to the fuse-link; test arrangement:

-

Nore. -

Thermal cracking which leaves the fuse-link in one piece is accepted.

( IEC page 3.5 )

18

IS 13703 ( Part 4 ) : 1993 IEC Pub 269 - 4 ( 1980)

-

burning or melting through of end caps; significant movement of end caps.
TABLE

VIIIB

Values for breaking capacity tests and for venijcation of cut-off; 12t and arcing voltage characteristics for d.c.

Tests according to Sub-clause 85.5. I

No. I I

No. 12

No. 12a

Mean value of recovery voltage

110% of the rated voltage Tit*

Prospective test cuqent

II

12

I2a

Tolerance on current

+ 10% -0%

Not applicable

Time constant ** * **

15msto20ms

With the manufacturer's consent, the upper limit may be exceeded. In some practical applications, time constant values may be found which are shorter than those indicated in the tests, this may result in a more favourable fuse performance. Time constants which are considerably longer than those indicated will in most cases significantly affect the performance of the fuse-link, in particular with respect to the rated voltage. For such applications, further information may be available from the manufacturer. = current which is used in the designation of the rated breaking capacity (see Sub-clause 5.7) current which shall be chosen in such a manner that the test is made under conditions which approximate to those = giving maximum arc energy Note. This condition may be deemed to be satisfied if the current at the beginning of arcing has reached a value between 0.5 and 0.8 times the prospective current. to Sub-clause 7.4.3, except that,

II
12

lh

= current which leads to a pre-arcing time of I to I.5 times the value corresponding with the manufacturer's consent, the upper limit may be exceeded

8.6 8.6. I

Verification of cut-oflcharacteristics Test method The test arrangement, test circuit, measuring instruments, calibration of test circuit and interpretation of oscillograms shall be as for the breaking capacity tests. These tests may be used to prove the characteristics of all fuse-links of a homogeneous series. For a.c., tests shall be made as specified in Table VIIIC. For each of the tests Nos. 6 to two fuse-links of the maximum current rating of a homogeneous series shall be tested. addition, test duty No. 6 shall be performed on two fuse-links of the minimum current rating a homogeneous series. If, during test No. 6, the requirements of test No. 7 are met on one more tests, then these tests are deemed to fulfil test No. 7. IO, In of or

19

( IEC page 37 )

IS 13703 ( Part 4 ) : 1993 IEC Pub 269 - 4 ( 1980)
TABLE

VIllC

Values for verification of cut-o& 12t and arc voltage characteristics for a.c.

Tests according to Sub-clauses 8.6 and 8.7

No. 6

No. 7

No. 8

No. 9

No. IO

,
Power-frequency recovery voltage as a percentage of a rated voltage** loo"/o* 25 `%I *

Prospective test current

4l

Tolerance on current

)

Not applicable

Power factor

Where 1, is equal to or less than 20 kA: 0.2 to 0.3 *** Where It is greater than 20 kA: 0.1 to 0.2

Making angle after voltage zero

Not applicable

0

+ 20" -0"

Not applicable

Initiation of arcing after voltage zero

65" to 90

65" to 90"

* ** ***

i
A tolerance of *5% of the value of the power-frequency voltage is admitted. The positive tolerance may be exceeded with the manufacturer's consent. For single-phase circuits, the r.m.s. value of the applied voltage is for all practical purposes equal to the r.m.s. value of the power-frequency recovery voltage. Power factor values lower than those indicated for the test may be found in some practical applications, but it is considered that this does not significantly influence the performance of the fuse. However, a power factor value appreciably higher than that of the test circuit may result in a more favourable performance, in particular with respect to the f2r values for breaking. For such applications, further information may be available from the manufacturer.

I,

12 =

current which is used in the designation of the rated breaking capacity (see Sub-clause 5.7 of Part I) current which shall be chosen in such a manner that the test is made under conditions which approximate those giving maximum arc energy 16 = the geometric mean value of It and 12
= I, = Is =

0.5 11to I, 0.25 I, to I,
Note. -

Tests Nos. 6, 7 and 8 are to establish the characteristics at rated voltage. Tests Nos. 9 and IO provide the basis for the characteristics at lower voltages.

For d.c., tests shall be made as specified in Table VIIIB. Tests conducted Sub-clause 8.5 shall be used for evaluation according to Sub-clause 8.6.2.

in accordance

with

(IEC

page 39 )

20

IS 13703 ( Part 4) : 1993 IEC Pub269-4(1980) 8.6.2

Venjkation of cut-off characteristics and acceptability of test results For a-c., the values of peak current shall not exceed those indicated by the manufacturer for the stated applied voltages. The cut-off characteristics shall be verified from tests Nos. 6, 7 and 8 and for lower voltages from tests Nos. 9 and IO. For d.c., cut-off characteristics VIIIB. shall be verified from tests Nos. I 1, 12 and l2a of Table

8.7 8.7. I

Verification of the I 2t characteristics and arc voltage characteristics Test method The test method is that specified in Sub-clause 8.6. I.

8.7.2

Verification of I zt characteristics and acceptability of test results For a.c., the I't characteristics shall be verified from tests Nos. 6, 7 and 8 according to Table VIIIC and for lower voltages from tests Nos. 9 and IO. I't- values shall be determined from the appropriate oscillograms. For d.c., the Ft characteristics Table VIIIB. The values of the pre-arcing stated by the manufacturer. shall be verified from tests Nos. I I, 12 and I2a according to

I?t at each prospective current shall be not less than the values

The values of operating I't at each prospective current shall not exceed the values indicated by the manufacturer for the stated applied voltage. 8.7.3 Verification of arc voltage characteristics and acceptability of test results The highest values of arc voltage derived from each of the following tests shah not exceed those indicated by the manufacturer. For a+, arc voltage characteristics shall be verified from all tests in Tables VIIIA and VIIIC. If, on test No. 7, the arc voltage obtained is appreciably in excess of that obtained on test No. 6, further tests at the current I? shall be performed at 50% and at 25% of the rated voltage to determine the maximum arc voltage at these lower voltages.

For d.c., the arc voltage characteristics shall be verified from all tests in Table VI I I B.

21

( IEC page 41)

IS13703( Part4):1993 IEC Pub269-4(1980)

log

t

tv (s

Pre-arcing characteristic

`Constant

I2

t line

Conventional

overload curve

i

y

I
I

I
Jphlls)
_____c

log
119/77

FIG. I . -

Conventional capability).

overload

curve (example)

(X and Y are points

of verified

overload

(IECpage 43)

22

Is 13703 ( Part 4) : 1993 IEC PubM9-4(1980)

-

-4

-

o4 ff

-a

-

--

--

-

__

o-

1

-

-4

-

o3s

-

-

-

l

--IIDimensions in millimetres

n
611/74
(approximate values).

FIG. 2. -

Conventional

test arrangement.

23

( IECpage 44 )

Is13703( Part4):1993 IEC Pub269-4(1980)
Notes for Figure 2:

I.' Fixing

bolts.

2. Alternative points of measurement of voltage for determination of power loss. 3. Insulating blocks (for example, wood). 4. Insulated base panel (for example, I6 mm plywood).

5. Matt black finish. 6. Position of thermocouple fixed to hottest upper metal part of the fuse-link indicated by the manufacturer or otherwise specified.

7. Contact surface to be tin-plated. 8. Insulated clamps. Where clamps may be left loose. necessary, the two upper

( IEC

page 45 )

24

Is 13703 ( Part 4 ) : 1993 IEC Pub 269 -4 ( 1980 )

APPENDIX

A

GUIDE

FOR THE CO-ORDINATION WITH SEMICONDUCTOR

OF FUSE-LINKS DEVICES

(The numbering of the following clauses and sub-clauses is not related to rhat of the requirements in the main text)

A 1. AI.1

General
Scope

This guide is limited to the use of fuse-links in circuits having the characteristics found in converters based on semiconductors.

generally

It deals with the performance of fuse-links under the conditions covered, but it does not deal with the adequacy of fuse-links with respect to converters.
Note. Particular attention is directed to the fact that fuse-links intended for use on a.c. are not necessarily suitable for use on d.c. The manufacturer should be consulted on all cases of d.c. applications. It should be noted in particular that the relationship between rated voltage ax. versus rated voltage d.c. cannot be stated in a general form. The few references in this guide to d.c. operations are not complete and do not cover all of the important factors related to such use.

A 1.2

Object

It is the object of this guide to explain the performance to be expected from the fuse-links in terms of their ratings and in terms of the characteristics of the circuits of which they form a part, in such a manner that this may form the basis for the selection of the fuse-links.

A2.

Definitions (see also the definitions of Clause 2)
Pulsed current (in a semiconductor

fuse-link)

A unidirectional current the instantaneous value of which varies in a cyclic manner and includes intervals of zero or insignificantly small values of current for times significant in relation to the total cycle.
No/e. A typical pulsed current is the current in a single arm of a bridge-connected rectifier.

Putsed load (in a semiconductor

fuse-link)

A load where the r.m.s. value of the current varies in a cyclic manner and includes intervals of zero current or insignificantly small values of current for times significant in relation to the total load cycle.
Note. In a rectifier circuit, a pulsed load may be caused by cyclic, making and breaking of the d.c, circuit for instance by the starting and stopping of a motor.

current,

25

IS 13703 ( Part 4) :-I993 IEC Pub219-4.(1980) A3. A3.1 Current-carrying capabilities Rated current The rated current of a semiconductor fuse-link is assigned by the manufacturer and verified in particular by the temperature-rise test (see Sub-clause 8.3) and by the repetitive duty test as described in Sub-clause 8.4.3.5.
Nore. The ability to carry current without deterioration is closely related to the temperature variations. The data given by the manufacturer relate to the test conditions (see Sub-clauses 8. I .4 and 8.3). The cooling conditions depend on the physical properties of the fuse-link, the flow of the cooling medium, the type and temperature of the connections and of adjacent hot bodies. Guidance on the influence of these factors may be obtained from the manufacturer.

A3.2

Continuous duty current For most kinds of fuse-links for semiconductor devices, the continuous duty current is identical with the rated current (see Sub-clause A3.1). However, fuse-links designed for applications not requiring the carrying of rated current continuously are to be de-rated for continuous duty.

A3.3

Repetitive duty current The tests for rated current verify that the fuse-link is able to withstand, under the test conditions, repetition of the rated current load at least 100 times. The expected life in number of repetitions will increase as the value of the actual load current is reduced in relation to the rated current. The manufacturer's advice should be sought on the suitability of a given fuse-link for a required repetitive duty, since the specified tests establish minimum life expectancy requirements only.

A3.4

Overload current The overload capability (see Sub-clause 5.6.3.1) indicated by the manufacturer is based on one or more co-ordinates of time and current for which the overload capability has been verified under conditions identical with those indicated for the rated current (see Sub-clause 8.4.3.4). The conventional overload characteristic based on these verified points is a conservative estimate of the overload capability (see Sub-clause 5.6.3.2 and Figure 1, page 43). As the actual overload rarely shows the same function of time as the conventional it has to be transformed into an equivalent conventional one as follows:
-

overload,

the maximum value of the actual overload equivalent conventional overload;

is equated

to the maximum

value of an

-T the duration of the equivalent conventional overload shall be such that its I*t becomes equal to the 12t of the actual load integrated over a time of 0.2 times the conventional time of the fuse-link. Any value of load which approaches 0.2 times the conventional be a continuous load with respect to the fuse-link. time shall be considered to

( IEC page 49 )

26

1s 13703 ( Part 4) : 1993 IEC Pub269-4(1980) However, as the verification of the overload capability is based on 100 overload cycles, the practical cases of repetitive overload may necessitate a de-rating. The manufacturer's advice should be sought. A3.5 Peak current (cut-off current) The highest value of peak current is obtained when the fuse-link operates under adiabatic conditions. Under conditions where the rate-of-rise of the current is essentially taneous value of the current reached at the end of the pre-arcing period root of the rate-of-rise. For many fuse-links, this is essentially the peak reaching the peak value of current significantly later (in the arcing period), can be made and information should be obtained from the manufacturer. constant, the instanincreases as the cube value. For fuse-links no general statement

A4. A4. I

Voltage characteristics Rated voltage The rated voltage (see Sub-clause 5.2) of the fuse-link for the protection of semiconductor devices is a value of sinusoidal applied voltage of rated frequency (or, in some cases, d.c.) assigned by the manufacturer. Information on the fuse-link is related to the rated voltage. Comparison between fuse-links of different manufacture on the basis of the voltage rating alone is insufficient.

A4.2

Apphed voltage in service The applied voltage is the voltage in the fault circuit that causes the fault current to flow. In most cases it is possible to consider the no-Ioad voltage in the fault circuit as the applied voltage, since the influence of the voltage drop can usually be disregarded.
Now. The applied voltage may be affected by any commutation which takes place during the operation of the fuselink or by the arc voltage of another fuse-link.

During the pre-arcing period, the applied voltage and the self-inductance of the circuit determine the rate-of-rise of the fault current (in general, its increase from zero to almost its peak value). In a given circuit, i.e. for a given self-inductance, it is the value of 12f that determines the end of the pre-arcing period, and it is the integral of the applied voltage during that period that determines the instantaneous value of the current reached by the end of the pre-arcing period. During the arcing period, the difference between the arc voltage and the applied voltage determines the rate-of-change of the current. Generally, it is a decrease from the peak value to zero. The zero value is reached in that instant where the integral of this difference becomes equal to the integral of the applied voltage over the pre-arcing period. For the time in which the arc voltage is less than the applied voltage, the current continues to increase, but in most cases this time is short and the associated current increase negligible. For the fuse-link operating in the adiabatic, or near adiabatic zone, the pre-arcing Pt is a well-defined quantity. The arcing I*r can assume very different values, even for the same arcing

27

( IEC page 51)

13703 ( Part 4) : 1993 IEC Pub 269 - 4 ( 1980)

time. It becomes a minimum when the excess arc voltage reaches its maximum during the early part of the arcing period.

A4.3

Arc volthge

The peak value of the arc voltage indicated by the manufacturer is that obtained under the most unfavourable conditions. The arc voltage characteristic is given as a function of the applied voltage. The peak value of the arc voltage should be limited to that which can be withstood by the semiconductor device.

A5

Power loss characteristics

A5.1 Rated power loss
The rated power loss is based on rated current and on the standard test conditions (see.Subclauses 8.1.4 and 83.1). The temperature coefficient of the resistance of the fuse-link causes an increase in the power loss at a higher rate than the square of the current.

For this reason, the manufacturer provides information about the relation between current and power loss, either in the form of a power loss characteristic or in the form of discrete points. The power loss characteristic may deviate from the rated value because of installation conditions different from those of the test (see Sub-clause 8.3). A5.2 Factors injluencing the power loss Because of the significant influence on the power losses of the relation between the actual current and the rated current, it may be desirable to use fuse-links of larger current ratings than those determined by repetitive duty and overload. However, the higher current rating does imply a larger value of Pt. The use of a fuse-link,of the highest current rating consistent with a reasonable protection may at the same time reduce the power losses and solve the problems of repetitive duty and overload. The use of a fuse-link of a higher voltage rating inherently leads to higher values of power losses. If its use is possible in spite of higher values of arc voltage, a reduction of the arcing Z*t will be obtained which may permit the selection of a fuse-link having a higher current rating, resulting in a reduction of the power loss. Fuse-links having iron parts may show a significant increase of power loss when used at, frequencies higher than rated frequency.

A53

Mutual influence

A very short electrical connection between the fuse-link and the associated semiconductor device provides a significant thermal coupling between the two. Thus any reduction in the power loss of the fuse-link may improve the current loading of the semiconductor device.

( IEC

page 53 )

28

IS 13703 ( PBL't 4) : 1993 IEC Pub269.4(1980) A6. A6. I Time/current characteristics P&-arcing characferistic In the region where the pre-arcing characteristic leaves the adiabatic zone but is still less than 0.1 s to 0.2 s, the deviation from a symmetrical sinusoidal current is often encountered in practice. This may be significant, because the heating is not adiabatic,and because the real time (and thereby the cooling) is different from that on which the characteristic is based. A pulsed current as it appears in the arms of rectifiers or invertors cannot be dealt with solely on the basis of its r.m.s. value. In marginal cases, it is necessary to make sure that a single pulse alone cannot damage the fuse element. For instance, if a short-time overload (e.g. below 0.1 s) is considered in accordance with Sub-clause 8.4.3.4, the peak of the actual overload is not the maximum value of the r.m.s. value but the peak of the highest pulse. Any current of frequency higher than rated frequency has practically no influence on the prearcing characteristic except in the region mentioned above. For values of prospective current where the virtual pre-arcing time at rated frequency is less than one quarter-cycle, the tendency at higher frequencies is towards pre-arcing times shorter than indicated on the characteristic. For frequencies lower than rated frequency, the effect is the opposite of that mentioned above, but attention is drawn to the fact that the increase in pre-arcing time can be even more significant, particularly towards the higher values of prospective current. For lower values of prospective current, the only influence of an asymmetrical current (a.c. with a transient d.c. component) is to give a slight increase in the r.m.s. value of the current. In the adiabatic zone, the influence is best considered as an increase or decrease in the rateof-rise, replacing the actual current by that symmetrical current that has the same (or similar) rate-of-rise during the pre-arcing period. In the critical zone, where the pre-arcing characteristic leaves the adiabatic zone, a distinction has to be made between an asymmetry beginning with a major loop and one beginning with a minor loop. The major loop will give a decrease in the virtual pre-arcing time, the minor loop will give an increase. When considering the ability of the fuse-link to withstand an asymmetrical of the asymmetry has to be taken into account. current, the peak

In case of operation with d.c. the pre-arcing characteristic based on a.c. may not be applicable at all, or only partly applicable, depending on the circuit parameters. If the time constant of the circuit is smaller than the shortest time being considered, the virtual time becomes practically the same as the actual time, and the prospective current is the applied voltage divided by the resistance. If the circuit contains a significant amount of self-inductance, the adiabatic zone of the prearcing characteristic can be used provided the abscissa refers to rate-of-rise instead of prospective current (i.e. the rate-of-rise of the d.c. current is determined as applied voltage divided by the self-inductance). It is further to be assumed that the value of the prospective current (the applied voltage divided by the resistance) is significantly higher (three times or more) than the cut-off current at the rate-of:rise considered.

29

( IEC page 55 )

Is 13703 ( Part 4 ) : 1993 IEC Pub269-4(1980)

For the remaining cases of d.c. operation, it is very difficult to draw any significant conclusions about the pre-arcing time to be expected from the normal pre-arcing characteristic based on a.c. and the manufacturer should be consulted. However, the majority of practical cases are covered by the consideration of the rate-of-rise equivalence. The normal pre-arcing characteristic does not give much information on the behaviour in the case of a non-sinusoidal current unless it is either a case where the rate-of-rise is predominant (i.e. for very large currents) or where the current is of such low value that the long time involved permits the use of the r.m.s. value. A62 Operating characteristic For a given prospective current, the time difference between the pre-arcing the operating characteristic is the maximum value of the arcing time which is conditions for which the operating characteristic is drawn. The data manufacturer are based on a low value of power factor (i.e. below 0.3) and the applied voltage. characteristic and possible under the presented by the the r.m.s. value of

The worst case is reached when the instantaneous value of applied voltage is as large as possible both throughout the pre-arcing period and the arcing period. Since this situation seldom occurs, advantage may be taken of this fact. For the same applied voltage and the same prospective short-circuit current, a higher frequency implies a lower value of self-inductance, so the arcing time decreases and within practical limits it is inversely proportional to the frequency. For the same applied voltage and the same prospective short-circuit current, a lower frequency implies a higher value of self-inductance, so the arcing time increases and within practical limits it is inversely proportional to the frequency.
Nore. Because of the longer arcing time and the resulting energy released. it is not ensured should that fuse-links are suitable for use at a frequency below rated frequency. The operating frequency below rated frequency is contemplated. manufacturer be consulted whenever

The influence of usymmetricul current has to be taken into account in the selection of the maximum value of the arcing time. In all cases of direct current (see note in Sub-clause Al.l) where the pre-arcing time is judged on the basis of the rate-of-rise (see Sub-clause A6.1) and if the cut-off current is reached at the end of the pre-arcing period, the operating characteristic is also valid provided that the.voltage parameter (which is based on r.m.s. values) is so chosen that the applied d.c. voltage is less than the average a.c. voltage (90% of the r.m.s. value). All other cases require special consideration or additional information should be obtained from the manufacturer.

A6.3

Cut-off characteristic In the absence of published information and in the adiabatic zone where cut-off is of interest, the value of cut-off can be estimated from the pre-arcing characteristic by assuming the maximum rate-of-rise during the pre-arcing time for the prospective current considered. However, if the operating characteristic indicates operating times in excess of two or three times the pre-arcing time, it is likely that the actual cut-off current is higher than estimated.

( IEC

page

57 )

30

IS 13703 ( Part 4 ) : 1993 IEC Pub 269 - 4 ( 1980) A7. Breaking capacity Within the rating, breaking cupaciry for non-sinusoidal U.C. is rarely critical for fuse-links for ,the protection of semiconductor devices. For the higher values of voltage (high-voltage fuse-links), the task of breaking small values of current may be a problem, but this problem normally lies outside the range of currents which is of interest here (see Sub-clause 7.4.3). The breaking capacity is not impaired by frequencies higher than rated frequency as long as the maximum value of rate-of-rise of the current for rated frequency is not exceeded. At frequencies lower than rated frequency, the energy released in the fuse-link is larger than at rated frequency. Additional information should be obtained from the manufacturer, which may include a test at the lower frequency, according to Sub-clause 8.5.5. I. For breaking cupuciry on d.c. (see note in Sub-clause A I. I), the energy released in the fuse-link is.in many cases greater than at rated frequency. Often satisfactory operation can be ensured only by using a fuse-link having an a.c. rated voltage appreciably higher than the d.c. supply voltage. Additional information should be obtained from the manufacturer.

A8.

Commutation Short-circuit currents in semiconductor installations normally involve circuits having several arms between which commutation can take place during the operation of the fuse-link. Such commutation can be caused by the cyclic change in the voltage of the a.c. source, by the firing of thyristors or by the arc voltage of another fuse-link. The commutations influence the operation of the fuse-link by altering the circuit configuration, the circuit constants, and by changing ihe applied voltage (e.g. by adding an arc voltage). Another form of unintentional commutation which may seriously affect the duty of the fuselink is that caused by the appearance of a secondary fault.

31

( IEC page 59 )

IS 13703 ( Part 4) : 1993 IEC Pub 269 - 4 ( 1980)

APPENDIX

B

SURVEY ON INFoKMATION BY THE MANUFACTURER FOR A FUSE DESIGNED
(The information

TO BE SUPPLIED (CATALOGUE) DEVICES OF SEMICONDUCTOR

IN HIS LITERATURE

FOR THE PROTECTION
shall be given separatelyfor

ax. and. where applicable, for d.c.)

1.
2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.

10. 11. 12. 13.

14. 15. 16. 17.

Name of the manufacturer (trade mark) (see Sub-clause 6.2). Type or list reference of manufacturer (see Sub-clause 6.2). Rated voltage (see Sub-clause 3.5.1). Rated current (see Sub-clause 3.6). Rated frequency or frequencies (see Sub-clause 5.4). Rated breaking capacity (at rated voltage and at different applied voltages) (see Sub-clauses 3.9 and 8.5). Pre-arcing and operating time/current characteristics (diagrams) and apphcation class (symbol), where applicable (see Sub-clauses 5.6 and 8.4.3.1). ,Pre-arcing 1*t characteristic (see Sub-clauses 5.8.2.1 and 8.7.2). Operating I*t characteristic in relation to the voltage with indication of the power factor, or time constant (see Sub-clauses 5.8.2.2 and 8.7.2). Arc voltage at 25%, 50% and 100% of the rated voltage or in the form of a diagram (see Subclauses 5.9 and 8.7.3). Cut-off characteristic (see Sub-clauses 5.8.1 and 8.6). Temperature rise at rated current under conventional test conditions and indication of a defined measuring point (see Sub-clauses 7.3 and 8.3.4). Power loss for at least 50% and 100% of the rated current, at fixed points or in the form of a diagram for that range (additional parameters may be 63% and 80%) (see Sub-clauses 7.3 and 8.3.4). Required minimum operating voltage of the indicator (see Sub-clause 8.4.3.2). Permissible current as a function of the ambient temperature (diagram) (see Sub-clause 8.4.3.5). Instructions for mounting, where necessary with respect to the dimensions (sketch). Current-carrying ability under special conditions of mounting (e.g. cross-sectional area of connected conductors. inadequate cooling, additional heat sources, etc.).
In the case of special conditions, the manufacturer should be consulted.

Note. -

( IEC page 61 )

32
Printed at Dee Kay Printers.New Delhi, India

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodica!ly; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indin Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this lndian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. ET 39 ( 3683 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 11002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 C 331 13 75 37 84 99, 37 56 26, 533543, IL53 23 84 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 1640

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

235 02 16, 235 04 42 235 15 19, 235 23 15 632 92 95, 632 78,91, 632 78 58 632 78 92

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India

