( Reaffirmed 2004 )

CONTENTS
National Foreword SECTION One-GENERAL Clause 1. scope 2. Object . .. . . . SECTIONTWO3. 4. 5. 6. ... . . . .. . . . . ... . . . . .. . . .
COND~TJONS

Page 3

. . . .
OFMEASUREMENT

. .. .. . ... . .. .. . .. .

4 5

SUPPLEMENTARY DEFINITIONS AND . .. . .. . .. .. .
0~ RFCEIVER-DECODER CALLING )

Supplementary terms and definitions . .. . .. Standard test conditions . .. Supplementary test conditions ... Characteristics of the,measurmg equipment SECTIONTHREE -MEASUREMENTS
( SELECTIVE

... .. . ... ...
RADIO-FREQUENCY

... . .. ... . ..
PARAMETERS

6 6 7 12

7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21.

Average radiation sensitivity ( selective calling ) . .. . .. Reference sensitivity ( selective calling ) . . . .. . .. . Adjacent radio-frequency signal selectivity ( selective calling ) ... Adjacent-channel selectivity ( selective calling ) .. . ... Co-channel interference rejection and blocking ( selective calling ) . . . Spurious response immunity ( selective cdlling ) . .. ... Intermodulation immunity ( selective calling ) . .. ... Sensitivity reduction under multipath propagation conditions ( selective calling ) Protection from radio-frequency interm2dulatiJn false operation ( selective caliing False responses due to noise ( selective calling ) . .. . .. Signalling altack time ( selective calling ) ... . .. Recovery time ( selective calling ) ... . .. .. . Required prelection time ( selective calling ) ,.. . .. Signal-to-residual output-power ratio ( selective calling ) . .. Impulsive-noise tolerance ( selective calling ) ... ... SECTIONFOURMEASUREMENTS for OF RECEIVER-DECODER radio-frequency RADIO-FREQUENCY measurements

... . .. . .. ... . .. . .. .. . ) . .. ... .. . . .. ... .. .
( DATA

. .. . ... . .. ... . ... . . .. . .. .. . ... ... . ..
)

14 15 18 20 20 20 24 26 29 30 32 33 33 34 35

PARAMETERS

22. 23.

Supplementary Reference

definitions sensitivity (

receiver-decoder

( data )
. . . .. . ... . .. ... ... . . . ... . ..

. . . . . . data ) 24. Acceptable radio-frequency displacznxnt ( data ) ... 25. Adjacent radio-frequency signal selxtivity ( data ) . .. . .. 26. Co-channel interference rejection ( data ) .. . 27. Adjacent-channel selectivity ( daLt ) 9.. 28. Spurious response immunity ( data ) .. . . . 29. Intermodulation immunity ( data ) . . . 30. Sensitivity reduction under mrlltipath propagation conditions ... . .. ... .. . 31. SECTIONFIVE -- MtASUREMENrS
32. 33. Conducted Radiated spurious spurious SECTION SIX components components ( ( data OF RECEIVER-DECODER ( DATA selective selective AND COMPONBNTS and SELECTIVE calling calling )

. . . . .. ... . .. ... .. . . . . ( data ) .. .
CONDUCTED CALLING AND )

. . . ... ... . .. ... . . . . .. . .. . ..
SPUR,O"S

37 41 43 46 50 50 50 54 58

KADIATED

)

...
... RADIO-FREQUENCY

.. .
... PARAMETERS

. ..
...

data and

62 63

MEASUREMENTS

OF ENCODER-TRANSMITTESS

(DATAAND~ELECTIVE CALLING) Clauses 34 to 38 ( ruder considevrrriarz ) OF ENCODER SECTION SEVEN -AUDIO-FREQUENCY BAND MEASUREMENTS
( SELECTIVE 39. CALLING )

OUTPUT

CHARACTERISTICS

40. 41. 42. 43. 44.

Tone pulse-rise time ( selective calling )... Tone pulse duration ( selective calling )... Tone pulse-decay time ( selective calling ) Frequency of tone(s) ( selective calling )... R.M.S. voltage of tone(s) ( selective calling ) Encoder overall operate time ( selective calling ) 1

. .. .. . .. . . ... ...

.

..,
. .. . .

... . .. .

. .

... .

64 64 67 67 67 68

Page SECTION EIGHT45. 46. 47. 48. 49. Decoder Decoder Decoder Decoder Decoder operation AUDIO-FREQUENCYBAND MEASUREMENTS
OF DECODER

CHARACTERISTICS .. . ... ... ... .. .

( SELECTIVE CALLING ) level range ( selective calling ) calling ) calling ) . .. . .. . .. calling ) . . . ... . .. . .. .. . ..* .. .

...
. .. .. . ... . ..

69 70 70 71 12

attack time ( selective recovery required

time ( selective protection

time ( selective

alarm time ( selective calling ) . . . SECTION NINE -

OVERALL MEASUREMENTS IN SIMULATED SYSTEMS ( SELECTIVECALLING ) ... .. . ... . .. .. . ... ... .. . . .. of test .. . . .. . .. ... . .. . .. . .. ... radio. .. tests for .. . . .. 90 121 86 12 73 73 74 75 78 79 85

SO. General 51. 52. 53.

... conditions operate

Supplementary System overall System recovery

of measurement

for system response times ... .. . .. . ... . .. . ..

time ( selective

calling)

time ( selective

calling ) networks

APPENDIX A APPENDIX B APPENDIX C APPENDIX D APPENDIX E APPENDIX F -

Examples

of combining

Recommended Rayleigh

characteristics

of the measuring equipment ... . . . .. ...

and its methods . .. .. . . .. ...

fading simulator response

Intermodulation

Guide for the construction frequency Accuracy sensitivity electromagnetic and dispersion

of a 30 m radiation energy of methods .*. of .. .

teat site for equipment . .. and . .. ( selective calling )

receiving ...

measurements ... ( M)

compliance .. . . .. . ..

( data and selective calling ) and degradation

measurements

( data and

selective calling ) APPENDIX G AppF~nIx H -

Mean time between false calling responses Alternative test mounting arrangements for

equipment . .. of a .. . test site . .. test

which is hand-held or carried . .. .. . device ... radio. .. above . .. .. . ... . .. ... . .. 134 138 143 146 131 125 123

on the person while in normal operation APPENDIX J APPENDIX K Guide for the construction (RFCD) frequency APPENDIX L Guide for . .. electromagnetic Guide for the construction and .. . energy

measurement

radio-frequency . .. for equipment .. . site for

coupling . .. emitting ... measurements

of a 30 m radiation

the construction emitting

of a 3 m radiation radio-frequency

100 MHz of equipment APPENDIX M APPENDIX N APPENDIX P _ General Example Audio information

electromagnetic

energy . . . generator

on impulsive

noise and random impulse stabilization

of a mains power line impedance commonly

network

frequencies

used in tone-signalling

systems

2

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR RADIO EQUIPMENT USED IN THE MOBILE SERVICES
PART NATIONAL FOREWORD 6 SELECTIVE-CALLING AND DATA EQUIPMENT

This Indian Standard which is identical with IEC Pub 489-6 ( 1987 ) `Methods of measurement for radio equipment used in the mobile services - Part 6 : Selective-calling and data equipment' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Radio Communications Sectional Committee ( LTD 20 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. The text of the IEC Publication has been approved as suitable for publication as without deviations. Certain conventions, are however, not identical to those Standards. Attention is pirrticularly drawn to the following: India;: Standard used in Indian they should the current

a) Wherever the words `International Standard' appear referring to this standard, be read as `Indian Standard'. b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, practice is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. CROSS REFERENCES

In the adopted standard, reference appears to certain international Standards for which Indian The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their Standards also exist. place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated:
International IEC Pub Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equhwlence

489-l ( 1983 ) Methods of measurement for radio equipment used in the mobile services Part 1 : General definitions and standard conditions of measurement

TS 10820 ( Part 1 ) : 1984 Methods of measurement for radio equipment used in the mobile services : Part 1 General definitions and standard conditions of measurement

Technically equivalent

The concerned Technical Committee responsible for preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of the following 1n:ernatioual Publications and has decided that they arc acceptable for use in conjunction with this stundard. IEC 315-l ( 1970 ) : Methods of measurement 3n radio receivers for various emission, Part I General conditions for measurements and measuring methods several types of receivers measurement particularly on radio receivers for various i'clatrd to the audio-frequency classes applying of to

IEC Pub 315-2 ( 1971 ) : Methods of emission, Part 2 Mzasuremznts receiver

classes of part of a

3

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 1% Pub 489-3 ( 1979 ) : Methods of measurement for services, Part 3 Receivers for A3 and F3 Emissions radio equipment used in the mobile

IEC Pub 489-5 ( 1987 ) : Methods of measurement for radio equipment used in the mobile services, Part 5 Receivers employing single-sideband techniques ( R3F, H3F or J3E ) The contents standard. of Amendment No. 1 and 2 to International IEC Pub 489-6 have has been been incorporated in this ir

Only the English language in this Indian Stai,dard.

text of the

Standard

retained

while adopting

SECTION 1. Scope This standard calling) (data) is applicable signals, having to receivers

ONE -GENERAL

used in the emission

mobile

services,

for

receiving

(selective

the following

characteristics:

Type of modulation (A) (H) (R) (F) (G) Nature (1) (2) (7) Type

of the main carrier:

amplitude double-:,ideband, single-sideband, full carrier, single-sideband, reduced or variable frequency modulation, phase modulation. modulating the main carrier:

carrier,

of signal(s)

a single channel containing modulating sub-carrier, a single channel containing modulating sub-carrier, two or more channels containing

quantized quantized quantized

or or

digital digital

information information information.

without with

the use of a the use of a

or digital

of information (A) (B) (D)

to be transmitted:

telegraphy-for aural reception, telegraphy--for automatic reception, data transmission, telemetry, telecommand. of signal(s) (fourth symbol, optional): of differing of the of numbers and/or durations, without error-

Details (A)

two-condition

code with elements code with code code with elements elements

(B) two-condition correcting, (C) (D) (E) (F) two-condition correction, four-condition more bits), multicondition more bits), multicondition a character.

same the

number number

and duration and a signal a signal

same

duration element element

with error(of one or (of one or represents

in which

each each

condition condition or

represents represents

code in which code in which

each condition

combination

of conditions

Nofr. -

See ITU Radio Regulations the emission characteristics.

(Edition

1982), Article 4 and

Appendix

6. for details

and

definition

of

4

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 This standard and definitions is intended tests. to be used in conjunction of measurement with set forth IEC Publication in this standard 489-l. The terms for

and the conditions

are intended

type and acceptance

The methods of measurement in this standard have the radio-frequency input signal moduMethods of measurement for a radiolated only with either a selective calling or data signal. frequency input signal modulated simultaneously with both a data signal and other signals (e.g. other data signals Selective receivers(s) calling and/or voice) are under used to select consideration. or a group an alarm. of measurement it is only parameter are designed to measure the if the For necessary specification. to determine parameter. of receivers by conditioning the

is usually

one

to deliver

a voice message

or to activate `Method

In this standard,

the sub-clauses

titled

In some cases value of a radio-frequency parameter. receiver-decoder is compliant with the radio-frequency be done more simply the more frequently in the appropriate appropriate 2. Object and with measured clauses. less effort than measuring radio-frequency The specified by a regulation,

This can usually is included will be the

the radio-frequency a compliance radio-frequency

parameters, the contract

test method parameter

value for

value specified

or equipment

specification.

The object of this standard is to standardize the definitions, the methods and conditions of measurement used to ascertain the radio-frequency performance of selective calling or data receiver-decoder equipment, thus making possible meaningful comparisons of the results of measurements made by different manufacturers. This standard will cover selective calling signals and three types of data signals:

q) bit streams, 6) character c) messages. The methods _of measurement for the radio-frequency parameters using are the appropriate port that for the provides strings,

three types of data signals. The measurements will be made signals for the intended application (excluding test ports).

TO differentiate the radio-frequency parameters measured in this part of IEC Publication 489 from those in other parts of IEC Publication 489, the name of each parameter is followed by either "(selective calling)", "(bit stream)", "(character string)" or "(meassage)". In Sections Four and Six, the genera1 term "(data)" parameter. When equipment is measured, the proper string)" or "(message)" will be substituted for "(data)". is used after each radio-frequency data type "(bit stream)", `i(chdracter

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IIX Pub 489-6 : 1987 SECTION TWO SUPPLEMENTARY DEFINITIONS OF MEASUREMENT AND CONDITIONS

3.

Supplementary

terms and definitions of this standard, the following supplementary terms and definitions apply.

For the purpose 3.1 Standard

calling probability of successful calling.

An @lo/;;probability 3.2 Modulation depth

For double-sided following:

amplitude

modulation,

the

modulation

depth,

in percent,

is given by the

Modulation
where: V max is the peak-to-peak v,,~, is the peak-to-peak

depth

= ( V,,,

( ~max - Vnlln)
+ Vmln)

x 100%

voltage at the crest of modulation voltage at the valley of modulation

3.3

Signal A physical phenomenon or variation represents information. characteristic quantity of such a phenomenon, whose time

3.4

Coded signal That signal or group of signals that enables the performance of a unique calling function.

3.5

Standard

coded test signal (SCTS)

For the purpose of these measurement, the standard coded test signal shall be defined in the equipment specification and will usually be generated by an encoder of the type associated with the decoder under test. The parameters of the coded test signal ( e. g., frequencies, pulse etc ) shall have tolerances small enough to ensure that the results are duration, pulse timing, not significantly influenced by them. In addition values maximum to any other parameters, usable modulation deviation depth the equipment of Type specification or shall define the appropriate for the permissible: A modulation, or sidebands produced by Type H or R

frequency/phase

of Type G or F modulation, between the carrier and the

-_ amplitude modulation. 3.6 Coding system

relationships

A system that Present techniques of these. 3.7 Encoder The apparatus 3.8 Decoder

permits

the

transmission phase coding,

of unique

information frequency

from one coding

point

to another.

include

pulse coding,

and a combination

in a selective-calling

system that generates

the coded

signal

for transmission.

The apparatus in specific coded signal.

a selective-calling

system

which is intended

to respond

exclusively

to a

6

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 3.9 Alarm In a selective-calling associated
Note. -The

system, have received

an alarm

is

any indication coded
within

that any or all receivers
a vibrator, or only

and their
the

decoders

their intended
generated
The

signals.
the decoder,

alarm may be a lamp, a "bleep"
circuit.

open_

ing of a mute or squelch
noise level at the output

latter is usually

indicated by an increase

in the residual

of the receiver.

3.10

Selective-culling system A system whereby termined station the transmission of stations of a signal code from a station enables another
prede-

or group

to be called exclusively.

3.11

Standard unwanted signal If the wanted modulated signal has Type A modulation, depth then the standard unwanted signal should be with 400 Hz at the modulation signal of 60%. then the standard permissible frequency signal, the standard unwanted deviation. unwanted signal is not signal should

If the wanted be modulated

has Type F or G modulation, of the wanted

with 400 Hz at 60';; of the maximum

For all other types of modulation modulated. 3.12 Selective-calling equipment Apparatus consisting of operation of the equipment. at

least

an

encoder,

decoder

and the

power

supplies

for the

If it is not possible to isolate the associated transmitter and receiver circuits and decoder, they shall be considered as part of the selective-calling system. 3.13 Radio pager A small radio call. 4. 4.1 receiver-decoder, which provides an alarm following

from the encoder

reception antenna.

of a selective

It is intended

to be worn on a person

and usually

has an integral

Standard test conditions
Unless

otherwise stated, methods of measurements conditions as stated in IEC Publication 489-1 and Clause 5. have In this standard the methods of measurement automatic test equipment will be available.

shall be performed the supplementary been developed

under the general test test conditions given in the assumption that

4.2 4.3

under

If the data source and encoder are unique, the manufacturer shall supply to the organization making the measurements either detailed information so that the items can be manufactured, or the unique items themselves. test conditions

5. 5.1

Supplementary

Receiver-decoder having an integral antenna In this standard receivers conditions compliance having apply: average radiation sensitivity ( selective calling ), Clause 7, measurements and tests are made on a test site. 7 the methods of measurement and compliance with integral tests have been antennas written for test For receivers the following

antenna

terminals.

Concerning

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 The Clauses measurements 23 through and compliance tests in Clauses 8 through an 21 ( selective antenna calling) and

30 ( data ) for receiver-decoders

having

integral

are made with

the receiver in a suitable radio-frequency coupling device ( RFCD ). The same procedures are used as for receivers having antenna terminals, except that the input signal level recorded is
that

introduced
The

at the input measurements

terminals

of the RFCD
tests in

instead
Clauses

of at the
8 through

antenna

terminals

of the

receiver.
Notl~s 1. -

and compliance

21 ( selective

calling ) and

Clauses 23 of trails in required to procedures this time. bit stream 2. -

through 30 ( data, message 1 have been designed for non-automatic use: the I;umber these measurements and compliant,: tests have been reduced to the minimum Various automatic measuremetlt obtain the necessary accuracy and variation. may be used, but it is not proposed that they be standardized in this standard at However, the measurements and compliance tests in Clauses 23 through and character string ) have been designed to use automatic test equipment. 30 ( data,

The measurements in Clauses 8 through 21 ( selective calling ) can be used for continuous signal ( e. g. continuous tone controlled squelch systems ) provided that a time for the op;ra_ tion of the decoder is sptcificd ( e. g. 300 ms ).

5.2

Input-si,qnol arrangements for testing receivers equipped Ivith suitable Depending on the type of three measuring arrangements a) Arrangement The arrangement a test data A comprises source and the following an encoder pieces of equipment: as required, or modulation described

antennas ternzinals available, one of the

and the measuring equipment below shall be employed.

a test encoder

combining

these two

functions, a radio-frequency signal generator or an alternate capable of being modulated in accordance with receiver, an impedance matching network to the receiver under test. Note. - Examples
of impedance matching

signal source ( see Sub-clause 6.9 )' the type of modulation used by the 1) placed as close as possible
A.

-

( or pad; see (3) of Figure
nctwrks a;, I c.>mbining

networks

are given i.1 Appendix

b)

Arrangement B For some types of single-sideband

characteristics as given modulation, with corrc;ponding the modulated signal by using two in Item (1) of the Scope, it may be possibl e to simulate In this case, an arrangement similar to arrangernent A may be radio-frequency generators. used, but with the signal generator frequency signal generators, the outputs terminated in an adjustable attenuator. or alternate signal source replaced by two radioof which are connected to a combining network

C) Arrangement

C is similar to arrangement A, except that it also requires a means to

The arrangement

convert the output frequency of the alternate signal source to the nominal frequency spccified for the receiver. This is accomplished by using a radio-frequency signal generator and a frequency converter which is terminated in an adjustable attenuator. Some measurements radio-frequency which is inserted The presentation signal require an unwanted conncctcd
pl~c in

signal to

to be added.
one

generator

This signal is supplied by ;I of the inputs of a combining network
line (2) shown in f-`igurc: I.

at a convenient of results

the transmission

shall state which of the arrangement!,

A, B or C, has been used.

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 For arrangements that the receiver than the receivers' 5.2.1 Source impedance resistance This sub-clause mission dance for example of the receiver. The source impedance R, of the measuring arrangement shown in Figure 1 shall be equal to the specified source resistance, or, in the absence of such specification, to the specified nominal radio-frequency The nominal input impedance R, of the receiver. input impedance is that value stated by the manufacturer for applies to receivers which are connected with `feeder line') to the having antenna a specific radio-frequency by means input of a transimpeimpedance line ( which is synonymous characteristic A and C, the performance may be measured values. measuring arrangement for receivers requiring a speci$ed source specified of the of the up to alternate values which signal are source at least should be such

parameters

10 dB greater

equal to R,,, Rn being the specified

nominal

radio-frequency

which the equipment performance will be mission line of the same impedance.

optimum

when

connected

to an antenna

or trans-

3

5

i________-J
l_

I- __-----radio-frequency signal generator with source transmission line impedance matching network ( pad ) 3= nominal input impedance of receiver: R, 47 5 ::. artificial antenna ( where required ) of the input-signal source Rs = impedance
2=

J
impedance

L-J
Ri

FIG.

1.

-

Input-signal

source test arrangement.

5.2.2

Input-signal source for receivers tested with the aid qf an arti'cial antenna This sub-clause complex is applicable to receivers intended to operate with an antenna having a impedance.

The input-signal source shall consist of a radio-frequency signal generator, a transmission The characteristics of the line. an impedance matching network, and an artificial antenna. artifcial antenna shall be specified by the manufacturer of the rcceivcr. 5.2.3 Receivers tested with the aid The input-sigtlal artificial 5.3 5.3.1 antenna. level

of an arti/icial arltcnw
c.m.f. of the source connected lo ihc input terminals

is the

of an

It should

be expressed

in I_LV or dB ( PV ).

Input-signal mea,nrri!lg convention Receiver requiring a specijicd source rcsistancc The input-signal level should preferably 9 be determined by measuring the electromotive

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 force Figure prcscnt 1 ). the input-signal having level may be determined a value equal to R,. by measuring the matched-load ( ml ) at the output terminals of the unterminated input-signal source ( e.m.f. of

Alternatively, voltage

across a resistance

The matched-load supplying network the input

( ml ) is one- half the value of the c.m.f. I level is determined signal ( voltage
also

When the input-:ign::

with Figure

a voltmeter 1 ), the loss

incorporated of the

in the equipment impedance matching network

eg in

and, if applicable, attenuators of

the losses of the transmission in the transmissioir shall state which resistance

line and any combining into account. for

and adjustable The 5.3.2

inserted results

line shall be taken voltage has

presentation

been recorded,

example,

2 ILV ( e.m.f. ) or 1 PV ( ml ).
Input-signal level

The source

R. shall be stated

with the results.

In this standard, the input-signal levels of the wanted in terms of r.m.s. values as follows:

and unwanted

signals

shall be expressed

-

for angle

( Type G or F: or

phase or keying:

frequency the

) modulation, of the

including signal,

frequency-shift either modulated

and or

phase-shift modulation unmodulated, -

r.m.s. voltage

for on-off modulation, or keying of a sinusoidal carrier which may or may not be modulated with an additional signal: the r.m.s. voltage of the continuous carrier, without modulation, for double-sideband amplitude the unmodulated carrier, for single-sideband carrier: the r.m.s. amplitude (Type A) modulation with full carrier: the r.m.s. voltage of

amplitude (Type H or R) modulation with full, reduced or variable value of a sinusoidal voltage, the peak value of which is equal to the cycle at the crest of the envelope expressed in I_LV or dB (pV) of the modulated shall be wave. in may be 5.2. and determined

of one radio-frequency

The input-signal levels accordance with Sub-clause 5.4 Connections intended of the measuring

equipment shall be connected to the port that provides signals for the

The data measuring application.

equipment

Care should be taken that the input impedance the loading conditions specified for the receiver. 5.5 5.5.1 Standard Standard input signal input signal (Type signal A, G or F modulation) at standard

of the

measuring

equipment

does not affect

A radio-frequency standard input-signal 5.5.2 Standard

input-signal

level

with

standard

modulation,

at the

frequency. H or R modulation) of two radio-frequency signals from a signal from a transmitter when it is modulated with the class of emission carrier and the other the
up011

input signal (Type

A radio-frequency source that simulates an audio-frequency The frequencies they represent.

signal or linear combination the single-sideband emission signal of 1 000 Hz.

and the levels of the input signal are dependent one of which represents the Two frequencies, 10

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 sideband, frequency are chosen such that when demodulated they will produce an audio output at a

of 1 000 HL. input-signal levels are:
Sign,il reprtse!.tii!g sideband

The standard

Class

of emission

.._
carrier

~~_. --.-.. -- _

R3E H3E

-t 42 dB (CLV) $- 54 dB (pV)

t 60 dB (pV)
+ 54 dB (pv)

5.6

Standard Unless

input-signal otherwise

level specified, the standard (e.m.f.) input-signal level for a receiver of the ty;,c consi-

dered in this standard 5.7

is 60 dB (,V)

or 54 dB (pV) (ml).

Standard input-signal frequency For all tests, except where otherwise specified, the standard input-signal frequency is one of For S.S.B. type of modulaiion, the nominal frequency is the specified nominal frequencies. the frequency of the carrier. of 1 000 Hz at a level to produce: (or phase) deviation. of equipment equipment for duplex operation for duplex operation is to be part of Standard modulation of an input signal The modulation due to an input signal a modulation depth of 30%; 6O'j: of maximum permissible freq.uency

5.8

5.9

Input-signnl When

arrangements

for testing of the

the receiving part receiving

the performance

evaluated while the associated transmitting part is operating, precautions should be taken in order to ensure that the operation of the signal generator or generators used for testing the receiving part is not affected by the radio-frequency signal of the transmitting part and that the latter is terminated by its proper load impedance. for marking 2. measurenents on receivers of equipment 5.9.1 Input-signal source An example of a suitable arrangement for duplex operation is shown in Figure

-

A' 2

N
T%J

dB 3,

-

IS 10820 (Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 Connect point the input-signal under at point conditions. (3) should capability.
level

source (1) (levels of the band-stop such test. B' shall be

adjusted

in

accordance

with Sub-clause

5.3) to

A'. The centre

frequency

filter (2) is adjusted the transmitting the combining

to the operating part is operating

frequency under the

of the transmitter The impedance specified of the dissipate 5.9.2 matched attenuator nearly of any mismatch

that

To ensure be at

that the

V.S.W.R.

will be less than be noted that and therefore

1.25, irrespective the attenuator will shall have suitable

caused by the band-stop all of the power

filter (2) and

unit (4), the attenuation

It should from Lhe transmitting part

least 30 dB.

power-handling
Input-signal

The level of the radio-frequency
5.9.3 Input-signal location

input

signal

shall be determined

at point B` of Figure

2.

The radio-frequency 6. Characteristics

input

signal

shall be determined

at point

B` of Figure

2.

of the measuring equipment ( for measurin operators certain for g equipment which may not be commercially available ), and at different locations will obtain similar rcbults when mcasurof the measuring equipment and test sites have meet,> these specificaverifying that the measuring equipment

Where necessary to ensure ing

that ditl'zrent

the same receiver,

characteristics

been specified. Procedures tions arc also given. 6.1
Signal generator

intermodulation

characteristics

A method are combined, 6.2

for identifying

intermodulation B.

between

signal

generators,

the outputs

of which

is given in Appendix

Signal gerlerator noise characteristics

A method
6.3 Selective

for identifying

signal generator

noise is given

in Appendix

B

measuring &vice

The selective or a calibrated

measuring device may be a frequency The bandwidth field-strength meter. being made or shall

selective voltmeter, a spectrum analyzer, of the measuring device shall be approto the value stated in the method

priate for the measurement of measurement. 6.4
liitdio-frequency

be adjust,;d

`I p device (HFCP) coup11 ?.

Characteristics

am1 m~asurewzents

The measurement or an integral

in this standard

are applicable

to

receivers

having

either antenna

terminals

antenna. having an integral precautions shall antenna are be taken to

Measurements of the radio-frcqucncy parameters of receivers performed in an RED. When making these measurements, ensure that: is adequately shielded from electromagnetic

the receiver

disturbance; source and the receiver the measuring frequency being range. mca-

the attenuation of the coupling between the radiation sured is sufficiently low, stable and constant throughout

The coupling loss depends on the particular measuring arrangement, the frequency being used, and the receiver being measured. Normally it is not precisely measured as it will only be useful for a particuiar Treasuring arrangement and frequency. 12

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 The coupling singal generators cially available loss shall be sufficiently low so that the output power requirements of the used in this standard will not exceed the power output capability of commersignal generators. an RFCD which includes the following should be used

To ensure measurement repeatability, in the measurement arrangement: a radiating element; input terminal

a radio-frequency line;

connected

to the radiating

element

through

a transmission of

a means to ensure that the input impedance of the RFCD be the same as the impedance the transmission line from the radio-frequency signal generator; a means manner; a means for Positioning the receiver of being measured the person making in a precise, repeatable does and

stable

-

to ensure

that the presence

the measurement

not affect

the results. It shall also have the following a coupling 10~sbetween of less than 30 dB; a coupling loss variation the characteristics: radio-frequency input terminal and the receiver
being measured

-

over the frequency

range used in the measurement

which does not

exceed 2 dB; 6.5 no non-linear elements which can affect the measurement results.

Combining networks Examples of combining

network?

are given

in Appendix

A.

6.6

Rnyleigh ,fading sirnu/ntorcharacteri.rtics Appendix C contains the following fading items: simulator;

an example specifications a method

of a Rayleigh

for the required

parameters; parameters.

of measurement

for the required

6.1

Characteristics of radidion test sites Appendix E provides a guide for the construction of a 30 m radiation test site for equipment receiving radio-frequency electromagnetic energy and a method for calibrating the test site. Appendix K provides a guide for the conStruction of' a 30 m radiation ment emitting radio-frequency electromagnetic energy.
Appendix L provides a guide

test

site for

equip-

ments 6.8

above

100 MHz of equip:n:nt

for the construction of a 3 m radiation test site for measureemitting radio-frequency electromngnetic energy.

Sinnllrrred111m7
A

simulated
pager

radio 6.9

is lllcasured.

radiation sensitivity (selective calling) of a man is required when the average A description of a simulated man and its use is given in Appendix H. it mrly I;ot be possible for to modulate a radio-frequency cxanjplc for singlesideband. signal In these

Altcrnatc signal source For certain measurelnents, generator to produce the

necessary

ill;)lltsignals,

13

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 circumstances, or unwanted a transmitter signal. require that the frequency be moved. translation. be such that receiver parameters may than the receivers' specified values. A local oscillator, balanced mixer may have to be used as an alternate signal source for the wanted

Some measurements

and filters may be used to make the frequency

The characteristics of the alternate signal source should be measured up to values which are at least 10 dB greater Care must be taken 6.10 Signal generators Signal generators are normally characterized for to shield the receiver

from the transmitter.

sinewave in can the

modulation transmission affect

and application accuracy

of

non-sinusoidal to monitoring measurements 6.10.1

waveforms which are often encountered or modulation problems. Such problems that are made.

of data may lead of any

the overall

Monitoring problems If the signal generator modulation is provided with a voltmeter in error when system to monitor the applied external

signal the readings

may be

non-sinusoidal

waveforms

are applied.

It is recommended that an oscilloscope be used to monitor the peak voltage of the applied data signal and that the level be adjusted to be equal to the amplitude of a pure sine wave which would produce the required modulation condition. If the signal generator monitor shows the same indication on both input signal conditions, then the user can be confident that inaccuracies due to monitoring will not be a problem. 6.10.2 Modulating problems The signal high-pass provided generator modulating filters. system will have finite bandwidth which is determined amplitude by and low-pass The high-pass filter can introduce phase and errors

at low frequencies

and the user

by the manufacturer.

should assess the suitability of the instrument .from the data In some circumstances, a signal source with a response exten(e.g. 1 Hz) will be satisfactory. source will be most noticeable when modulating Depending on the characteristics of the filters, exhibit overshoot or degradation simulates of the rise signal a narrowby filtering the modulating

ding down to a sufficiently

low frequency

The effect of the low-pass filter on the signal signals with fast rise and fall times are applied. the modulation and fall times. applied to the carrier signal In practice, these problems generator,

will

can be eliminated

before it is applied band transmitter. SECTION

to the signal

so that the test source correctly

THREE -

MEASUREMENTS PARAMETERS )

OF RECEIVER-DECODER ( SELECTIVE CALLING )

RADIO-FREQUENCY 7. Average radiation sensitivity This measurement 7.1 Definition

( selective calling

is only applicable

to receivers

with integral

antennas,

The average of eight field strength measurements at a specified frequency with standard coded test signals (SCIS) each producing the st:tndard calling probability when the rcccivcr under test is rotated in $5' azimuth increments stnrti;lg at the reference azimutlr.
Note. -

This parameter

is sometimes

called

GGsiy!;al!in{:sc:isi!iVity". 13

IS 10820 ( Past 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 7.2 Method

qf measurement
on a suitable radiation test site. See Appendix E for details

This measurement shall be made and test site calibration procedure. Calibrate Appendix the radiation

test site at the standard

input-signal

frequency

in accordance

with

E (Sub-clauses the equipment

E 10.1 to E 10.4) fol' a field strength as illustrated
worn

of 100 pV/m [40 dB (CLV/m)].

6) Connect

in Figure
on the

Elb. test

Note. - For receivers normally fixture of Appendix H.

body (e.g. radio pagers) trse the simulated-man (1) with the SCTS. to the direction of the transmitting

C) Modulate

the radio-frequency E, Clause

signal generator E 3).

d) Orient the equipment
(2) (see Appendix

so that a face is normal

antenna

This determines

the referenceazimuth. is functioning. probability (e.g. less than

e) Transmit
f) 107;). g) Translnit rules:

the SCTS and confirm

that the receiver-decoder produce

Set step attenuator

(5) to a value which will

a low calling

the SCTS repeatedly

and adjust

the step attentiator

(5) according

to the following

,$) 1) Transmit however, Adjust 2) If the dccrease

the SCTS a maximum if the receiver-decoder

terminating the transmission sequence, of four times, fails to recognize the signal any one of those times. to Step h) 2 ) or h) 3), whichever either the first, second, third, is appropriate. or fourth SCTS,

the step attenuator receiver-decoder the attenuation

(5) according fails to recognize of step attenuator

(5) by 1 dB, and repeat record

Step Iz) 1 ). value of step
to

3) If the receiver-decoder recognizes the four SCTSs, attenuator (5) in decibels, and proceed to Step i). Note. - A careful study of the example avoid the possibility of misunderstanding
i)

the attenuation

in Figure Step h).

Fl,

page 128, of Appendix

F, is recommended

Change

the azimuth Step

by 45" and repeat

Steps

f)to h).
recorded for eight different positions.

j) Repeat 7.3

i) until attenuation

values have been

Presentation of results a) Convert the eight attenuation values to field strength values using:

PV = 100 ' 10 ( TO- "dB" ) / 20 pv/m where "dB" is the attenuation value recorded in Step h) 3) of Sub-clause 7.2.

This is the average radiab) Calculate the arithmetic mean of the eight field strength values. tion sensitivity ( selective calling ) which may be expressed as pV/m or dB ( pV/m ). 1.4 Complinnce test method This measurement shall be made on a suitable and calibration procedure of the test site). radiation test site (see Appendix E for details

a) Calibrate
Appendix

the radiation test site si the standard E (see Sub-clauses ElO.l through

input-signal E10.4) for

frequency in accordance with a field strength of 100 Pv/m

[40 dB (~Vjm)].

bj Connect

the equipment

as illustrated

in Figure 15

Elb.

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 JEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 c) Adjust step attenuator (5) from 20 dB to: = 20 + 20 log specified 100~ V/m field strength -dB in t,V/m antenna (2)

attenuation

d) Orient the equipment so that a face is normal to the direction of the transmitter (see Appendix E, Clause E3). This determines the reference azimuth. e) Transmit recognize
Note. f)
g)

the standard

coded

test

signal

(SCTS)

18 times.

four or more SCTS's record

a failure

at this azimuth;

If the receiver-decoder fails to otherwise record a pass.

The test at this azimuth may be stopped after four SCTS's have failed to be recognized. the azimuth Stepf) until by 45" and repeat passes or failures radiation Step E). have been recorded sensitivity (selective for eight different calling) positions. otherwise

Change Repeat

h) If five or more of the positions does comply record 8. 8.1 Reference Dejnition The reference at a specified probability. RECD
specified

were recorded

as a pass in Step e), record that the equipment specification;

with the average

that it does not comply. sensitivity ( selective Calling ) sensitivity frequency, ( selective modulated calling ) is the level of the receiver-decoder input signal calling

with the SCTS,

which will result in the standard

reference
frequency,

sensitivity modulated

( selective-calling ) is the level of the RFCD input signal at a with the standard coded test signal, which will result in the

standard 8.2 Method

calling

probability.

of measurement

In this standard, reference sensitivity ( selective calling ) will be interchanged with RFCD reference sensitivity ( selective calling ) when the receiver-decoder is measured in an RFCD. The reference sensitivity ( selective calling ) shall be determined before the measurcmcnts in Clauses 10, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 can be made. An RFCD should be used for those measurements being that require has a ratio of two input an integral antenna. signal levels and for those that where the receiver-decode1 remain in exactly the measured It is essential the receiver

same position in the RFCD for all RFCD measurements. The measuring arrangement required for Clauses 9, 12, 13, 14 and 15 should be set up at the same time and should not be changed The measuring procedure is as follows: until the measurements are completed. a) Connect b) Modulate the equipment as illustrated signal in Figure generator 3, with the switches (2) with the SCTS. input-signal frequency at a in position b.

the radio-frequency

Apply to the step attenuator (3) a signal having the standard level of approximately 60 dB ( PV ). Record this Icvel.

Ifan RFCD is being used, the level in dB ( ,xV ), at the input of the RFCD, should be 60 dB greater than the coupling loss. th c SCTS and confirm that the dccodcr Set the step attenuator (3) to a low value, transmit is functioning. Increase .1;1 Transmit rules: 16 the step attenuator (3) to a value which and adjust the step will produce a low calling to probability the following (e. g., less than loo{). attenuator (3) according

the SCTS repeatedly

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 g) 1) Transmit however,
Adjust the

the transmission sequence, the SCTS a maximum of three times, terminating if the receiver-decoder fails to recognize the signal any one of those times.
step

attenuator

(3) according fails to recognize

to Step g) 2) or g) 3), whichever either the first, Step 8) 1). second or third

is appropriate. SCTS, decrease

2) If the receiver-decoder the attenuation

of (3) by 1 dB, and repeat

recognizes the three SCTSs. record the attenuation 3) If the receiver-decoder decibels, increase the attenuation of (3) by 1 dB, record the new attenuation decibels, A) 1) Transmit however, Adjust and proceed to Step h) 1 ). of three times, fails according to recognize terminating the signal the transmission the SCTS a maximum if the receiver-decoder (3), the step attenuator

value

in

value in

sequence, times.

any one of those

to Step h) 2) or h) 3), whichever either the first, second attenuation or third

is appropriate.
SCTS, decrease

2) If the receiver-decoder the attenuation Step h) I). 3) If the receiver-decoder 1 dB, record procedure
Note. -

fails to recognize record

of (3) by 1 dB,

the new

value in

decibels,

and repeat

recognizes

the value

three

SCTSs,

increase and continue

the

attenuation the
SCTS

of (3) by transmission to avoid

the new attenuation

in decibels,

in Step h) 1) until the total number

of Step /I) 1) transmissions

is 20.

A careful study of th: example i LFigure F2, page 128, of Appeildix F, is recommended

the possibility of misunderstanding 8.3 Presentation of results

Steps g) and 12).

a) Calculate the average Sub-clause 8.2. b) The reference Reference =A -Bsensitivity CdS(PV)

of the attenuation ( selective calling

values ) is:

recorded

in

decibels

in Steps g) and /I) of

sensitivity

( selective

calling

) = .4 -

B -

C dB ( pV ) reference sensitivity (selective calling)

If the measurement
where :

is made in an RFCD,

the RFCD

A is the output level of the radio-frequz,lcy
B C 8.4

signal generator

(2) in dB ( PV )

is the loss of the combining network (4) in decibels is the average of the attenuation values calculated

in Step a ) in decibels

Compliance

test method testing purposes, the test method described is that of sensitivity terminal.
(sL]rctiv;

For compliance calling)
Note. -

(selective

and applies

to receiver-decoders

that have an antenna

This test method does not yrovid2 :L method calllug). For the m:thod of measurement clause 8.2.

of a meas~.lrzme.~t of rcf..rence ssnsirivity of referei;c: sensi!ivily (selective calling),

see Sub.

n)

Connect

the equipment

as

illustrated

in Figure

3, with

switches

in position

b. ~hc attenu-

ator (3) is either b) Modulate (SC-i-s).

not connected

or is set to Lero attenuation. signal generator (2) with the the standard coded ic:;l signal

the radio-frequency

C) Apply to the input of the receiver-decoder frequency at the specified signal Icvel. 17

(10)

a

signal

at the

standard

it;put

signal

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994

IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
d) Transmit

If the receiver-decoder the SCTS 18 times. record that the receiver decoder does not comply specification; otherwise record that it does comply.
The test may be stopped

fails to recognize four or more SCTS's with the sensitivity ( selective calling )

Nofe. -

after four SCTS's have fai!ed to be recognized.

9. 9.1

Adjacent radio-frequency
Dcjnition

signal selectivity

( selective calling )

The ability the desired

of the response

receiver-decoder at the output

to prevent

an unwanted

adjacent

signal

from degrading

of the receiver-decoder. of: that causes a wanted calling input signal, a calling which is 3 dB in probability equal

It is the ratio, a) the level

expressed

in decibels input

of an unwanted calling sensitivity

signal to

excess of the reference to the standard
b)

sensitivity probability, ( selective

( selective

), to produce

the reference

calling

).

9.2

Method

qf medsurcmef/t Note.- 1 he value of the rcfercnce
required for this measurement.

sel:sitivity

( stilcctive

calling

J determined

in Sub-clause

8.3 is

n) Connect b)

the equipment

as illustrated signal

in Figure generator

3, with the shitches (2) with the SCTS.

in position

b.

Modulate

the radio-frequency

c) ln the absence of the unwanted signal, generator (2) at the standard input-signal receiver-decoder in Sub-clause
d) Adjust

apply a signal from the radio-frequency frequency so that the level at the input sensitivity ( selective calling

signal of the

is 3 dB in excess of the reference Record this value. 8.3.

) determined

produce

the radio-frequency signal generator (6) and the audio-frequency generator (5) to standard modulation of the unwanted signal in accordance with Sub-clause 3.11. signal (1) and if the unwanted signal is modulated with between 300 Hz and 500 Hz to modulate the unwanted generator increment (6) to a high value, for example, higher or lower than the standard produce a low calling probability

If 400 Hz is present in the encoded 400 Hz, use some other frequency signal ( see Sub-clause 3.11 ).

e) Adjust the level of the radio-frequency signal SO dB ( PV ), and set its frequency to a specified input-signal f) Decrease frequency. the step Record attenuator

this level in dB ( FV ). (9) to a value which will

( e.g., less than g) Transmit rules: h) 1) Transmit however, Adjust

10% ). and adjust the step attenuator (9) according to the following

the SCTS repeatedly

the SCTS a maximum if the receiver-decoder the step attenuator

of three times, terminating the transmission sequence, fails to recognize the signal any one of those times. to Step h) 2) or lz) 3), whichever or third is appropriate. SCTS, increase

(9) according

2) If the receiver-decoder fails to recognize either the first, second the attenuation of (9) by 2 dB, and repeat Step II) 1). 3) If the receiver-decoder recognizes the three decibels, decrease the attenuation of (9) by decibels, and proceed to Step i) 1). 18

record the attenuation SCTSs, 1 dB, record the new attenuation

value in value in

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 i) 1) Transmit the SCTS a maximum of three times, terminating the transmission sequence,

however, if the receiver-decoder fails to recognize the signal any one of those times. Adjust the step attenuator (?), according to Step i) 2) or i) 3), whichever is appropriate. 2) If the receiver-decoder fails to recognize either the first, second, or third SCTS, increase the attenuation of (9) by 1 dB, record the new attenuation value in decibels, and repeat Step i) 1). 3) If the receiver-decoder recognizes the three SCTSs, decrease the attenuation of (9) by 1 dB, record the new attenuation value in decibels, and repeat the SCTS transmission procedure in Step i) 1) until the total number of Step i) 1) transmissions is 40.
Notes I. A careful study of the example in Figure F4, page 130, of Appendix the possibtlity of misunderstanding Step h) and i).

F is recommended

to avoid

2. j)

In this step the SCTS is transmitted

40 times.

Steps e) to i) may of results

be repeated

for other unwanted

signal

frequencies.

9.3

Presentation
a)

Calculate

the average

of the attenuation signal

values recorded ( selective

in Step II) and i) of Sub-clause calling), in decibels is:

9.2.

b) The adjacent

radio-frequency

selectivity

A-B-C-D-E
where: A is the output level of the radio-frequency network network signal generator (6) recorded in Step e) of Sub-clause 9.2

in dB ( yV ) B is the loss of the combining C
D

(7) in decibels (4) in decibels 8.3

is the loss of the combining is the averag: attenultion is the reference sensitivity

E c)

value calculated i -I Step a) of this Sub clause in decibels ( selective c-rlliag ) in dB ( gV ) determined in Sub-clause

Record

in a table

the values of the departure frequency and the

from adjacent

the standard

input

signal signal

frequency

of

the unwanted signal ( selective calling ). d) Record the reference

radio-frequency

selectivity

sensitivity

( selective

calling

) in dB

( PV ) the standard used.

input-signal

frequency, and the characteristics of the standard unwanted signal used to modulate the unwanted signal, record the frequency used. 9.4 Compliance
Note. -The

If 400 Hz is not

test method
srnsitivity (selective calling) determined in Sub-clause 8.3 is required

value of the reference for this test.

a) Connect the equipment as illustrated in Figure 3, with switches in (3) and (9) are either not connected or are set to zero attenuation. b) Modulate (SCTS). c) In the absence generator receiver-decoder in Sub-clause 8.3. of the unwanted signal, signal apply a signal from the radio-freque;?cy signal generator (2) with th.:

position

b. Attenuators

standard

coded

test signal

the radio-frequency the level at the input calling)

signal
of the

(2) at the standard Record

input this value.

frequency

so that

is 3 dB in excess of the reference

sensitivity

(selective

determined

d) Adjust the audio-frequency signal generator (5) to modulate the generator (6) with the standard modulation of the unwanted signal. 19

radio-frequency

signal

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 If 400 Hz is present (see Sub-clause modulate in the encoded signal. generator (6) to a specified increment higher or lower and adjust its level to apply to the receiver the frequency, Record the frequency and the level of the unwanted signal and between if the unwanted signal is to be modulated Hz, other than 400 Hz, to

3.11), use

a frequency

300 and 500

the unwanted

e) Set the frequency than the standard specified signal. f) unwanted

of radio-frequency input-signal signal level.

If the receiver-decoder fails to recognize seven or more Transmit the SCTS 33 times. SCTS's, record that the receiver-decoder does not comply with the adjacent radio-frequency signal selectivity ( selective calling ) specification, otherwise record that it does comply. have failed to be recognized. unwanted signal frequencies

A'ote. - The test may be stopped after sever. SCTS's g) Steps e) and 10. Adjacent-channel When mobile frequency signal discrete channel

f) may be repeated
selectivity

for other

( selective calling )

radio services useidiscrete channel spacing<, the value of adjacent radioseleclivity ( selective cllling ) measured for a signal spacing equal to the spacing may be quoted as the value of the adjacent-channel selectivity ( selective calling ) is measured using the

( selective calling ). Adjacent-channel selectivity method of measurement given in Clause 9. 11. Co-channel Co-channel interference

rejection and blocking ( selective calling ) rejection ( selective calling ) is a particular case of adjacent radio-

interference

frequency signal signal frequency

selectivity ( selective calling ) where the and the standard input-signal frequency using the method of measurement

difference between the unwanted is a specified amount less than 9.

300 Hz. It is measured

given in Clause

Blocking (selective calling) calling) where the difference

is a particular case of co-channel interference rejection (selective belween the unwanted signal frequency and the standard inputinput-signal frequency.

signal frequency is a specified amount greater than I y/i of the standard It is measured using the method of measurement given in Clause 9. 12. Spurious response immunity ( selective calling )
Nolr. -

This method is under consideration

for lcceivers having an integral

antenna

using

an RFCD

12.1

Lkfinition The ability of the receiver-decoder to prevent a single unwanted degrading the desired response at the output of the receiver-decoder. It is the ratio, expressed in decibels, of: which is 3 dB in probability equal spurious signal from

a) the level of an unwanted input excess of the reference sensitivity to the standard b) the reference 12.2 Method calling sensitivity probability, ( selective

signal that causes a wanted input signal, ( selective calling ), to produce a calling to calling ).

of measurement
of the reference measurement. sensitivity ( selective calling ) determined in Sub-clause 8.3 is required for this

Note. _ The value

20

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 a) Connect ' the equipment -b--J- a

as illustrated 2 -

in Figure
3 4

3, with the switches
4 I ,=

in position
11 r-----y

b.

b

1 --e-v i lo I"/"(/

a
0

I _
6 7 -o9

i---_-i

I I

5

-+A+--b

1
0

8 i
1 - encoder 2 = radio-frequency signal generator 3 = 60 dB step attenuator ( 1 dB steps 4 = matching and combining network

5 = audio-frequency signal generator 6 = radio-frequency signal generator 7 _ matching alld combining network 8 ==radio-frequency signal generator 9 = 60 dB step attenuator ( 1 dB steps 10 = receiver-decoder II _ radio-frequency coupling device (
Notes. I. -

( if required ( if required ) if required )

J
)

The connections Sub-clause 15.2.

represented

by the switches should

in position

a are only

for the

tear

described

in

2. -

The output signals of all generators the method of measurement. FIG. 3. -

be reduced

to zero

unless otherwise

indicated

in

General

test arrangement signal

for receiver-decoder

characteristics.

b) Modulate

the radio-frequency of the

generator signal,

(2) with the SCTS. a signal from the radio-frequency signal

C) In the absence

unwanted

apply

generator (2) at the standard input-signal frequency SO that the level at the input of the receiver.decoder is 3 dB in excess of the reference sensitivity ( selective calling ) determined in Sub-clause 8.3. Record this value.

4'

Adjust

the

radio-frequency

signal

generator unwanted

(6) and signal.

the

audio-frequency

signal

generator

(5) in order to produce
NCJ/CJ. -

the standard

If 400 Hz is present in the encoded signal, 400 Hz, use some other frequrxcy between sig.7al ( set Sub-clause 3.11 ,I.

with and if the unwanted signal is modulated 300 fiz and 500 Hz to modulate the uilwanted

e)

Adjust the level of radio-frequency signal generator (6) to a high value [ e.g. 80 dB (PV)] and Record this frequency in megahertz and set its frequency to produce a spurious response. this level in dB (,uV). Note. The method of measurement of spurious response immunity ( selective calling ) requires that the operator search for the frcqucncies of the unwanted signals which may degrnde the output elIor rate, or message accepof the receiver ( e. g., si~::sal-!o-nl,ise ratio, calling prob:;bility, this is ,lorm:illy done by applying only tar.ce rate ). When the rc.c<iver 11,:s an audio outptli,

21

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
the unwanted signal to the receiver at a high level. Then the frequency of the unwanted signal is slowly moved across the frequency band of interest, and the frequencies that produce a change in signal-to-noise ratio are noted. These frequencies are then used in the spurious response immunity ( selective calling ) method of measurement. If the receiver-decoder does not have an audio output, other methods for making the search shall be used. One method of making the search is to use a sensitive detector ( e.g., a communications receiver tuned to the intermediate frequency of the receiver-decoder ) and a probe ( antenna ) which may also be tuned to the i. f. By placing the probe near the later stages of the i. 1. amplifier, the activity of the i. f. amplifier can be monitored. When the above procedure is used, changes in the signal in the i. f. amplifier can be detected and the frequency of the unwanted signal noted.

f) Decrease

the step

attenuator

(9) to a value

which

will

produce

a low

calling

probability

( e.g., less than

10% ). and adjust the step attenuator (9) according to the following

d

Transmit

the SCTS repeatedly

rules:

fd 1) Transmit
however, Adjust

the

SCTS a maximum receiver-decoder

of three fails

times,

terminating the

the

transmission any one

sequence,

if the

to recognize

signal

of those times.

the step attenuator

(9), according fails to recognize

to Step h)2) or h)3), whichever either the first, second Step h)l).

is appropriate. SCTS, increase

4

If the receiver-decoder the attenuation

or third

of (9) by 2 dB, and repeatthe

3) If

the receiver-decoder recognizes the three SCTSs, record the attenuation decibels, decrease the attenuation value by 1 dB, and proceed to Step i)l).

value

in

i) 1) Transmit
however,

Adjust

the transmission sequence, the SCTS a maximum of three times, terminating if the receiver-decoder fails to recognize the signal any one of those times. the step attenuator (9) according to Step i)2) or i)3), whichever is appropriate. fails to recognize record the either the first, second, new attenuation or third SCTS, increase and repeat

2) If the receiver-decoder
the attenuation Step i)l).

of (9) by 1 dB,

value in

decibels,

recognizes the three SCTSs, decrease the attenuation of (9) by 3) If the receiver-decoder 1 dB, record the new attenuation value in decibels, and continue the SCTS transmission procedure in Step i) 1) until the total number of Step i) 1) transmissions is 40. Notes 1. - If the rules do not require
not record an attenuation 2. 3. In these measurements an attenuator value. c!tange after a transmission 40 times. F, is recommenof the SCTS, do

the SCTS is transmitted

A careful study of the example in Figure F 4, page 130, of Appendix ded to avoid the possibility of misunderstanding Steps k) and i).

_i) Steps

e) to i) may be repeated

for other unwanted

signal frequencies.

12.3 Presentation

of results
Ihe average response of the immunity attenuation (selective values calling) recorded in decibels in is: Steps II) and i) of Sub-

a) Calculate
clause

12.2.

b) The spurious

A-B-C-D-E
22

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
where: A js the output B c D E

level of the radio-frequency

signal generator

(6) recorded

in Step e) of Sub-clause 9.2

in dB ( PV ) js the loss of the combining network (7) in decibels is the loss of the combining network (4) in decibels is the average attenuation value calculated in Step a) of this sub-clause in decibels is the reference sensitivity ( selective calling ) in dB ( PV ) determined in Sub-clause

8.3

C) Record

(selective

in a table the unwanted signal frequency and calling) calculated in Step b) of this sub-clause.

the

spurious

response

immunity

d) Record the reference sensitivity (selective calling) in dB (,V), the standard input-signal frequency and the characteristics of the standard unwanted signal used. If 400 Hz is not used to modulate the unwanted signal, record the frequency used. 12.4 Compliance test method
sensitivity (selective calling) determined in Sub-clause 8.3 is required Note. -The value of the reference for this test.

a) Connect b) Modulate (SCTS).

the

equipment

as illustrated signal

in Figure generator

3, with

switches the

in position standard

b. Attenuators coded test signal

(3) and (9) are either the

not connected

or are set to zero attenuation. (2) with

radio-frequency

c) In the absence generator receiver-decoder in Sub-clause

of the

unwanted input

signal,

apply

a signal

from

the radio-frequency

signal

(2) at the

signal frequency so that the level at the input of the is 3 dB in excess of the reference sensitivity (selective calling) determined this value. radio-frequency signal

standard

8.3. Record

d) Adjust the audio-frequency signal generator (5) to modulate the generator (6) with the standard modulation of the unwanted signal. Jf 400 Hz is present in the encoded (see Sub-clause 3.1 I), use a frequency modulate the unwanted signal.

signal and if the unwanted signal is to be modulated between 300 and 500 Hz, other than 400 HZ to

e) Set the frequency of radio-frequency generator (6) to produce a spurious response, and adjust its level to apply to the receiver the specified unwanted signal level. Record the frequency and the level of the unwanted signal. Note. - The test of spurious response immunity (selective calling) requires that the operator search for the
frequencies of the unwanted signals which may degrade the output of the receiver-decoder (c.g. signal to-noise ratio, callirg probability, error ratios or message acceptance ratios). When the receiver has an audio output, this is normally done by applying only the unwanted signal to the receiver-decoder at a high level. Then the frequency of the unwanted signal is slowly moved across the frequency band of interest and the frequencies that produce a change in the signal-to-noise ratio are noted. These frequencies ax then used in the spurious response immunity (selective calling) test. If the receiver-decoder does not have as audio output, other methods for mztking the search should bc used. One method of making the search is to LISA a sensitive detector (e.g. communication receiver tuned to the intermediate frequency of the receiver-deco Isr) and a pickup (antenna) which may also be tuned to the intermediate frequency. By placing the pickup near the later stages of the intermediate frequency amplifix, the activity of this amplifier can be monitored. When the above procedure is used, changes in the signal in the intermediate frequency amplifier can bc detected and the frequency of the unwanted signal noted.

f) Transmit

the SCTS 33 times. If the receiver-decoder fails to recognize seven SCTS's, record that the receiver-decoder does not comply with the spurious immunity (selective calling) specification; otherwise record that it does comply. 23

or more response

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
Note. -

The test may be stopped after seven SCTS's have failed to be recognized.

g) Steps e) and 13. 13.1 Intermodulation

f) may be repeated

for other unwanted

signal frequencies.

immunity ( selective calling )

L)efinition
The ability frequency desired of the receiver-decoder to the wanted of: unwanted reference calling calling). input signals to that cause a wanted calling), input signal, a calling at the output expressed to prevent two unwanted (see signals which have a specific D) from degrading the relationship response signal frequency Appendix

of the receiver-decoder.

It is the ratio,

in decibels,

a) the Ievel of one of two equal-level
which is 3 dB in excess probability of the equal to the standard sensitivity (selective

sensitivity probability,

(selective

to produce

b) the reference
13.2

Method of measurement Notes I. -The
2. -

vaIue of the reference sensitivity required for this measurement.

( selective calling)

determined

in

Sub-clause

8.3 is

A measuring error may result from intermodulation between generators, generator noise, or receiver desensitization. See Appendices A and B for precautions regarding the signal generators. the equipment as illustrated in Figure 3, with

a)

Connect

the switches

in position

b.

b)

Modulate generator

the radio-frequency of (2) at

signal generator

(2) by the SCTS. the radio-frequency level at the input calling) signal of the

c) In the absence

the unwanted signals, the standard input-signal

apply a signal from frequency so that reference may sensitivity produce

receiver-decoder is 3 dB in excess of the in Sub-clause 8.3. Record this value.

(selective

determined ( see adjust signal

d)

Choose a pair of frequencies Appendix D).

fn and f* that

an intermodulation

response ,fn and

e) Adjust
f) Apply
Note. -

the unmodulated radio-frequency signal generator (8) to frequency the signal level to a high value, for example, 80 dB (PV). Record this level. the standard unwanted signal at the frequency ,fr from the generator (6) at the same level as in Step P),

radio-frequency

If 400 Hz is present in the encoded signal, and iT the unwanted signal is modulated with 400 Hz, use some other frequency between 300 Hz and 500 Hz to modulate the unwanted signal ( see Subclause 3.11 ).

g)

Decrease the step attenuator (e.g., less than 10;:). the SCTS repeatedly

(9) to a value and adjust

which

will produce attenuator

a low

calling

probability

/I) Transmit rules:

the step

(9) according

to the following

i) 1) Transmit

the

SCTS a maximum

of three

times,

terminating

the transmission

sequcncc,

however, if the receiver-decoder fails to recognize the signal any one of those times. Adjust the step attenuator (9), according to Step i/2) or i)3), whichever is appropriate. 2) If the receiver-decoder recognize either the first, second of (9) by 2 dB, and repcat Step i)l). 24 fails to or third
SCTS, increase

the attenuation

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

3) If

the receiver-decoder decibels decrease the and proceed

recognizes attenuation to Step j)l).

the three SCTSs, record the of (9) by IdB, record the new

attenuation attenuation

value value

in in

decibels,

.i) 1) Transmit
however, Adjust

the SCTS a maximum if the receiver-decoder the step attenuator

of three fails to

times,

terminating the

the transmission signal any one whichever

sequence,

recognize

of those times.

(9) according to recognize

to Step j)2) or j)3), either the first, record

is appropriate. SCTS, stop the value in

2) If

the receiver-decoder

fails Step j)l>.

second, the

or third

SCTS, decibels,

increase

the

attenuation

of (9) by

ldB,

new

attenuation

and repeat

3) If

the receiver-decoder recognizes the three SCTSs, decrease the attenuation of (9) by 1 dB, record the new attenuation value in decibels, and continue the SCTS transmission in Step j) 1) until the total number of Step j) 1) transmissions is 40.
do not lecord

procedure

Notes 1. _ Ifthe rules do not require an attenuator an attenuation value. 2. _ in this step the YLX.5 is transmitted 3. _ A careful
avoid k)

change after a transmission

of SCTS,

40 times. F is recommended to

study of the example ii> Figure F4, page 130, of Appendix the possibility of misunderstanding Steps i) and j).

Steps d) to j) may be repeated of results average of

for other unwanted

signal

frequencies.

13.3 Presentntion

a) Calculate the clause 13.2.

the

attenuation

values

recorded

in

Steps i) and,j)

of

Sub-

b) The intermodulation

immunity

(selective calling), A -B-C--D--E

in decibels,

is:

where: A is the output level of the radio-frequency signs1 generator (8) ( the output level of the radiofrequency signal generator (6) is at the same level ) recorded in Step e ) of Sub-Claus: 13.2 in dB ( PV ) B is the loss of the combining network (7) in decibels

C is the loss of the combining network (4) in decibels D is the average of the attenuation values ca!culated in Step a) of this sub-clause, in decibels E is the reference sensitivity ( selccrive calling 1 in dB ( PV ) determined in Sub-clause 8.3 c)

Record

In a table the

values

of the

departure and the

from the intermodulation

standard

input

signal

frequency

of

the unwanted signal calculated in Step b!.

frequencies

immunity

(selective

calling)

d) Record the reference sensitivity (selective call ing) in dB (PV), the standard input-signal frequency and the characteristics of the standard unwanted signal used. If 400 PIL is not used to modulate the unwanted signal, record the frequency used. 13.4 Compliu~iw test method

Notes 1. - The value of the r<ferencc sensitivity

(selectiv; c.lllilig) tlztermi-->,kd in Sub-clause 8.3 is rc_qujred for this test. 2. -A meast:ring error may result from i~~!crm~~dulatio:i ber:vce!l generator<, g,;;lcrator ,.ois- or Sre Appendices A and B f:\: prec:tutioils receiver c!escrsitir:itiol?. rcynrc'ing lhc sldiral gc:lerators. the equipment

a)

Connect

as illuctraied not conncc!cd

in

Figure

3, with

switches

in position

b. Attenuators,

(3) and (9) are either

or arc set to zero atienkition. 25

IS 10820( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 b) Modulate (SCTS). c) In the absence of the unwanted signal, apply a signal from the radio-frequency SO that the level at the input signal frequency reference sensitivity (selective calling) signal of the the radio-frequency signal generator (2) with the standard coded test signal

generator (2) at the standard input receiver-decoder is 3 dB in excess of the in Sub-clause d) Choose Appendix 8.3. Record this value.

determined

a pair of frequencies, D). Record

fn and.fr, that may produce

an intermodulation

response

(see

these frequencies.

e) Adjust the unmodulated radio-frequency generator (8) to frequency fnand adjust the signal level to apply the specified unwanted signal level to the receiver-decoder input. Record the frequency f) Apply and the level of the unwanted unwanted signal at signal. the frequency

the standard

frfrom radio-frequency

signal gene-

rator (6) at the same level as in Step e). If 400 Hz is present in the encoded signal and if the unwanted Hz, signal other is to be modulated than 400 Hz, to

(see Sub-clause 3.1 I), use a frequency modulate the unwanted signal. g) Transmit the SCTS 33 times. If the

between

300 and 500

receiver-decoder

fails

to

recognize

seven

or more immu-

SCTS's, record that the receiver-decoder does not comply with the intermodulation nity (selective calling) specification; otherwise record that it does comply.
Nofc. h) The test may be stopped after seven SCTS's have failed to be recognized.

Steps d) through

g) may be repeated

for other unwanted

signal

frequencies.

14.

Sensitivity

reduction under multipath propagation of amplitude and phase

conditions ( selective calling ) signal are created by multipath

Variations

of a radio-frequency

reflections in the propagation medium whenever the transmitting or receiving antennas are in motion. These signal variations are a function of both the antenna velocity and the frequency of the desired radio-frequency signal. Variations of signal amplitude, due to motion, follow a Rayleigh distribution in limited They may, therefore, be simulated by modulating the areas where the direct signal is missing. desired radio-frequency signal. 14.1 Definition The ratio, a) the r.m.s. standard expressed value calling in decibels, of a Rayleigh probability, to calling). of: faded input signal level that is required to maintain the

6) the reference 14.2 Method

sensitivity

(selective

of measurement the equipment simulator). 26 as illustrated in Figure 4 (see Appendix C for details of the

a) Connect Rayleigh

fading

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 ;___--,

II

-_

-t

I
I

L

m
6 ____A

I
I 1

1

2

3

4

6

1 = encoder 2 = radio-frequency 3 4 5 6 = = = =

signal generator

Rayleigh fading simulator step attenuator ( 1 dB steps ) radio-frequency coupling devic- ( if required receiver-decoder

)

FIG. 4. -

Arrangement propagation

for measuring conditions. signal

receiver-decoder generator

sensitivity

reduction

under

multipath

b) Modulate

the radio-frequency

(2) with the SCTS. generator (2) to the Rayleigh fading simu-

C) Apply the output of the radio-frequency
lator (3) at the level specified

signal

by th: manufacturer

of the fading

simulator.

4

Adjust Proceed

the Rayleigh to Step

it is equal

to the r.m.s.

fading simulator to the non-fading setting and adjust the level so that output value that the simulator would have at other velocities. to a specified velocity. will produce a
low

f).
attenuator (4) to a value which calling probability

4 Adjust the velocity of the simulator f) Increase
the step (e.g., less than 10 X). and

d

Transmit rules:

the SCTS repeatedly

adjust the step

attenuator

(4) according

to the following

h) 1) Transmit
however,

the SCTS a maximum if the receiver-decoder

the transmission sequence, of three times, terminating fails to recognize the signal any one of those times.

Adjust the step attenuator (4), according to Step h)2) or h)3, whichever is appropriate. fails to recognize either the first, second or third SCTS, decrease 2) If the receiver-decoder the attenuation of (4) by 2 dB, and repeat Step h)l). recognizes the threz SCTSs, record the attenuation value in 3) If the receiver-decoder decibels, increase the attenuation of(4) by 1 dB, record the new attenuation value in decibels, and proceed to Step i)l).

i)

1) Transmit however, Adjust

the SCTS a maximum if the receiver-decoder

of three times, fails to

terminating the

the signal

transmission any

sequence, times.

recognize

one of those is appropriate.

the step attenuator

(4) according

to Step ij2) or i)3), whichever

fails to recognize either the first, second, or third SCTS, decrease 2) If the receiver-decoder the attenuation of (4) by 1 dB, record the new attenuation value in decibels and repeat Step ijl). 27

IS 10820 ( Part

6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 3) If the
receiver-decoder recognizes the three value SCTSs, increase the
attenuation oP(4) by

1 dB, record procedure
Notes 1. -

the new attenuation

in decibels,
change after

and continue
a transmission

the

SCTS transmission is 40.
of the SCTS, do not

in Step i) 1) until the total number

of Step i) 1) transmissions

If the rules do not require an attenuator record an attenuation value. In this slep the SCTS is transmitted 40 times.

2. -

3. -- A careful study of the example in Figure F4, page 130, of Apperidix thr possibility of misunderstanding Steps h) and i/.

F is recommended

to avoid

j)

Repeat and

Steps e) to i) with the Rayleigh C).

fading

simulator

(3) adjusted

for 100, 50, 20, 10, 5, 2

I km/h (see Appendix
of rt~sdfs

14.3

Prrscntdiow 0)

Calculate clause

the

average 14.2. average 14.2. reduction

of

the

attenuation fading simulator

values

14.2, with the the

Rayleigh of the

recorded in Steps h) and i) of Subset to the non-fading position as in Step d)

of Sub-clause bl Calculate clause

14.2, with the

Raylcigh

attenuation values recorded in Steps /I) and i) of Subfading simulator adjusted for a velocity specified in Step c)

of Sub-clause c) The sensitivity is:

under

multipath
A-B

propagation

conditions

(selective

calling)

in

decibels

where: 4 is the average of th; att?ilultion B is the average of the attenuation

valles calculated values calculated

in Step a) in decibels in Step b) in decibels

rl) Record conditions e) Record

in a table the (selective

velocities

and

the sensitivity

reduction

under

multipath

propagation

calling). input-signal frequency.

the standard

14.4 Complirrrlce test iriethod
Notr. The value of the reference this mLasurement. sensitivity (selective calling) determined in sub-clause 8.3 is require<1 l`or

U/ Connect

the the

equipment simulator).

as

illustrated signal

in Figure generator

4 (see (2) with

Appendix the

C for

details coded

of

the

Rayleigh b) Modulate (SCrS).
C)

fading

radio-frequency

standard

test signal fading simu-

Apply the output of the radio-frequency signal lator (3) at the level specified by the manufacturer the attenuator (4) to produce the specified

generator (2) to the Rayleigh of the fading simulator. signal level at the receiver for mobile to recognize

LI) Adjust

input. or 10 km/h

e) Adjust the velocity control for portable applications. f) Transmit SCTS 33 times.

of the simulator

to 100 km/h fails

applications seven

If the receiver-decoder does not (selective

or more WTS's, under that it

record that the receiver-decoder multipath propagation conditions does comply.
Note. -

comply calling)

with the sensitivity reduction specification; otherwise record

The test may be stopped

after seven SCTS's have fdiled to be recognized.

28

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 successively adjusted g) Repeat Steps e) and f) with the Rayleigh fading simulator and 10 km/h for mobile applications or 5, 2 and 1 km/h for portable applications. 15. 15.1 protection
Dejkition

to 50, 20

from radio-frequency

intermodulation

false operation ( selective calling )

to prevent two unwanted signals (one of which is modurelationship to the wanted signal frequency, lated by the SCTS) having a spceific frequency at the output of the receiver-decoder due to intermodufrom causing unwanted responses receiver-decoder lation (see Appendix D). in decibels, unwanted of: signal that produces the standard calling probability,

The ability of the

It is the ratio, to
b)

expressed

a) the level of the modulated

reference

sensitivity

(selective

calling).
characteristic. For specific

Nuts.. - This method of measurement
modulation 15.2 Metkod Notes 1. 2. processes, of measurement

provides the two-signal intermodulation the modulating signal may have to be inverted.

The value of the reference red for this measurement.

srnaitivity

( selective

calling ) determined between B for

in Sub-clatlse

8.3 is requi_ noise, or the signal

A measuring error may result from intermodulation receiver desensitization. KC Appendices A and generators.

generators,

generator regarding

precautions

a) Connect the equipment

as illustrated

in Figure

3, with the switches an

in position

a. response (see

b) Choose a pair of frequencies.f, and fr that Appendix D). Record these frequencies.
C) Adjust the unmodulated

may produce

intermodulation

with the SCTS and adjust this level.
d) Apply

radio-frequency signal generator (6) to frequency fr modulated the signal level to a high value, for example 80 dB &v). Record

the

unwanted signal

unmodulated generator

input (8) to the

signal

of

frequency network

frfrom
(7) at the

the

output

of the

radio-frequency Step c).

combining

same

level as in

c) Increase the step attenuator (e.g., less than lO"A).

(9) to a value a:ld

which will

produce

a low

calling

probability

f) Transmit
rules: g)

the SCTS repeatedly

adjust the step

attenuator

(9) according

to the following

the transmission sequence, I) Transmit the SCTS a maximum of three times, terminating however, if the receiver-decoder fails to recognize the signal any one of those times. Adjust the step attenuator (9), according to Step g)2) or gj3), whichever is appropriate.
2) lf the receiver-decoder

the attenuation 3) If the decibels, decibels,

fails to recognize either the first, of (9) by 2 dB, and repeat Step gjl). recognizes attenuation to Step Jz)l).
29

second,

or third

SCTS, decrease

receiver-decoder increase the and proceed

the

three

SCTSs,

record

the

attenuation attenuation

value

in

of (9) by 1 dB,

record

the new

value in

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 h) 1) Transmit the SCTS a maximum of three times, terminating the transmission sequence,

however, if the receiver-decoder fails Adjust the step attenuator (9), according 2) If the receiver-decoder the attenuation Step h)l). 3) If the receiver-decoder 1 dB, record procedure
Notes. I. -

to recognize the signal any one of those times. to Step h)2) or h)3), whichever is appropriate. either the the first, second, or third SCTS, decrease and repeat of (9) by new attenuation SCTSs, value in decibels, the the attenuation is 40. of the SCTS, do not

fails to recognize by 1 dB, record the

of(9)

recognizes

three

increase

the new attenuation

value in

decibels, change

and continue

SCTS transmission

in Step h) 1) until the total

number

of Step h) 1) transmissions after a transmission

If the rules do not require an attenuator record an attenuation value.

2. _ In this step the SCTS is transmitted
3. -

40 times. F is recommended to

A careful rtudy of the example in Figure F 3, page 129, of Appendix avoid the poosibility of misunderstanding Steps g) and h).

i) Steps b) to h) may be repeated

for other unwanted

signal frequencies.

15.3

Presentation of results a) Calculate clause 15.2. from radio-frequency intermodulation A-B-C-D-E
where: A IS the signal B is the C is the D is the E is the C) Record output level of the radio-frequency signal generator (6) ( the output of the radio-frequency generator (8) is set at the same level ) recorded in Step c) of Sub-clause 15.2 in dB tcLV) loss of the combining r,etwork (7) in decibels loss of the combining netv.ork (4) in decibels average of the attenuation values calculated in Step a) of this Sub-clause, in decibels reference sensitivity (selective calling) in dB (FV) determined in Sub-clausi: 8.3 in a table

the

average

of

the attenuation

values

recorded

in

Steps g) and (selective

h)

of

Subin

b) The protection decibels is:

false operation

calling)

the

unwanted

the values of the departure signals and the protection calling) in Step b). (selective sensitivity

from the standard input-signal frequency of radio-frequency intermodulation false from in dB (pV) and the standard input-signal

operation

(selective

d) Record the reference frequency. 16. False responses

calling)

due to noise ( selective calling ) decoder to produce false calling responses in the absence of

Receiver selective 16.1 Definition

noise can cause the signals.

calling

The mean time between consecutive to produce
Notes. I. -

false

calling

responses this

(M) is defined by

as the

average the

time time

between required

false calling

responses. time is estimated it by eight. observing responses and dividing

For the purpose

of this measurement,

eight false calling

6.2 Method of rrreasu,*ement
Five per cent of the measurements will require more than 13 times the mean time (M) of the equipment (see Appendix G), if the required measurement time is too long to b: practical, this measurement should not be specified.

30

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
2. This test is applicable only to receivers in which the squelch cat be disabled, receiver noise to reach the decoder.

thus and,

allowing with no

a) Terminate input b/ Adjust

the input

terminals

of the receiver deactivate control,

as specified the receiver if fitted

by the

manufacturer

signal applied receiver gain

to the receiver, and volume

squelch. normal decoder operation, in

for

accordance c) Monitor

with the manufacturer's the operation of the decoder (H) in hours.

instructions. until eight false operations have occurred. Record

the total time interval 16.3 Presentation Calculate af results M, using:

M=H 8
16.4 Compliance receiver noise test method only to receivers the decoder. with antenna manufacturer. This test is applicable to reach

(hours)

in which

the

squelch

can be

disabled

thus allowing

a) For receiver-decoders
as specified be shielded. squelch. by the

terminals, terminate Receiver-decoders to the

the input with an

terminals of the receiver integral antenna should deactivate decoder the receiver operation in

With no input

signal applied

receiver-decoder, for normal

b) Adjust the receiver
accordance

gain and volume control, with the manufacturer's instructions.

if fitted

Test the receiver-decoder for a maximum period calling responses Fin the elapsed time T.
M is the specified

of 8.67 times M.

Note the number

of false

mean time between consecutive T is in the same units as M F is the number of false calling responses

fals:

calling

responses

Record calling)

that the receiver-decoder specification if:

does comply

wtth the false responses

due to noise (selective

1) at the end of the test period, or 2) at any time during

Fis

8 or less, [T] is greater comply than with F+3. the The test is then false responses terminated due to noise

the test period,

Record that the receiver-decoder (selective calling) specification if: 1) at any time during or 2) at any time during Example:

does not

the test period,

F is greater

than 8. The test is then

terminated,

the test period,

F is greater

than

T+3.

The test is then terminated.

An equipment with M = 1.6 h will comply responses are detected been detected after 8 h (5 x I .6). 31

with the specification if only two

if 8 or less false calling responses have

in 13.87 h (8.67 x I .6) or

false calling

IS 10820t Part 61 :1994
IEC Pub 489-6 : I%7 17. 17.1 Signalling Definition The elapsed time from the instant standard coded test signal when the at the radio-frequency receiver until input-signal the modulated (selective by the calling) attack time (selective calling)

is applied

receiver-decoder

successfully

responds. If the response is an audio output, then the signalling attack time is measured when the audio output reaches 507; of the steady-state value. 17.2 Method of measurement the equipment as illustrated in Figure 5.

a) Connect

I

_

,-L-. i 4 !

. 5-6-y-

z-_-1

I ' I I I I I I -

iI

I L---l

I

I=
2-

3= 4= SE 6z I= 8= 9-_

controller (programme) encoder audio-frequency signal generator

(if required)

matching and combining network (if required) radio-frequency signal generator attenuator oscilloscope radio-frequency coupling device (ii` required) receiver-decoder Measuring

FIG. 5. -

arrangement.

b)

Modulate to produce terminals.

the radio-frequency

signal generator

(5) with the SCTS.

C) Adjust the radio-frequency

signal generator (5) to the standard input-signal frequency and a level 30 dB above reference sensitivity (selective calling) at the recaeiver input

d)

Display decoder

the encoder alarm

voltage

on one

trace of a doitble-beam

oscilloscope

and

display
to

the

indicating

signals

on the other beam. signal level . . voltage
until tllc

e) Measure the time interval
radio-frequency

from the instant when the coded " ' of ita rn;rximum signal generator exceeds 50,,, output has reached 50;; of its maximum amplitude. I 1 ^d been detected after 8 h (5 x I .6). 31

applied
alarm

the circuit

._ . ,,

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 18. 18.1 Recovery time ( selective calling ) Dejinition The minimun to ensure time interval that is needed between two successive encoded calling sequences that the decoder will respond correctly to the second sequence. automatically resets.

This characteristic 18.2 Method

can be observed

only when the decoder

of meusurement the equipment specified by the manufacturer generator as illustrated in Figure 5, page 51.

a) Connect b) Modulate c) Adjust

the radio-frequency

signal signal

(5) with the SCTS. (5) to the standard ( selective input-signal frequency and

the radio-frequency

generator

to produce d) Arrange

a level 30 dB above reference for the interval between

sensitivity

calling). from zero to at least

two successive

SCTSs to be variable

twice the recovery
e) With

time stated by the manufacturer.

the time interval set for zero. transmit the two SCTSs repeatedly and observe whether the second SCTS is successfully decoded. After each transmission series, adjust the interval according to the following rules: if the receiver-decoder of the recovery fails to decode the signal, increase the interval by 20% of the value

time stated

by the manufacturer; decodes successes. the signal, do not change the interval until Then record this value of the interval. This is

if the receiver-decoder the recovery

successfully calling).

there have been four consecutive time (selective

19. 19.1

Required protection time ( selective calling ) Definition The maximum other coded signals A
B

time

during

which

a partially

operated

decoder

requires

protection 6).
x B

from

containing
I X

the complementary
A X B

part of the necessary I -I 1 I
X A

code (see Figure

input sgnal

I t:
Protectton time

I
Prolecrlon ,,me 1

I

Response

to

Code burst A n

n

Response 10
Code burst B Alarm J Correct alarm response Case b False alarm response two ~ncc)rrect but complemerrlary where the second transmftted wlthlri reowred protectfon IS the llme to

Case a

IO correclly coded

signal

I

sgnais

I

FIG. 6. -

Protection 33

time.

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 19.2 Method of measurement the equipment used to as illustrated make the in Figure 3, page 35. shall incorporate a means to vary the time

a) Connect

The encoder interval b) Modulate c) Adjust

measurement generator

between

transmission

of the two parts of the SCTS. signal signal (2) with the SCTS. (2) to the sensitivity standard input-signal calling) at the frequency receiver and input

the radio-frequency

the radio-frequency

generator

to produce terminals. d) Arrange e) Increase ]W. f) Transmit

a level 30 dB above reference

(selective

the encoder the interval

to initially to a value

send the first part of an SCTS part of the SCTS. which will produce

and after an probability

interval,

adjust-

able up to recovery

time, send the remaining

a low calling

(e.g. less than

the SCTS repeatedly adjust

and observe

whether

the signal

is successfully rules: the not value

decoded.

After

each transmission, -. -

the interval

according

to the following

if the receiver-decoder the value of protection

(10) fails to decode the signal, time stated by the manufacturer; (IO) successfully consecutive time (selective decodes the successes.

decrease do this

interval change

by 20;;) of the interval interval.
to repeat

if the receiver-decoder until there This is the protection

signal, Record

have been four

of time

calling).

.Norc. _ In inc!ivi!ual-toj?c
this measurement 20.

seque:Gial system having more than two tones, it mr?y be necessary with the time interval in different positions of the SCTS.

Signal-to-residual vidual-tone

output-power ratio (selective
is 0r11y applicable

calling) receivers and decoders employing continuous indie accessible audio-terminals.

This characteristic selective

to

calling

signalling

and having

20.1

Definition The ratio, expressed in decibels, of: with 1 000 Hz plus the continuous calling

a) the receiver output power when a signal modulated selective calling tone is applied to its input, to b) the receiver
tone

output

power when a slgnal

modulated

only by

the continuous

selective

is applied

to its input.

20.2

Method

of measurement the equipment as illustrated test in Figure load and 7. an audio-frequency voltmeter to the output of

a) Connect b) Connect

the audio-frequency

the receiver. c) Apply receiver. The d) Adjust composite modulation
volume

a standard

input

signal

modulated level

with which

1 000 Hz and produces

the continuous SINAD

selective input

calling of the

tone at a level 30 dB above

the

12 dB

to the

should
control

be adjusted
to produce

in accordance
output

with
power

the

manufacturer's

instructions.
the receiver

the reference

at the test load.

34

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

7

r

I

r-----7 I r

I

1 = 1000 Hz generator 2 = audio-frequency signal generator 3 4 5 6 = = = = matching and combining network radio-frequency signal generator attenuator receiver-decoder coupling device test load voltmeter

7 - radio-frequency 8 = audio-frequency 9 = audio-frequency

FIG. 7. -

Measuring

arrangement

for signal-to-residual

output-power

ratio

( selective

calling 1,

e) Remove the standard 1 kHz modulation but not the continuous individual-tone modulation and record the reduction, in decibels, of the power dissipated in the audio-frequency load_ 21. 2 1.1 Impulsive-noise Definition The ability the output of a receiver to prevent impulsive-noise from degrading the desired response at of the receiver. as a ratio of: of the impulsive-noise sensitivity (selective probability, to that causes a wanted signal, calling), to produce a calling tolerance ( selective calling )

It is expressed

a) The median level of spectrum amplitude which is 3 dB in excess of the reference probability b) the reference equal to the standard sensitivity (selective calling calling).

21.2 Method of measurement
Notes. I. The value of the refcrehce sensitivity mcnt. 2. - For information on the characteristics Appendix M. determined and in Sub-clause of 8.3 is required impulse for this measuregenerator, see

calibration

a random

3.5

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 n) Calibrate M and attenuation b) Connect generator generator c) Modulate the record random the impulse generator attenuation the attenuation in Figure and in accordance median spectrum with Sub-clause M3 of Appendix the minimum

minimum M. Increase

amplitude

S and

value

to a high value. 3, page 35, and network connect the random impulse

the equipment to the input

as illustrated of matching A). signal

combining

(7) in place or radio-frequency

(6) (see Appendix the radio-frequency input

generator

(2) with the SCTS. from the radio-freque;lcy in Sub-clause generator (2) of the receiver-decoder is 3 dB

cl) In the absence at the standard

of the impulsive-noise, frequency sensitivity

apply a signal (selective calling)

so that the level at the input

in excess of the reference this value in dB (,uV).

determined

8.3. Record

e) Adjust the random impulse generator to the following settings: - a frequency 100 kHz below the standard input frequency, - an average pulse repetition rate of 100 impulses per second, Note. -

a pulse duration

of 0.2 ps,

a standard deviation of amplitude of 6 dB, a 10 Hz cut-off frequency of the low-pass filter, a minimum
The random that would random

spectrum
impulse impinge

amplitude.
generator settings of simulate a nearby the radio-frequency mobile: land station. environments. noise produced by city traffic settings of the The above

on the antenna

impulse

generator

are not applicable

to other

_f)

Decrease

the random impulse

impulse

generator

attenuator probability

and

decrease

the

step attenuator

(9) to a A

value which will produce of the random g) Transmit rules. h)

a low calling

(e.g. less than

10%). Record

the value

generator. and adjust the step attenuator (9) according to the following

the SCTS repeatedly

terminating the transmission sequence, 1) Transmit the SCTS a maximum of three times, however, if the receiver-decoder fails to recognize the signal,any one of those times. Adjust the step attenuator (9) according to Step h) 2) or h) 3), #hichever is appropriate. 2) If the receiver-decoder the attenuation fails to recognize either the first, second SCTS, the or third record

SCTS,increase
the attenuation value in

of (9) by 2 dB, and repeat

Step I?) 1). new attenuation

3) If the receiver-decoder value in dB, decrease decibels, j) 1) Transmit ho,vevcr, Adjust and proceed

recognizes the first, second and third the attenuation of (9) by 1 dB, record to Stepj) 1).

the SCTS a maximum if the receiver-decoder

the transmission sequence, of three times, terminating fails to recognize the signal any one of these times. to Stepj) 2) orj) the first. attenuation 3, whichever second, is appropriate. SCTS, increase and repeat or third

the step attenuator

(9) according

2) lf the receiver-decoder the attenuation of(9) stepjj I).

either fails to recognize by I dB, record the new

value in decibels,

the three SCTSs, decrease the attenuation of(g) by 3) If the receiver-decoder recognizes and continue the SClX transmission 1 do, record the new attenuation value in decibels, procedure in Stcpj) 1) until the total number of StePj) I) transmission is 40. 36

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
Note. A careful study of the example ia Figure F4, page 130, of Appendix possibility of misunderstanding Steps h) and j). F is recommended to avoid the

21.3 Presentation a) Calculate clause

of results D, the average of the attenuation values recorded in Steps h) and j) of Sub-

2 1.2. tolerance is: dB L pV/MHz -m-___ PV

b) The impulsive-noise

S-D-A+M-B-C-E

where: S is the minimum attenuation median spectrum amplitude recorded in Step a) of Sub-clause D is the attenuation value calculated in Step a) ./I is the attenuation value recorded in Step f) of Sub-clause 21.2 M is the minimum attenuation value recorded in Step a) of Sub-clause 21.2 B is the loss of the combining network (7) in decibels C is the loss of the combining network (4) in decibels E is the reference c) sensitivity (selective calling) in dB (pV)

1

21.2

Record

the impulsive-noise sensitivity

tolerance (selective

(selective

calling),

the

standard

input

signal frequency, impulse generator.

the reference

calling),

and the settings

of the random

SECTION 22. Supplementary

FOUR -

MEASUREMENTS

OF RECEIVER-DECODER (DATA) measurements (data)

RADIO-FREQUENCY definitions for receiver-decoder

PARAMETERS radio-frequency

The definitions listed in Clause 22 apply to the methods of measurement described in Clauses 23 to 30. The definitions listed in Clause 3 apply to the methods of measurement described in Clauses 7 to 21. 22.1 Binary digit; abbrev.: bit (IEV 702-05-03") A member 22.2 Bit error ratio The number 22.3 Bit rate The number 22.4 Bit stream A continuous of erroneous bits received, divided by the total number of bits transmitted. of a set of two elements commonly used to represent information.

of bits transmitted

per unit of time,

expressed

in bit/s, kbit/s or Mbit/s.

series of bits. agreed upon to be used for organization, representation or
func-

22.5 Character (IEV 721-03-09i) A member of a set of elements control of information.
tion controls

Not<,. __ Characters

may be letters, digits, punctuation marks or other symbols and, by extension, such as space shift, carrrage return or line feed contained in a message. 501. IEV Chapter 702, Oscillations,

*International Elcctrotechnical Vocabulary (IEV) [IEC Publication and related devices, is at present under considcrntion. jIEV Chapter 721, Telegraphy, facsimile and data communication,

signals

is being printed.

37

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 22.6 Character string
A character 22.7 or sequence of characters. Comparator (data) Comparator (bit stream or character string) A device capable storing counting comparing ters, and counting of: sequence of bits or characters, that are transmitted, with the reference sequence of bits or charac-

a reference the number

of bits or characters received received

the bits or characters the number of correctly

bits or characters.

Comparator (message) A device or person storing counting a reference the number capable of:

message, of times a message is transmitted, and

comparing the message received with the reference message, counting the number of correctly received messages.

22.8 Data (IEV 721-01-02) Information 22.9 Decoder
A device, which may be intended output signal.

represented

in a manner

suitable

for automatic

processing.

in

the

receiver,

that

translates

the

demodulated

signal

into the

22.10 Encoder (data) A device which translates suitable
-

a group

of input

signals
are:

into

a unique

group

of output

signals

for transmission.
addition addition of functions that may be involved of synchronization bits, of error control bits, conversion: and phase shaping.

Note. - Examples

parallel/serial amplitude

22.11 Erroneous bit, character or message Any decoded bit, or message. 22.12 Error Failure
Note. -

character

or message

that

is not the same as the

transmitted

bit, character

to decode

correctly

the intended

transmitted

bit, character

or message.

Another type of error is the rcczption of data in the absence of any intended transmission (false reception). The mean time between two successtve false receptions is generally so high that a measurement would be impractical; this parameter is estimated by calculation.

22.13

Message (IEV 721-09-o 1) A group a transmitter mitter. 38 of characters and function control sequences which is transferred as an entity from to a receiver, where the arrangement of the characters is determined at the trans-

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 22.14 Message format Description of the elements and their arrangement in a message.
bits, address bits, text, flag

Note. - The arrangement

may include among other items, synchronization bits and additional bits for error correction and/or detection.

Synchronization bits: additional bits which are provided only for the purpose of synchronization. Address: information that identifies the address or identifies the sending unit. Function: information that identifies which of a plurality Text: informatiol? (e.g., character string). Error control detection. bits: bits which are provided solely of responses purpose is to be executed. of error correction and/or

for the

22.15 Peak envelope amplitude In amplitude modulation, the amplitude the envelope of the modulated wave. 22.16 Port representing A place of access to a device or network where energy, or withdrawn, or where the device or network variables may be observed 22.17 Heference test signal error ratio reference ratios apply for an equipment measured with the standard coded (data). error ratio (data) of erroneous transmitted. bits, characters or messages to the total number of data, may be supplied or measured. of one radio-frequency oscillation at the crest of

Tne following a) Reference

The ratio is the number bits, characters

or messages error

b) The reference Reference Reference Reference 22.18 Standard error error

ratios are: 0.01 or string) 0.01 or 0.2 1% 1%

ratio (bit stream) ratio (character

error ratio (message)

or 20:{

base band test signals of the measurements described in this standard the following qualifications

For the purpose apply: a) Reference A binary
Note. -

sequence sequence

of bits pattern of 511 bits which are generated in a pseudo-random
binary sequence

order,
(PRBS) pattern,

For details concerning the gencration of the pseudo-random see CCJTT Fascicle VIII. 1, Recommendation V 52. sequence of characters

b)

Reference

A character sequence pattern in a specified pseudo-random c) Reference A sequence 22.19 Standard sequence

comprising order.

all

elements

of a specified

character

set arranged

of messages of the specified SCTS ( data ) of a message.

of three transmissions

coded test signal (data):

The radio-frequency signal applied to a data receiver-decoder that simulates the output transmitter which is modulated by one of the following standard base band test signals:
39

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 the reference the reference the reference sequence sequence sequence of bits, or of characters, of messages, specification. or

at the bit rate defined

in the data equipment

phase-shift angles), shall be smal1 All parameter tolerances (e.g. rise times, tone frequencies, enough to ensure that the results are not significantly influenced. In addition to any other parameters, the equipment specification shall define the appropriate modulation, or full, reduced or variable carrier or values for: the modulation depth of double-sideband deviation

the frequency/phase the amplitude modulation,

of angle modulation,

relationship

to the carrier

of single-sideband,

-

the frequency modulation.

relationship

to the

carrier

of single-sideband,

full,

reduced

or variable

carrier

22.20

Standard train of standard coded test signal (bit stream or character string)
Note. -

The length of the standar.1 trains have been chosen in order to achieve a dispersion the measurement of reference sensitivity and of *2 dB for all other measurements.

ofi1

dB for

For all measurements propagation conditions

and

compliance

tests,

except string),

sensitivity the standard

reduction trains are:

under

multipath

(bit stream

or character

For bit stream For character
Note. -

string

2 556 bits of SCTS 2 556 characters of SCTS
reliability IS obtained if the transmrssion is

For the measurements in this standard, the required stopped after 26 bit or character errors are detected. the measurement

For

of sensitivity string), the standard

reduction trains are:

under

multipath

propagation

conditions

(bit

stream

or character

For bit stream: 2 556 bits of SCTS or 43 200 x (bit rate) km/h x MHz whichever is greater string: 2 556 characters or 43 200 x (character rate) x (bits per character) km/h x MHz whichever
For

For character

of SCTS

is greater. sequence this length may be rounded off to the smallest integer of bits or of characters that exceed the above values.
after

ease of measurement,

multiple

of

the reference
Note. -

For the measurements in this standard, the transmission may be stopped bit error or 00.1 x character plus 1 character error arc detected.

0.01 ,: bit:; p{~!s

40

. IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 22.21 Standard lation unwanted signal (dota) unwanted signal for measuring spurious response immunity and intarmoduis not modulated. unwanted signal rejection for measuring is continuously in a pseudo-random adjacent radio-frequency signal selectivity or with

The standard immunity

The standard co-channel

interference

modulated order.

with a binary The modulation

sequence is identical

pattern

of 32 767 bits which the modulation 22.22 Telegraphy A form recorded ~o,tes. 1. on

is generated

characteristics (IEV 721-01-06)

of the system transmitter.

of telecommunication arrival as a graphic

in

which

the the

transmitted transmitted

information information use.

is intended may

to

be be

document;

sometimes

presented in alternative

form or may be stored

for subsequent

A graphic document records infarmatioil in a permanent form and is capable of being filed and consulted; for example it may take the form of written or printed matter or of a fixed image.
Convention (Nailobi 1982).

2. -This is the definition given in the International Telecommunication 3. -- Telegraphy does not include television and videogrnphy.

22.23

Test data source (message) A device that will: 1) generate 2) repeat the message the message in the form of electrical for a specified number signals, intervals.

of times and at specified

23. 23.1 i 23.2

Reference sensitivity Dejinition

(data)

The radio-frequency level of the standard coded which will result in the reference error ratio (data). Method of measurement for bit stream or chnracter

test signal (data),

at a specified

frequency,

string b. Test

a) Connect the equipment as illustrated in Figure 3 with the switches in position equipment items (!) and (2) and a comparator are required (see Sub-clause 22.7). b) Adjust the frequency nominal frequencies. c) Using encoder of the radio-frequency signal generator (2) to one of

the specified

(1) modulate (bit stream

radio-frequency or character stringj signal to string)

signal string)

generator

(2) with the the standard to the value

standard coded of the

train test

of

coded test signal (SCTS) (bit stream d) Adjust sensitivity e) Transmit f) Calculate

to generate

signal

or character

(see Sub-clauses

22.18, 22.19 and 22.20). rcfcrcncc specification.

the level of the input (bit stream the standard

the receiver-decoder

or character train

stated in the equipment 22.20).

of SCTS's (see Sub-clause ratio. reference the and proceed error ratio

and note the error ratio equals the Record string)

g) If the error stream

(bit stream signal

or character reference 23.3. character

string),

terminate (bit

the measurement. or character

radio-frequency

level as the

sensitivity

to Step b) of Sub-clause error ratio (bit stream or

If the error the input

ratio is less than reference

string),

decrease

signal

level to the receiver-decoder 41

by 0.5 dB.

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 If the error increase ratio is greater signal than the reference error ratio (bit stream or character string),

the input

level to the receiver-decoder

by 0.5 dB. ratio have been obtained, string). Record the input is just greater than the

h) Repeat Steps e) through g) until two consecutive values of error which bracket the reference error ratio (bit stream or character signal level, V, in dB (pV> that corresponds reference 23.3 Presentation a) Calculate
whcl c: V is 111~ value of input signal level to the receiver-decoder recorded in Step

to the error string). string or character

ratio

which

error

ratio (bit stream bit stream sensitivity

or character or character (bit stream

of results,for the reference

string),

S, as follows:

S = V + 0.25 in dB (,V)
h) of Sub-clause 23.2.

b) Record character 23.4 Method

the

input

signal

arrangement

used,

string)

and the reference for message as of the

sensitivity

characteristics of the SCTS (bit stream or character string).

(bit

stream

or

of measurenw~t the

a) Connect equipment

equipment

illustrated

in

Figure

3 with the generator

switches (2) to

in

position

b. Tebt

items (I), (2) and (3) are required radio-frequency

(see Sub-clause signal

22.7). one of the specified frequency and at a

b) Adjust the frequency nominal frequencies.
C)

Apply to the attenuator level of approximately

(3) a signal having the standard input-signal 60 dB (t&V). Record this level as A.

ti) Using encoder (1) modulate the radio-frequency signal generator (2) with the sequence of messages to generate the standard coded test signal (SCTS) (message) clauses e) Adjust greater). 22.18 and 22.19). step attenuator (3) to a value which will produce a high error

reference (see Sub-

ratio (e.g. .50:/, or

the transmission sequence if ,f) 1) Transmit the SCTS a maximum of three times, terminating the receiver-decoder fails to recognize the SCTS any one of those times. Adjust the step attenuator (3) according to Step ,f) 2) or f) 3), whichever fails to recognize either the first, 1). SCTS's record the the neN attenuation attenuation value in is appropriate. second or third SCTS, decrease ?) If the receiver-decoder the attenuation 3) If the decibels, decibels, g) 1) Transmit attenuator

of (3) by 2 dB and repeat Step.fl recognizes to Step g) 1). a maximum the three

receiver-decoder increase the and proceed SCTS

the attenuation

of (3) by 1 dB, record of three times,

value in sequence the step decrease repeat

terminating

the transmission Adjust SCTS,

if the receiver-decoder (3) according 2) If the receiver-decoder the attenuation Step g)l). 1 d-3, record h) Continue See Step h).

fails to recognize fails to recognize

the SCTS any one of those times. is appropriate. or third in the value either the first, second

to Step g) 2) or g/3), whichever the new attenuation three attenuator 42 SCTS's.

of (3) by 1 dB, record recognizes the

decibels, attenuation

and

3) If the receiver-decoder Steps g)l),

increase

of (3) by

the new attenuation

value in decibels,

and repeat

Step gjl).

See Step h). 20 times.

gj2) and gj3) until

values have been recorded

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IBC Pub 489-6 : 1987 23.5 Presentation a) Calculate of results jbr message the average of the attenuation values recorded in decibels in steps f ,13), g)2) and

g)3) of Sub-clause b) The reference

23.4. (message) is: A-B dB(pV)

sensitivity

where: ,4 is the value recorded in Step c) of Sub-clause 23.4. B is the average of the attenuation values calcukted in Step a) in decibels. c) Record

the input reference sensitivity test method

signal arrangement (message). Sensitivity as illustrated (data) in

used,

characteristics

of the

SCTS (message)

and

23.6

Compliance

a)

Connect equipment

the equipment
items (I) and

Figure

3 with the (see 22.7). signal

switches

in position

b, using

test

(2) and a comparator of the radio-frequency

b/ Adjust
nominal

the

frequency

generator

(2) to one of

the specified

frequencies. encoder (l), modulate radio-frequency signal generator (2) with the the standard train of

c)

IJsing

coded test signal (data) or with the specified message to signal (data) (SCTS) ( see 22.14, 22.18, 22.19 and 22.20).

generate

standard

coded test

d)

Adjust sensitivity

the level of the input (data). the standard messages. train

signal

to the receiver-decoder

to the specified

value

of reference

e) Transmit
specified

of SCTS's for bit

stream

or

character

string

(see 22.20), or 18

If there are 25 or less errors

for

bit stream

or

character

string,

or three

or

less

errors for

message, record that the receiver-decoder otherwise record that it does not comply. Record specified
24.

does comply used,

with the sensitivity of the

(data) specification, and the

the

input

signal (dataj.

arrangement

characteristics

SCTS (data)

sensitivity

Acceptable Definition

radio-frequency

displacement

(data)

24.1

The ability receiver-decoder frequency.

of a receiver-decoder when the input

to minimize signal

the degradation is displaced

of the desired from the

response specified

of the nominal

frequency

It is the smaller

of the two possible

radio-frequency sensitivity

displacements

that causes an input an error ratio equal

signal to the

which is 6 dB in excess of the reference reference error ratio (data).
Note. -

(data) to produce

Radio-frequency displacement is an absolute value and an increase the radio-frequency away from rhe nominal frequency.

in the displacement

is to move

24.2

Method
Nofe. -

of measurement

for bit stream and character
(bit stream

string
or character stxi!ly) determined in Sub-clause 23.3

The value of the reference sensitivity ia required for this mensuremznt.

43

IS 10820 ( Part 6 1 : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : lh7 a) Connect equipment the equipment as illustrated in Figure 3 with the switches in position (see Sub-clause 22.7). (2) to one of the b. Test specified

items (1) and (2) and a comparator of the radio-frequency

are required signal

8) Adjust the frequency nominal frequencies.

generator

C) Using encoder (I) modulate coded test signal (bit stream (SCTS) (bit stream Adjusl reference Adjust fransmit Calculate

radio-frequency signal generator or character string) to generate string) (see Sub-clauses

(2) with the the standard

standard train of coded test signal

or character

22.18, 22.19 and 22.20). to a value 6 dR in Sub-clause in excess of the 23.3. radio-frequency

the level of the input sensitivity the input signal

signal to the

receiver-decoder string) stated

(bit stream frequency train

and character displacement string)

determined

to the value of the acceptable in the equipment 22.20).

displacement

(bit stream

and character

specification.

the standard

of SCTS's (see Sub-clause ratio.

and note the error

If the error ratro equals: the reference error ratio (bit stream and character string,) terminate Record the radio-frequency displacement F, as the acceptable radiothe measurement. frequency displacement (bit stream and character string), and proceed to Step b) of Subclause 24.3. If the error increase the If the error decrease the ratio is less than the reference error ratio (bit stream and character frequency displacement by 100 Hz. ratio is greater than the reference error ratio (bit stream and character frequency displacement by 100 Hz. string], string),

Repeat Steps f) through h) until two consecutive values of error ratio have been obtained which bracket the reference error ratio (bit stream and character string). Record the frequency displacement, D, that corresponds to the error ratio which is just greater than the reference error ratio (bit stream and character frequency string). displacement on the other side of the specified Repeat Steps e) through nominal frequency. 24.3 Presentation a) Calculate where:
D is the

i) for the

of results for bit stream the upper

nnd character

string displacement,
F, as follows:

and lower radio-frequency F = D - 50 Hz

magnitude of the frequency displacement radio-frequency displacement

record-d in Step i) or j) of Sub-clause 24.2. is the smallest value of F. the SCTS (bit stream and (bit stream and character
at other levels than the 6 dB

b) The acceptable
c) Record

character string).
Note. -

the input signal arrangement used, characteristics of string) and the acceptable radio-frequency displacement is suitable
24.2. for making measurements

This method of measuremen,
increase

per Step of d)Sub-clause

24.4 Method
Note. -

of measuremem

for message
sensitivity (message) determined in Sub-clause 23.5 is required for this

The value of the reference measurement,

a) Connect equipment

the equinment

as illustrated

in

Figure

3 with

the

switches

in position 22.7).

b.

Test

items (1) and (2) and a comparator 44

are required

(see Sub-clause

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 JEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 b) Adjust nominal the frequency of the radio-frequency signal generator (2) to one of the specified

frequencies. radio-frequency the standard signal generator (2) with the reference coded test signal (SCTS) (message) sequence (see Sub-

C) Using encoder (1 j modulate of message to generator clauses 22.18 and 22.19).

d) Adjust the level of the input signal to the receiver-decoder to a value 6 dB in excess of the reference sensitivity (message) determined in Sub-clause 23.5. e) Increase the input signal frequency displacement to a value which will produce a high error

ratio (e.g., 50% or greater).

.f) 1) Transmit
input

the SCTS a maximum fails to signal frequency

of three times, recognize the according

terminating SCTS any to one Step

the of

transmission those times.

sequence if
Adjust the

the receiver-decoder appropriate. 2) If the receiver-decoder input signal frequency

displacement

f) 2) or f) 3), whichever is
or third SCTS, Step f) I). decrease the

fails

to recognize

the first,

second

displacement

by 200 Hz and repeat

3) If the receiver-decoder recognizes the three SCTS's, record the input signal frequency, increase the input signal frequency displacement by 100 Hz, record the new frequency, and proceed g) to Step gJ I). seqL[ence if Adjust whichever the is

1) Transmit the SCTS a maximum of three times, terminating the transmission the receiver-decoder fails to recognize the SCTS any one of those times. input signal appropriate. frequency displacement according to Step g) 2) or g) 3,

2) If the receiver-decoder the input signal Step g) 1). See Step hl. 3) If the receiver-decoder displacement h) Continue 40 times. i) Repeat nominal

fails

to recognize displacement

either the first, by 100 Hz, record

frequency

second or third SCTS, decrease the new frequency and repeat

recognizes

the

three SCTS's

increase

the input

signal frequency

by 100 Hz, record

the new frequency frequency

and repeat displacement

Step g) 1). See Step 12). values have been recorded

Steps g) I), g) 2) and g) 3) until

Steps e) through frequency.

h) for the frequency

displacement

on the other side of the specified

24.5

Presentation a) Calculate Stepsf) b) Record

of results for message the average of the upper and lower 23.4. radio-frequency these values. (message) as the smaller of the values and the displacements recorded in

3), g) 2) and g) 3) of Sub-clause the acceptable radio-frequency arrangement
is suitable

Record

displacement used,

found in Step a). c) Record the input signal reference
Note. -

characteristics

of the SCTS
at other

(message)

sensitivity

(message).
for making measurements levels than the 6 dB

This method of measuremeilt increase per Step d).

45

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 24.6 Compliance test method Acceptable radio-frequency
(data)

dispIacement

(data) for this

Note. - The value of the reference sensitivity
measurement. a) Connect the equipment

determined

in 23.3 or 23.5 is required

as illustrated

in

Figure

3 with the switches
(see 22.7).

in position

b, using test

equipment
b)

items (1) and (2) and a comparator the frequency of the radio-frequency

Adjust nominal

signal

generator

(2)

to one Of the

specified

frequencies. encoder (data) (1), modulate or radio-frequency with the specified signal generator message to (2) with the generate standard train of

c) Using signal d) Adjust

coded test signal (data)

the standard

coded test

(SCTS) (see 22.14, 22.18, 22.19 and 22.20). signal to the receiver-decoder in 23.3 or 23.5. to the stream upper or specified value of the acceptable string (see 22.20), or 33 to a value 6 dB in excess of the

the level of the input sensitivity the input (data)

reference e) Adjust f) Transmit specified

determined

signal

frequency train

displacement for bit

radio-frequency

displacement

(data). of SCTS's character

the standard messages.

g) If there are 25 or less

errors

for

bit

stream

or

character

string,

or

six or less errors

for

message, record that for this displacement the receiver-decoder does comply with the upper specified acceptable radio-frequency displacement (data) specification, othewise record that it does not comply. h) Repeat steps e) through nomimal frequency. g) for the frequency displacement on the lower side of the specified

i) If it was recorded in step g) that the receiver-decoder does comply for both displacements, then record that it does comply with the acceptable radio-frequency ment (data) specification, j) Record the input value of the acceptable 25. Adjacent radio-frequency 25.1 Definition otherwise record used, that it does not comply. characteristics signal arrangement radio-frequency

frequency displace-

of the SCTS (dataj and the specified

displacement (data)

(data).

signal selectivity

`The ability of the receiver-decoder to minimize the degrading effect of an unwanted adjacent signal on the desired response at the output of the receiver-decoder. It is the ratio, expressed in decibels of:

a) the level Of an Unwanted excess of the reference error ratio (data) to b) the reference 25.2 Method Note. sensitivity

input signal that causes a wanted input signal, which is 3 dB in sensitivity (data), to produce an error ratio equal to the reference

(data). string
and character string) determined in Sub_

of measurement

for bit stream and character

The value of the rcf`rence sensitivity (bit clause 23.3 is required for this measuremeilt. 46

stream

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

a)

Connect

the

equipment

as illustrated

in

Figure

3 with

the

switches

in position (see

b.

Test 22.7).

equipment items (l), (2), (4), (5) and (6) an d a comparator Item (5) is replaced with an unwanted signal encoder.

are required

Sub-clause

b) Adjust the frequency
nominal frequencies. encoder

of the

radio-frequency

signal

generator

(2) to one

of the specified

C) Using

(1) modulate

radio-frequency

signal

generator

(2) with

the standard

train

of

coded test signal (bit stream or character string) to generate the standard coded test signal (SCTS) (bit stream or character string) (see Sub-clauses 22.18, 22.19 and 22.20). d) In the absence of the unwanted signal, adjust the wanted signal level at the input of the matching and combining network (4) to be 3 decibels in excess of the reference sensitivity
(bit stream

and character network

string)

determined

in Sub-clause

23.3 plus the loss of the matching

and combining Using adjacent encoder

(4). Record

this value as R in dB (,uV). generator at the 22.21). upper (6) with the (lower) standard specified unwanted frequency signal of the

(5) modulate the signal

radio-frequency signal (see Sub-clause

(data) to generate unwanted

unwanted

Adjust the level to the input of the matching and combining network (4) to equal the reference sensitivity (bit stream and character string) multiplied by the ratio of the adjacent radio-frequency signal selectivity (bit stream and character string), stated in the equipment specification plus the loss of the matching and combining network (4).

f) d

Transmit Calculate

the standard

train

of SCTS's (see Sub-clause ratio.

22.20).

and note the error

h) If the error

ratio equals the reference error ratio (bit stream or character string), terminate the measurement. Record the radio-frequency signal level, G, in dB (PV), and proceed to Step b) of Sub-clause 25.3. If the error ratio is less than the reference error ratio (bit stream or character increase the unwanted input signal level to the receiver-decoder by 0.5 dB. string), string),

If the error ratio is greater than the reference error ratio (bit stream or character decrease the unwanted input signal level to the receiver-decoder by 0.5 dB.

i) Repeat Steps e) through
which bracket

h) until two consecutive the reference error ratio (bit stream

values of error ratio have been obtained or character string). Record the unwanted ratio which is just greater than signal.

input signal level, in dB (pV> that corresponds to the error the reference error ratio (bit stream or character string).

j) Repeat Steps e) through
Note. -

i) for the lower specified
is sllitable

frequency

of the adjacent

unwanted

This method of measurernext unwanted signal frequency.

for mlking

measurements

at other than the specified

25.3

Presentation a) Calculate

of results for bit stream and character the level of the unwanted G=U-0.25-L

string G, as follows:

radio-frequency, in dB (pV)

where: D is the unwanted b) Calculate

input signal level to the receiver decoder recorded L is the loss of matching and combi:-ing network (4)

in Steps i) or j) of Sub-clause

25.2

the upper

and the lower adjacent S=GR in decibels 47

radio-frequency

signal selectivities,

S, as follows:

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 where: G is the value recorded in Step hJ of Sub-clause 25.2 or in Step a) of Sub-clause
R the reference sensitivity (bit stream and character combining network (4) recorded in Step d) of Sub-clause
is

string) 25.2.

plus

the

25.3 loss of the

matching

and

c) Record

the adjacent the input adjacent

radio-frequency signal arrangement signals

signal above.

selectivity

(bit stream

and

character

string)

as or

the smaller d) Record character unwanted

of the values of S calculated string ), the characteristics

used, the characteristics of the unwanted sensitivity signal,

of the SCTS the frequencies

( bit stream string ).

of the specified

and the reference

( bit stream

and character

25.4 Method of measurement for message core. _ The value of the reference sensitivity ( message ) determined in Sub-clause 24.5 is requirx! for this measurement. a) Connect the equipment as illustrated in Figure 3 with the switches in position b. Test equipment items (l), (2), (4), (5), (6) and (9) and a comparator 22.7 >. Item (5) is replaced with an unwanted signal encoder. b) Adjust the frequency of the radio-frequency signal generator are required (2) to one ( see Sub-clause of the specified

nominal frequencies. C) Using encoder (I), modulate radio-frequency signal generator (2) with the reference sequence of messages to generate the standard coded test signal (SCTS) (message) ( see Sub-clauses 22.18 and 22.19). d) In the absence of the unwanted signal, adjust the signal level at the input of the matching and combining network (4) to be 3 dB in excess of the reference sensitivity (message) determined in Sub-clause 23.5, plus the, loss of the matching and combining network (4). Record this value as R in dB (,uV). e) Using encoder (5) modulate radio-frequency generator (6) with the standard unwanted frequency of (e.g. 100 dB signal (data) to generate the unwanted signal at the upper (lower) specified the adjacent unwanted signal (see Sub-clause 22.21). Apply a high level signal (PV) to the attenuator (9). Record this value, A, in dB (pV>. f) Adjust greater). g) 1) Transmit attenuator the SCTS a maximum fails to (9) according of three times, terminating the SCTS any the transmission sequence if the receiver-decoder recognize one of those times. Adjust is appropriate. second or third SCTS, increase the step the step attenuator (9) to a value which will produce a high error

ratio (e.g.50';/, or

to Step g)2) or gj3,) whichever

2) If the receiver-decoder fails to recognize either the first, the attenuation of (9) by 2 dB and repeat Steps g) 1).

3) If the receiver-decoder recognizes the three SCTS's, record the attenuation value in decibels, decrease the attenuation of (9) by 1 dB, record the new attenuation value in decibels, and proceed to Step h) 1). h) 1) Transmit the SCTS a maximum of the three times, terminating the transmission sequence if the receiver-decoder fails to recognize the SCTS any one of those times. Adjust attenuator (9) according to Step h)2) or h)3). whichever is appropriate. 2) If the receiver-decoder fails to recognirc either the first, second or third SCTS, the step
incrcxe

the attenuation of (9) by 1 dB, record the new attenuation value in decibels, and repeat Step h)l). See Step ii. 3) If the receiver-decoder recognizes the three SCTS's, decrease the attenuation of (9) by 1 dB, record the new attenuation value in decibels, and repeat Step h)l). Se:: Step i). i) Continure Steps /r)l), hj2) and h)3) until attenuator values have been recorded 40 times. j) Repeat Steps e) through i) for the lower specified 48 frequency of the adjacent unwanted signal.

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 25.5 Presentation a) Calculate of results for messaage the average of the attenuation values frequency values recorded in decibels in Steps g)3), k)2) and signal. signal. S, as follows:

h)3) of Sub-clause b) Calculate h)3) of Sub-clause c) Calculate where:
A is the value

25.4 for the upper of the attenuation

of the adjacent recorded of the adjacent

unwanted unwanted selectivity,

the average

in decibels

in Steps g)3), 1112) and

25.4 for the lower frequency

the upper and lower adjacent radio-frequency signal S =. A-B-C-R in decibels

recorded in dB (,V) in Step e) of Sub-clause 25.4 B is the average of the attenuation values calculated in Step a) in decibels C is the loss of the matching and combining network (4) in decibels R is the reference sensitivity (message, ~ILIS the loss of the matching recorded in Step d) of Sub-clause 25.4 the adjacent above. radio-frequency signal selectivity (message)

and combining as the smaller

network (4) of the values the

cl) Record

of S calculated

e) Record the input signal arrangement used, the characteristics and the frequencies characteristics of the unwanted signal, adjacent signals and reference sensitivity (message). 25.6 Compliunce
Note. -

of the SCTS (message), of the specified

unwanted

test method the

Adjacent
reference

radio-frequency
sensitivity (data)

signal selectivity
determined

(data)
for this

The value of measurement.

in 23.3 or 23.5 is required

CI) Connect

the equipment

as illustrated

ment items (I), (2), (4), (5), (6) and with an unwanted signal encoder.

in Figure 3 with the switches in position b. Test equipa comparator are required (22.7). Item (5) is replaced

b) Adjust the frequency
nominal frequencies.

of the

radio-frequency

signal generator

(2) to

one

of the specified

c.) Using encoder (l), modulate

radio-frequency signal generator (2) with the standard train of coded test signal (data) or with the specified message to generate the standard test signal (data) (SCTS) ( see 22.14, 22.18, 22.19 and 22.20).

Adjust the wanted signal level at the input of the matching and combining network (4) to be 3 dB in excess of the reference sensitivity (data) determined in 23.3 or 23.5, plus the loss of the matching and combining network (4). Record this value in dB (rV).

e) fl

IJsing

encoder

(5), modulate

radio-frequency

generator

(6) with the standard adjacent

unwanted

signal

(data) to generate Adjust equal the reference

the unwanted signal sensitivity

signal at the upper input (data) determined signal for bit stream

specified

frequency increased by

(see 22.21). network (4) to the specified

the unwanted

level at the

of the selectivity stream or

matching (data) or

and combining
plus

in 23.3 or 23.5,

value of the adjacent radio-frequency and combining network (4).

the loss of the m:ltching string or ( set 22.20), or 33

sl Transmit
specified

the standard messages.

train errors

of SCTS's for bit

character string,

h)

If there are 25 or less
message, record that

character

six or less error::, fog doer, comply with

the adjacent

for the upper specified frequency the receiver-decoder radio-frequency signal selectivity (data) specificalion. 49

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 i) Repeat j) steps e) through h) for the lower specified adjacent frequency. both specified signal selecti-

If it was recorded in step h) that the receiver-decoder does comply for frequencies, then record that it does comply with the adjacent radio-frequency vity (data) specification, otherwise record that it does not comply. of the signal

k)

Record the input signal arrangement used, characteristics sensitivity (data) and the specified adjacent radio-frequency interference rejection (data) interference rejection unwanted (data) (data) is a special using the method

SCTS (data), the selectivity (data).

reference

26.

Co-channel selectivity frequency

Co-channel

c-c LIYeof adjacent given

radio-frequency in Clause signal.

signal

(data).

It is measured

of measurement

25 with the

of the standard selectivity

signal (data) the same as the wanted

27.

Adjacent-channel When mobile frequency signal

radio services use discrete channel spacings, selectivity (data) measured for a signal spacing

the value of adjacent radioequal to the discrete channel

spacing may be quoted as the value of the adjacent-channel selectivity (data). Acljacent ,-hannc] selectivity (data) is measured using the method of measurement given in Clause 25, with the frequency of the standard unwanted signal displaced one channel space. 28. 28.1 Spurious response immunity (data) Definition The ability of the receiver-decoder to prevent a single unwanted degrading the desired response. It is the ratio, expressed in decibels, of: a) the level of an unwanted input excess of the reference sensitivity error to h) the reference 28.2 sensitivity (data).
string) dctermil?ed i!i Sub_

spurious

signal

fron;

signal that causes a wanted input signal, which is 3 dB in (data), to produce an error ratio equal to the reference

ratio (data),

Method of measurement for bit streum and character string Nofc. _ The value of the rLf:rcnc.: sensitivity (bit stream and character cla~sc 23.3 is requll-ed for this n:easurcment. a) Connect equipment b) Adjust nominal c) Using the

equipment as illustrated in Figure 3 with the switches in position b. Test are required (see Sub-clause 22.7). items (l), (2), (4) and (6) and a comparrtor of the radio-frequency signal generator (2) to one of the specified

the frequency frequencies.

encoder

(1) modulate (bit stream

radio-frequency or character string)

signal string)

generator to generate

(2) with

the

st:indard

train

of

coded test

signal

the standard

coded test signal of the matching (bit stream and and cotnbilling of the

(SCTS) (bit stream d) In the absence and combining character network e) Adjust

or character

(see Sub-clauses

22.18, 22.19 and 22.20).

of the unwanted signal, adjust the signal level at the input network (4) to be 3 dB in excess of the reference sensitivity

string) determined in Sub-clause 23.3, plus the loss of the matching (4). Record this value as R in dB (,u\`). radio-frequency generator (6) to a frequency signal 50 frequency that may degrade

the response

receiver-decoder.

Note the unwanted

(see Sub-clause

22.21).

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
Adjust reference

the level to the sensitivity immunity

input

of the

matching

and string), string),

combining multiplied stated in (4).

network by the ratio the

(4) to

equal the

(bit stream and character (bit stream and character and combining

of the spurious specification,

response

equipment

plus the loss of the matching

network

Note. - The method of measurement

of spurious response immunity requires that the operator search for the frequencies of the unwanted signals which may degrade the output of the rccciver (e.g., signal-to-noise ratio, or error ratio). When the receiver has an audio output, this is normally done by applying only the unwanted signal to the receiver at a high level. Then the frequency of the unwanted signal is slowly moved across the frequency band of interest and the frequerxies that produce a change in the signal-to-noise are then used in the spurious response immunity method ratio are not';d. of measurement. These frequcneics

If the receiver-decoder does not have an audio output, other methods for making the search should be used. One method of making the search is to use a sc,isitivc dctectol- (e.g., a communication receiver tuned to the intelmediate frequency of the receiver.dccoderj and a pickup (antenna) which may also be tuned to the intermediate frequency. By placing the pickup near the later stages of the intermediate frequency arnplifizr the aclivity of this amplifier can be monitored. When the above procedure is used, changes in the signal in the intermediate frequency amplifier can be detected and th,: ilcqucncy of the lliiwantdd signal noted.

f) d

Transmit

the standard

train

of SCTS's ( see Sub-clause ratio. the

22.20).

Calculate

and note the error Record 28.3.

h) If the error ratio equals the reference
the measurement. Step b) of Sub-clause

error ratio (bit stream or radio-frequency signal level, G,

character string), terminate in dB (PV), and proceed to

If the error ratio is less than the reference error ratio (bit stream or character the unwanted input signal level to the receiver-decoder by 0.5 dB. If the error
decrease

string),

increase string),

ratio is greater
input

than the
signal

reference

error

ratio (bit stream or character by 0.5 dB.

the unwanted

level to the receiver-decoder

values of error ratio have been obtained i) Repeat Steps e) through 12) until two consecutive which bracket the reference error ratio (bit stream or character string). Record [he unwanted input signal level, U in dB (PV), that corresponds the refzrence error ratio (bit stream or character .il Repeat Steps LJ) through i) for response of the receiver-decoder. 28.3 presentation
of

to the string). signal

error ratio which frequencies

is just grcatcr degrade

than the

other

unwanted

that may

resuhs.for

bit stream and character string level G, as follows: G = U-O.25 in dB (pV)
dec.)~ltzr r.zc.)rdzd i,l Step i) ori) of Sub-clause signals ;is follows: 26.2.

4

Calculate

the radio-frequency

where: U is the unwanted

input signal level to Lhc izczivzr

bl Calculate

the spurious

response

immunity, S = G-R

S, for each of the unwanted in decibels

where: G is the value recorded in S~cp h) of Sub-clause 23.2 01 in Slcp n) of Sub-clnase 25.3 string) ~1~1sthe loss of tnc R is the refcrcncc sensitivity (bit strc`am and character combinir!g network (4) recorded in Step d) of Sub-clause 28.2.

matchil:g

~1-1d

51

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 c) Record d) Record character unwanted 28.4
Method
Note. -

the spurious

response

immunity

(bit stream

and

character

string)

as the smaller

of

the values

of S calculated

above. used, the characteristics signal, the sensitivity of the SCTS (bit stream string). and

the input string), adjacent

signal arrangement the characteristics

of the unwanted

frequencies

of the

specified

signals and the reference

(bit stream

and character

of measurenw~t ,for message The value of the :eference measurement. sensitivity (message) determined in Sub-clause 23.5 is required for this

a)

Connect

the

equipment

as illustrated

in

Figure

3 with the

switches

in

position

b. Test 23.7).

equipment b) Adjust nominal c) Using

items (l), (2), (a), (6) and (9) and a comparator the frequency frequencies. of the radio-frequency signal

are required generator (2) to

(see Sub-clause

one of the specified

encoder

(1) modulate

radio-frequency

signal

generator

(2) with the reference

sequence 22.18

of messages to generate and 22.19). d) In the absence and combining

the standard

coded test signal (SCTS) ( message)

(see Sub-clauses

of the unwanted network

signal of the

adjust

the

signal level at and combining that may

the input network degrade

of the

matching determined this of the (9) (see

(4) to 3 dB in excess of the reference matching

sensitivity

(message)

in Sub-clause ?3.5, plus the loss value as R in dB (PV). ej Adjust radio-frequency generator

(4). Record

(6) to a frequency

the response

receiver-decoder and apply a high level signal [e.g., 100 dB (pV) ] to the attenuator Sub-clause 22.21). Record this value in dB (,LGV ) as _4. Record this frequency. Arote. _ The method
for the

of measurement of spurious response immunity requires that the operator search frequencies of unwanted signals whic'l may degrade the output of the receiver output, this is (e.g., signal-to-noise ratio, or error ratio). When the receiver has an audio normally done by applying only the unwanted signal to the receiver at a high level. Then the frequercy of the unwanted signal is slowlymoved across the frequency band ofintcrest and the frequencies that produce a change in the signal-to-nois e ratio are noted. These fi-cquencies ale then used in the spurious response immunity method of measurement.

If the receiver.decoder does not have an audio output, other methods for making the starch should be used. One method of making the search is to use a sensitive detector (for example, a communication receiver tuned to the intermediate frequency of the receiver-decoder) and a pickup (antenr,a) which may also be tuned to the intermediate frequency. BY Placing the amplifier the activity of this pi&up near the later stages of the intermediate frequency amplifier can be monitored. When the above procedure is used, chaJges in the signal in the intermediate frequency amplifier can be detected and the frequency of the unwanted signal noted. f)

Adjust the step attenuator greater).
tne SCTS the receiver-decoder

(9) to a value which
of three

will produce
terminating

a high the

error

ratio (e.g.JOjL

or

d 1) Transmit
attenuator

a maximum

times,

fails to recognize

the SCTS any one of those

transmission sequence if times. Adjust the step

(9) according

to Step g)2) or gJ3), whichever fails to recognize

is appropriate. or third SCTS, increase

2) If

the receiver-decoder

either the first, second Step g)l).

the attenuation

of (9) by 2 dB and repeat 52

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 3) If the decibels, decibels, receiver-decoder decrease the and proceed recognizes attenuation to Step h) 1). the three SCTS's, record the the attenuation value in

of (9) by 1 dB,

record

new attenuation

value in

the transmission sequence if h) 1) Transmit the SCTS a maximum of three times, terminating Adjust the step the receiver-decoder fails to recognize the SCTS any one of those times. attenuator (9) according to Step h) 2) or h) 3), whichever fails to recognize record either the new the first, is appropriate. second or third SCTS, increase and repeat value in decibels,

2) If the receiver-decoder the attenuation Step 12) 1). See Step i). 3) If the receiver-decoder 1 dB, record i) Continue j) Repeat response 28.5 Presentation a) Calculate

of (9) by 1 dB,

attenuation

recognizes

the

three

SCTS's,

decrease

the attenuation

of (9) by 40 times. the

the new attenuation

value in decibels,

and repeat values

Step h) 1). See Step i).

Steps h) 1)1 h) 2) and h) 3) until attenuator Steps e) through i) using other unwanted

have been recorded that

signal

frequencies

may degrade

of the receiver-decoder. of results for message the average of the attenuation values recorded signals. S, for each of the unwanted signals in decibels in Steps g) 3) 12) 2) and

h) 3) of Sub-clause b) Calculate as follows:

28.4 for each of the unwanted response immunity

the spurious

(message), in decibels

S=A-B-C-K where: A is the value recorded in Step e) of Sub-clause
B is the average C is to R is in of the attenuation the loss of the matching receiver input, in decibels the reference sensitivity (message) Step n) of Sub-clause 28.4

28.4 values calculated in Step a) in decibels network (4), from the radio-frequency and combining plus the loss of the matching and combining

signal generator network

(6)

(4) recorded

c) Record

the spurious

response

immunity

(message)

as the

smaller

of the values

of S calcu-

lated above. d) Record reference 28.6 Compliance the input signal arrangement signal, used, the the characteristics frequencies of the of the SCTS (message), unwanted signals the

characteristics

of the

unwanted

and the

sensitivity test method

(message). Spurious response
reference sensitivity

immwity
(data)

(data)
determined in 23.3 or 23.5 is required for this

N&e. _ The value
measurement. a) Connect

of the

the equipment

as

illustrated

in Figure

3 with the signal

switches

in position

b, using test specified

equipment

items (I), (2) (4) and (6) and of the

a comparator

(see 22.7). generator (2) to one of the

b) Adjust the frequency nominal frequencies.

radio-frequency

C) Using encoder (I), modulate radio-frequency signal generator (2) with the standard of coded test signal ( data ) or with the specified message to generate the standard test signal (data) (STCS) ( see 22.14, 22.18, 22.19 and 22.20). 53

train coded

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994

IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 d) Adjust the wanted signal level at the input of the matching and be 3 dB in excess of the reference sensitivity ( data ) determined loss of the matching and combining network (4). Record this value combining network (4) to in 23.3 or 23.5, plus the in dB (PV). the response of the

e) Adjust radio-frequency generator (6) to a frequency that may degrade receiver-decoder. Note the unwanted signal frequency ( see 22.21 ).
Note. -

The method of measurement of spurious response immunity requiles that the operator search for the frequencies of the unwanted signals which may degrade the output of the receiver ( e.g. signal-to-noise ratio or error ratio ). When the receiver has an audio output, this is normally done by applying; ol;!y the unwanted signal to the receiver at a high level. Then the freqluency of the unwanted signal is slowly moved accross the frequency band of interest and the frequencies that produce a change in the signal-to-noise ratio arc noted. These frquencies are then used in the spurious response immunity method of I-,xnsurement. If the receiver-decoder does not have an audio output, other methods for makir;g the search shall be used. One method of making !he search is to use a sensitive detector ( e.g. a communication receiver tuned to the IF frequency of the receiver ) and a pickup ( antenna ) which may also be tuned to the IF frequency. By placing the pickup near the later stages of the IF amplifier, the activity of the amplifier can be monitored. When the above procedure is used, of the unwanted changes in the signal in the IF amplifier can be detected and the frequency signal noted.

f)

Adjust

to

the unwanted signal level at the input of the matching and combining network (4)) equal the reference sensitivity ( data ) determined in 23.3 or 23.5, increased by the value of the spurious network messages. are 25 or less record errors for bit stream or character string, or six or less errors for that the receiver-decoder does comply for this unwanted frequencies selected frequency with the the the (4). train of SCTS's for bit stream or character string (see 22.20), or 33 the standard response immunity data plus the loss of the matching and

specified combining g) Transmit specified A) If there message, i)

spurious response immunity (data) specification. Repeat step e) through h) for other unwanted unwanted

signal

that may degrade in Step e) that

response of the receiver-decoder. _j) If it was recorded in Step h) for all of the receiver-decoder spurious response did comply, immunity then record

frequencies

( data ) specification,

that the receiver-decoder does comply with the otherwise record that it does not comply. of the SCTS ( data ). ( data ), reference

k) Record the input signal arrangement used, characteristics sensitivity ( data ) and specified spurious response immunity 29. Intermodulation 29.1 Definition The ability immunity (data) of the receiver-decoder to prevent two

unwanted frequency It is the

adjacent

signals which have D), from in decibels, which is

specific frequency relationships degrading the desired response
Of: 0)

to the wanted signal of the receiver-decoder. input sensitivity signals (data), that to

(see Appendix ratio, expressed input error

the common

level of two unwanted

cause a wanted produce an

signal,

3 dB in excess of the reference reference error ratio (data), to b) the reference sensitivity (data).

ra";io equal to the

54

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 29.2 ,Method of measuremenr for bit stream or character string in Sub-clause position
23.3

jyote. _ The value of the reference sensitivity (bit stream or character string) determined is required for this measurement. a) Connect the equipment as illustrated in Figure 3 with the switches in

b. Test (see Sub_

equipment items (I), (2), (4), (Q 6% (8) and (9) and a comparator clause 22.7). Step attenuator (9) will need 0.5 dB steps. Matching

are required

and combining networks (4) and (7) have two inputs and may not have identical If there is a difference in the losses, it should be accounted for losses for each of the inputs. rn the calculation of the intermodulation immunity (bit stream or character string). of the radio-frequency Signal generator (2) to one

b) Adjust the frequency nominal frequencies. (:) Using encoder

of

the

specified

(1) modulate

radio-frequency or character string)

signal string) to

generator generate 22.18,

(2) with the

the standard

train

of

coded test signal (bit stream (SCTS) (bit stream

standard

coded test signal

or character

(see Sub-clauses

22.19 and 22.20).

d) Jn the absence of the unwanted signal, adjust the signal level at the input of the matching and combining network (4) to be 3 dB in excess of the reference sensitivity (bit stream or character string) determined in Sub-clause 23.3, plus the 10~s of the matching and combining network (4). Record this value as R in dB (PV). that may produce an intermodulation response (see

e) Choose a pair of frequencies, fn andfr, Appendix D), Record these frequencies. f) Adjust attenuator (9) to 8 dB. of radio-frequency

g) Adjust

the frequency

generator

(6) to&

and

radio-frequency

generator

(8) to fr. Adjust the levels of the unwanted network (7) to equal the reference the ratio of the intermodulation equipment specification plus the plus 8 dB. Record 12) Transmit i) Calculate i) signalsf, and fr to the input of matching and combining sensitivity (bit stream or character string) multiplied by immunity (bit stream or character string), stated in the losses of matching and combining networks (7) and (4)

this value as G in dB (PV). train of SCTS's (see Sub-clause ratio. error ratio (bit stream C, and or character proceed to string), Step terminate
b) of

the standard

22.20).

and note the error

If the error ratio equals the reference the measurement. clause 29.3. If the error the attenuation If the error increase Record the

attenuation error

value,

Sub-

ratio is less than the reference of (9) by 0'5 dB. than the

ratio (bit stream

or character

string)

decrease

ratio is greater

reference

error

ratio

(bit

stream

or character

string),

the attenuation Step h) throughj)

of (9) by 0.5 dB. until error two to the consecutive error values of error ratio have been obtained string). greater Record the value of is just than the reference

,k) Repeat

which bracket attenuation, error

the reference

ratio (bit string). 55

stream or character ratio which

A, that corresponds or character

ratio (bit stream

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pnb 489-6 : 1987 1) Repeat 29.3 Presentation a) Calculate Steps d) through k) using other pairs of unwanted or character string pairs of frequencies as follows: signal frequencies that may produce

an intermodulation

response.

of results for bit stream the attenuation,

C, for each of the unwanted C=A t 0'25 in decibels

where : A is the attenuation b)

recorded

in Step IL) or I of Sub-clause

29.2.

The intermodulation where:

immunity,

S, for each of the unwanted in dB (uV)

pairs of frequencies

is:

S = G-L-Q-C-R
C is the value recorded

in Stepj) of Sub-clause 29.2 or calculated in Step a) G is the unwanted input signal level of matching and combining network Step g) of Sub-clause 29.2 L is the loss of combining network (7) in decibels & is the ioss of combining network (4) in decibels R is the reference sensitivity (bit stream or character string) network (4) recorded in Step d) of Sub-clause 29.2 plus the
loss

(7) in dB rPV) recorded

in

of the matchmg

and combining

c) Record values

the intermodulation of S calculated

immunity

( bit stream

or

character

string)

as the smaller

of the

in Step b).

d) Record the input signal arrangement used, the characteristics of the SCTS (bit stream or character string), the characteristics of the unwanted signals, the frequencies of the unwanted signals and the reference sensitivity (bit stream or character string). 29.4 Method
Note. -

of measurement

for

message
sensitivity (message) determined in Sub-clause 23.5 is required for this

The value of the reference measurement.

a) Connect

the equipment

as illustrated

in Figure

3 with

the switches

in position

b. Test cquip-

are required (see Sub-clause 22.7). ment items (1). (2), (4), (6), (7), (8) and (9) an d a comparator Matching and combining networks (4) and (7) have two inputs and may not have identical losses for each of the inputs. If there is a difference in the losses it must be accounted for in the calculation of the intermodulation immunity (message). b) Adjust nominal c) Using sequence Sub-clauses the frequency of the radio-frequency signal generator (2) to one of the specified

frequencies. encoder (1) modulate to radio-frequency the standard signal coded generator test (2) with (SCTS) the reference (see

of messages

generate

signal

(message)

22.18 and 22.19). of the unwanted signal, adju.;t the signal level at the input network (4) to be 3 dB in excess of the reference sensitivity 23.5 plus the loss of the matching and combining of the matching (message) deter(4). Record (see

d) In the absence and combining mined e) Choose Appendix f)

in Sub-clause

network

this value as R in dB (PV). a pair of frequencies, D). Record ,fn and fr, tha i may these frequencies. produce an intermodulation radio-frequency the same high Record response

Adjust the frequency of radio-frequency generator (6) to fn and (8) to fr. Adjust the output of each of the generators to apply [e.g., 100 dB (PV)] to the dB (WV). 56 matching and combining network (7).

generator signal level A, in

this level,

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 g) Adjust greater). h) 1) Transmit attenuator the SCTS a maximum fails to (9) according of three times, recognize recognize terminating the transmission times. is appropriate. or third SCTS, increase sequence Adjust if the receiver-decoder 2) If the receiver-decoder the attenuation the SCTS either any of those the step the step attenuator (9) to a value which will produce a high error ratio (e.g. 50% or

to Step h) ?) or h) 3), whichever fails to Step h) 1). three SCTS's, record

the first, second

of (9) by 2 dB and repeat recognizes attenuation to Step i) 1). the

3) If the receiver-decoder decibels, decibels, i) reduce the and proceed

record the

the new

attenuation attenuation

value in value in

of (9) by 1 dB,

1) Transmit the SCTS a maximum 01 c three times, terminating the transmission scqLlcnce if the receiver-decoder faiis to recognize the SCTS any one of those times. Adjust the step attenuator (9) according to Step i) 2) or i) 3), whichever is appropriate. 2) If the receiver-decoder the attenuation Step i) 1). See Step j). 3) If the receiver-decoder recognizes the three SCTS's, reduce the attenuation of (9) by 1 dB, record the new attenuation value in decibels, and repeat Step i) 1). See Step j). fails to recognize record the either new the first, second attenuation or third SCTS, increase and repeat

of (9) by 1 dB,

value in decibels

j)

Continue

Steps i) l), i) 2), and i) 3) until attenuator

values

have betn

recorded

40 times.

k) Repeat Steps e) through j) using other pairs of unwanted the response of the receiver-decoder. 29.5 Presentation of' results for message 0) Calculate the average of the attenuation values recorded

signal frequencies

that may degrade.

in dccibsls signals.

in Step /z) 3), i) 2) and

i) 3) of Sub-clause 6) Calculate

29.4 for each of the pairs of unwanted immunity,

the intermodulation S=A-B-C-D-R

S, for each of the unwanted in decibels

signals

as follows:

where: ,4 is the value rscordzd in Step f) of Sub-clause 29.4 B is the average of the attenuation values calculated in Step a) in dccibcls C is the loss of the combining network (4) in decibels D is the loss of the combining net work (7) in decibels R is the reference sznsitivity (message) plus the loss recordec! in Step d) of Sub-clause 29.4 C) Record of the matching and combining network (4)

the intermodulation

immunity

(message)

as the smaller

of the values

of S calculated

above. of the SCTS (message), the d) Record the input signal arrangement used, the characteristics characteristics of the unwanted signal, the frequencies of the unwanted signals and the reference 29.6
Note. -

sensitivity

(message).

Complirmce test method -- Intermodulation immunity ( data >
The value of the rcfcrence measurement. sensitivity (data ) determined in 23.3 or 23.5 is required for this

a)

Connect

the equipment

equipment

as illustrated in Figure 3 with the switches in position ( see 22.7 ). items (I), (2), (4), (6), (7) and (S), and a comparator 57

b, using

test

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
&ote. _ Matchirg and combining networks (4) and (7) have If there is a differcxce losses for each of the inputs. in determining the levels of the unwanted signals.

two inputs and may not have identical in the losses it should be accounted for

b) Adjust nominal

the frequency frequencies.

of the

radio-frequency

signal

generator

(2)

to

one

of the

specified

c) Using encoder (I), modulate radio-frequency coded test signal ( data ) or with the specified

generator message to

(2) with the standard train of generate the standard coded test

signal ( data ) ( SCTS ) ( see 22.14, 22.18, 22.19 and 22.20 ). d) Adjust the wanted signal level at the input reference and combining network fi, of the (4). that matching Record and combining in 23.3 network or 23.5 (4) to the

be 3 dB in excess of the loss of the matching e) Choose ,f) Adjust a pair the

sensitivity

( data ) determined

plus

this value in dB (PV). an intermodulation radio-frequency response generator

of frequencies, D ). Record of radio

ffi and frequency

may produce

( see Appendix

these frequencies. generator (6) to,fn and

frequency

(8) to fr. g) Adjust the unwanted

signal levels offn and& at the input of matching and combining nctwork (7) to equal the reference sensitivity ( data ) determined in 23.3 or 23.5, increased by the specified value of the intermodulation immunity ( data ), plus the the losses of matching and combining network (7) and (4). Record train of SCTS's this value in dB (PV). string ( see 22.20 ), or 33

h) Transmit specified

the standard messages.

for bit stream or character

i) If there are 25 or less errors for bit stream or character string, or six or less errors for message, record that the receiver--decoder for this pair of unwanted frequencies does comply with the intermodulation immunity ( data ) specification. i, Repeat Steps e) through i) for other unwanted frequency pairs that may degrade the response

of the receiver-decoder. k) If it was recorded in Step j) for all of the unwanted frequency pairs the receiver-decoder did comply, then record that the receiver-decoder intermodulation I) Record reference 30. Sensitivity the immunity input signal ( data ) specification, arrangement used, otherwise record selected in Step e) that does comply with the not comply. ( data ), the

that it does of the

characteristics

SCTS ( data ).

sensitivity

( data ) and the specified

intermodulation

immunity

reduction under multipath propagation conditions (data)

Variations of amplitude and phase of a radio-frequency signal are created by multipath reflections in the propagation medium whenever the transmitting or receiving antennas are in motion. frequency These signal variations of the desired signal. variations of signal are a function of both the antenna velocity and the radioin limited method of

r'he resulting

areas where the direct signal is missing. modulating both the envelope and phase. 30.1 Dejnitinn The ability of the receiver-decoder

amplitude and phase show a Rayleigh distribution They can be simulated by an appropriate

to

minimize signal

variations of amplitude and phase of the input It is the ratio, expressed iu decibels, of: 58

the degradation of its response caused by due to multipath propagation conditions.

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 JEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 a) the r.m.s. value of a Rayleigh ratio (data), b) the reference 30.2 Method
Note. -

faded

input

signal

level

that

produces

the reference

error

to sensitivity (data). for bit stream and character string
or character string ) determined in Sub-

of measurement

sensitivity ( bit stream The value of the reference clause 23.3 is required for this measurement.

a) Connect

the equipment

as illustrated

in Figure

4 (see Appendix (see Sub-clause signal generator

C for details 22.7).

of the

Rayleigh

fading simulator). b) Adjust the

A comparator of the

is also needed radio-frequency

frequency

(2) to one of the

specified

nominalfrequencies. c) Using encoder (I) modulate the radio-frequency signal gcenerator (2) with the standard train of coded test signal (bit stream or character string) to generate the standard coded test signal (SCTS) (bit stream or character string) (see Sub-clauses 22.18, 22.13 and 22.20).
d) Adjust

the Rayleigh test is mobile

fading

simulator

(3) for a velocity

of 100 under

km/h if the

receiver-decoder

under e) Record

or 10 km/h

if the receiver-decoder signal,

test is portable. fading
simulator iI1 JB (pv)_

the r.m.s. value of the output

J, of the Rayleigh

f) Adjust the attenuator
receiver-decoder,

(4) to produce a radio-frequency input signal level to the input equal to the reference sensitivity (bit stream or character string) under multipath propagation equipment specification to the or character string) determined

of the multi-

plied by the ratio of the sensitivity reduction stream or character string) as stated in the Record the reference sensitivity (bit stream 23.3 as R. g) Transmit /z) Calculate the standard train

conditions (bit nearest decibel. in Sub-clause

of SCTS's (see Sub-clause ratio.

22.20).

and note the error

i,l If the error ratio equals the reference error ratio (bit stream or the measurement. Record the attenuation, M, of step attenuator of Sub-clause
If the

character (4) and character

string), terminate proceed to Step b) string), decrease

30.3. ratio is less than by I dB. than the reference error ratio (bit stream or character string), reference error ratio (bit stream of

error

the attenuation If the error
increase

ratio is greater

the attenuation

by I dB. i) until two consecutive error ratio (bit stream
to the error ratio

j)

Repeat

Steps g) through
A, that

values
which

of

error ratio

have

been the the

obtained value of reference under

which bracket
attenuation,

the reference

or character

corresponds

string). Record is just greater than

error ratio (bit stream or character string). k) Repeat Steps d) through j) for velocities of 50, 20 and test is mobile or 5, 2 and 1 km/h if the rccciver-dccodcr 30.3 Presentation a) Calculate
w!:erc:

10 km/h if the receiver-decoder under test is portable.

of results for bit stream or character the attenuator values, M=A -0.5

string as follows:

izI, for the four vclocitics in decibels

59

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 b) Calculate character the sensitivity string), reduction under multipath propagation using: in decibels
fading simulator in dB (FV), recorded in Step E) of

conditions

(bit

stream

or

S, in decibels,

for each velocity S=J-M-R

where: J is the r.m.s.

level of the output

of the Rayleigh

Sub-clause 30.2. ,+I is the value recoldcd
R is the reference
C)

in Step i,i of
(bit slream

s.2nsitivity

Sub-clause 30.2 or calculated iI; Step a} in decibels or characte: stri:lg) in dB (uV) determined in Sub-clause

23.3

Record the input character string); conditions character (bit string).

signal stream

the velocities

arrangement used, the and the sensitivity character string) and

characteristics reductions the reference

of the under

SCTS

(bit stream or propagation (bit stream or

multipath

or

sensitivity

30.4

Method

qf meusurcment
measurement.

.for message sensitivity (messa&-) determined in Sub-clause 23.5 is required
for this

~~~~~_ `Ihe valui: of !he refkrence

(0

Connect

the

equipment

as illustrated

in Figure

4 (see Appendix (see Sub-clause signal generator

C for details of the 22.7). (2) to one of the

Rayleigh

fading

simulator).

A comparator

is also needed

6) Adjust nominal C,J Using

the frequency

of the

radio-frequency

specified

frequencies. the encoder (I) modulate the radio-frequency the standard signal coded generator test signal (2) with the (SCTS) reference
(:;ee

sequence of messages to generate Sub-clauses 22.18 and 22.19). d) Adjust the Rayleigh under test is mobile e) Record
f)

(Illcssage)

fading simulator (3) for a velocity of 100 km/h if the reccivcr-decoder or 10 km/h if the receiver-decoder under test is portable.
Of

the r.m.s.

va:uc'

the output

signal, which

J, of the Rayicigh will product

fa&g

simulator

in

dB ccLv).

Adjust the attenuator greater). 1) Transmit
attenuator

(4) to a value

a high the

error

ratio

(e.g.

50':/, or if
step

g)

the SCTS a maximum (4) according

of three times, terminating the SCTS any

transmission
times.

sequence
the

the receiver-decoder

fails to recognize

one of those

Adju:,t

to Step g) 2) or g) 3), whichever fails to recognize either the first,

is appropriate. second record or the third SCTS, reduce value value in in

2) If the receiver-decoder

the attenuation of (4) by 2 dB and repeat Step g)l). 3) If the receiver-decoder recognizes the three SCTS's, decibels, decibels,
/I) I)

attenuation attenuation

increase

the

attenuation

of

(4) by 1 dB, record

the new

and proceed to Step 1z)l). the transmission sequence if the SCTS a maximum of three times, terminating the receiver-decoder fails to recognize the SCTS any one of those times. Adjust the step attenuator (4) according to Step 1z)2) or h/3), whichever is appropriate.
`Transmit

2) If the receiver-decoder the attenuation Step h)l). See Step i).

fails to recognize record

either the

first,

second value

or

third

SCTS, and

reduce repeat

of (4) by 1 dB,

the new attenuation

in decibels,

3) If the receiver-decoder recognizes the three SCTS's, increase the attenuation of (4) by 1 dB, record the new attenuation value in decibels, and repeat Step h)l). See Step i). 60

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 i) Continue Steps h)l), h)2) and h)3) until attenuator values have been recorded 40 times. under

.i) Repeat Steps d) through i) for velocities of 50, 20 and 10 km/h if the receiver-decoder test is mobile or 5, 2 and 1 km/h if the receiver-decoder under test is portable. 30.5 Presentation a) Calculate of results for message the average of the attenuation values recorded in decibels

in Steps g)3), h)2) and (message), S, is given by

h)3) of Sub-clause 30.4 for each velocity. b) The sensitivity reduction under multipath the following:

propagation

conditions

S = J-B-R in decibels where: J is the value recorded in Step e) of Sub-clause 30.4 B is the average of the attenuation values calculated in Step a) in decibels R is the reference sensitivity (message) in dB (,,V) determined in Sub-clause
c)

23.5

Record velocities

the input

signal

arrangement reductions (message).

used, under

the

characteristics

of the

SCTS (message), (message),

the and

and the sensitivity sensitivity test method

multipath

propagation

conditions

the reference 30.6 Compliance

sensitivity

reduction

under multipath

propagation

condition

( data )

Not?. _ The value of the reference sensitivity ( data ) determined in 23.3 or 23.5 is required for this mciisurcment. a) Connect the equipment as illustrated in Figure (4) and include a comparator ( see Appendix C for details of the Rayleigh fading simulator b) Adjust the frequency of the radio-frequency nominal frequencies. c) Using encoder (I), modulate radio-frequency specified and 22.7 for the comparator ). signal generator (2) to one of the signal generator (2) with the the specified train

standard

of coded test signal ( data ) or with the d) Adjust under e) Record f) Adjust the Rayleigh test is a mobile the r.m.s. value the attenuator by the equal fading simulator

message to generate of

standard

coded test

signal ( data ) ( SCTS ) ( see 22.14, 22.18, 22.19 and 22.20 ). (3) for a velocity 100 km/h if the fading level receiver-decoder in dB (PV). input 23.3 or of the 23.5, or 10 km/h if the receiver-decoder of the olutpllt signal, (4) to produce to the rzfcrence a radio-frequency sensitivity reduction ( data ). under input test is a portable. simulator at the in multipath

J, of the Rayleigh

receiver-decoder, increased conditions g) Transmit

( data ) determined under

specified value train

( data ). Record the standard

of the sensitivity the reference sensitivity of SCTS's for bit stream for bit stream or

propagation

or character string,

string or

( see 22.20 ), or 78 less errors for

specified messages. /2) If there are 25 or less errors

character

15 or

message, record that the receiver-decoder does comply for this velocity with the sensitivity reduction under multipath propagations conditions ( data ) specification.

specified

of 50, 20 and, 10 km/h if the receiver-decoder i) Repeat steps d) through h) for velocities under test is a mobile, or 5, 2 and 1 km/h if the receiver-decoder under test is a portable. selected in step d) that the .j) If it was recorded in step h) for all the velocities decoder did comply, then record that the receiver-decoder does comply with the sensitivity k) Record specified reduction under multipath of the under propagations ( data ) specification, sensitivity otherwise that it does not comply. the characteristics sensitivity reduction SCTS ( data ), the reference multipath 61 propagations ( data ) and the conditions ( data ). recciverspecified record

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 SECTION FIVE MEASUREMENTS OF RECEIVER-DECODER (DATA calling) CONDUCTED CALLING) AND

RADIATED

SPURIOUS

COMPONENTS (data and selective

AND SELECTIVE

32. Conducted spurious components 32.1 Definition

Conducted spurious components are radio-frequency components that are usually characat a discrete frequency or in a narrow band of terized by having a dominant component They may be present at the antenna or a.c. power terminals of the receiver. frequencies. 32.2 &f&h& of measurement of antenna terminal conducted 8. of the selective measuring device (4) over spurious components

a) Connect

the equipment

as shown adjust

in Figure

b) With the receiver the specified C) Record

operating,

the frequency

range of measurements

to search for the spurious component

components. found.

the frequency

and level of each spurious

1

S
I Power mains 12 = 3 = 4 = 5 = 6 =
FIG. 8. -

receiver under test artificial antenna, if required (see Sub-clause 5.2.2) test load selective measuring device mains power line impedance stabilization (isolation) switch

network

Measuring arrangement spurious components.

for

antenna

terminal

and

a.c. power

terminal

conducted

Notes

1. -

For the purpose of this measurement, the impedance of the test load (3) including the effect of the selective measuring device (4) should be equal to the source impedance required by the artificial antenna (or the receiver). from

2. _ Measurement precautions: Precautions should be taken to prevent interfering voltages entering the measuring equipment, either by radiation or through the mains supply ]cads. 3. -

This test method is limited to the case of metre and decimetre wavcler gths silicc the voltage measured across a test load connected to the ante!lna terminals is not rcprcsentative of the interference in the case of hectometre waves. In the case of a ship, the result obtained, when the installation is built, depends to a considerable e,.tcnt on the position of the antenna with respect to the superstr&uie.

32.3 Presentation

qf results are the

The levels recorded in Step c) of Sub-clause 32.2 expressed as a voltage or as a power, the antenna terminal conducted spurious components. Record their frequency and 62

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 impedance Record the component values of the artificial antenna and of the of the test load. Also record the characteristic impedance and the length of the cable between the antenna.
power terminal

test load. receiver and the artificial below 30 MHz) a) The asymmetrical

32.4 Method qf measurement qfa.c. components

conducted
using

spurious components arrangement (isolation) shown

(for frequencies in Figure 8 but

are measured

the

with switch (6) in position

B. network, also khlown a8 an measuring along device (4) over with the attenu-

Note. - An example of a mains power line impedance stabilization artificial mains network, is given in Appendix N. 6) With the receiver the specified operating, adjust the frequency range of measurements

of the selective

to search for the spurious

components.

c) Record the frequency and level of each spurious component found, ation due to the mains power line stabilization (isolation) network. 32.5 Presentation of results

The levels recorded in Step c) of Sub-clause 32.4 corrected for loss of the mains power line impedance stabilization (isolation) network and expressed as a voltage or as a power, are the a.c. power terminal No requirement conducted spurious components. up to I 000 MHz) 32.6 Method of measurement at the ax. power terminal (for frequencies at this time. (data and selective calling)

33. Radiated spurious components 33.1 Dejinition Any radiation originating

from within 9 )

a receiver.

33.2 Method of measurement

(see Figure

a) Select the test site, suitable for the range of frequencies from those described in Appendices K or L. b) Connect terminal, c) Operate d) Identify selective

and

power

levels to be measured, has an antenna

If the receiver the equipment as illustrated in the chosen appendix. it shall be terminated in a test load having an impedance equal input impedance. the receiver.

to the nominal

radio-frequency

the frequencies of the significant spectral radiated spurious components by using a If necessary, closely couple it to the receiver under test. measuring device. of one spurious
component

e) Adjust the measuring antenna (if adjustable) to the correct length for the frequency of the significant spectral radiated spurious components identified in Step d). f) Tune the selective component. lLotc. Deactivate in Step fj. the receiver under test to verify that it is the origin of the radiated spurious

measuring

device to the

considered

significant

spectral

radiated

g) Position h) Rotate

the measuring the equipment

antenna under

for vertical

polarization. the maximum indication on the selective measuring antenna to obtain

test to obtain

device. raise and lower the i) When required by the test site description, the maximum indication on the selective measuring device. 63

measuring

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
j) Repeat Steps h) and i) until maximum indication. the measuring antenna no further increase occurs. Note the frequency and the

k) Position

for horizontal

polarization

and repeat

Steps h), i) and ,j). spectral radiated

I) Repeat Steps e) to k) until the levels have been measured spurious components identified in Step d). m) Replace the receiver under test by a vertical spectral radiated auxiliary spurious

for all significant

antenna. components measured in Step~j) and

n) Select one of the significant adjust
0)

the frequency the length the length the selective

of the radio-frequency of the auxiliary antenna antenna

signal generator (if adjustable) (if adjustable)

to its frequency. frequency. frequency.

Adjust

for the considered for the considered

p) Adjust q) Tune r) Position s) Adjust

of the measuring measuring antenna of the device.

device to the considered for vertical radio-frequency polarization. signal

frequency.

the measuring the output level

generator

to provide

an indication

on

the selective

measuring

raise and lower the measuring t) When required by the test site description, a maximum indication on the selective measuring device. u) Readjust the output level of the of indication as noted in Step j).
rator

antenna

to provide

radio-frequency Note the output

signal generator to obtain the level of the radio-frequency

same value
signal gene-

and its frequency. Steps s) to u) with the auxiliary Steps n) to V) for the remaining and measuring significant antennas spectral horizontally polarized. measured

,,)

Repeat

W) Repeat

radiated

components

in Step j).

33.3

Presentation of results Calculate Sub-clause
auxiliary

the

power

available

to the

auxiliary

antenna

from the

values noted

in Step u) of

33.2 taking into account the different settings of the the radio-frequency antenna and the cable loss between antenna. spurious component is defined as the

attenuator, the gain of the signal generator and the

auxiliary

The power of the radiated calculated. Record component. If necessary, this power and

largest

of the

values thus

the

frequency

of the

corresponding

spectral

radiated

spurious

show the power of the other significant

spectra1 radiated

spurious

components.

64

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
START

Q
under Tess

r

COnnecI eqw~me",
\

, Actwate (wIthout equipment wanted under sIgna test

ml(l
ReDlace equpment 0) PI

under

test by aux~l~arv

I Identdy sgnkant spectral

nj-cy--j
Tune signal generaror

toa specrra~

components , I

llOnYllj
Tune measunng amenna to a spectral Tune selectwe measunng devtce

I

Tune auxtllarv

and measwng

antennas

1

I
Tune selectwe measwng de-we

I

*I
Orlent Rotate

Orlent

both antennas

to vertical

poiawitton antenna to verttcal LI-

measuring

Sl

LLiiZiFT
equomenr under test for

I

Adjust

s!gnal

generator

output

level I

pzig
Aalse and lower measuring Record trequencv value and Ind'csted

fla!se

and lower

measurlng

antenna

for

mawnun

lndtcat1on

antenna Adjust sIgnal generator level to gwe

Ihe same

lndlcatlon

as I" Steo/,

jl ----J eat,o"

1

`Hecord signal

!recwn:v gerwa!or

and level

F1c.9.

65

Flow chart.

END

IS 10820 ( Part

6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
SECTION SIX MEASUREMENTS PARAMETERS Clauses OF ENCODER-TRANSMITTERS (DATA AND SELECTIVE ) OF CALLING)

RADIO-FREQUENCY

34 to 38 ( under consideration

BAND MEASUREMENTS SECTION SEVEN -AUDIO-FREQUENCY ENCODER OUTPUT CHARACTERISTICS (SELECTITE CALLING) 39.

Tone pulse-rise time (selective calling)
Dejinition The tone pulse-rise the pulse envelope time is the increases interval between the instants during from 10?A to 90"/" of its steady-state value. which the amplitude of

39.1

39.2

Method

of measurement the encoder the vertical output display with the load specified of an oscilloscope with the horizontal manufacturer's by the manufacturer. with the output from the signal load and adjust that starts the measure the from 10% to

a) Terminate b) Connect

in parallel

the encoder encoder

in accordance

instructions.

Derive the synchronizing

pulse for the calibrated sequence.

sweep of the oscilloscope

c) Arrange for the encoder to send a single standard coded interval between the instants during which the pulse envelope 90% of its steady-state value. d) This measurement 40. may be repeated for any other coded signal.

test signal and value increases

Tone pulse duration (selective calling)
Dejnition The duration the amplitude of a tone pulse is the interval exceeds between the first and last instants during which

40.1

of the pulse envelope

50% of its steady-state

value.

40.2

Method

of measurement the encoder the vertical output display with the load impedance of an oscilloscope in specified by the manufacturer. output load and adjust

a) Terminate
6) Connect

parallel

with the

the encoder in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Derive the synchronizing pulse for the calibrated horizontal sweep of the oscilloscope from the signal that starts the encoder sequence. c) Arrange for the encoder to send a single tone pulse and measure the interval between the first and last instants during which the amplitude of the pulse envelope exceeds SOT/;:of its steady-state value. may be repeated for any other tone pulses. can be used to determine:

d) This measurement e) For sequential the duration

tone systems, of individual

this method tone pulses:

the pulse-spacing pulses is less than the total duration

time, for example, IO'/, of the maximum of a single

the interval amplitude;

during

which

the

amplitude

of the

-

coded signal. 66

. IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 41. 41.1 Tone pulse-decay Definition The tone pulse-decay the pulse envelope 41.2 Method of measurement a) Terminate the encoder output with the load specified by the manufacturer. time is the interval between the instants during value. which the amplitude of decreases from 90% to IO:/, of its steady-state time (selective calling)

b) Connect the vertical display of an oscilloscope in parallel with the output load and adjust the encoder in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Derive the synchronizing pulse for the calibrated encoder sequence. measure tbc time 901% to lo::, of its horizontal sweep of the oscilloscope from the signal
that starts the

c) Arrange for the encoder to send a single standard coded test signal and interval during which the amplitude of the pulse envelope decreases from steady-state value. calling) 42. Frequency of tone(s) (selective 42.1 Definition The frequency within 42.2 Method of the tone(s) is the fundamental frequency (or frequencies)

of the

tone(s)

the duration

of one tone pulse.

of measuremerlt the output of the encoder with the load specified by the manufacturer. load.

a) Terminate b) Connect c) Arrange

a period-measuring for the encoder

device in parallel

with the output

to send a single tone pulse. device after the pulse envelope the tone has reached and its steady-state compute value.

d) Start the period-measuring

e) Measure the period of at least 10 cycles of from the period thus measured.
Note. Alternatively, the frequency of a single-tone

frequency

the frequency

test instrument if the tone measuring instrument. J) For sequential tone systems,

pulse arrange

duration

pl11se may is significantly

be measured with a freqllency-colmting longer th.tn the counting period of the

for the encoder

to send each tone pulse individually. frequency of the tone

g) For simultaneous tone systems, required to be measured, should 43. R.M.S. voltage of tone(s) (selective

band-pass filters, at the nominal be used to reject all other tones.

calling)

43.1 Definition The r.m.s. voltage of the tone output of the decoder measured when the output is correctly terminated. 43.2 Method of measurement the encoder output with the load specified by the manufacturer. is the r.m.s. voltage of the tone pulse

a) Terminate 6) Connect encoder C) Arrange

the vertical input of an oscilloscope in parallel with the output load and adjust the according to the manufacturer's operating instructions. Measure the peak-to-peak amplitude for the encoder to send a single coded signal. may depend on the tone frequency, measurements should

of any or all of the tone pulses. d) Because the amplitude of the tones be repeated until all possible

tones have been measured. 67

IS 10820( Part6):
IEC Pub 489-6 :

1994 1987
tone systems, values should band-pass frequencies filters at the nominal except the one to be measured. to r.m.s. values, assuming of the coded

e) For simultaneous
signal f) should The peak-to-peak sinusoidal.

be used to reject all tones

be converted

that the tones are
and

Note. -

If the manufacturer provides a facility for adjus1mer.t miaimum amplitudes obtained should bz recorded.

to the amplitude,

both the maximum

43.3 Presentation

of results of tones is involved, the results should be recorded in graphical form.

If a large number

44. Encoder overall operate time ( selective 44.1 Definition The encoder sequence overall operate until the complete coded

calling )

time is the elapsed time from the start of the encoder signal has been observed at the output terminals.

enabling

may be incorporated 1 Overall operate time _i

in the operate time to provide for such other events as trarsmitter attack time before the signal code is sent in interval tl.

Start of encoder 44.2

sequence FIGURE. 10

Method

of measurement the encoder output with the load specified by the manufacturer.

a) Terminate b) Connect

the vertical display of an oscilloscope in parallel with the output load and adjust Derive the synchronizing pulse the encoder according to the manufacturer's instructions. for the calibrated horizontal scan of the oscilloscope from the signal that starts the encoder sequence.

c) Arrange for the encoder to send a single standard coded test signal and measure the overall operate time from the start of the scan until the amplitude of the envelope of the final pulse has fallen to 50"/, of its steady-state value. d) The measurement should be repeated for all coded signals having different initial tone frequencies. 44.3 Presentation of results If the encoder overall operate be recorded on a graph showing is dependent operate time on the initial tone frequency, the results should

versus frequency.

68

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 SECTION EIGHT - AUDIO-FREQUENCY DECODER CHARACTERISTICS 45. Decoder operation level range ( selective calling ) 45.1 Dejinition The decoder operating level range is the range of input levels over which the calling probaEach input level of this range shall be expressed by its ratio in bility exceeds a specified value. decibels to the nominal input level, specified by the manufacturer. as shown in Figure 11. ----_
interference r or source NOW

BAND

MEASUREMENTS CALLING)

OF

(SELECTIVE

45.2 Method of measurement a) Connect the equipment

1

1

1 --

_+ i

Adaptiva Enqoder I-1

dewe

for impedance matching and sqnal vartstion

e

Oelsy

dewce

.

-

Comparator device

1 Code-counting device

I

) Success counting debwe 4

FIG.

at the nominal input level b) Apply the standard through a matching c) Vary the input level in steps of 1 dB both below and above the specified nominal level and Continue to vary the input level in record the number of successful calls at each input level. steps of 1 dB until the calling 45.3 Presentation of results Plot decoder relative input level corresponding input probability is less than 80%. 12. Record the

.-Typical measuring arrangement. coded test signal to the input of the decoder network as specified by the manufacturer.
11

level versus calling probability as shown in Figure to 0 dB. Record the number of trials. 1.0

1

-___--__---0.6

f 6 2 : F 5 v

d

I

I -5

I

I

I

I 0

I
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

11

I1

11 I

I

+5

11 II +10

-

Relative input level (dB) 0 (db) Corresponds FIG. 12. 69

to.........volts

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 46. Decoder attack time (selective calling) 46.1 Dejinition The decoder the decoder attack time is the elapsed time from the instant exceeds 10% of the maximum If the response output voltage the is an audio output, (see Figure 13). shall specify that its intended response coded signal at the decoder is 5O:C; of the input terminals steady-state successful value until

successfully responds. maximum steady-state For signal. 46.2 Method multi-tone

decoders,

manufacturer

the

characteristics

of the coded

of measurement coded test network signal to the input of the decoder at the nominal input level and a matching the other as specified by the manufacturer. beam of a double-beam circuits. exceeds output oscilloscope

a) Apply a standard
through connect

b) Display the input voltage

to the decoder on one beam across the alarm indicating circuit has reached

C) Measure the elapsed time from when the input
the time when the alarm
Note. -

signal

10% of its maximum voltage.

level to

507; of its steady-state

When the alarm circuit is only a means of de-muting to feed an audio-frequency tone into the auxiliary response.

an associated receiver, it may be necessary circuit of the decoder to measure an audio,

Tnput signal amplitude

10----

-

I Alarm circuit response
%A
loo----__

\ Time

L)

lI

HO_____-____ i
I

I

I

I Alarm time

clAttack time

-I

Time

FIG. 47. Decoder recovery time (selective 47. I Dejkition The decoder encoded sequence. This characteristic can be observed calling recovery sequences time is the to achieve calling)

13.

minimum time that is needed decoder response a successful only when the decoder
70

between two successive on the second encoder resets.

automatically

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 47.2 Method

qf measurement
an encoder or code simulator 11). two successive ensure coded signals can be progressively varied time stated by the manufacturer. success is observed, rate is obtained. for example, up between to the decoder, with means of recording the number calls (see Figure

a) Connect 6)
Arrange from the

of successful

that the interval time interval

zero to a time equal to at least twice the recovery at maximum, until a significant

C) With
Reduce

that a satisfactory of failures

the time interval

number

to 20:,;. This time interval 48. 48.1 is the decoder recovery time.

Decoder required protection time (selective Definition

calling)

The decoder required protection time is the maximum time during which a partially operated decoder may respond to other coded signals containing the complementary part of the standard coded test signal (see Figure 14).

A tnput signal

0

!XA

X0

I
I I

X

A

x

B

I IDecoder required protection time

I-

DECODER Response to Code burst A Response to Code burst B Alarm Case 8: Correct alarm response to correctly coded signal.

Decoder required protection time

1

I

Case 6: False alarm respotase to two incorrect but complementary signals; where the second is transmitted within the required orotection time.

Case c: No alarm response to two incorrect signals as in case b but when the interval between the complementary parts just exceeds the required protection time.

I FIG. 48.2 Method of measurement 14.

ai Connect
b) Arrange
interval

an enoder or code simulator of successful calls (see Figure 1I). that the encoder initially

to the decoder,

with

means of recording

the

number

sends

the

first

part of a particular

code and after an

adjustable

up to the recovery

time, sends the remaining ensure time.
signals

part of the code. success is observed, rate is obtained. i.e. up to 20%.

Ci With

the time interval

set to a minimum, until protection
from

that a satisfactory of failures

Increase

the time interval

a significant

number

This time interval
Arote. -The decoder

is the decoder
must

be protected positive

complementary

until

they

no loriger

result

in a

significar.t

percentage

responses.

71

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994

IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 d) In individual tone sequential system having more than repeat this measurement with the time interval inserted sequence. 49. 49.1 Decoder alarm time ( selective calling ) Definition The decoder the output the decrease alarm time is the elapsed voltage time between a successful 13). cancellation. decoder alarm response, i.e. voltage exceeding 50% of its maximum steady-state value, and at cessation of alarm, two tones, it may be necessary to in different positions of the code

of the output

to this 500; value (see Figure only when the alarm

This characteristic 49.2 a) Arrange
Note. -

can be observed

is fitted with automatic

Method of measurement to display the alarm signal on an oscilloscope which has a calibrated time base.
Should the alarm signal be of a form which cannot be readily displayed, then it may be nccessary to arrange for an auxiliary signal to be provided to enable the measurement to bc made, for example, an audiofrequeacy-tone, a d.c. voltage, etc.

b)

Apply facturer,

a standard the

coded test signal of the decoder, of the alarm

through signal,

a matching input the time i.e.

network, level. from

as specified when

by the manusignal first

to the input duration

at the nominal

C) Measure

the alarm

exceeds 50(x of the maximum Figure 13).

steady-state upon

amplitude

to when it falls the measurement

to the 50% value (see should be repeated

d) If the alarm time is dependent
for the limiting
SECTION NINE

the coded signal, element

values

of the controlling

of the coded signal.
!N SIMULATED SYSTEMS

-OVERALL

MEASUREMENTS (SELECTIVE CALLING)

50.

General system measurements are described in which the radio-frequency transIn this section, It is imperative that the measuring arrangement is such mission medium must be simulated. that the test results will not be affected by undesired coupIing between the transmitter and

51.

receiver. Supplementary

conditions

of measurement

for system response times ill Figure adjust 15. the radio-frequency attenuation aHcnuation to

0) Connect

the system for the reference input

to be measured individual-tone Ggnalling

as shown

b/' Except
produce

continuous

systems, adjust

sensitivity systems,

for the receiver/decoder. the radio-frequency terminals. to produce antenila

c) For continuous
the standard
52.

individual-tone signal

level at the receiver
Sekcth

System overall operate time ( Defifinition The system over-all operate signal,
when

calling )

52.1

time js the

elapsed

lime from

the

start

of the

c~~coder-cnablillcc~~~li~~~

this instant being simultaneous the decoder alarm successfully is when the 16). audio output

response
(xc

start of the transmit function anti the morne~~t If the response is an audio o~.~!put, successful reaches SO]`,, of the maximum sloady-sla:c oulpul voltage

with the responds.

Figure

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

Transmitter and receiver - with simulated transmission medium

,

c

Decoder

e

Delay device b-

t

Comparator device

I

FIG. 15. -

7 yplcal

measuring arrangement.

Afarm.circuti (voltage)

response % 1
1oo

I I
I

_-j__-__---

I

5o -t-------

---__---c Time

1
Start of the encoder/iransmitter enabling signal -1

I
r Overall operate time Alarm time

FIG.

16,-System

overall

operate

and alarm

time.

Note. -

This method of simultaneously.

measurement

applies

only

when

the

encoder

and

transmitter

are

enabled

52.2

Method circuit. b) Derive

of measurement the vertical display of an oscilloscope in parallel with the decoder alarm initiating

a) Connect

the synchronizing

pulse for the calibrated

horizontal

sweep

of the

oscilloscope

from

the encoder-enabling

signal. is the interval between the start of the encoder-transmitter when the decoder alarm-initiating circuit respone reaches output voltage. signals having different
initial

c) The system overall operate time enabling signal and the moment 50% of the maximum cl) Repeat
Note. -

steady-state

this measurement

for all coded

tone

frequencies.

When the alarm circuit is only a means of de-muting the associated receiver, it may be necessary iest modulation to th:: tra!ismitter to m':asure the audio to simultaneously apply standard response or, alternatively, the rise-time of the signal that performs t11~de-muting function.

73

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 52.3 Presentation of results If the overall operate time is dependent on the initial tone frequency, the results recorded on a graph showing overall operate time versus initial tone frequency. 53. 53.1 System recovery time (selective Definition The system recovery sequences to achieve This characteristic 53.2 time is the minimum a successful decoder can be measured time needed response between two successive encoded encoder sequence. resets. calling on the second calling) should be

only when the decoder

automatically

Method of measurement a) Connect an encoder or code number of successful calls. simulator to the transmitter with a means can of recording fromz the

b) Arrange that the interval between two successive coded signals time at least twice the recovery time stated by the manufacturer. With the time Reduce to 207;. This time interval is the system recovery time. interval at maximum, ensure that a satisfactory of failures the time interval until a sginificant number

be varied success

ero to a

rate for

is obtained. example up

is observed,

74

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

APPENDIX A
EXAMPLES Al. Examples Figures output OF COMBINING NETWORKS

of simple combining networks Al and A2 illustrate examples of resistance networks suitable for combining the of two or three signal generators.

signals

Rs

Receiver

Note. -

The source impedance R, of the network is equal to Ri if:

R,-_R,=R,+
In this case, the network

attenuation for combining

is about 6 dB. two signals,

FIG. Al. -

Network

I

Ri

Rl

R4

--

R9 0

T
I

Ri

R2

Nor@. -

The source impedance

R, of the network is equal to Ri if:

R1zR,:-RS.R,+
In this case, the network attenuation

is about 10 dB. three signals.

FIG. A2. -

Network

for combining 75

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 A2. Examples of networks providing higher isolation between signal generators isolation The high

Resistance networks, as shown in Figures Al and A2, may not provide sufficient between signal generators to avoid intermodulation products appearing in their output. isolotion
Noies I. 2. -

networks

described

in Notes

1 and 2 reduce this effect.
12 and Figures using a hybrid 1, 2 and 3 ). ring is shown in Figure A3. The operation

See 1EC Publication

315-2 ( Clause network

An exanlple of a combining of this device is ;?sfollows:

The coaxial cable of the hybrid ring is cut to lengths of multiples of a quarter wavelength of the median frequency. The power from signal ger:erator GA will then be divided equally between the termination point A ( provided the network is loaded at that point by a resistance R, ) and the resicrer R,, the value of which is equal to R,. The signals from signal generator GA at the output terminals of signal genelator Gg nil1 cancel each other since the two paths differ by half a wavelength. The power from signal gererator signal generator GA cancelled. GB is similarly divided and its signal at the oultput of the

Because the coaxial cable of the hybrid ring cancellation will be effective over a wide rarge of the generators GA and GB. The source impedance R, of the left-hand ( e.g. 50 Q ) if the characteristic impendacce

has a relatively low quality factor CQ ), the of frequency difference between the frequencies part of the network of the cable is Hi,./7 at point A is equal to RI ( e.g. 71 Q ).

If, for certain measurements, a wanted signal in combination with two unwanted signals is needed, the third generator, Gc, supplying the wanted signal should be connected to point A by means of the combining network shown in the right-hand part of Figure A3.
The source impedance
R',

of the complete RIzR,R4=%

network

at point B is equal to & ( e.g. 50 L! ) i

Rs
4

R2 R4 LR3 0 R',

I I

AL

GA GA and GB = signal generators Gc = additional FIG. A3. signal generator, when required

Gc

Example

of combining 76

network

using a hybrid

ring.

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 AS. Example of an input-signal source matching network

Other examples of such networks are given in Clause 45 of IEC Publication

3 15-1.

R2 k ! _-_-------__

I-_

RS Rn
4

I
A

I

G G = radio-frequency
M = matching R = receiver
R =

M

V

signal generator

network

I

2,/h.RiR,,
N--l--_ R, -R,

R,

=

R, = R,
where N is the required power loss ratio FIG. A4. Example

(g

) -R,

of a matching

network.

77

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

APPENDIX
RECOMMENDED

B
EQUIPMENT AND

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MEASURING ITS METHODS OF TEST characteristics

Bl.

Method for testing the intermodulation The inter-modulation Insert Increase a variable

of the signal generators procedure: under test. by

in the signal generators attenuator between the

may be tested by the following combining increase signal output network the output and

the receiver

the attenuation

in steps of 1 dB and

voltages

of the generators

the same amounts,

thus maintaining

the original in the

leve! at the input should remian

to the receiver. constant, any increase is

Since the intermodulation caused by intermodulation

products in the signal

generators.

B2. Mothod of testing signal generator noise The measurement erroneous At frequencies channel whether a result of certain characteristics, having a crystal output for example, filter having noise. adjacent channel selectivity, can be when a signal generator below 200 MHz, at the is influenced a high spectral noise constant is used. at the adjacent of assessing

at least 20 dB rejection under

can be connected

of the

generator

test as a means

by signal generator

78

IS 10820( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

APPENDIX
RAYLEIGH Cl. General characteristics A Rayleigh in a manner The following fading of a Rayleigh simulator FADING

C
SIMULATOR

fading simulator which will modulate of signals simulator signal; signal; signal crosses a given level (in one encountered must be known: a radio-frequency in the mobile signal services.

is a test apparatus the fast variation of a fading

which simulates

three characteristics

a) the phase distribution b) the level distribution

of the fading-modulated of the envelope

of the modulated of the modulated

c) the mean rate at which the envelope direction). Measurements obtained Rayleigh depend simulator using Rayleigh only slightly fading

simulators simulators

are meaningful used. To ensure

on the

only if the ressults which are this, it is necessary that the

has the following

characteristics:

1) The

phase of the modulated radio-frequency signal shall have a density distribution within f 20% of l/277 with reference to the phase of the radio-frequency input signal over the range of - rr to + * radians. cumulative distribution of the envelope of the modulated radio-frequency signal shall be within f2 dB of a cumulative Rayleigh distribution over a range of + 8 dB to - 32 dB referred to the r.m.s. value of the modulated radio-frequency signal. Rayleigh law, P(r) is the probability that the envelope of the modulated equal to or less than the value of x as calculated below: P(r)=
where I-x

2) The

According to the radio-frequency is

1 - e-r8

(1)

x(r.m.s) =

instantaneous envelope voltage r.m.s. voltage of the envelope rate (in one direction),
e-P,

(2) shall be within f 20% of: (3) (4)

3) The mean level crossing
Ne=1/3ifm.B.

in S-I

for 0 varying
where

from

+ 5 dB to - 25 dB with fm=v/A

v is the vehicle velocity, in metrcsjsecond x is wavelength of signal, in metres o= y y (r.m.s)

voltage level for envelope
= r.m.s. voltage

crossing rate determination of the envelope

(5)

The r.m.s. value
Note. -

will have large be determined

short-term

variations.

Therefore

to

reduce

the uncertainty,

its

should

over a sufficienty

long period.
value.

The median

value of the envelope

is 1.6 dB less than the r.m.s.

For an example

of a Rayleigh

fading

simulator 19

see Figure

Cl.

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 C2. Performance verification of a Rayleigh fading simulator

C2.1 Principle of verification This verification and c) of Clause 1) comparing Cl. applies to each of: at the simulator distribution output with the theoretical values correspondrate; tolerance. of the parameters previously defined under Items a), 6) It consists

the values obtained

ing to phase distribution, 2) ensuring C2.2 Equipment that used

envelope

and mean level crossing

the corresponding

deviations

do not exceed the permitted

A fast logarithmic

radio-frequency

selective

measuring

device, a phase meter, performance verification.

and means for An example

analyzing a distribution of equipment for doing The requirements The baseband flat response frequency converter. -

are required to carry out the this is illustrated in Figure C2. are:

for the equipment output of the

logarithmic an device

radio-frequency output

from 0 to 3 000 Hz and measuring

measuring device range of 40 dB. The output with the input

shall have a of the radio-

selective

shall be

compatible

range of the A/D

The A/D converter 80 ms.

shall have

g-bit encoding

and

have

a conversion

time

no greater

than

-

of storing at least 32 000 &bit words (Bytes) at the rate Although this memory size will not hold all of the information generated in one measurement, statistical significance will not be lost if the samples. are taken in several segments, provided that the sum of the samples in the segments is equal to the required number of samples.

The memory should be capable generated by the A/D converter.

-

The baseband output of the phase meter shall have a flat response from 0 to 3 000 HZ and be able to make accurate phase measurement over an amplitude range of at least 40 dB. The processor should be capable of storing the output of the A/D converter and then taking the information from the memory and processing it. in the memory

-

Notes 1. _ If the output of the A/D converter is processed in real time to provide an address to a memory position that can be made to correspond to a level or phase, then the memory position content can be increased by I each time that it is addressed. This method requires only 256 16-bit words
of memory data. 2. for the amplitude or phase measurement and reduces the time needed to process the

For the crossing rate measurement, the same procebs can be used. In this case, however, analog comparators. each connectkg to a 16.bit word of memory, would be required.

seven

C2.3 Method C2.3.1 Method No!P. -To

of measurement of measurement for phase distribution
64 000 phase samples be used

achieve statistical significance, this measurement requires that to verify the phase performacce of the Rayleigh fadizg simulator.

a) Connect b) Adjust

the equipment the frequency

as illustrated

in Figure

C2. to 40 times fm, in hertz.

of the clock of the A/D converter 80

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 cj Adjust interest the frequency of the radio-frequency signal generator to the frequency band of

and note the frequency.
at a radio frequency which is within 20% of the

Note. -The Rayleigh fading simulator should be verified frequency c f the receiver being measured.

d) Adjust lowpass

the velocity

control

of the

Rayleigh

fading

simulator velocity

( or

bandwidth

of the noise of interest

filters) according velocities 20 km/h, 2 km/h, control

to equation are:

(4) for a specified

of the application

and note the velocity. The specified 10 km/h, 1 km/h,

50 km/h and is adjustable input

100 km/h in

for modile

application;

5 km/h and

10 km/h for portable discrete

application.
set to within 20:/, of the

If the velocity
specified

steps, it shall bc fading

velocity. level to the Rayleigh counter simulator to the value specified

e) Adjust the radio-frequency by the manufacturer.

f) Clear the memory,
g) Run the measurement

and reset the sample for 64 000 samples,

(or clock). in the memory.

and store the values for the samples number

h) Process the information in the memory to detemine the in each 10 degree phase increment, and record the results. i) Repeat C2.3.2 Steps d) to h) for the other of results noted in Step c) and the velocity specified velocities.

of sarnples that occurred

Presentation a) Record

the radio frequency

in Step d) of Sub-clause

C2.3.1.

b) Make a table of the phase angles and the number of samples in each of the 36 ten-degree increments for each velocity recorded in Step d) of Sub-clause C2.3.1. c) If the number lator complies radio C2.3.3 Method
Note. -

of samples in each class lies between I 422 and 2 134, record that the simuwith this IEC standard for the phase distribution at the specified velocity and for crossing rate and enveIope distribution

freqency. of measurement

To achieve statistical significance, the crossing rate measurement requires that 128 000 samples of the envelope be used to verify the crossing rate performance oi the Rayleigh fading simulator. The same samples may be used to measure the envelope distribution of the Rayleigh fading simulator.

a)

Connect

the equipment

as illustrated

in Figure

C2. band of interest,

b) Adjust the conversion rate of the A/D converter to 128 timesfm, in hertz. c) Adjust the frequency of the radio-frequency signal generator to the frequency and note the frequency.
Note. The Rayleigh fading simulator should be verified frequency of the rec:ivrr bci,g measured. at a radio frequency

which is within 20% of the

d) Adjust the velocity control of the lowpass filters) according to equation and note the velocity. The specified velocities are: -

Rayleigh fading simulator (4) for a specified velocity

(or bandwidth of the noise of the application of interest

10 km/h, 20 km/h, 50 km/h and 100 km/h for mobile application; 1 km/h, 2 km/h, 5 km/h and 10 km/h for portable application. 81

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 Tf the velocity specified e) Adjust control is adjustable input in discrete steps it shall fading be set to within f20% of the

velocity. the radio-frequency level to the Rayleigh simulator to the value specified

by the manufacturer. f) Clear the memory, the memory. h) Process samples.
i) Process

and reset the sample for

counter

(or clock). and store the the value cumulative of the samples in the of the

g) Run

measurement the information

128 000 samples, memory to

in the

determine

distribution

It is recommended

that each class have width of 1 dB.

the information in the memory to determine the number of level crossings (one direction) of the envelope for each level (- 25, - 20, - 15, - 10, - 5, 0 and + 5 dB) referred to the r.m.s. value of the signal envelope. Steps d) to i) for the other
of results for envelope

j) C2.3.4
a) 6)

Repeat

specified

velocities.

Presentation

distribution

Record C2.3.3.

the

frequency

noted

in Step c) and determined

the

velocity

noted

in

Step d) of Sub-clause graph

Plot the cumulative paper,

distribution

in Step h) of Sub-clause number

C2.3.3 on Rayleigh of samples.

or make a table of r in decibels

and the cumulative

c) Record the verification envelope distribution 2 dB of the samples C2.3.5 is within

that the simulator complies with this IEC standard for the cumulative at the specified velocity and radio-frequency if the value lies within value shown defined by equation (1) or if the cumulative number of in Table CI.
rate

corresponding the range

Presentation a) Make

of results for level crossing

velocity
b)

a table of the envelope levels, and the number observed in Step d) of Sub-clause C2.3.3.

of crossings

for

each level and for each

Record the verification that the simulator complies with IEC standards for level crossing rate if the number of crossings for each level is within the range shown in Table CII, for each specified velocity and radio-frequency.

82

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
TABLE CI

Limitsjbr
Level (dB) -32 -31 -30 -29 -28 -21 -26 -25 -24 -23 -22 -21 -20 -19 -18 -17 -16 -15 -14 -13 -12 -11 -10 -9 -8 z: 7: 1; -1 0 : : :, 7 8

the cumulative number of samples at each value of decibels
Lower limit 2: 81 102 128 161 203 255 321 404 509 2: 1013 1 274 Expected value 1:: 128 161 203 255 321 Upper limit 128 161 203 255 321 404 509 640 805 1013 1 274 1 601 2 013 2 529 3 175 3 984 4 996 6 251 7 827 9 1'4 12 181 I5 141 18 761 23 153 28 432 42 34 036 702 59 456 50 893 70 80 911 159 91 653 101 164 110 595 117 617 125 122 582 611 127 167 148 127 955 127 994 _ -

'

I

iti
640 805 1013 1 214 1 601 2 013 2 529 3 175 3 984 4 996 6 257 7 827 9 774 12 181 15 141 18 761 28 432 23 153 42 34 702 036 50 59 456 893

I

z::;

1601

3 175 3 984 4 996 6 257 7 827 9 714 12 181 18 761 15 141 23 432 153 28 34 702 036 42 50 456 59 893 10 911 159 80 101 91 653 164 110 595 117 617 122 582 125 611

I

70 159 80 911 101 91 653 164 117 110 122 125 127 127 617 595 582 611 148 767

TABLE CII

Limit for the number of level crossings in ttie measurements
Level (dW Expected rate (fm) 0.14 0.25 0.43 0.72 I .02 0.92 0.19 Lower limit Expected value Upper limit

-25 - 20 -15 -10 - 5 0 +5

112 199 345 514 822 738 151

141 248 432 117 1 027 922 189

169 298 518 861 1 233 1 107 226

83

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

Unmodulated radio-frequency input signal

-

6

I.2 = Gaussian
2 4,5 6,7 8 9 = = = = =

noise generators 90" phase shifter low-pass filters balanced mixers power divider hybrid

FIG. Cl. -

Example

of a Rayleigh

fading

simulator.

7

5

6

7

8

1= 2 = 3 = 4 = 5 = 6 = 7 =

radio-frequency signal generator Rayleigh fading simulator phase meter logarithmic, radio-frequency, selective A/D converter memory (if necessary) processor

measuring

device

8 = output device 9 = variable clock Note. If the simulator (2) does not have a zero velocity setting, it should generator (1) should be adjusted to allow for its attenuation. be bypassed and the output of the

FIG. C2. -

Example

of measuring

arrangement

for evaluating 84

a Rayleigh

fading

simulator.

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

APPENDIX
INTERMODULATION Dl

D
RESPONSE

. Intermodulation
Intermodulation Unwanted the wanted

response responses corresponding which may as follows: to the intermediate produce an frequency are not significant response are related in to

this class of equipment. signal frequencies signal frequency intermodulation

D 1.1

Second-order

relationship

fw =frffn
Note. Commonly used frequency relationships + Af or fr = 2fi + Af D 1.2 fr = Zfw- Af include: fn =fw

fn = fw-Af

Third-order relationship fw = 2fnf.f;

Note. - Commcnly

used frequency

relationships

include: fn -fw-Af

fn = fw -t Af

or
fr = fw + 2Af D 1.3 fr=

fw-2Af

Fifth-order

relationship j; = 35, f 2fi
include: fn =fw-Af or f, =h + I.SAf fr = f,-l.5Af used signal frequency relationships

Note. -

Commonly

fn = .fw + Af

fw f" fr Af

where is the is the is the is the

frequency frequency frequency frequency

of the wanted signal of the nearer unwanted signal of the more remote unwanted signal difference between the wanted signal and the nearer

unwanted

signal reasonable of the number equipment of

Other frequencies considered

intermodulation in this standard

orders

exist. sufficient

However, to

selection the

of

a

fnand fr is generally

describe

performance

with respect to intermodulation.

85

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

APPENDIX GUIDE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION
FOR EQUIPMENT The equipment pertaining El. RECEIVING parameter measurements energy,

E
TEST SITE ENERGY ELECTROMAGNETIC

OF A 30 m RADIATION

RADIO-FREQUENCY

to received

radio-frequency

applicable to for example,

this test site are all measurements receiver radiation sensitivity.

Test site characteristics Limits Useful frequency range: Nominal site attenuation:
Note. -

25 MHz to 1 000 MHz 20 dB to 46 dB for 25 MHz 52 dB to 78 dB for 1 000 MHz

The nominal attenuation of the test site for a half-wave dipole is 26 dB for 25 MHZ and 58 dB for 1 000 MHz. The actual attenuation may vary due to ground reflectiolis.

Equipment Radiation

size limits: angle limits:

6 m maximum, Limits

excluding

the antenna plane

only apply to the horizontal mounting arrangement.

See Appendix 162. Radiation test site

H for tests using an alternative

The radiation test site shall be on level ground with uniform electrical characteristics and be free from reflecting objects over as wide an area as is practical to minimize errors in the test results. The distance between the vertical axis through under test and the vertical axis through the centre the centre of the antenna of the transmitting antenna of the equipment shall be 30 m.

The minimum boundary of the test site shall be an ellipse having a major axis equal to 60 m and a minor axis equal to 52 m. The equipment under test and the transmitting antenna shall be located at the foci. No extraneous conducting objects having any dimension in excess of I5 cm for measurements. over the frequency range of 25 MHz to 300 MHz, or 5 cm for measurements over the frequency range of 300 MHz to I GHz, shall be in the immediate vicinity of either the equipment under test or the transmitting antenna. Care shall be taken accuracy to ensure that the extraneocrs electromagnetic field do not affect the

of the test results.

All test equipment shall preferably be powered by batteries. If the equipment is powered from the mains, each of the mains supply cables shall be provied with a suitable radio-frequency filter. The cable connecting the filter and the measuring equipment shall be screened and shall

be as short screened E3.

as possible.

The cable

connecting

the filter

and

the supply

mains

shall be either 30 cm.

and be at ground

level, or shall be buried El).

to a depth

of approximately

Position of the equipment under test (see Figure

The equipment in its cabinet or housing in which it normally operates shall be placed on a horizontal platform, the upper side of which is 1.50 m above the ground. This platform and its support shall be made of non-conducting material. 86

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 For equipment having an integral antenna, place the equipment which is closest to its position in normal use. For equipment antenna having a rigid position. a non-rigid support. to rotate the equipment about the vertical axis through the integral remotely external integral antenna, mount the antenna vertically external integral antenna, on the platform in a position

mount

the

equipment

so that the

is in a vertical having

For equipment

with a non-conducting It shall be possible

antenna. It is recommended that a platform controlled, be used for this purpose. For information on the use of alternative or carried

in the

form

of a turntable,

preferably

mounting

arrangements

on this

test site for equipH.

ment which is hand-held E4. Radio-frequency

on the person

while in normal

use, see Appendix

signal generator

with a combining network and associated The well-shielded radio-frequency signal generator, output cable, shall be placed in a position that will not affect the accuracy of the test results, and shall be connected to and matched to the transmitting antenna. E5. Selective measuring device a frequency selective voltmeter, a spectrum

The selective measuring device (4) may be either analyzer, or a calibrated field-strength meter. E6. Step attenuator A step attenuator (5) shall be placed at the output It should have a range of 80 dB in 1 dB steps. E7. Encoder

of the radio-frequency

signal generator

(1).

The encoder (7) shall be able to modulate the radio-frequency signal standard coded test signal to the deviation specified by the manufacturer. E8. Transmitting antenna

generator

(1) with the

The transmitting antenna (2) shall be suitable for the radiation of linearly polarized It may consist of a half-wave dipole, but for practical reasons a more complex antenna high directivity material. equipment and broad bandwidth is preferred. by The the the transmitting pole, vertical centre both pole of antenna at the end of a horizontal The boom under test and boom supported shall be arranged a vertical so that

waves. having

shall be mounted of the 0.2 m

made of non-conducting in the direction is 3 f the antenna

shall project

at least 1 m from

The mounting shall permit the antenna to be positioned above the ground. polarization as that of the receiver's antenna. The cable from the antenna along the horizontal boom and the vertical pole. At some frequencies, height due to ground moved appreciable reflections. variation Where of signal this

for the the same should be routed

level occurs for small changes the transmitting in a region small changes antenna in antenna

of antenna should be sensi-

occurs,

up or down by an amount

that will place the antenna less dependent 87 upon

of small height

tivity and make the test site calibration

position.

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 E9. Calibration antenna antenna (3) replaces the equipment under test during Ela). The calibration antenna shall be an antenna calibration of the test of suitable dimen-

The calibration site (see Figure

sions for which the available power output has been calibrated in field strength. The centre of the calibration antenna will be located so that this point coincides with the centre of the integral matched 60 MHz, vertical the ground ElO. E1O.l antenna the above polarization. of the equipment under test. The measuring antenna, device. antenna including the cable, shall be to the input impedance condition of the selective may be impossible under At frequencies below about when the antenna is arranged for should be placed 0.3 m above above.

to achieve

In this case, the lower

end of the

and the equipment

test shall be positioned

to satisfy the conditon

Method of calibrating Connect under test. the frequency

the test site as illustrated oriented in to Figure provide Ela and the described in Clauses intended Eg and E9

the equipment

with the transmitting

antenna

polarization

for the receiver

E10.2

Adjust

of the

radio-frequency

signal

generator

(1) to

the operating

frequency

of the receiver. E10.3 Tune generator E10.4 the selective (1) . measuring device to the operating frequency of the radio-frequency signal

Adjust the output of the radio-frequency signal generator (1) to produce a reading of lOOpV/m [40 dB &V/m)] on the selective measuring device. Record the output level of the radio-frequency signal generator (l), Uy, in PV with attenuator (5) set to 20 dB.
Note. The calibration is only valid for the frequency, antenna, polarization and antenna position III the calibration procedure. If any of these change, the test site should be recalibrated. used

88

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

FIG. Ela.

6

FIG. Elb. 1 = radio-frequency signal generator transmitting ante;lna 3 = calibration antenna 4 = selective measuring device 5 = 80 dB step attenuator, 1 dB steps 6 = receiver under test 7 = encoder
2 =

Care should

be taken to ensure Measuring

that

the field in the vicinity for receivers

of

the receiver

under

test

is

not

disturbed

by the test equipment. FIG. El. arrangement on a radiation test site (30 m).

89

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

APPENDIX
ACCURACY COMPLIANCE AND AND DISPERSION FOR TESTS SENSITIVITY

F
OF MEASUREMENTS AND AND SELECTIVE SELECTIVE AND CALLING) CALLING)

OF METHODS (DATA (DATA

DEGRADATION

MEASUREMENTS

F'l . Introduction This discussion will show, by analysis of examples, the underlying basis for determining the accuracy and dispersion for the methods of measurement and compliance tests used in this The examples of error ratio curves selected are typical for receiver-decoders that will standard. be measured using the methods of measurement in this standard. and compliance tests have been designed to provide the desired signal level

The methods

for equipments that have error ratio versus input degree of accuracy and dispersion curves that have significantly less slope than the examples used in this discussion. The analysis to evaluate given in this appendix of measurement will allow one to use other or compliance examples of error

ratio curves

the methods

tests used in this standard.

In this standard, there are measurements of receiver r.f. parameters for several types of The r.f. parameters fall into three signals each having a standardized reference error ratio. classes: sensitivity, sensitivity reduction under multipath propagation conditions and degradation. In this appendix to as fading. Sensitivity is the level of r.f. input signal required to produce the reference error ratio. sensitivity reduction under multipath propagation conditions will be referred

In this standard, the fading measurements are made using a Rayleigh fading simulator. However, most of the measurements are made in the static condition and in this appendix, unless otherwise stated, the static condition is implied. The reference ratio. In the degradation measurements, the requirement is to find signal that causes a wanted input signal which is 3 dB in excess will produce the reference error ratio. the level of the unwanted input of the reference sensitivity that fading error margin is the ratio of r.f. input signal signal level required (static) required to produce the error

ratio to the r.f. input

level (faded)

to produce

the reference

Different methods of measurements are used for the different signals. The two methods of measurement used in this standard are named the up/down method and the straddle method. error ratio and the method of A summary of the types of parameters, signals, the reference measurement
Note. -

used are shown

in Table F I.

1~ the title of some of the figures the word bbit' has been used for bit stwum :%nd <character' has The word `fading' has been used for sorsiri~~it.~ (,fi/n'i/rg). been used for cl~awfr~~ srring. 90

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

TABLE
Receiver parameter Sensitivity Sensitivity Sensitivity Sensitivity Sensitivity (fading) Sensitivity (fading) Sensitivity (fading) Sensitivity (fading) Degradation Degradation Degradation Degradation Type of signal

Fl
Refererce error ratio 0.201) 0.01 Straddle Method of measurement used Up/down*)

Selective Data

calling

(bit stream) string)

Data (character Data (message) Selective calling

0.01 Straddle 0.20 Up/down*) 0.201) Up/down', 0.01 Straddle

Data (bit stream) Data (character Data (message) Selective calling string)

0.01 Straddle 0.20 Up/down 0.20') 0.01

)

Up/down')
Straddle Straddle Up/dowiI'J

Data (bit stream) Data (character Data (m:sssge) string)

0.01 0.20

the 1) Selectivecalling uses the reference of 807; calling probability. For t s discussion, selective calling reference error ratio is l-0.80 or 0.20. 21 The method of measurement for messages used in this standard is based on the up/clown This nlcthod seeks a signal lovzl ill' wazted or !:r,wanted signals SO Ihat the method. mess:ige sequence will have an error ra!io of 50%.

The relationship sequence is:

between

the number

of messages

in

a sequence

and the error

ratio for the

(1 - Pm)N=O'5
where P, is the message error rate of the message sequent;: Iv is the number of messages in each sequence.

for a Pm of 0.2, N is very nearly 3, which is used in the message measurements. The up/down method of measurement assumes that the errors occur independently from one However, this method is not used for bit stream message to the next, which is indeed the case.
For example,

or character string measurements, because for these, the assumption does not always hold. Tt should be noted that measurements of a radio-frequency parameter, for example reference sensitivity on the same receiver-decoder for bit stream, character string or message, will probably not give the same result. F2. Measurement and compliance test In this standard there are two types of methods because F2.1 they serve different purposes.
Measuremerlt

of measurement.

Both types

are included

which is the input signal level or the The first type of measurement measures the parameter Since this method provides an unwanted signal level that produces the reference error ratio. estimate of the parameter, it is a two-sided test and usually requires a longer measurement than in this discussion is referred to as a method the compliance test. This method of measurement of measurement. 91

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 F2.2 Compliance
test

The second type of measurement ratio is greater unwanted or smaller This signal (s). is a

is the one-sided

compliance error test and

test in

which

only

determines input

if the error signal and in less

than the reference

ratio for a specified level of many cases can be

performed

time. An important characteristic of a compliance test method is its risk curve (see F8.4). The concept of the risk curve has a correspondence to the concept of dispersion for methods of measurement. F3. Dispersion Dispersion of a measurement is characterized the by a probability distribution of the results of

the measurement same equipment F3.1
Dejnition

that can be expected when under the same conditions.

measurement

is 17erformed many times on the

cf dispersion

Dispersion varies with te>t equipment, with operator :IQC!, in the measurement of selective call and data receivers, uith the statistical process used in the measurement. In this appendix, only the latter is discussed for nlc'asdring sensitivity, fading and degradation. The measurements will produce values (e,timatcs) which have a probability distribution that has a bell shape for units of input signal level in decibels. Since the probability distribution can be diKerent for each receiver-decoder measured, the dispersion is defined as the range of input signal levels from the level where the cumulative probability distribution equals 0.05 probability to where it equals 0.95 probability (e.g. - 1.2 to 0.9 dB).

For compliance tests, dispersion is defined as the difference between the receiver-decoder parameter that has a 0.95 probability of passing and one that has a 0.05 probability of failing (see F 8.4). F3.2
Magnitude of' dispersion

The design goals for the methods of measurement standard are to have a dispersion and risk of: & 1 dB or less for sensitivity, 5 2 dB or less for degradation & 2 dB or less for fading. This was done by assuming in current messages) receiver-decoders used in the method the lowest slope and by selecting of measurement of the (e.g. selectivity

and

compliance

test

methods

in this

or intermodulation),

error

ratio curves generally (tones, test method.

experienced or

the number

of elements

bits, characters

or compliance

While the examples used in this discussion are typical, The methods above goals in their dispersion and risk. methods have been designed with this in mind, as there have error ratio curves that are significantly The number of elements selected different

they have considerable of measurement and may be receiver-decoders

margin to the compliance test measured that

from those in the examples. of measurement goals. or compliance test methods

for the methods consistent

have been reduced

to the minimum,

with the above

While there are many useful methods available tests, the methods chosen to be standardized dispersion and risk. 92

for making these measurements and compliance for this standard will produce the desired

IS 10820( Part 6): 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 F4. Accuracy Accuracy between the one would -0.08 confused and for methods average of measurement, obtained For example, in this appendix, from the measurement if the theoretical obtained is characterized and by the difference value of that is measureestimate the theoretical method

expect to obtain.

value for a method

ment is zero dB and the average dB, the accuracy a high inaccuracy

of the estimates

from the

of measurement

of the method or the opposite. and accuracy. test methods of passing

with the range of dispersion.

of measurement is -0.08 dB. Accuracy should not be A method of measurement could have a small dispersion Ideally, the method of measurement should have low

values for both dispersion Accuracy that produces F5. Shapes for compliance 0.5 probability

is the difference and the theoretical

between value.

the

relative

input

signal level

of error ratio curves factors that determine the dispersion of a method of measerement or the risk of test methods are the reference error ratio, the shape of the error ratio curve of the under test and the number of elements used in the method of measurement or test method. ratio curve for that the error a receiver-decoder input signal of ratio curve is not by the method can be known determined plotting by the lengthy the result. ln test except for the error ratio for different
levels and

important compliance equiplnent compliance process

The shape of the error of measuring bounds this standard, some general it is assumed

to the operator

and is not required

measurement

or the compliance

In this appendix, method. ratio curve to be determined

however, the examples used provide a model that allows the error for the examples which are used in this discussion.

All of the error ratio curves for the examples used in this appendix have been normalized so that zero dB is at the reference error ratio. The analysis only makes use of the shape of the Receiver-decoders that require a greater signal-to-noise ratio will have their error ratio curves. error ratio curves shifted to the right and if the required signal-to-noise ratio is less, the error ratio curves F5.1 will be shifted to the left.

Sl?upes of bit stream error rutio curves For data ( bit stream ), common [I]* used for receiver-decoders

F5.1 1 For sensitivity measurements examples of error ratio functions ( see page 406 of reference ( static ) are:
Errbit =

0.5 [ 1 -

erf ( \f'w)

]

where Errblt is the bit error ratio
evfis C is A = A = the error function the ratio of the carrier to noise powel 1 for ideal coherent PSK (antipodal sign.alli:lg) 2 for coherent FSK (orthogonal signalling)

The value of A varies with the modulation error ratio curve. See curve 1 of Figure F I. Other examples of error

system used but it does not affect the 111):

shape of the

ratio function are (see page 406 of reference Errbit = 0.5 exp (- C/A)
F9.

(2)

*The figures in square

brackets

refer to Clause

93

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
where C is the ratio of the carrier to noise power A := 1 for differentially coherent PSK A = 2 for non-coherent

FSK Fl. It is also assumed signal level. most often presented in the format of log error ratio versus input in this appendix that the carrier power is directly

See curve 2 of Figure proportional Error signal Error ratio to the input curves

are

level in dB. ratio curves measured on receiver-decoders may differ from those in Figure Fl, but

most will be sufficiently

similar to this model. Since the curve for equation 1 has the least slope of in the region of 0.01 error ratio, it will be used as the bit error ratio curve for the remainder this discussion. The error ratio curve of a receiver-decoder is not known by the experimenter from this example. one-half are one-half viable for The dispersion measuring and risk obtained methods that using this error ratio be about that stated in F3.2 that of the examples. so that the receiver-decoders of measurement have error

and can vary significantly ratio curve should and compliance F5.1.2

test methods

curves with slopes of about For degradation Selectivity,

measurements response immunity, intermodulation response immunity and impulsive as they measure the level of unwanted signals. degradation measurements will be used; it is also

spurious

noise tolerance are degradation measurements In this discussion, the following model for applicable to the compliance test methods.

In these methods of measurement, the wanted signal level is first set at the reference sensitivity without the unwanted power applied to the input of the receiver. Then the wanted signal level is increased 3 dB (twice the power) which accounts for the factor 2 in the numerator in the following equation. The same reference error ratio (the same signal-to-noise ratio) is reproduced by applying the unwanted power. Signal-to-noise ratio = 2S/(N + U) (3)

where S is the wanted signal power corresponding to the receiver-decoder reference sensitivity N is the noise power of the receiver and is assumed to be constant U is the unwanted signal power or the power of the on channel intermodulation response intermodulation immunity measurements U is the unwanted

for spurious

and

power unwanted

in the receiver signal level

(e.g. at ?he detector) recorded in the

and has been

attenuated

by the will be a

receiver. function

The input

degradation

measurements

of the receiver

attenuation

and of a non-linear

coefficient. noise tolerance, If the unwanted

In this discussion, for selectivity, it is assumed that U is proportional

spurious response immunity and impulsive to the input level of the unwanted signal(s).

power is generated by an intermodulation the unwanted signal(s). In this case, the slope. If the signal-to-noise
3 in Figure Fl. In

process than U may vary exponentially as a Dower of degradation bit error ratio curve will have a steeper

ratio from equation

(3) is applied

to equation

(1) as C, the result

is curve

the graph the input signal level is U, so the bit error ratio increases as Lr increases and the slope of the curve near the reference error ratio is less steep than the bit error ratio curve. 91

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 F5.1.3
Sensitivity measurement impact on degradation measurements and compliance tests

Curve equation obtained

3 in Figure Fl is based on the assumption that the value S is replaced by 2s in (3). In the degradation method of measurement, the value of S used is an estimate from the sensitivity measurement and has a distribution. If the value of S used is not

exactly the value for the receiver-decoder sensitivity, the shape of the degradation error ratio curve will move either to the right or to the left as well to change its slope. The result of this effect is that the dispersion and risk are greater than they would be if the exact sensitivity were known F5.2 and used in the degradation measurements and compliance tests.
Shape of character string error ratio curves

For characters which are composed of a number of bits, the shape of the error ratio curves is derived from the bit error ratio curve. The shape is a function of the number of bits in the character and whether curve correction error correction F2 codes are used. is the character a 15-bit error character ratio curve for an 8-bit character bit of error correction

For example, with no error capability.

1 of Figure

and curve 2 is for

with one

The main difference between bit stream and character string error ratio curves the maximum error ratio for bit stream is 0.5 the maximum ratio for character almost 1.O. Generally, but not always, the slope of the curve 0.01 is steeper for character strings than for bit streams. For the remainder of this discussion, used, so the character error ratio is:
Errchar =

is that while string can be error ratio of has been

near the

reference

a character

of 8 bits with no error

correction

1 - (1 - Errbit)* (1).

(4)

where

,!+rbit is the bit error

ratio from eqUatiOn

core. _ The equation above is correct with the assumption that the bit errors are independent. This assumption is used in this appendix. However, there are many cases where this assumption does not hold. For example, in some modulations with differential encoding (e.g. PSK modulaoccur in pairs. In this case for low bit tion with differentially coherent ( detection ) bit errors error ratios: Gr,,,,,
Other

= 1- (1 - Errbi,/2)8 and propagation which would which tend to change have the bit errors the shape of the error ratio

types

of

modulation,

decoders

correlated may have different relationships curves used in the examples in this appendix, .Degradation

curve 3 of Figure curve 3 of Figure Fl.

F2 was

derived

using the same procedure

(see F5.1 .l) as for

degradation

Codes that use more bits per character steeper F5.3 slopes near the reference error
Shape of message error ratio curves

and ratio.

use

error

correcting

codes

generally

will

have

Messages can take on many configurations and therefore the error great deal. The example chosen for this discussion consists of characters ) with no error correction age is not uncommon, most systems

ratio curves will vary a 128 bits ( e.g. 16 g-bit

and is shown in Figure F3. While the length of the messwould have some form of error control which generally

would make the slope of the error ratio curve greater near the reference error ratio of 0.2. The curve of Errmass is derived from the bit error ratio curve given in curve 1 of Figure I;1 using the following function: 95

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
Errmess =

1 -

(1 (1).

Errbit )l**

(3

where Errbit is the bit error For this example,
Note. -

ratio from error

equation

a 0.2 message

ratio corresponds

to a 0.0017 bit error

ratio.

The equation above is correct with the assumption that the bit errors are independent. This there are many cases where this assumption assumption is used in this appendix. However, in some modulations with differential encoding ( e. g. PSK modudoes not hold. For example, lation with differentially coherent detection ) bit errors occur tn pairs. In this case for low bit error ratios: Err,,,, = 1 - ( 1 - Errbit 12 )I*8 Other types of modulation, decoders and propagation which tend to have the bit errors correlated may have different relation ships which would change the shape of the error ratio curves used in the examples in this appendix.

Degradation degradation steeper F5.4 F5.4.1

curve 2 of Figure curve 3 of Figure Fl.

F3 was derived

using the same procedures codes

( see F5.1.1 ) as for generally will have

Codes that use more bits in the message and use error correcting slopes near the reference message error ratio of 0.2.
Shape of selective calling error ratio curves

For digital modulation

When

the selective

call

transmission

has a digital discussion

form,

the results will to be

be very

similar

to

that of message ( see above ) and for this sensitivity and degradation measurements. F5.4.2
For analog modulation

will be assumed

the same for both

For AM and SSB,

when the selective

call

transmission

consists

of

several

audio

frequency

or in sequence, the selective calling error ratio curve may be For FM and PM, the error ratio curves error ratio curve. While the error ratio of each tone detector may have may have a considerably steeper slope. a shape not unlike that of equation (I), many designs have the tone detect level located on the steep portion of the FM threshold curve ( i.e. below the threshold knee ). In this case, the signal-to-noise ratio C in equation (1) may vary much faster than the input signal ITvel and the selective calling error ratio may vary from 0.9 to 0.1 for a one or two dB change in input level. F5.5
Shape of error ratio curves for fading signals

tones transmitted simultaneously similar in shape to the character

The fading

measurement simulator

of

sensitivity

fading

uses an

input

signal

that is produced

by a Rayleigh

( see appendix

curves that result from using condition. F5.5.1
Shape of bit stream

The bit stream, character string and message error ratio this signal differ considerably from those obtained from the static

C ).

error ratio curve

For this discussion, models non-coherent

the error

ratio versus the mean carrier

to noise

power

ratio function

that

FSK ( see page 407 of reference
Emit = I/ ( 2 +

[ 11 ) will be used and is: (6).

C/A )

where c is the mean carrier .4 = 1 for differentially A I 2 for non-coherent to noise power ratio coherent PSK FSK

96

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 4 curve of this function is shown in Figure F4, curve 1. It has been a zero dB input signal level produce a 0.01 bit error ratio and is shown level. level. F5.5.2 Shape oj" character string error ratio curve Using the almost F5.5.3 example of a character in F5.2 applied to equation (6), the normalized F4, curve 2. curve is identical to the bit stream error ratio curve and is shown in Figure Again it is assumed that the mean carrier power is proportional normalized to have this input signal

for & 6dB about

to the mean

Shape qf message error ratio curve Using the example of a message in F5.3 applied to equation (6), the zero dB to produce 0.2 error ratio is shown in Figure F4, curve 3. normalized curve for

F6. Models for the straddle method of measurement string measurements of sensitivity, of measurement and compliance is used in this standard for bit stream and character The sensitivity and Odiug methods fading and degradation. test methods have been analyzed to determine the expected For the bit stream only, the degradation mcasuredispersion and risk of the examples used. that the sensitivity is known. ment has been analyzed using the assumption However, to simulate the degradation method of measurement as it is used, Monte Carlo simulations were used to obtain F6.1 estimates of the dispersion and risk. The straddle method of measurement

Model for bit stream sensitivity. measurement

For this discussion, a bit error ratio curve given by equation (1) is assumed and the know sensitivity is zero dB. All other input levels are referenced to zero dB. See Figure Fl, curve 1. The method of measurement says to start the measurement at an input signal level corresponding to the specified reference sensitivity. Let US assume, for example, that this starting level L, corresponds ( j = 1, 2,..., if the initial When Event Event bit error to a bit error ratio higher l%.) Li, one of the following in error. in error. Then increase events occurs: the input
:;ig;la[ level by

than

1%.

n ) will be increased

by steps of 0.5 dB. with level 25 bits

The successive input signal levels L ( A similar analysis could bc performed

ratio was lower than

2 500, bits are transmitted X: Y: there are there are more than exactly Record

0.5 dB and Li+r = Li + 0.5. 25 bits the Then the measurement The preceding is terminated levels tested one" ). (Ll = Ln). as possible Event Z: as S = Ln.

bit sensitivity

values of S have been Ll,.. . . Li. .., Ln = S ( called "series

there are ( for the first time ) less than 25 bits in error. is terminated ( Li=Ln ). Record the bit sensitivity

Then the mcasurcment as S=Ln-0.25 dB ( or

levels tested as possible values of S have been L n_1+0.25 dB ). The preceding (L,-0.25 ), . . . . . . . ( Li-0.25 ), . . . . . . . ( Ln-0.25 =S ) ( called "series two" ) but the corresponding input signal levels are 0 .25 dB higher than S or equal to L, ,..., Li,..., Ln. Event Y occurs with a probability: 2475 Errbit is the bit error ratio corresponding
97

ErrbIt 25 (7) to level LI ( see Figure FI ),

wheie

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 Event Z occurs with a probability: = k=24 2 k=O 2500! ( 1 - Errbit ) 2500-k k! (2500 - k)! to
level

pz (S-Li-0.25) where

Errhit

(8)
Fi ).

Errblt

is the bit error the probability px(L,)=l-py(S=Lr)

ratio corresponding of having event

LI ( see Figure signal

Obviously

X for an input

level equal to Li is: (9)

-p,(S=Li-0.25) a level Li of the "series one" by all be the recorded as the of

The probablity

p(Li) that probability

sensitivity preceding

corresponds to the events X, i.e.: S=Ll )`py

of event
j=i-1

Y multiplied

probabilities

p (

( S=Li ) X

77 j=l

px ( S=Li )

w-9

The probability sensitivity preceding
p (

p( Lt-0.25

) that a level ( Li-0.25 probability of

) of the

"series

two" be recoraed the

as the of

corresponds to the events X. i.e.: S=Li-0.25 )=pz

event Z multiplied

by all

probabilities

j=i-1

( S=Li-0.25)

x

rr j=l

px ( S=L1)

(11)
dB, corresponding

For example, the measurement starts at to a bit error ratio of 0.06 ( see Figure is 1, and: PCS=p ( S=-2.55 Tf events Y and Z do not occur, Then, from equation

an input signal level Li= -2.8 Fl ). The probability of being ) ) by 0.5 dB and L,=

at

the

start

level

2.8 ) = py ( S= -2.8 ) = pz ( S=-2.55

the level is increased equations

-2.3

dB.

(9) and using S--2.3)1

(10) and (11) alternately:

p(S=-2.3)=p,( p(S=-2.05) and so on. For greater =pz(

l-p,(S=-2.8)-p,(S=-2.55)] I-py( S=-2.8)-p,(S=-2.55)]

S=-2.05)[

this example, the different than 10" and the cumulative

values obtained are plotted in Figure probability are given in Table F2. TABLE F2
Cumula the probability pcS,

F5 and the

values

Value of S in dB

p(ti)

-0.8 -0.55 -0.3 -0.05 00:425 0.7 0.95 1.2 1.45

0.001 0.001 0.044 0.123 0.051 0.612 0.000 0.163 <10-s 0.000

15 45 14 93 53 96 62 49 73

0.001 15 0.002 60 0.046 74 0.170 67 0.222 20 0.835 16 0.835 78 0.999 27 0.999 27 1 .OGO 00

98

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 JEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 The results obtained starting levels would for the example have slightly are related to the starting level of -2.8 dB and other

By repeating the calculation for many starting levels ( e.g. -3 to -2.5 dB ) an envelope of p(,) can be plotted. This can be considered the probability distribution of pcs, for this example and is curve 1 in Figure F6. The accuracy for this example, at any low starting level, is-O.014 dB. Pep, is curve 2 of Figure F6 and shows that 90% of the results will 0.05 and 0'95) which is the dispersion

different

results.

The cumulative be between -0.5 for this example F6.2

probability

and 0.4 dB (levels for for any low starting

which P (s) equals level. is similar

Bit stream degrudation measuremerit The analysis for the degradation measurement ment except for two items. The first is that CJ, the unwanted 3 of Figure that "input "increase", Fl is used. of measurement is replaced and "add" uses by the same signal level,

to that for

the

sensitivity

mcasure-

is used (see F5.1.2)

and, for this example,

curve

The method

events input

X, Y and signal" results and

2 mentioned all the

in F6.1

except

signal" "subtract"

"unwanted input

words high

"decrease", error ratio

are reversed, signal level that level. degradation measurement is in an initial

The second

is that the unwanted input

will be high (e.g. 3.4 dB is assumed sively lower the unwanted

in this example)

and the measurement

method

will progres-

signal

The resultant probability distribution, P(s), for a bit stream curve 3 of Figure F6. The accuracy of this example is 0.112 dB. Curve 4 of Figure F6 is the cumulative probability model given in this example the deg radztion dispersion Curves 3 and 4, which are helpful in obtaining assumption an ment, are based on the simplifying known and zrsrd in the that the

of P(s) and shows that for this simplified is -0.6 to 0.9 dB. understanding estimate of the methods of the bit of mcasureis exactly sensitivity

measurement. AS discussed in F5.1.3, this is not the case. .4s shown in When this distribution is Figure F6, curve 1, the bit sensitivity estimate has a distribution. applied to S of equation (3), the resultant degradation dispersion is greater. An easy way to estimate the dispersion for this measurement is to use a Monte Carlo simulation of the degradation measurement. In the simulation, the sensitivity measurement is first simulated and the result obtained is used in the degradation simulation. In this way, the sensitivity variation is In the simulation as in the measurement, which is a ratio included in the all over simulation. measurement, the degradation estimate is obtained by subtracting the results of the degradation

measurement from the estimate of the sensitivity. Since there is a positive correlation (for this example, the correlation coefficient is 0.52 as determined by the Monte Carlo simulation) between the sensitivity to note that for this probability histogram estimate example of the and the degradation, curves 3 and 5 are result of 5 000 this reduces the dispersion. It is interesting nearly the same. Curve 5 of Figure F6 is a measurements, an accuracy and curve 6 is the of the degradation

simulated

cumulative probability. The results of the simulation indicate measurement of 0.09 dB and a dispersion of -0.6 to 1.0 dB. Since the Monte Carlo the rest of this appendix simulations. However, process of the method

simulation is more representative of the method of measurement, for the degradation dispersion values stated will be from Monte Carlo in E6.1 and F6.2 provides a good insight into the

the analysis given of measurement.

99

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 F6.3 Character string sensitivity measurement The only difference from the bit stream sensitivity sensitivity measurement is that EVYchar is substituted example Errchar is given error in equation Since the character curve, the dispersion is about -0.35 F6.4 ratio curve (see Figure F2, analysis for EPlbit curve (see F5.5.1) in equations in Figure for character string (7) and (8). For this F7, curves I and 2. ratio

(4) and the results are shown of this example

1) is steeper than the bit error is -0.003

will be less. The accuracy

dB and the dispersion

to 0.3 dB.

Ct'mructer string degradation measurement The above statement is also true example, the Monte Carlo simulation accuracy for this example for the character string analysis (see F5.5.2). For this results are shown in Figure F7, curves 3 and 4. The is about -0.8 to 0.9 dB.

is 0.015 dB and the dispersion

F7.

Model for the up/down method of measurement For this dicussion, help one to understand calling, here. however many method or the message selective the up/down process.

of selective calling and message sensitivity in F5.3. A careful will be steeper because steps, the the
review

will be as discussed

of Figure

F8 will

This discussion

will also be applicable than the signal method

to selective example level used can be

calling

error ratio curves method

The up/down either increased

differs from the straddle depending upon

input

decreased

the outcome

of each up/down

transmission.

Since the of measure-

change in signal level is depending ment can be modelled as a simple

upon the preceding Markov chain.

An example of one of the Markov equaticns is shown below and indicates of being at level IZ+ 1 dB is the sum of two probabilities: 1) 2) the probability of being consecutive successes, the probability at the IZ dB level, times the probability

that the probability

of not

having

three

of being at the n + 2 dB level, times the probability P n+l = P,[ 1 -(I--Err,)"]

of three successful

decodes. (12)

+ Pn+2 (1 - Errn+2)3

where Pn, P,,+l and Y,,z are the probabilities of being at the n n + 1 and n + 2 dB levels dB levels

Err, ard Err,+2 are error ratios at the N and nf2
Notes 1. _ In the up/down intervals. method of

the n, n + 1 and n + 2 dB levels are the input signal levels in dB for curve 1 of Figure F3 measurement, the input slgnal levels are spaced at one dB

2. _ For simplicity, the input signal level to the receiver is used in this discussion, but many of the methods of measurement arc irritten to adjust the input signal level using an attcnuutor. Similar equations can be written

for each input

signal level. of being at each level is one, is: (13)

Another

equation

which says that the sum of the probabilities P,_, + Pn_s + . . . + Pn+6 z 1

Equation (13) along with equation (12) for each level, less one, makes a set of simultaneous equations which can be solved for the values of P,. Since the values of P, will be different depending on the starting value, the Pn values for many starting values were calculated and the envelope of the Pn values is shown in Figure F9, curve 1. 100

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 F7.1 Message and selective calling accuracy The first moment of curve 1 will provide a value for the accuracy for the message sensitivity measurement and, for this example, it is 0.02 dB. This indicates that this method of measurement for this example will on the average find the input signal level that will produce an error ratio of 0.2. Similar results will be obtained for error ratio curves that differ considerably from the example F7.2 used here.

Message and selective calling dispersion It is somewhat estimated The standard more involved to determine the dispersion for the up/down methods as it is using the statistics deviation, of sampling. 1 of Figure using F9 is 0.94 dB The probability the sampling in Figure theory. distribution of the in of but if

Q',of curve

result of the measurement the measurement curve many valid. 1. For any one

is estimated

Let each level intervals of one

recorded dB,

be a sample

(there are ten samples the samples will

F9) taken from the distribution

measurement,

always be in

measurements starting at many diRerent The result of the method of measurement of the measurement (the averages)

levels are used, the use of the continuous curve is is the average of these samples. The distribution will have a normal probability distribution is the [2] accuracy. (14)

of the results

with a mean equal to the mean of the distribution whose standard deviation The standard deviation of the results of the measurement, s, will be as follows: S= G/l/;;_
where x 14 the number of samples &s the standard deviation per measurement of each sample

While the average number of transmissions per level change recorded, N, can vary from 2 to 3 depending on the slope of the error ratio curve, the value of N for this example is about 2.36. For very steep error ratio curves, N approaches the value of 2. N is obtained using the following N= relationship: 3 ( 1-Err,)3+3 ( 1-Err,)2Errn+2( l-Errn) Errn+Errn] (15) n=6 _Z P,[ n=-6
where P, is the probability of being at level ~1( see clause 7 ) Err* is the error ratio at level n

From the above, x is the number of transmissions, T, in For the sensitivity measurement T = 20 and N = 2.35. The value of the dispersion for this example is: dispersion = accuracy & 1.645 CI!,/?~X' = -0.024 The cumulative distribution of a normal distribution

the

measurement

divided

by

N.

+ 0.532 dB curve for a mean of 0.024 can be made smaller by

(16) dB and a increasing

dispersion off 0.53 dB is shown in curve 2 of Figure F9. For the up/down method of measurement, the dispersion F7.3 the number of transmissions of the message used. Message and selective calling degradation measurements The analysis of the up/down method of measurement

used

for

degradation

measurements

is similar to that for sensitivity direction to change the input ( see F5.1.2 ).

except that, since it is the unwanted signal that is varied, the signal based on the outcome of the transmission is reversed

101

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 JEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 Using, about for this example, the error ratio curve 3 of Figure From this the accuracy F3 and a Monte of this example Carlo simulation, to be

curve 3 of Figure 0.087 dB.

F9 is generated.

is calculated

The cumulative in F3.2. F7.4 F7.4.1

distribution

of the message

degradation

is shown

in curve 4 of Figure the goal

F9

and shows a dispersion

for this example

of - 1.9 to 1.7 dB.

This is just within

given

Model for fading measzwement Bit stream and character string fading measurements Since these measurements stream and character ratio curve 1 from error character string Figure use F4; the the straddle results method, are the analysis of the example of the bit string is similar to the discussion ratio curves are so similar, is -0.21 in F6.1 and F6.3 except for using the error FIO. Since the bit stream and for these measureis about - 1.5 to 0.6 dB. and dispersion

shown in Figure the accuracy

ments are nearly F7.4.2

the same. The accuracy

dB and the dispersion

Message and selective callirtg fading This measurement uses the up/down

measurements method as discussed in F6 and F6.1, F6.2 and F6.3, F4, curve 3 is used and the results are is about -0.09 dB and the dispersion is

The faded message error ratio curve shown in Figure shown in Figure Fl 1. For this example, the accuracy about -0.8 to 0.8 dB. F8. F8.1 Compliance test

Principle of shared risk In any Because ment are is a little compliance test there is a chance that the compliance test will give a wrong decision. of this, the compliance tests designed by those who will receive or certify the equipdesigned so there is a high probability of failing the compliance test if the equipment worse than the specification limit. On the other hand, the manufacturer would like tests designed so that there is a high probability is a little better than the specification limit. the compliance parameter test in of passing the compliance

to see the compliance test if the equipment To attempt

to meet both requirements,

this standard matches

are designed the parameter

so This error

that, if a receiver-decoder

has a radio-frequency

that exactly

specification, there will be a 0.5 probability that it will pass or fail the compliance test. is the principle of shared risk. In this circumstance, the error ratio will be the reference ratio at the specified input signal level. F8.2 Design objectives

The design goal for sensitivity compliance tests is to meet the principle of shared risk and to have a 0.95 probability of passing the compliance test if the equipment is one dB, or less. better than the specification limit, and to have a 0.95 probability of failing the compliance test if the equipment is one dB, or less, worse than the specification. For degradation and fading compliance tests. the 0.95 probability of passing or failing arc

for equipments F8.3

that are 2 dB, or less, better or worse than the specification.

Compliance test model For the compliance is a function tests used in this standard, the probability of input passing signal the compliance level and is: tcbt of the receiver-decoder error ratio at the specified
102

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
K = f t ! ( 1 - Err )`t-kl Err" Z: K!(t-K)! K -=O test

Ppassing whrre Is the probability P nas,fna Err ; F8.4 F8.4.1

=

(17)

of passing

the compliance

is the error ratio when the specified signal level is applied to the receiver-decoder is the number of transmissions in the compliance tests ( e.g. 18, 33, 78, or 2 556) is the number of failures allowed in the compliance test ( e.g. 3, 6, 15, or 25 J

Risk curve Risk curve .for sensitivity measurements

In equation ment,

( 17 ), Err is a function sensitivity signal level

of the input is applied sensitivity.

signal level.

For

the the

sensitivity specified

measuresensitivity, smaller and

if the receiver-decoder will

is better ( e.g. +2 d.B ) than to the receiver-decoder, of passing. discussion, For this probability

then when the specified the receiver-decoder sensitivity input signal level.

Err will be

have a higher

The opposite

is true if the specified

is worse than the specified

zero dB is the

In the examples used in this appendix, Err can be determined as a function of the input signal level from the appropriate equations (I) through (1 l), thus Ppassina is a function of the input signal level. When the function in equation (17) is plotted with t and f fixed, and the input signal level is varied in accordance with the error ratio function of the equipment being tested, the resultant curve is called a risk curve. Note that the input signal level is given as the ratio of the receiver-decoder solid-line parameter ( e.g. sensitivity ) to the specified value of the parameter. The F12 is derived from equation (I) for the sensitivity bit stream comThe long-dash curve is for character string and the shortpliance test and is the risk curve. dash curve is for selective calling and message.
F&4.2 Risk curve for bit stream degradation compliance tests

curve of Figure

This example is derived from the model given in measurement is the ratio of the level of the sensitivity, to it will affect the if the sensitivity value used is in error, tivity is low, the risk curve will be shifted to the left,

F5.1.2. The the unwanted shape of the and, if it is

result of a degradation signal level. Therefore, risk curve. If the sensihigh, the curve will be

shifted to the right, Curve 1 of Figure F13 was calculated on the basis that the sensitivity was low by -0.5 dB. Curve 2 was calculated using a sensitivity that was high by 0.4 dB ( see Figure F6, curve 2 ). Since for the example used in this appendix the estimate of the sensitivity will fall between these points 90?: of the time, it follows that the risk curve will fall between curves 1 and 2 of Figure F13. Curve 3 is the risk curve if the true sensitivity were used. The dispersion for the compliance test of degradation is the limits of the input signal levels between the 95% point of curve 1 and the So/, point of curve 2, or -2.2 to 1.6 dB. F8.4.3
Risk cwve_for character string degradation compliance tesrs

Figure F14 shows the results of risk curves based on the sensitivity 0.3 dB ( see Figure F7, curve 2 ); the dispersion is - 1.5 to 1.2 dB.

values

of

-0.4

and

F8.4.4

Risk curve for message

and selective calling deqradation

compliance

tests

Figure F15 shows the results of risk cvrves 0.5 dB ( see Figure F9, curve 2 ); the dispersion 103

based on the sensitivity IS -2.7 to 1.9 dB.

values

of

-0.55

and

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 F8.4.5 Risk curve for fading compliance tests characalling

Figure F16 shows the risk curve for these examples for fading. The bit stream and cter string are almost identical and are shown by the solid-line curve. The selective and message curve is the short dash-curve. F9. References [l] M. Schwartz New York, et al. 1966. Association, page 109, Volume 43, by W. J. Dixon and "Communication Systems and Techniques". McGraw-Hill

Book

Company, [2] Mood.

American

Statistical

A. M.

104

0.1

/ 0 5 i
G

/

/
0.01

.

//

\

0.001

4
1
\
-6
I

-4

-3

-2

-1

3

4

5

Reletive carrier to noise power ratio, in decibels

Figure

F2 - Character

error

ratio

versus

input

signal

level

0.2

-

0.1 -.

.o E AM z $ 0.01 -'

//-

0.001 \

6

-5

-4

-3

-2 Relative

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

carrier to noise power ratio. in decibels

Figure

F3 - Message

error

ratio

versus

input

signal

level

I--

--_

0.2 0.1

P @
W

Ei

0.01

0.001

I

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Relative carrier to noise power ratio, in decibels

Figure

F4 - Bit,

character

and message

error

ratio

versus

faded input

signal ievel

Accuracy = 0.42 dB 0.95

2 = %
i: L

0.5

0.05 -l-.5 -1 -0.5 0 0:5 ; 1:5 215 .

Retstive carrier to noise power ratio, in decibels

Figure

F5 -

Straddle Accuracy

method - Sensitivity and dispersion

(Bit

stream)

-

Accuracy

sensitivity

= -0.0027

de

~.CIYWRCY dnnradatian = 0.015 de

-1.5

-1 Relative

-0.5 carrier

0 to noise power

0.5 ratio, in decibels

115

2

2.5

Figure

F7 - Straddle

method

- Character

string

- Accuracy

and

dispersion

&h %+d kg ;;z U00. . 41g &

Average input sign& level is: input rignal level in decibels 4 L 3 -t or -0.1 dB 10 F = failure to decode S = succsssfu!!y decoded l value recorded in decibels

`S 0
-1 -2 -3 -4. . * F F F SSF

s s
`F

l s

s s
l s

s s

S' l S F

`S F

s s
lF

l s

s s
l s
s

-3 5 IO 15 20 25 Number of transm&wons

Figure

F8 - Example

of the

up/down

method

of measurement

of sensitivity

IS 10820( Part6)
IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

:1994

114

Accuracy sensitivity (fading) = -0.093

dB

/

2

/
1

Relative mean carrier to noise power ratio, in decibels

Figure

Fll

- Up/down

method

fading

- Message

- Accuracy

and

dispersion

0.95

F ._ r
`i

E 8
0.5,

6 t = j

0.05

I
Figure F12 -

I
-1.5 -1

I

I
+

-0.5

0

0.5

1

l.! 5

2

2.5

Relative value of receiver-decoder parameter, in decibels

Risk cuFve for sensitivity - Bit character string and message

stream,

,

-2

-1.5

0.5 1 -1 -0.5 0 fleletive value Of receiver-decoder parameter. in decibels

1.5

2

2.5

Figure

F14 - Risk

curve

for

degradation

- Character

strip

IS 10820( Part 6) :1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

APPENDIX
MEAN TIME BETWEEN FALSE CALLING

G
n4) (SELECTIVE CALLING) distrihas an exponential

RESPONSES(

This standard assumes that time between false calling responses bution, and the estimate for M is given by the following formula:
&f =

time for n false calling _._~ n responses.

responses

to occur in

hours

where n is the number Eight false calling

of false calling responses

have been selected within

for the value.

noise falsing

measurement

in order to

keep the span for this measurement The cumulative many measurements probability are

a usable of the

distribution

estimates

of M that will

be obtained

when

made on the same

equipment,

as compared

with the

true value of M

or the equipment, can be described by the chi-squared distribution where 2n is the number of degrees of freedom. From the chi-squared table for 16 degrees of freedom, it is determined that 95% of the value estimates for M obtained by this measurement for fi/ will will be 0.5 0.5 and the 90;; or more times the true the true value the will being of M and also that 95% of the 90% of the estimates of M this has the estimates be 1.64 or less times the true value

of M. Therefore, Since require the

for M will be between chi-squared distribution.

1.64 times total of the time

of M, and this is the span of this measurement. estimate al:;o time has distribution, Therefore, to make measurement a total measured. The measurement this length of time. should not be specified if it is impractical to measure the equipment for If it can be assumed that variou; different items of equipment have the same type of measurements equipment

of between

3.98 and 13.15

times the value of M of the

value of M, this measurement can be made using all these items of equipment simultaneously. The measurement is made until a total of eight false calling responses has occurred, and the time is the sum of the times of each of the different equipment. Probability of faking of a given number of false calling responses occurring in a specilied period of using the following p(t) where r is the specified period of time
n is the given number of false calling responses

The probability

time can be calculated

formula: (@J+Ye-(r:M)

=

The value of M used will be the estimate of M obtained from the measurement. The magnitude of the span of the value of M has been discussed. When the estimate of M is used to estimate the probability of a given number of false calling responses occurring in a specified period, the effect of the probability is small. Discussion test of the compliance span of M should tests be considered. The effect can bc very large when the

In any compliance test there is a risk that the test will give a wrong decision. The conlp]iance designed by those who will receive or certify equipment will be such that, if the equipmellt 121

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 performance is a little worse than the specified limit, there will be a high probability of failure. 011 the other hand, the manufacturer would like to see the test designed so that there is a high probability of passing In an the test if the euiqpment attempt to meet both is a little better than the specification requirements, the compliance false calling between risk. a 95yJ probability of the equipment of passing failing the test value, in this and a 95% probability standard, the the test if it has limits. are designed matches so the that exactly tests in this standard responses

that if a receiver-decoder specification, compliance The

has a mean time

there will be a 50:1/, probability test. This is the principle goal for these tests is to value. test used

that it will pass and a 50% probability have

that it will fail the

of shared

design

if it has an A4 that is one half of the specified an M of twice the specified For passing the type the test is a function of compliance

probability

of a receiver-decoder and

of the ratio R, the actual
i=8 P(psss~np,= i=%

receiver-decoder

M to the spcified value,

is given by: (8.67/R)`exp(8.67/R)/i!

where PC p&sB,,,g, is the probabilty is the rAti of the R

of passing the compliance test equipment M to the specified value is plotted it is called some time a risk curve and it is shown in Figure Gl. can be saved by truncating the test using the in the same units as M, and

When

the above

equation

When R is either small or large, following rules. Where T is the total time that the

test has run measured

F is the number of false calling responses observed during the time T: - stop the test and pass the equipment if T is greater than 3 + F, stop the test and fail the equipment if F is greater than 3 + T. The modified risk curve is shown by the points in Figure Gl. The data by simulation. 0.95 / / points I

were obtained -

z=

=:

0.5

-

-

-

-

-

-

/

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.05
0.1

d

0.2

0.3 0.4 -

0.5

0.6

3

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

1.6

1.7

1.6

1.9

R, the ratio of the receiver-decoder false calling response to the specified false calling response. FIG. Gl. Risk curve False responses 122 due to noise (selective calling).

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

APPENDIX
ALTERNATIVE HAND-HELD TEST MOUNTING OR CARRIED test device receivers have an intergral ON THE PERSON

H
FOR EQUIPMENT IN NORMAL WHlCH OPERATION IS WHILE

ARRANGEMENTS

Hl .

Simulated-man

Most radio-paging is worn on the person paging antennas

antenna. to

In normal when worn measurements, of a standard man. radiation pagers.

operation, on the

the radio pager waist. Radioperson. Therefore,

and most

often is clipped

the clothing

at the person's

are designed

for optimum

performance

to standardize the radio-paging simulate the human body. This water, and is referred The simulated and/or Hl .l average

radiation sensitivity test device consists

a test device is used to container filled with salt

to in this appendix

as the simulated the reference calling)

man is used to measure radiation sensitivity

sensitivity

(selective

calling)

(selective

of radio

Description? Material: Height: Outside Sidewall diameter: thickness: thickness: Cast acrylic 1.7 fi 0.1 m 305 f 4.8 f 30 f 2 mm 0.2 mm 2 mm water (H20). test site. tube closed at both ends

Top and bottom Filled

with salt (NaCI) solution

of 1.49 g per litre of distilled of the radiation

The simulatted Hl.2 Location

man shall rest on the surface

of radio pager for measurement pager should be 1.0 f 0.1 m from the ground. The radio pager should of the simulated man without a gap between them.

The top of the radio be fixed on the surface H2. Simulated Under band consideration.

123

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

I

5

1 = encoder 2 _ radio-frequency generator 3 :: 80 dB step attenuator. steps of 1 ?B 4 := transmitting antenna 5 = s;mulatec! man 6 --~ receiver under test Care should be taken to ensure that the field in the vicinity test equipment of the receiver under test is not disturbed by the

FIG. Hl.

-

Measuring

arrangement

for radio pagers

on a radiation

test site (30m).

124

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-Q : 1987

APPENDIX

J
OF A

GUIDE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION AND MEASUREMENT RADIO-FREQIIENCY COUPLING DEVICE (RFCD) The equipment (RFCD) receiver parameter measurements applicable to this

radio-frequency

coupling for

device example,

are all ratio measurements selectivity, spurious response RFCDs for higher frequency

pertaining to receiver radio-frequency immunity and intermodulation immunity. ranges are under consideration.

energy,

Jl.

RFCD characteristics Limits Useful frequency range: in the RFCD: 1 MHz to 200 MHz for Size I 1 MHz to 100 MHz for Size II Available Equipment (antenna field strength size limits included): See Clause JS Size I Length Width Height = 200 mm = 200 mm = 250 mm Size ZZ 400 mm 400 mm 500 mm

52. RFCD construction The RFCD is a transmission line of stripline class. conductive metal (e.g. support the equipment copper sheet) that are under test mounted in

The RFCD is made of three pieces of highly sufficiently rigid (e.g. strengthened by wood) to the stripline.

The shape and size of the RFCD is shown in Figure Jl. It is open on both sides. The RFCD has an impedance of 100 Q and shall be terminated with this impedance by a resistance having Both outer conductors less than 5 R of reactance at any frequency from 1 MHz to 200 MHz. are connected by the sheilding of the transmission line. The RFCD shall be matched to the transmission line impedance with matching networks (see Figures 52 and 53) with resistors that have less than 5% reactance at any frequency from 1 MHz to 200 MHz (e.g. for a 50 Q transmission line, a shunt and series resistance of 70.7 Q should be used). Care should be taken to choose resistors with very low inductance and capacitance (e.g., surface mounting re+tors) because the size and the material of the resistors have a great influence on the reactance of the RFCD at frequencies especially above 100 MHz.

53. Measurement

After constructing the RFCD, it is necessary to measure the radio-frequency behaviour of the RFCD in the frequency range from 1 MHz to 200 MHz to determine at what frequency and by how much the field strength deviates from a constant value. 53.1 Method highest of measurement antenna, which is short in comparison is mounted on the lower outer to a quarter conductor, wave length pointing for the measuring frequency, to the inside

A 40 mm monopole

of the stripline. The antenna base shall be located in the centre of the area designated to locate This monopole is connected as the antenna base to a 50 Q, 20 dB pad, the receiver under test. and from there with a low loss cable to the selective 125 measuring device.

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 Connect a radio-frequency of the RFCD. antenna has an impedance iieid $Lrength, which is, for practical Gal wili increase purposes, capacitive signal generator followed by an amplifier if necessary and apply

1 V to the input

The 40 mm monopole and which gives a voltage, the frequency Vary the the frequency is increased frequency

in a conbtalli

by 6 dB for each time

by a factor of 2. 1 MHz to 200 MHz in steps not greater than 3:< and record

from

and the reading

of the selective

measuring

device.

53.2 Presentation of results
Note. See

Figure 54 for an example graph. the selective measuring device readings values recorded recorded in scale. each time the frequency is increased by a in Sub-clause 53.1 53.1 to dB &V). on a log scale and the

u) Convert

b) Plot on a graph dB (,uV) values c) Fit a straight

the frequency converted

Sub-clause

in Step a) on a linear increases plotted of 6 dB for on the graph.

line,

with

factor of 2, to the points
d) At any frequency,

deviation. subtracted

the difference between the straight line and the plotted This is used to correct the spurious response measurement. The from the measurement.

value is the deviation is

54. Position of the equipment under test The equipment under test shall be mounted on a pedestal made of a low dielectric material (dielectric constant of less than 2) which places it at least 10 mm above the lower conductor. The equipment a) For equipment vertical position, shall be centred having in the horizontal antenna, plane of the RFCD in the following position: is in a

an integral

with the vertical

mount the equipment so that the antenna axis that is closest to vertical in normal use. integral antenna, mount the equipment

b) For equipment having a rigid external antenna is in a vertical position. c) For equipment a non-conducting d) Or as agreed J5. Explanation
Note. -

so that the

with a non-rigid support.

external

integral

antenna,

mount

the antenna

vertically

with

with the manufacturer.

of the the term `available field strength in a radiation stripline'

In this standard the measurements that use the RFCD are of the ratio type and are made in terms of the ratio of the voltages applied to the input uf the RFCD. Therefore, knowledge of the absoj(ltt: value of the field strength in the RFCD is not required. for those who wish to know the values of the field

The following information is provided strengths involved in the measurements.

The available field strength is equal to the voltage on the central conductor divided The relationship distance from the central conductor to the outer conductor in metres. field strength in the RFCD to the input voltage is given by the following formula: field strength = Vi x Cx A x ok P\`/m

by the of the

126

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
where Vi is the voltage A is the voltage or 0.5858 in PV at the input to the RFCD ratio of the voltage on the central the outer conductor to V, and central in this RFCD is equal to 100/170.7 conductor, and is equal to 0.3 m

H is the distance in metres between for size I and 0.6 m for Size II. C is a constant Vt is determined

conductor

and the

in the signal

same way that the generator networks). output VI should

input reduced be

voltage by any determined

to a receiver losses for due each

is determined to attenuators, measuring

(e.g., the cables, device and

radio-frequency combining each frequency

or matching

used in the measurement. signal generator signal generator output output is calibrated is calibrated in PV (e.m.f.), then C is 0.5. [ml]), then

If the radio-frequency If the radio-frequency Cis 1.

in PV (matched-load

127

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

Insulating

su~Dorls

_) -c---L .J

N--I---+

h

-II
I
Dimc:lsions Sk&: 1 Dimensions Size II

A : D ; G H : K L

I

600 6:: 31 1 250 312 125 700 800 600 50 x0 250 200

I : I

1 200
1316 120 62 2 624 500 250 1 350 1 500 200

hf
N

4%
500 400

FIG. Jl. -

RFCD

(dripline).

128

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

//

p

Outer cogductor

Surface-mounted resistor

`-ier

conductor

FIG.
RF connector

52. -

Detail

of stripline

loan.

Surface-mounted

resIstor

Surface-mounted

resIstor

Outer conductor

FIG. 53. -

Detail

of stripline

input

matching

resistor.

129

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

APPENDIX
GUIDE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT Emission EMITTING RADIO-FREQUENCY

K
TEST SITE FOR ENERGY to radiated transmitter ELECTROMAGNETIC

OF A 30 m RADIATION

measurements

radio-frequency electromagnetic radiated spurious power, receiver KI . Test site characteristics Useful frequency range: Nominal site attenuation: Note. _ The nominal Equipment Radiation

can be made for all radio-frequency parameters pertaining transmitter radiated power, energy, for example, radiated spurious power.

Limits 25 MHz to 1 000 MHz 20 dB to 46 dB for 25 MHz 52 dB to 78 dB for I 000 MHz

attenuation of the test site for a half-wave dipole is 26 dB for 25 MHz 1 000 MHz. The actual attenuation may vary due to ground reflections. size limits: angle limits: 6 m maximum, Limits excluding the antenna plane

ar.d 58 dB for

only apply mounting

to the horizontal arrangement.

See Appendix

H for tests using an alternative

K2.

Radiation

test site test site shall be on level ground having uniform electrical to ensure characteristics extraneous and clecthat

The radiation

be free from reflecting objects over as wide an area as possible tromagnetic fields do not affect the accuracy of the test results. The minimum 52 m minor the foci. No extraneous boundary axis. of the test site shall test be an ellipse

having

a 60 m major shall

axis and a at

The equipment conducting objects

under having

and the

transmitting

antenna

be located

any dimension

in excess of 15 cm for measurements

over the frcauency range of 25 MHz to 300 MHz, or 5 cm for measurements over the frequency range of 300 MHz to I GHz, shall be in the immediate vicinity of the equipment under test or the transmitting antenna. The distance under between the vertical axis through above axis through the centre of the antenna antenna of the equipment shall be 30 m. by batteries. If the test and the vertical is powered the centre ground of the transmitting

All test equipment equipment

if located

shall preferably

be powered

from the mains, each of the mains supply cables shall be provided with the filter and the measuring equipment a suitable radio frequency filter. The cable connecting shall be screened and shall be as short as possible. The cable connecting the filter and the supply to a depth of mains shall be either screened and be at ground level, or shall be buried approximately 30 cm. K3. Position of the equipment under test (see Figure A pedestal shall be placed on a turntable be 1.5 m above ground. The equipment normally turntable Kl)

so that the pedestal's upper horizontal sul-face will under test in the cabinet or housing in which it operates shall be placed on the upper horizontal surface of the pedestal. Roth the and the pedestal shall be made of non-conducting material. 131

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 For equipment having an integral antenna, which is closest to its position in normal use. For equipment antenna having a rigid external place the equipment antenna, mount on the platform the equipment in a position so that the

integral

is in a vertical having

position. a non-rigid support. external in:egral a;l:cn;la, mount the antenna vertically

For equipment

with a non-conducting

It shall be possible to rotate the equipment about the vertical axis through the centre of the It is recommended that a platform in the form of a turnantenna of the equipment under test. table, preferably remotely controlled should be used flor [his purpose. extend dow:7 to the turntable, and any excess If the equipmel?t has a power cable, it should cable length should be coiled on the turntable. For information equipment which Appendix H. K4. Measuring on the use is hand-held

of alternative mounting arrangements or carried on the person while in

on this test site for normal operation, see

antenna support shall consist material. of a horizontal boom supported by a vertical The boom shall project at least 1 m from the under test and shall be arranged so that it may

The measurirlg antenna support pole, both made of non-conducting vertical K5. pole in the direction from antenna antenna be raised and lowered Measuring

of the equipment 1 m to 4 m.

shall be suitable for the reception of linearly polarized waves. It the length of which is adjusted for the frequency may consist of a half-wave dipole, concerned. For practical reasons: however, or to increase the sensitivity of the measurements, it may be convenient to use a number of separate fixed broadband dipoles or more complex antennas. The measuring antenna shall be mounted at the end of the horizontal boom. The mounting shall permit the antenna to be positioned for measuring both the horizontal and the vertical The loner end of the antenna, when oriented for vertical components of the electrical field. polarization and placed in its lowest position, shall be at least 0.3 m above the ground. The cable from the antenna shall be routed along the horizontal level, at least boom for at 3 m beyond device. least 1 m, and the minimum Alternatively,

The measuring

should preferably extend, while being at ground boundary of the test site before it is connected to the seleciivt the cable may be routed K6. Auxiliary, antenna The auxiliary The auxiliary antenna replaces the equipment under test underground.

measuring

during

part

of

the

measurement.

antenna

that of the measuring antenna, approximately with the normal K7. Radio-frequency A well-shielded required affect the accuracy antenna.

shall be a half-wave dipole and shall be arranged in a manner similar to except that the centre of the auxiliary antenna should coincide position of the centre of radiation of the equipment under test.

signal generator radio-frequency output signal generator with a matching or combining network such that it will cable, shall be placed in a position and shall be connected to and matched to the ( if not

) and its associated

of the test results,

auxiliary

132

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 At frequencies antenna below about for vertical 60 MHz, the above condition is impossible to achieve dipole when shall the be

is arranged

polarization.

In this case, the lower end of the

placed 0.3 m above ground. KS. Selective analyzer, measuring device measuring device may field-strength be either a frequency selective voltmeter, with a spectrum its associated or a calibrated meter, and shall be placed, together

The selective

input cable, in a position

such that it shall not affect the accuracy

of the test results.

i
q-g-;

7

2

L --I

L-J

FIG. Kla.

FIG. Klb.
1 = transmitter 2 =: selective 3 =- measuring 4 =- auxiliary 6 =: selective 5 =-. radio-freqllency 7 == optional calibrated or fundarner-.tal under n..::isuri:ig a,.tel?na ar.tenna signal ge lerotor for m:asuri.Tg rejection filter the effective for measuring radiated wwer, measuring device atten.uator oscillation test device

non-essential

emissiors FIG. Kl. Measuring arrangement 133 for transmitter at 30 m.

IS 10820( Part 6): 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

APPENDIX
GUIDE

L
FOR

FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF A 3 m RADIATION TEST SITE MEASUREMENTS ABOVE 100 MHz OF EQUIPMENT EMITTING RADIO-FREQUENCY ELECTROMAGNETIC ENERGY measurements can be made for all radio-freqUenCy parameters transmitter radiated for example, energy, radiated spurious power. pertaining power,

Emmission

radio-frequency electromagnetic radiated spurious power, receiver Ll. Test site characteristics

to radiated transmitter

Limits Useful Nominal frequency range: 100 MHz to 1 000 MHz 12 dB to 38 dB for 100 MHz 32 dB to 58 dB for 1 000 MHz
attenuation of the test site for a half-wave dipole is 18 dB for 100 MHz and 38 dF$ Note. - The nominal for 1 000 MHz. The actual attenuation may vary due to ground reflections.

site attenuation:

Equipment Radiation

size limits: angle limits:

6 m maximum, $40" to - 10"

excluding

the antenna

See Appendix L2.

H for tests using an alternative

mounting

arrangement.

Radiation test site The 3 m test site described in this standard provides consistent results regardless of time 01 location. It permits an accuracy over the useful frequency range comparable to that achievable on larger test sites while requiring less sensitive instrumentation than on these larger sites. electrical characteristics ensure that exiraneous and elec-

The radiation test site shall be on level ground having uniform be free from reflecting objects over as wide an area as possible to tromagnetic fields do not affect the accuracy of the test results.

A continuous ground screen ( either sheet metal or wire mesh having openings no than 1 cm, which should maintain good electrical contact between the wires ) shall be establish a uniformly conducting area is shown in Figure LI. No extraneous conducting earth over part of the test site. The minimum ground

greater used to screen

objects

having

any

dimensions

in excess

of

5 cm should
ground

bc

present within the minimum ground screen screen boundary and the test site boundary The test site shall have a turntable the horizontal plane between the vertical axis through the centre

boundary. Objects between the minimum shall not be such as to affect the test results.

and a support for the measuring vertical axis through the centrc antenna mounted

antenna. The dirtancc in of the turntable and the shall bc 3
111.

of measuring

on its support

A

shelter may be provided for all or part of the test site. All such construction, except for hinges, etc, having no dimension greater than 5 cm, shall be of wood, plastic, or other conducting material. The wood shall be impregnated 134 to ensure minimum water absorption.

nails,
non-

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 All test equipment equipment is powered located above ground shall preferably mains be powered cables by batteries. shall be provided If the with

from the mains,

each of the

supply

The cable connecting the filter and the measuring equipment a suitable radio-frequency filter. The cable connecting the filter and the shall be screened and shall be as short as possible. supply mains shall be either screened and be at ground level, or shall be buried to a depth of approximately L3. 30 cm. L2). operates shall be placed The platform on a the ground. and its

Position of the equipment under test (see Figure The equipment in its cabinet or housing

in which it normally

horizontal platform, the upper side of which is 1.5 m above support shall be made of non-conducting material. For equipment having an integral antenna, which is closest to its position in normal use. For equipment antenna For equipment having having a rigid position. a non-rigid support. to rotate the equipment about external integral external is in a vertical

place the equipment antenna, mount

on the platform the equipment

in a position so that the vertically

integral

antenna,

mount

the antenna

with a non-conducting It shall be possible

the vertical

axis through

the centre

of the

antenna of the equipment under test. turntable, preferably remotely controlled,

It is recommended that a platform should be used for this purpose. extend down to the turntable,

in the form of a and any excess

Tf the equipment has a power cable, it should cable length should be coiled on the turntable.

For information on the use of alternative mounting arrangements ment which is hand-held or carried on the person while in normal E4. Measuring antenna support

on this test site for equipoperation, see Appendix H.

The measuring antenna support shall consist of a horizontal boom supported by a vertical pole, both being made of non-conducting material. The boom shall project at least I m from the vertical pole in the direction of the equipment under test and shall be arranged so that it may be raised and lowered from 1 m to 4 m. L5. Measuring antenna antenna shall be suitable for the reception of linearly polarized waves. It may

The measuring

consist of a half-wave dipole, the length of which is adjusted for the frequency concerned. For practical reasons, however, or to increase the sensitivity of the measurements, it may be convenient to use a number of separate fixed broadband dipoles or more complex antennas. The measuring antenna shall be mounted at the end of horizontal booni. The mounting shall permit the antenna to be positioned for measuring both the horizontal and the vertical components of the electrical field. The lower end of the antenna, when oriented for vertical polarization and placed in its lowest position, shall be at least 0.3 m above the ground. The cable from the antenna should preferably extend, shall be routed while being at along ground to the the horizontal at least boom for at 3 m beyond device. least 3 m and the minimum Altcrnativcly,

level,

boundary of the test site before it is connected the cable may be routed underground. 13s

selective

measuring

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 L6. Auxiliary antenna antenna antenna replaces the equipment that the under centre test during part of the measurement. in a manner antenna similar under to shall coincide test. shall be a half-wave antenna, except position dipole and shall be arranged of the auxiliary of radiation

The auxiliary The auxiliary approximately L7. Radio-frequency A well-shielded (if required) antenna. L8. Selective analyzer, input affect the accuracy

that of the measuring

with the normal signal generator radio-frequency

of the centre

of the equipment

signal output and

generator, shall be

with placed

a matching to and

or combining matched

network

and its associated

cable,

in a position

such that it will not to the auxiliary

of the test results,

shall be connected

measuring device measuring device may be or a calibrated field-strength meter, either a frequency selective voltmeter, a spectrum and shall be placed, together with its associated of the test results.

The selective

cable, in a position

such that it shall not affect the accuracy

Measunng anrenna Equlpmenl under test or auxlllary anlenna

,

\
MIntmum ground screen boundary

Top view

Turntable

I

Side view FIG. Ll. 3 m site dimensions inside the ground screen boundary.

136

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

6

2

i
q-l

6
L__!--?_!

2 r-i

FIG. L2a. -

Measuring

arrangement

for the equipment

under

test.

i i,

r-7

6

l--1

%H_!

FIG. L2b. 1 2 3 4 5 6 = = = = = =

Measuring
selective

arrangement

for substitution

measuiclnent.

equipn1en.t under test
m :asar iqg device

measuring antenna
auxiliary anlenna radio-frequency signal generator optional calibrated attenuator for measuring the effective radiated power, fu,ldanlental oscillation rejection filter for measurir!g non-essential emissions

or

FIG. L2. -

Measuring

arrangement

for radio-frequency

emission

(3 m).

137

1s 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

APPENDIX
GENERAL INFORMATION

M
NOISE AND RANDOM

ON IMPULSIVE GENERATOR

IMPULSE Ml. General

One of the major sources of impulsive interference in receivers and decoders used in the mobile services is the ignition systems of internal-combustion engines. The noise radiated by ignition systems is characterized by a great number of pulses of various amplitudes and spacings. The number of pulses per time unit exceeding a given value and band forms part of the spectrum signature of a noise environment. measured in a given frequency

The complete noise-amplitude distribution cannot be generated easily for the purpose of evaluating receiver performance. A random impulse generator can, however, be used to simulate the noise produced by city traffic. This has been found to be an effective method of measuring degradation of receiver performance due to impulsive noise. M2. Random impulse generator characteristics A block diagram of an example generators of a random used in the impulse generator is shown in Figure Ml.

The random carrier type. M 2.1 Spectrum

impulse

measurements

in this standard

are of the pulsed

bandwidth within 0.5 dB, over the radio-frequency band-width

The output spectrum should be uniform, of the receiver being measured.

The spectral amplitude for an individual carrier pulse shall be uniform, within 0.5 dB, up to a radio-input-signal-frequency f (in MHz), of f 186/7, where T is the duration of the equivalent The pulse duration of the generator is an important facto1 rectangular pulse in nanoseconds. to consider when determining the offset of the carrier frequency from the nominal frequency 01. the receiver. M2.2 Output The output of a random impulse generator is in spectrum amplitude. The spectrum amplitude produced by impulsive noise within a given frequency band is the vector sum of the voltage within that frequency band, divided by the bandwidth; it is expressed, for example in /.LV/MHZ or dB (pV)/MHz.
Note. -

it will be a series of short pulses of the When the output is observed on a wide-band oscilloscope, carrier. When observed on a narrow bandwidth spectrum analyzer, it will b.: a (sin X)/X type frequency distribution.

The random impulse generator should be calibrated f I dB, and have a source impedance (A) equal to the including the matching and combining network. The test load of 50 L2. M2.3 Average second impulse rate impulse generator should have an

in dB (pV)/MHz with an accuracy of impedance of the receiver (e.g., 50 iJ), output is a voltage measured across a

The random (i/s).

average

impulse

rate

of 100 impulses

pet

138

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 M2.4 Rundom Poisson output distribution distribution. a satisfactory random distribution pattern is to apply generators to an "and having circuit" the of three pseudo-random binary sequence lengths of 20, 21 of impulses between impulses is random. The distribution of the impulses is given by a

The time interval

One way to generate

and 22 bits, clocked at 800 bits per second. The output of the "and circuit" impulse. The average impulse rate shall be 100 i/s and the probability approximate M2.5 Random normal carrier that of a Poisson distribution distribution. amplitude and amplitude The limited The the correlation

is used to trigger the density shall closely

of the spectrum carrier that

The amplitude distribution

of each

pulse

is random. deviation by band

probability

density

is given by a logbetween

has a standard as that produced a satisfactory

of 6 dB. The distribution probability amplitude

amplitude

correlation

pulses is defined

noise of 10 Hz bandwidth. is to pass flat noise through density of this noise shall of the carrier pulses using a deviation of of the log-normal applied to the the noise

One way to generate

random

amplitude

a low-pass filter with a 10 Hz cut-off frequency. have a normal distribution. It is used to modulate modulator that has an exponential characteristic. amplitude modulator. M3. Calibration distribution can be varied by adjusting

The standard the magnitude

of the spectrum amplitude impulse generator the test load. signal to a test load and connect to the nominal values: an oscillo-

a) Connect

the output of the random scope to measure the voltage across of the

b) Set the frequency
receiver -

radio-frequency

generator

frequency

of the

to be measured. generator to the following

c) Adjust the controls

-

of the random impulse attenuator to its minimum value, pulse width to 0.2 PS, standard deviation to 0 dB, pulse rate to a constant (if possible).
oscilloscopes will be triggered

~~~~ _ lost

by an impulse

even if the impulses

OCCIUI' at random.

Record

the attenuation

value. adjusted to display one pulsed carrier Record the peak voltage in microvolts. impulse, measure the peak

d)

With the oscilloscope voltage of the impulse.

e) Measure the time between the two points where
that is 50;: of the value recorded

the envelope of the itnpulse crosses the level in Step d). Record the time in microseconds. of the impulsive noise as follows:

fl

Calculate

the spectrum

amplitude

where: S is the spectrum amplitude in pV/MHz V is the voltage recorded in Step cl) in I*V T is the time period recorded in Step e) in microseconds

This formula is valid only for that amplitude can be considered constant.
Note -

part

of the

frequency
distribution

band

in which

the

spectrum

An impulse of 0.2 (LSduration of &0.93 MHz.

will have a frequency

that is constant

over a bandwidth

139

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 Record M4. the spectrum verification amplitude as the minimum attenuation median spectrum amplitude.

Performance

of the random impulse generator to the pulse distribution and the amplitude distribution.

This verification

applies

M4.1 M4.1.1

Verijcation

that the pulse distribution

is Poissorl

Method of measurement the equipment the controls as illustraded in Figure impulse M2. as follows:

a) Connect 6) Adjust -

of the random value,

generator

attenuator

to its minimum

pulse width to 0.2 ps, standard deviation to 0 dB, pulse rate to random. the counter to measure at random the number of impulses that occur within a 0.1 s period. where 5, 1 000 periods and record in Table MI the number of periods

c) Adjust Measure

6,7.. .or 15 pulses occurred. M4.1.2 Presentation If the number random impulse of results of periods recorded in Table MI is within the specified limits, generator complies with this standard for the pulse distribution. record that the

M4.2 M4.2. I

Verification Method

that the amplitude of measwement

distribution

is log-normal

a) Adjust

the random

impulse

generator

to a standard

deviation

of 0 dB.

output b) Apply the radio-frequency acteristic (e.g. a spectrum analyzer), V, the pulse amplitude, in decibels. c) Adjust J) the random impulse generator

signal to an envelope detector with a logarithmic charset to zero scan mode and set to a decibel scale. Record to a standard deviation of 6 dB. samples of the pulse

Measure and record the amplitude, in decibels, of 1 000 independent amplitude. Take the samples at a rate of about one per second. Presenration of results i, calculate 2 where: Zi = Xi-V
where: v is the amplitude recorded in Step b) of Sub-clause MJ.2.1 X, is the amplitude recorded in Step d, of Sub-clause M4.2.1

M4.2.2

a) For each sample

in decibels

b) Record values

in Table indicated.

MI1

the

number recorded

of

samples

that

have a value of 2 that is less than the the specified for limits, record that

c) If the number the random distribution.

of samples impulse

in Table complies

MI1 is within with this

generator

standard

the log-normal

amplitude

140

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
TABLE MI Number of pulses per period 5 f 8 9 :: :: :: 12 ;"o 90 100 100 90 :s" 41 27 LO&Yr limit Measured (number of periods) Upper limit 46 1;; 136 151 151 137 114 42 ::

I

TABLE MI1 Lower limit Measured (number of samples) UPper limit

(less than)

Z Cd'9
- I5
14 213 -12 -11 -10 -9 1; -6 - 5 -4 - : - 1 0 : 3 : ! 8 9 IO :: 13 t:

I :z i IO 18 :Y! FE 117 155 200 251 307 434 500 %6 630 691 746 795 838 875 905 029 948 962 973 973 981 987 5; 52 ;: 125 162 205 254 309 370 434 500 566 631 693 149 800 845 883 914 938 953 972 982 990 994 998 999

141

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

1 :~=radio-frequency signal generator 2 = product modulator 3 = 4 = 5 = 6 = 7 = 8 = 9 :: 10 = impulse generator Poisson distribution generator exponential modulator gain adjustment low-pass filter noise generator clock internal attenuator

FIG. Ml.

-

Example

of a random

impulse

generator.

1 y random

impulse

generator

2 = envelope detector 3 = frequency counter FIG. M2. -

Measuring

arrangement

for measurement

of impulse

distribution.

142

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

APPENDIX
EXAMPLE N 1. Introduction
A mains

N
STABILIZATION NETWORK

OF A MAINS

POWER LlNE

IMPEDANCE

power

line

impedance between

stabilization the mains voltages

network terminals

is required of the receiver

to provide isolate

defined each the mains.

imof

pedances these circuit

at high frequencies and earth.

and between

terminals

The network

also provides

a suitable

filter to

receiver

from unwanted

radio-frequency

that may be present

on the supply

The impedance the combination
impedance

of this filter section at the measuring frequency shall be sufficiently high for of filter and associated network as represented in Figure Nl, to give an having a modulus of 150 rt 20 Q and a phase angle not exceeding 20", both of the receiver and between these two terminals connected together and

between earth. The Figure

the terminals

symmetrical NJ ).

voltage

is the

voltage

appearing

between

terminals

A and

B ( see

The asymmetrical Figure Nl ). These voltages Figure N2.

voltage may be

is the

voltage

appearing

between

terminal vector

C and

the earth as indicated

( see in

represented

in a theoretical

diagram

TABLE NT Resistarce,
three different

attenuation
input

impedance

:,alues of the artificial
Z of the measuring

impedances

nlains equipment.

network

of Figure

N3 ( Note

I ) for _

I I
z=50 R Z=60 Q

I

Z=?5

L1

I
Resisrurxc> (Note 2 )

R, = R, Ra =~ R, IL R, = R, R8 =~ R, RID = R,, RI?

I I
I

118.7 152.9 390.7 275.7 22.8 107.8

(120) (1 (1 SO) R (390) (2 (270) a (22) ,r2 (110) 0 (50) it

112.2 (110) R 169.7 (160) L2 483.9 (470) Q 230.3 (220) L2 27.6 (27) i2 129.1 (130) 61 (60) fi

107.1 (110) LZ 187.5 (180) Sl 621.4 (620) !1 187.5 (180) n 34.5 (36) Q 161.3 (150) n (75) L! ---

Attenrrtrfiorr ( Note

3 ) __-

Symmetrical Asymmetrical

A,,, A,,,,

20 (20) dB 20 (19.9; dB

20 (19 7) dB 20 (19.8) dB trctworh impwiurrcr ( Note

20 (19.8) dB 20 (20) dB ~__

.4rtificirrl

mains

3

) ._____

Symmetrical Asymmetrical

Zfiyrn Zasglll

150 150

(150) (148)

n LL

150 150

(145.7) (143.4) ~_______

L1 L1

150 150

(151.2) (145.2)

L1 LI

143

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 N2. Method of measuring interference For practica1 measurements, voltage a mains power line impedance stabilization network ( also

known as artificial mains network ), similar to the example given in Figure N3, may be used _ This network is suitable for measuring both symmetrical ( position 1 of switch S ) and asymmetrical ( position 2 of switch S ) components.
of turns to be: of the balacced to

with an unbalanced
unbalallc4 transformer

selective

voltmeter.
N3, page 171, is

Notes 1. _ The ratio
assumed 2. -

in Figure

2.5 1

with centre rap values shown in brackets are are the nearest usiq preferred preferred values resistance ( tolerance values f 5% ) nearest to the

Resistance

3. - values shown in brackets theoretical values.

calculated

Allowance values,

should

be made for

the attenuation

introduced

by this network. unwanted influencing

For

all pertinent

refer to Figure

N3 and Table

NI in this appendix. radio-frequency signals, the measurements.
0

An additional filter section may be required to prevent carried by the mains power line network, from significantly

Mains

1
0

Radio-frequency isolating filter

I
power line impedance ). stabilization network ( also known as artificial
mains

FIG. Nl.

-

Mains network

FIG. N2. -Vector

diagram

of interference

voltages.

144

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

i

I t I
I

r
Additional filter sections if required ==rC

k
!

r

Measuring

Set

M

1

I

P = connections for receiver 1 = symmetrical componenr 2 = asymmetrical component FIG. N3. Example of a mains power line impedance stabilization network

145

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994

IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

APPENDIX
AUDIO
PI.

P
IN TONE-SIGNALLING SYSTEMS

FREQUENCIES

COMMONLY

USED

General The frequencies services which Committee (CCIR). listed in this not already appendix been are those recommended used for selective signalling Radio in the mobile Consultative have by the International

P2. Introduction Whereas mobile selective dation the CCIR has it has not except cognizance yet been in the and judged authority necessary Maritime over operational to Mobile Service parameters affecting the services, calling 257). used for selective calling many elsewhere in the have mobile services been list those audio frequencies used for

International

(see CCIR Recommen-

Because the choice of frequencies requires considerable adopted for standard list those frequencies P3. P3.1 Continuous
Continuous

and because care and analysis, use but are not listed by the CUR, in current use.

frequencies

already

it appears

to be useful to collect and

individual tone systems
tone-controlled squelch (mute) systems (CTCSS)

3.1.1
Group A

3.1.2
Group B

3.1.3
Group C

Hz
67,0 77,0 8S,5 151,4 162,2 173,s 186,2 203,s 218,l 233,6 250.3

Hz 71,9 82,5 94,s 103,5 1 IO,9 I l&8 127,3 136,5 146,2 156,7 167,9 179,9 192,8 210,7 225,7 24 1,s

Hz 74,4 79,7 85,4 91,5

100,o 107,2 114,s 123,0 131,8 141,3

Note. - Assignments of freqtiencies from Group A, B or C are made in order to provide protection interference depending upon geographic areas. P3.1.4 Hz
97,4 102,6 Other frequencies in use

from

Hz
114,6 117,7

HZ 131,2 134,s 138,5 142,4 146,3
146

Hz 150,3 154,5 158,7 163,l

HZ 167,6 172,2 176,9 181,8

Hz I86,8 192,0 197,2 202,7

105,6 108,5 Ill,5

120,9 I24,3 127,5

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 lEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 P3.1.5 Frequencies usedfor mobile telephone systems 4 090 Hz, 4 010 Hz, 4020 Hz,. . ,6 990 Hz, 7 000 Hz p3.2 P3.3 p3.4 Receiver-voting systems 1 950 Hz Data systems 388 Hz Data transmission in radiotelephone systems 1 950 Hz et/and P4. P4.1 Individual tone pulse systems Group A Hz 1 050 1 200 1 350 1 500 P4.2 Group B 1 575 Hz P4.3 Group C Hz 860 950 1 060 I 150 P4.4 Group D Hz 1 200 1 275 1 350 1 425 1 500 1 575
Note. The groups

2 250 Hz

2 325 Hz

2 070 Hz

Hz 1 650 1 800 1 950 2 000

Hz 2 100 2 200 2 250 2 400

Hz 2 550 2 700 2 850 3 000

1 725 Hz

1 875 Hz

2 025 HL

Hz 1 250 I 350 1 425 1 520

Hz 1 600 1 685 1 775 1 870

Hz 1 965 2 070 2 155 2 245

Hz 2 340 2 440 2 545 2 650

Hz 2 765 2 880 3 000

Hz 1 650 1 725 1 800 1 875 1 950

Hz 1 965 2 000 2 025 2 050 2 100
to specific

Hz 2 150 2 200 2 250 2 350 2 400
manufacturers.

Hz 2 475 2 500 2 550 2 625 2 700

HZ 2 775 2 805 2 850 2 925 3 000

shown are indigenous

P4.5 P4.6

Group E 1 810 Hz Group F Hz 102,6 105,6 108,5 111,5 114,6 117,7 120,9 Hz I24,3 127,7 131,2 134,s 138,5 142,4 146,3 2 100 Hz 2 400 Hz Hz 176,9 181,s 186,s 192,O 197,2 202,7

HZ

150,3 154,5 158,7 163,l 167,6 I72,2

Hz 208,3 214,O 219,9 225,9 232,2 238,6

Hz

245, I 251,9 258,X 266,0 273,3 280,X

147

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 P4.7
Group G

HZ 910

HZ 1 120

HZ 1 370

Hz 1 750

Hz
2 135

Hz
2 800

P5. P5.1

Pulsed individual tone, sequential systems
Below voice-band tones

HZ 67,0 71,9 77,0 79,7 82,5 P5.2 P5.2.1
Voice-band Group A tones

Hz 85,4 88,5 91,5 94,s 100,o

Hz 103,5 107,2 110,9 114,8 118,s

HZ 123,O 127,3 131,s 136,5 141,3

Hz 146,2 151,4 156,7 162,2 167,9

Hz 173,s I79,9 186,2 192,s 202,7 .--

Hz 517,5 532,5 547,5 562,5 577,5 P5.2.2
Group B

Hz 592,5 607,5 622,5 637,5 652,5

Hz 667,5 682,5 697,5 712,5 727,5

Hz 757,5 772,5 787,5 802,5 817,5

Hz 832,5 847,5 862,5 877,5 892,5

Hz 907,5 922,5 937,5 952,5 967,5

Hz 288,5 296,5 304,7 313,o 321,7 330,5 339,6 349,0 358,6 368,5 P5.2.3
Group C

Hz 378,6 389,O 399,s 410,8 422,l 433,7 445,7 457,9 470,5 483,5

Hz 496,8 510,5 524,6 539,0 553,9 569,l 584,8 600,9 617,4 634,5

Hz 651,9 669,9 688,3 707,3 726,8 746,8 767,4 788,5 810,2 832,5

Hz 855,5 879,0 903,2 928,1 953,7 979,9 1 006,9 1 034,7 1 063,2 1 092,4

HZ 1 122,5 1 153,4 1 185,2 1 217,8 1 251,4 1 285,8 1 321.2 1 357,6 1 395,0 1 433,4

Hz 487,5 637,5

Hz 787,5 931,5

Hz 1 087,5 1 237,5 148

Hz 1 387,5 1 537,5

Hz 1 687,5 1 837,5

IS 10820(Part6):

1994

IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987

P5.2.4

Group D HZ 495 512 530 549 568 588 609 631 653 676 700 HZ 725 750 776 804 832 862 892 923 956 990 1 025 Hz 1 061 1 098 1 137 1 177 1 219 1 261 1 306 1 352 1 400 I 449 1 500 Hz 1 550 1 553 1 600 1 608 1 664 1 723 1 784 1 847 1 912 I 980 Hz 2 049 2 121 2 196 2 274 2 354 2 437 2 523 2 612 2 704 2 799 Hz 2 898 3 000 3 106 3 215 3 329 3 446 3 568 3 694 3 824 3 960

P5.2.5

Group E Hz 850 960 1 190 1 200 Hz 1 440 1 530 1 680 1 870 Hz 1 920 2 160 2 210 2 400 Hz 2 465 2 550 2 635 2 640 Hz 2 805 2 880 2 890 2 975
HZ

3 120 3 145 3 230 3 315

P5.2.6

Group F 1 650 Hz 2 350 Hz

P5.2.7

Group G 2 200 Hz

P5.2.8

Group H Hz 960 1 022 1 124 Hz 1 197 1 275 Hz 1 358 1 446 HZ 1 540 1 640 Hz 1 747 1 860 Hz 1 981 2 110

P5.2.9

Group I Hz 805 885 970 Hz 1 060 1 270 1 400 Hz 1 530 1 670 Hz 1 830 2 000 Hz 2 200 2 400 Hz 2 600 2 900

P5.2.10

Group J Hz 250 258,33 266,67 275 283,33 Hz 291,67 300 308,33 316,67 325 HZ 333,33 341,67 350 358,33 366,67 149 Hz 375 383,33 39 I,67 400 408,33 Hz 416,67 425 433,33 44 I,67 450
HZ

458,33 466,67 475 483,33 491,67

IS 10820( Part 6): 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987
P5.2.11 Group K Hz 459 600 P5.2.12 Group L Hz 313,3 339,9 368,7 P5.2.13 Group M Hz 370 450 P5.2.14 Group N HZ 1 060 1 160 P5.2.15 Hz 1 270 1 400 Hz 1 530 1 670 HZ I 830 2 000 Hz 2 200 2 400 HZ 2 600 2 800 HZ 550 675 Hz 825 1 !I10 HZ 1 240 1 520 HZ 1 860 2 280 HZ 400,o 433,9 470,8 Hz 510,7 554,o 601 ,O Hz 652,O 707,4 767,4 HZ 832,5 903,l 979,8
HZ

Hz 741 882

HZ I 023 I 164

Hz 1 305 1 446

Hz 1 587 1 728

Hz 1 869 2 010

1 062,9 1 153,3

Voice-band teleprinter systems 1 366,0 Hz 1 612,5 Hz 1 640,O Hz

P5.2.16

Mobile status display 1 612,9 Hz 2 025 Hz 2 225 Hz

P5.2.17

Touch-tone, central ofice to central ofice Hz 700
Note. -

Hz 900
These frequencies services.

Hz 1 100
are listed because

Hz 1 300
they ale used frequently

HZ 1 500
in services rated

Hz 1 700
to the mobile

P5.2.18

Base-station wire line on radioyfrequency link control Hz 1 050 1 150 1 250 Hz 1 350 1 450 1 550
shown are indigenous to specific manufaclurers.

Hz 1 650 1 750

Hz 1 850 1 950

Hz 2 050 2 175

Hz 2 450 2 750

Note. _ The groups P6. P6.1 P6.1.1

Simultaneous tone systems Touch-tone, subscriber to cenfral ofJicce Group A HZ 697,0 770,o Hz 852,O 941 ,o 150 Hz I 209,O I 336,0 Hz 1 477,0 1 633,0

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 P6.1.2
Group B

Hz 501 547 596 650 P6.1.3
Group C

Hz 708 772 842 917 HZ 1 270 1 400 tone, sequential

HZ 1 000 1 090 1 188

Hz 1 295 1412 1 539

Hz 1 677 1 828 1 993

HZ

2 172 2 367 2 580

Hz I 060 1 160 P7. P7.1 Simultaneous
Group A

Hz 1 530 1 670 systems

Hz 1 830 2 000

Hz 2 200 2 400

HZ

2 600 2 900

Hz 679 700 770 P7.2
Group B

HZ 852 900

Hz 941 1 100

Hz 1 209 1 300

HZ

H2 1 500 1 700

1 336 1 477

Hz 346,7 358,9 371,5 384,6 398,l 412,l P7.3

Hz 426,6 441,6 457,l 473,2 489,8 507,o

Hz 524,8 543,3 562,3 582,l 602,6 623,7

HZ

Hz 794,3 822,2 851,l 88 I ,O 912,O 944,l

Hz 977,2 1 011,6 1 047,l 1 084,O 1 122,l 1 161,4

645,7 668,3 691,8 716,l 741,3 767,4

Group C--Touch-tone

Hz 697,0 770,o P7.4
Group D

Hz 852,O 941,o

Hz 1 209,O 1 336,O

Hz 1 477,0 1 633,0

435 Hz P7.5 Group E Hz 1 124
Note. -

558Hz

713 Hz

914 Hz

1 170 Hz

Hz 1 275
shown are indigenous

Hz I 446

HZ 1 640

IHZ

Hz 2 110

1 860

The groups

to specific manufacturers.

P8. PS. 1 P 8.2

Pulsed individual tone systems
Group A

600 Hz
Group B

1 500 Hz 590 Hz

1 800 Hz 1 500 Hz 151

2 000 Hz 2 805 Hz

2 805 Hz

IS 10820 ( Part 6 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 489-6 : 1987 P8.3 P8.4 Group C 600 Hz Group D 1 600 Hz Note. - The groups shown are indigenous P9. Pg.1 2 000 Hz
to specific manufacturers.

1 336 Hz

1 500 Hz

1 633 Hz 2 400 Hz

2 150 Hz

Pulsed individual tone, sequential systems Group A Hz 935 1 105 1 275 1 500 1 600 Hz 1615 1 955 2 125 2 295 2 500 Hz 2 635 2 800 2 975 3 145 3 315 Hz 3 345 3 855 4 365 4 875 HZ 6 105 6 615 7 125 7 635 Hz 8 145 8 655 9 165 9 675

Pg.2

Group B Hz 420 425 540 595 660 765 780 Hz
900

Hz 1 380 1 445 1 500 1615 1 620 1 740 1 785

HZ

Hz 2 340 2 463 2 465 2 580 2 635 2 700

Hz 2 805 2 820 2 940 2 975 3 060 3 180

935 1 020 1 105 1 140 1 260 1 275

1 860 I 955 1 980 2 100 2 125 2 220 2 295

Pg.3

Group C Hz 600 1 100 1 300 Hz 1 336 1 500 1 633 Hz 1 700 1 800 2 000 Hz 2 150 2 805

Pg.4

Group D

Five-tone sequential systems Hz 1 060 1 160 1 270 Hz I 400 1 530 1 670 Hz 1 830 2 000 2 200 Hz 2 400 2 600

Note. -

The groups

shown are indigenous

to specific manufacturers.

152

