( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard

GUIDE F-OR THE SELECTION OF INSULATORS IN RESPECT OF POLLUTED CONDITIONS

UDC 62 1'3 15'62'001'37 ( 036 )

0 4

BIS,1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR 110002 Price Group 5 MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI February 1992

Electrical

Insulators

and Accessories

Sectional

Committee,

ETD 06

FOREWORD This Tndian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized the Electrical Insulators and Accessories Sectional Committee had been approved by Electrotechnical Division Council. by the

The performance of insulators in polluted conditions has been the subject of many studies that permit the specification of the required insulation when the site pollution is known, or by experience of insulator performance in the same region which has been operating at the same or at a different system voltage. The approach based on laboratory simulation of natural pollution consists consequently of the following steps: a) evaluation of type and severity of the pollution at the site, of the pollution under of the this test. be adopted whenever site as Fossible

b) specification of a laboratory test as representative (in particular see IS 8704 : 1978 ), and c) selection This method circumstances Obviously, represented of insulators which would

show a good behaviour of the required insulation

of selection permit.

and specification

should

this approach in a satisfactory

for instance, when a natural has some limitations, way by an artificial pollution test in the laboratory.

site

cannot

be

The aim of the present guide is to give, on the basis of the experience in service and numerous test results in naturally and artificially polluted conditions, simple general rules that should assist irl choosing the insulator which should give satisfactory performance under polluted conditions. These guidelines are essentially based upon with a few other~geometrical parameters, which itself. They provide an easily accomplished severity of the site where these insulators are to insulators having an acceptable risk of flashover minimum creepage distance requirements associated generally do not limit the design of the insulator way to choose insulators based on the predicted be installed. The above requirements are based on when operating under such polluted conditions.

may NOTE - Suitab!e testing carried out in the laboratory or direct experience obtained in natural conditions allow the minimum creepage distances specified in this guide to be reduced (for instance, for insulators specially designed for polluted conditions ).

This guide describes

the method

of insulator the severity

selection of the

by: pollution to the of the site minimum (see 4, Table 1 and distance

a) evaluating qualitatively Annex A ); and

b) choosing insulator dimensions with regard (Table 2 ) within the limits stated in 5. In special cases, washing or greasing of insulators

specific

creepage

can be used

(see Annex

B).

This guide also indicates,

by way of information:

Different methods for measuring the pollution severity that make it possible to check, or to know with greater accuracy, the actual pollution severity of a site, while bearing in mind that valid information often calls for several years of measurements ( see 7 ); and Relation between pollution levels and artificial pollution tests (see Annex C). in respect of

This guide is based on IEC Report 815-1986 `Guide for the selection of insulators polluted conditions', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission.

IS 13134-i 1992

hdian

Standards

GUIDE FOR THE SELECTION OF INSULATORS IN RESPECT OF POLLUTED CONDITIONS
1 SCOPE 1.1 This guide is mainly applicable to three-phase systems up to 52'5 kV ( phase-to-phase ). For higher voltages, the possible non-linear performance of insulators is still under study. 1.2 This guide is applicable to outdoor ceramic and glass insulators used in ac systems, of the following types: a) Long-rod and traction line insulator, 5 RELATION BETWEEN THE POLLUTION LEVEL AND THE SPECIFIC CREEPAGE DISTANCE 5.1 For each level of pollution described in Table 1, the corresponding minimum specific creepage distance, in millimeters ~per kilovolt ( phase-to-phase) of the highest voltage for equipment is given in Table 2. 5.2 Experience has shown that the criterion of `minimum specific creepage distance', which implies linearity under pollution between withstand voltage and creepage distance, applies to most insulators used on existing systems. 5.3 Some insulators specially shaped for particular kinds of pollution may not satisfy these conditions even though they perform satisfactorily in service. 6 APPLICATION OF THE SPECIFIC CREEPAGE DISTANCE CONCEPT 6.0 General In order to successfully apply the speciJc creepage distance concept, certain dimensional parameters characterizing the insulator shall be taken into account. 6.0.1 These parameters, based on service experience and on laboratory tests, mainly relate to the shed shape or to the profile of the insulator, but also to the diameter and the position in service of the insulator. : 6.0.2 The parameters given in 6.1 to 6.3 are not intended to limit the future development of insulator design. They simply recommend certain limits ( indicated in Annex D ) which must be interpreted flexibly in order to provide a high probability of satisfactory performance in service. 6.1 Parameters Annex D ) Characterizing the Profile ( see

b) Cap and pin insulator, c) Pedestal type post and rigid pin insulator, d) Substation and line post insulator, e) Hollow insulator, and f) Bushing. 1.3 This guide cannot directly be used for special types of insulators such as insulators with conductive glaze, or covered, during the manufacturing, with any insulating material, for surge arresters and also for longitudinal insulation for open circuit-breakers. This guide does not deal with radio interference voltage, television interference voltage and audible noise, the intensity of which may be increased on some polluted insulators. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The following referred and are standard: IS No. Indian Standards have adjuncts to necessary Title vocabulary been this

1885 ( Part 54 ) : Electrotechnical Part 54 Insulators 1980 8704 : 1978

2165 : tin various par&) 3 TERMINOLOGY

Method for artificial pollution tests on high voltage insulators for use on ac systems Insulation co-ordination

3.1 The definitions of terms relating to insulators covered in IS 1885 ( Part 54 ) : 1980 shall apply. 4 POLLUTION SEVERITY LEVELS four from

6.1.1 The profile of an insulator by the following parameters:

is characterized

4.1 For the purposes of standardization, levels of pollution are qualitatively defined, light pollution to very heavy pollution.

4.1.1 Table 1 gives, for each level of pollution, an approximate description of some typical corresponding environments. Other extreme environmental conditions exist which merit further consideration, for example, snow and ice in heavy pollution, heavy rain, arid areas. 1

a) Minimum distance, c, between sheds; b) Ratio s/p betw~een spacing and shed overhang; c) Ratio Id/d between creepage distance and clearance; d) Alternative sheds [ see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3b) 1; e) Inclination of sheds; and f) Parameters characterizing the entire insulator: i) creepage factor ( C.F. ), and ii) profile factor (P.F. ).

IS 13134 : 1992 Table 1 Pollution Levels

[ Foreword, Clauses 4.1.1 a& 8. I. 1 ( a ) ]

Pollution Level I -Light

Examples of Typical Environments Areas without industries heating plants; and with low density of houses equipped with

Areas with low density of industries winds and/or rainfall; Agricultural Mountainous areas ( see Note 1 ); areas; and

or houses but subjzcted

to frequent

All these areas shall be situated at least IO km to 20 km from the sea and shall not be exposed to winds directly from the sea (see Note 2 ) 11 Mcdiu!-1 Areas with industries not producing particularly polluting smoke w.th average density of houses equzpped with heating plants; Areas with high density of houses and/or frequent winds and/or rainfall; and industries and/or to ( at

but subjected to the coast

Areas exposed to wind from the sea but not too close least several kilometres distant ) (see Note 2 ). I11 Heavy

Areas with high density of industries and suburbs of large cities high density of heating plants producing pollution; and Areas close to the sea or in any case exposed to relatively from the sea ( see Note 2 ). strong

with winds

IV -

Very Heavy

Areas generally of modsrate extent, subjected to conductive dusts and to industrial smoke producing particularly thick conductive deposits; Areas generally of moderate extent, very close to the coast and exposed to sea-spray or to very strong and polluting winds from the sea; and Desert areas, strong winds condensation. characterized by no rain carrying sand and salt, for long p-riods, exposed to and subjected to regular

NOTIS 1 Use of fertilizers by spraying, or the burning level due to dispersal by wind. 2 Distances conditions. of crop residues, can lead to a higher pollution wind

from sea coast depend on the topography

of the coastal area and on the extreme

Annex

D gives the definition of these parameters and an indication of their value.

6.2 Influence of the Position of Insulators
6.2.1 There is normaly some change in the pollution performance of insulators designed for use in the vertical position when they are used in an inclined or horizontal position. Generally, the change is for an improvement in performance, but in certain cases a reduction may result, for example, due to the cascade effect of heavy rain.

Unless specific data showing significantly improved performance is available, any change in performance due to position should be neglected.
6.2.2
NOTEIf insulators are designed for use in an inclined or horizontal position, the performance under polluted conditions can be checked by laboratory or field tests in the position for which they are designed.

6.3 Influence of the Diameter 6.3.1 Various laboratory tests appear to indicate that the pollution performance of post insulators and hollow insulators decreases with increasing average diameter.

2

IS 13134 : 1992 Table 2 Creepage Distance ( Foreword, Clauses 5.1, 7.1, and Table 3 )

Pollution Level ILight

Minimum Specific Creepage Distance ( mm/kV ) 16 20 25 31

II -- Medium III Heavy

IV - Very heavy NOTES 1 For the actual creepage distance, the specified manufacturing

tolerances

are applicable. phass-to-phase can be used

2 Ratio of the leakage distance measured between phase and earth value of the highest voltage for the equipment ( see IS 2165 ). 3 In very lightly polluted areas, specific creepage distances lower depending service experience. 12 mm/kV seems to be a lower limit.

over the rms than 16 mm/kV

4 In the case of exceptional pollution severity, a specific creepage distance of 31 mm/kW may not be adequate. Depending on service experience and/or on laboratory test results. a higher value of specific creepage distance can be used, but in some instances the practicability of washing of greasing (see Annex B ) may have to be considered.

6.3.2 The following values for k, are proposed, k, being a factor to increase the crcepage distance

determined, according to the pollution the site, by the relation:

level of

with average diameter Dm in millimetres. Average diameter Dm < 300 mm : k, = 1 : k, = 1'1 300 < Dill G 500 mm : k, = 1'2 Dm > 500 mm However, these values may differ according to the origin of different results (field results or laboratory tests). This factor should, therefore, be used with caution. For a given profile, the average diameter is given by:
DIII

Minimum creepage distance = Minimum specific creepage distance (Table 2) x highest system voltage phase-to-phase for the equipment x k,
where: k, is the correction ( see 6.3.2 ).

factor

due to diameter

where It is total creepage distance of the insulator; and D(1) is the value of the diameter at a creepage distance I, measured from one electrode.

are to be used between phases (phase-spacers for instance ), the creepage distance should be multiplied by ~`3 ( for a three-phase system ).

7.1.1 If insulators

8 EVALUATION OF POLLUTION SEVERCTY 8.1 The
application of this guide is directly related to the knowledge of the pollution severity of the site where insulators are to be installed.

The above formula
general by the following

may

be approximated

in

simple relations: ( Fig. 1)

DcfDi a) Regular sheds DUI = 2 b). Alternative sheds D = Dc1+De.2+2Di m

8.1.1 The evaluation of the pollution severity can be made with an increasing degree of confidence: a) Qualitatively from indications
given in Table 1;

4

( Fig. 2)

b) From

7 DETERMINATION OF THE CREEPAGE

DISTANCE 7.1 The insulator
minimum situated creepage distance between phase and of an earth is 3

information on the behaviour of insulators from lines and substations that site ( see already in service on Annex A); and measurement in siru.

c) From

IS 13134: 1992 8.2 For measurements

in situ, different are' generally used. They are:

methods pollutant gauges; the

4 Volume conductivity b) Equivalent

for the collected by means of directional

Salt Deposit Density on insulator surface ( ESDD method ); strings of various lengths;

4 Total number of flashovers to insulator
d) Surface conductance and of sample insulators;

e) Leakage current of insulators subjected to service voltage ( highest current values during subsequent time intervals, I,, ). 8.2.1 The first two methods do not require expensive equipment and can be easily performed. The volume~conductivity method gives no direct information by itself on the frequency and on the severity of the contamination events on a natural site. The ESDD method characterizes the pollution severity of the site. Information on wetting shall be separately obtained. 8.2.2 The accuracy of these methods depends upon the frequency of measurement. However, for the ESDD method, an automatic measuring system has been developed and therefore, pollution severity can be measured continuously, in order to find, for example, the suitable timing of washing. 8.3 The method based on total flashovers needs expensive test facilities. Reliable information can be obtained only for insulators having a length close to the actual length and flashing over at a voltage near the operating voltage. 8.4 The last two methods given in 8.2 which need a power source and special recording equipment have the advantage that the effects of pollution are continuously monitored. These techniques have been developed for assessing the pollution rate and the results, when related to test data, are used to indicate that the pollution is still at a level known to be safe for operational service or whether washing or re-greasing is required.
NOTE - For more information on these different methods see `Electra' No.64 - May 1979, Page 101 and Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. FIG. 2 ALTERNATING SHEDS

FIG. 1

REGULAR SHEDS

FIG. 3

MINIMUM DISTANCEc BETWEENSHEDS

FIG. 4

INCLINATION OF SHEDS

5A

Normal Sheds

5B

Alternating

Sheds

5C

Cap and Pin Insulator

5D

Underrib

Sheds

5E
FIG. 5

Pedestal Type Post Insulator

PARAMETERS CHARACTERIZING INSULATOR PROFILE 5

IS 13134 : 1992

ANNEX

A

[ Foreword and Chuse 8.1 (b) ]
EXAMPLE OF A QUESTIONAIRE TO COLLECT INFORMATION BEHAVIOUR OF INSULATORS IN POLLUTED AREAS A-4 INFORMATION ON THE

Company.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Indentification of project and/or location.. ..........
...............................................................

ON POLLUTION

Line or substation ........................................ Person to consult for complementary information, address, telex, telephone... ). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +... . . ..$...
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-l GENERAL INFORMATION
..s...........

For example: Seaborne pollution ( high percentage of salt ) - small ammountof insoluble matter Saline pollution other than coastal - small amount of solids Sand-based pollution or ground dust ( for example, desert... . . . . . . . . . . . . ) Industrial pollution with large amounts of solid deposits (except cement ) Industrial pollution with large amounts of cement Chemical industrial pollution (gas, smoke
. . . . . . . :_.... 1

Nominal voltage of the system and highest voltage for equipment Date of construction Type of system Maintenance (not involving changes of insulator)
For overhead line

Mixed pollution (indicate in this case the main components, for example, for coastal cement factories )
A-S DATA ON INSULATION For overhead lines

Type of tower ( sketch) Number of circuit Ground clearance of string Type of insulator sets Insulator protective fittings Date of energizing Cleaning-yesorno-frequency..., Washing -yes or no -frequency Greasing-yesorno-frequency
For substations

. . . . . . . . . . . . .... . . .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . ., . . .

Position of string: Vertical (suspension ) Horizontal ( tensions ) Angle ( in degrees) Number of units per string Type of insulator ( drawing ) Spacing Creepage distance of unit Indicate any modification in the initial insulation
For substations

Type of apparatus: Circuit-breaker Disconnector Instrument transformer Lightning arrester Bus-bar insulator Clearance between base of insulator and ground
A-2 INFORMATION ON THE SITE

Map of areas crossed and routing of the line. For polluted areas only, the different climatic zones crossed by the line ( mark them on the map ). For substations, place, orientation and altitude.
A-3 INFORMATION CONDITIONS OF WEATHER

Type of insulator: Post insulator ( solid core) Pedestal insulator Bushing Hollow insulator Profile and spacing of shed (give details) Total creepage distanee A-6 SCHEDULE OF INCIDENTS Date and time Situation of the tower (for line) and place of apparatus in substation Critical meteorological conditions at the moment of incidents Relative humidity Storm Rain Wind (direction, speed ) Drizzle Time between last rainfall and incident Fog Temperature Other
Type of incident

Type of climate : temperate, tropical, equatorial, continental... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Time without rainfall, in months Annual rainfall, in millimetres Dominant wind; direction, average speed in kilometers per hour Dew: sometimes, often, never Fog: sometimes, often, never 6

Flashover Heavy corrosion of metal parts Punctured dielectric Visible damage to dielectric Erosion or tracking For a string of insulators place of damaged units in the string Comments of the incident indicating any special circumstances.

IS 13134.:- 1992

ANNEX B ( Foreword and Table 2 Note 4 )
GREASING AND WASHING 5-l .2 Washing There are two main methods for insulators to remove pollution: a) By fixed sprays, b) By using jet. and controlled portable the washing of

R-l In exceptional cases, pollution problems cannot be solved economically by a good choice of the insulator. For instance, in areas having very severe contamination or low annual rainfall, insulator maintenance may be required. This can also occur when the environment of an already built -substation ( or line ) changes due to new polluting industries. Maintenance normally the following forms: Periodic a> takes one or more of

a manually

The frequency of washing should be such as to avoid significant accumulation of pollution. Thus the objective is to keep the insullators in as clean a condition as possible. Insulator washing with fixed, automatic sprays is an effective and reliable method of combating pollution, particularly when the deposit rate is high. This technique has high capital cost and low running cost. Portable jut washing equipment operators under the direct control of suitably trained -persons and can be used at more than one site. It has low capital cost and high running cost. Some safety precautions are necessary. Both systems require: a) A stored supply of water of adequate suitable low condutivity. capacity and Town mains water may be suitable for washing in some cases; b) Special nozzles to ensure that the wash water breaks into droplets; and c) Precautions to reduce the risk of water being blown onto unwashed insulators by strong winds. Where the pollution deposit rate is high, a pollution detector is desirable to initiate fixed washing or to call for a manual wash. The effectiveness of washing is dependent on the design of the insulators particularly the shape and spacing of sheds. In general, insulators oil good pollution performance will wash well, particularly if the shed profile has good aerodynamic qualities.
NOTE - For lightning arresters with internal gaps, special care should be taken to avoid flashover or explosion during washing.

hand wiping on de-energized installation of dry cleaning either energized or de-energized; coating with grease compounds;

b) Periodic
and

4 Periodic
energized.

washing,

either

energized

or de-

B-l.1

Greasing

Grease compounds used for coating insulators are mainly silicone products or hydrocarbons. The thickness of the applied layer of grease depends on the type of grease and on the degree of pollution; generally, for the silicone based compounds it is about 1 mm and for hydrocarbon compounds can reach some millimetres. requires regular of application This type maintenance for removing the grease and recoating It should be pointed out that and is expensive. the greased insulation loss most of their properties of self-cleaning through the rain or through the wind and that under certain conditions of heavy pollution the grease can damage the ceramic or the glass. The frequency of cleaning and regreasing ranges from some months to some years, depending upon the degree of contamination and the weather conditions. An optimization of these operations shall be reached by a check of the conditions of the grease, taking into account the accumulation rate of the pollution content in the grease and the ageing of the grease itself.

IS 13134:

1992

ANNEX C ( Foreword )
RELATION C-l BETWEEN POLLUTION LEVELS AND ARTIFICIAL POLLUTION TESTS

These relations between pollution levels and artificial pollution tests on particular cap and pin and long-rod insulators are given only as examples, and cannot be used for type tests on line insulators. Neither should the aiven withstand severity be interpreted as a specifiiation for post insulators and hollow insulators.
Table 3

C-l.1 Table 3 gives for each pollution level the range of values which were obtained in some artificial pollution tests performed according to the test procedures described in IS 8704 : 1978.
NOTE - The test procedures will be modified in the r.ext revision of 13'8704 : 1978, especially those of the solid-layer methods. This may lead to values different from those given here.

Severity Withstand (Annex

Voltage

c-1.1 )

Specific Creepage Distance (see Co1 2, Table 2 ) Salt Fog Method ( mm/kV ) ( kg/m' )

Artificial Pollution Tests Severity Withstand Values at the Phase-to-Earth Voltage

-

I
SDD+

Solid-Layer

Methods Layer Conductivity

( mdcma

)

( YS ) 15 to 20 24 to 3.5 36 -

16 20 25 31

5 to 14 14 to 40 40 to 112 > 160

0'03 to 0'06 0'10 to 0'20 0`30 to 0`60

`SDD = Salt, Deposit Density.

ANNEX D ( Clauses 6.0.2 and 6.1.1 )
PARAMETERS CHARACTERIZING THE INSULATOR PROFILE

D-O These parameters are related installed in a vertical position. positions, see 6.2.
D-l MINLMUM SHEDS D-l.1 DISTANCE

to insulators For other

For insulators having an overall length less than or equal to 550 mm, or for insulators with small shed overhang p ( see D-2 ) ( P < 40 mm ) a value of c in the order of 20 mm is acceptable.
NOTES 1 c is not applicable to pedestal-type post pin-type insulators. 2 For insulators with alternate sheds, see D-4. and

c BETWEEN

c is the minimum distance between adjacent sheds of the same diameter, measured by drawing a perpendicular from the lowest point of the outer rib of the upper shed to the shed below of the same diameter (see Fig. 3 ).

D-2 RATIO s/p BETWEEN SHED OVERHANG D-2.1

SPACING

AND

This distance is important in rainfall conditions to avoid bridging between two successive sheds. According to present knowledge, a value of c in the order of 30 mm or more fulfils this requirement. 8

The ratio s/r, describes the limitation on providing arbitrarily too high a leakage distance by either over dimensioning the shed overhang p or by unjustifiably increase the number of sheds. The ratio is important for self-cleaning properties of insulators.

IS 13134:1992 s/p should be equal to or greater than 0'8. Field experience shows that this value can be reduced to 0'65 in the case of plain sheds (without ribs). s is the vertical distance between points of successive sheds ( spacing).
p is the maximum

two similar

the above However, solution cannot be applied or may not be economical when the pollution severity is too high. Therefore, it is possible to design insulators having different profiles suitable for the specified pollution severity. The different parameters given above characterize local parts of a profile, but it is still necessary to characterize the entire insulator by the creepage factor (CF) and by the profile factor (PF). These two factors depend on the pollution severity. CF has a theoretical and scientific meaning, while PF is an empirical quantity derived from experience. CF can be used to characterize the profile of all types of insulators, whereas PF is not applicable to cap and pin insulators (see Fig: 5c ) and pedestal post insulators (see Fig. 5e). D-6.2 Creepage Factor ( CF ) ( see Fig. 5 ) The creepage factor, CF is equal to ) Where: It is the total creepage distance of an insulator; and St is the arcing distance, which is the shortest distance in air, outside the insulator, not considering arcing horns, between the metallic parts to which the voltage is normally applied. It is advisable to keep: CF < 3'50 for pollution levels i and II, and CF < 4 for pollution levels III and IV,
NOTE -If an insulator has a profile with a CF higher than the litnit value recommended, the insulator profile may be used if experience in operation, or a laboratory test reproducing operation conditions, permits the assumption of good performance.

shed overhang ( that is, p in Fig. 5a and Fig. 5d, p, in Fig. 5b and pz in Fig. 5c ).

D-3 RATIO I& BETWEEN CREEPAGE DISTANCE AND CLAEARANCE D-3.1 The ratio Id/d describes the use of the to avoid local creepage distance in order short-circuiting and should be lower than 5. This ratio should be checked for the `worst case' on any section, for example, of the underside of an anti-fog insulator profile.
d is the straight

air distance measured between two points situated on the insulating part or between any point located on the insulating part and the other or a metal part. la is the part of the creepage between the above two points. path measured

(

$

D-4 ALTERNATIVE

SHEDS ( see Fig. 5b )

D-4.1 The difference (pl -p2 ) between two consecutive shed overhangs is important in rain conditions to avoid bridging between them.
p, is the shed overhang of the larger shed; and p8 is the shed overhang of the smaller shed.

This difference (p, -pz ) should be in general greater than or equal to 15 mm. D-5 INCLINATION SHEDS

D-S.1 The inclination of sheds is important for the self-cleaning properties. For the top of the shed, the minimum inclination of the shed ("C) should be greater than 5" (see Fig. 4). No minimum angle in specified for the bottom part of the shed. However, if the bottom part is without ribs, a minimum inclination of 2" is advisable. D-6 PARAMETERS CHARACTERIZING ENTIRE INSULATOR THE

D-6.3 Profile Factor ( PF ) The PF is defined as the ratio of the simplified leakage distance to the actual insulating creepage distance measured between the two points which define the spacing S. The simplified leakage distance is the sum of:
2pfs

for insulators in Fig. 5a and Fig. 5d; for insulators in Fig. 5b; and

2pl+2pz+s

D-6.1 The insulators, as far as their performance under pollution is concerned can be designed in different manners. When the pollution severity increases, a solution to satisfy the specific creepage concept in obviously to increase the length of the insulator while keeping the same shed profile.
clean string insulator units are added NOTE -When to or replaced in a polluted insulator string,, the complete string shall be cleaned before the lure is re-energized.

p, pl, pz and s having the definitions given above and shown in Fig. 5a to Fig.-Se. Thus, PF is equal to: 2p+s for insulators 1 and 2p1+2pz+s 1
9

in Fig. 5a and Fig. 5d;

for insulators in Fig. 5b.

IS 13134: 1992

I being the creepage distance of the insulated leakage path measured between the two points which define s. It is advisable to keep: PF above 0'8 for pollution levels I and II; and PF above~0.7 for pollution levels III and IV.
NOTE - If an insulator has a profile with a PF lower than the limit value recommended, the insulator profile may be used if, experience in operation, or a laboratory test reproducing operation conditions, permits assumption of good performance. General NOTE -The protected part of the profile (protected creepage distance) should not be specified as a parameter characterizing a shed profile.

a) The different site conditions of contamination, b) The prevailing self-cleaning conditions, and c) The position of the insulator inclination ). (angle of

The example, for insulators used in vertical position in an area exposed to salt storms and frequent and intensive rain, protected (either profiles with underribs or plain sheds of steep inclination) have proved to be useful. On the other hand, for insulators used in an area with rare or low intensity rain or airborne contaminants, open ( or aerodynamic ) profiles seem to show good performance. In such cases, the creepage distance of underribs can be put out of action by being filled with contaminants.

In effect, no general rules can be quantified because the degree to which a shed profile is open or protected depends mainly on:

/

10

I

I

I

Standard

Mark

I

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Srandurds Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of tha-t standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
I

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau OJ Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, arc should ascertain that they are in possession of Users of Indian Standards issued from time to time. Standard may be sent to BIS giving the the latest amendments OT edition. Comments on this Indian following reference : Doc:No ETD06(3107) Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend

No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg, New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

I 331 331 01 13 75 31

Eastern

: I/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol,

Maniktola

37 86 62

Northern Southern Western

160036 600113 )

53 38 43 235 02 16 6 32 92 95

: C. I. T. Campus,

MADRAS (East

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

Andheri

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. LUCKNOW. PATNA. SRINAGAR. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

COIMBATORE. JATPUR. KANPUR.

Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India

