URAL ATP IS 18099 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Чеча течі тес — Frail 
afgaat 


Sodium Hypochlorite — Code of 
Safety 


ICS 13.300, 71.060.50 


© BIS 2022 


UR AAG A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS Чач, 9 679 Wes VHX HPT, Ag {е - 110002 
S МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2022 Price Group 7 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on recommendation of the Chemical 
Hazards Sectional Committee and approval of the Chemical Division Council. 


Sodium hypochlorite is an inorganic chemical widely used as bleach liquor and is generally sold in aqueous 
solutions containing 5 percent to 15 percent sodium hypochlorite, with 0.25 percent to 0.35 percent free alkali 
(usually NaOH) and 0.5 percent to 1.5 percent of chloride as NaCl. 


This standard prescribes properties of sodium hypochlorite, the nature of hazards associated with it and essential 
information on storage, handling, packing, labelling, waste disposal, cleaning of containers, selection and training 
of personnel, protective equipment and first aid. 


Safety measures mentioned in the standard for controlling hazards, essential information on symptoms of 
poisoning due to exposure to sodium hypochlorite, personal protection equipment, etc have been harmonised 
with the latest and applicable statutory rules. 


The properties of sodium hypochlorite solution listed in 4 have been taken from literature and have been 
included for information only. Moreover, these properties pertain to pure sodium hypochlorite solution. Bureau 
of Indian Standards has published a separate standards IS 11673 (Part 1) : 2019 on the requirements and the 
methods of sampling and test for sodium hypochlorite solution intended for household and industrial purposes 
and IS 11673 (Part 2) : 2019 on the requirements, methods of sampling and tests for sodium hypochlorite 
solution intended for water treatment meant for drinking purpose. 


There is no ISO Standard on this subject. In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance was derived 
from sodium hypochlorite safety data sheet issued by reputed Indian and International bleach liquor 
manufacturers. 


The various clauses of the standard are in line with the format being applied for all Indian Standards on Code of 
safety of chemicals. 


The list of abbreviation is listed in Annex A. The composition of committee responsible for the formulation of 
this standard is listed in Annex B. 


IS 18099 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
SODIUM HYPOCHLORITE — CODE OF SAFETY 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard describes the properties of sodium 
hypochlorite and nature of hazards associated with 
it. The standard prescribes safety measures for 
controlling hazards and essential information on 
symptoms of poisoning, first-aid, medical treatment, 
storage, handling, labelling and employee safety. 


1.2 The standard does not, however cover the design 
of buildings, chemical engineering plants, method 
and ingredients used in the manufacture, equipment 
for waste disposal and operation control. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed below contain 
provisions which through reference in this text, 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revisions, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS 4155 : 1966 Glossary of terms relating to 
chemical and radiation hazards 


and hazardous chemicals 


IS 8519 : 1977 Guide for selection of industrial 
safety equipment for body 


protection 


IS 8520 : 1977 Guide for selection of industrial 
safety equipment for eye, face 


and ear protection 


IS 8807 : 1978 Guide for selection of industrial 
safety equipment for protection 


of arms and hands 


IS 10667 : 1983 Guide for selection of industrial 
safety equipment for protection 


of foot and leg 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions 
given in IS 4155 shall apply. 


4 PROPERTIES 
4.1 General Information 


Sodium hypochlorite is a chemical compound with 
the formula NaOCl comprising 
a sodium cation (Na*) 

and hypochlorite anion (OCI). It may also Бе 
viewed as the sodium salt of hypochlorous acid. 


Sodium hypochlorite is a household 
chemical widely used as a disinfectant or 
a bleaching agent. In solution, the compound is 
unstable and easily decomposes, liberating chlorine 
which is the active principle of such products. 


Its corrosive properties, common availability, and 
reaction products make it a significant safety risk. In 
particular, mixing liquid bleach with other cleaning 
products, such as acids orammonia, will 
produce chlorine gas which is poisonous. 


4.1.1 Chemical Name — Sodium hypochlorite 


4.1.2 Common Name and Synonyms — Bleach, 
liquid bleach, hypochlorite, sodium salt, sodium 
oxychloride. 


4.1.3 Uses 


Sodium hypochlorite solution is used in textile and 
paper bleaching, laundry trade, sterilization of 
swimming pools, disinfection of drinking water, 
treatment of cyanide wastes of electroplating 
industry and treatment of sewage effluent. It is also 
used as a sanitizer and deodorizer for floors, sinks 
and toilets, as a therapeutic adjunct in the treatment 
of certain skin diseases and as a safe antiseptic. 


4.2 Identification 

4.2.1 Formula — NaOCl, NaClO 

4.2.2 CAS Number — 7 681-52-9 

4.2.3 UN Number — 1 791 

4.2.4 UN Hazard Class — 8 

4.2.5 Hazchem Code — 2X, Packing Group — III 
4.3 Physical Properties 

4.3.1 General 


А dilute solution of Sodium Hypochlorite is 
commonly known as bleach. Colour of bleach liquor 
is green to yellow. It can be crystallized as a 
pentahydrate NaOC1.5H20, a pale greenish yellow 
solid which is not explosive and is stable if kept 
refrigerated. 


The anhydrous compound is unstable and may 
decompose explosively. It decomposes at above 
40 °C on heating. Sodium Hypochlorite releases 
poisonous chlorine gas on contact with acids. 
Sodium hypochlorite is light sensitive and 
incompatible with strong acids, amines, ammonia, 
ammonium salt, reducing agents, metals, aziridine, 
methanol, formic acid, phenyl acetonitrile. It is 


IS 18099 : 2022 


completely soluble in water and reacts with many 
organic solvents. 


4.3.2 Molecular Mass — 74.44 g/mol 
4.3.3 Physical State — Liquid 


4.3.4 Colour — Water clear to a slight greenish- 
yellow or light yellow 


4.3.5 Odour — chlorine like and sweetish odour 
4.3.6 Boiling Point — 111 °C 

4.3.7 Melting point/freezing point — (-) 25 °C 
4.3.8 Vapour Density (Air = 1) — 1.2 

4.3.9 Specific Gravity 

a) Solid (water = 1) — Not Available 


b) Liquid (water = 1) — 1.126 (8 percent w/w Clo 
solution); 
1.163 (10 percent w/w СІ solution); 
1.202 (12 percent w/w Cl solution); and 
1.25 (15 percent w/w Cl; solution) 


4.3.10 Viscosity 
a) Kinematic viscosity 2.222 mm?/s at 20 °C 
b) Dynamic viscosity 2.8 mPa s at 20 °C 
4.3.11 Vapour pressure at 20 °C — 20 mm/Hg 
4.3.12 Heat of Combustion — Not Available 
4.3.13 Refractive Index at 25 °C — 1.3870 


4.3.14 Solubility in Water — 29.3 g/100 ml (0 °C), 
completely soluble. 


4.3.15 Solubility in other solvents — Reacts with 
many organic solvents. 


4.3.16 Light Sensitivity — Light sensitive. Degrades 
on exposure to UV light. 


4.4 Chemical Properties 
4.4.1 Reactivity 


Generally, salts of hypochlorous acid (НСІО) are 
toxic, irritants and powerful oxidizers, particularly 
in the presence of water or at higher temperature as 
they decompose to release oxygen and chlorine 
gases. On contact with urea, they form highly 
explosive nitrogen trichloride (М№СІз) which is highly 
explosive. On contact with acids, they produce 
highly toxic fumes of chlorine gas. Reacts with 
sulphuric acid to produce heat and chlorine gas. 
Sodium hypochlorite reacts violently with amines 
and ammonium salts. Sodium hypochlorite solutions 
are reactive with common cleaning products such as 
toilet bowl cleaners, rust removers, vinegar, acids, 


organics and ammonia products to produce 
hazardous gases such as chlorine апа other 
chlorinated species. 


4.4.2 Polymerisation — Not available. 


4.4.3 Allotrope Formation — Not available. 
4.4.4 Corrosion Properties 


Sodium hypochlorite is known to be corrosive to 
metals. It will generate hydrogen gas when in 
contact with aluminium. Sodium hypochlorite 
solutions are corrosive to eyes, skin and mucous 
membranes. 


4.5 Fire and Explosion Hazard Properties 
4.5.1 Ignition Temperature — Not available. 
4.5.2 Auto Ignition Temperature — Not available. 


4.5.3 Flash Point — Not applicable, this product 
does not flash. 


4.5.4 Upper Explosive Limit — Not available. 
4.5.5 Lower Explosion Limit — Not available. 
4.5.6 Fire Risk 


Sodium hypochlorite is non-flammable but is 
decomposed by heat and light, causing a pressure 
build-up which could result in an explosion. When 
heated, it may release chlorine gas or hydrochloric 
acid. Vigorous reaction with oxidisable or organic 
materials may result in fire. 


5 HEALTH HAZARD AND TOXICITY 
INFORMATION 


5.1 General Information 


Sodium hypochlorite and its fumes are known to 
have both acute and chronic health effects. The 
health affect can be dermal, respiratory and eye 
injury. Fatal exposure can occur by inhalation of 
high dose of chlorine. Exposure to Sodium 
Hypochlorite can be prevented by taking proper 
safety precautions in its handling. 


5.2 Routes of Entry 
5.2.1 Skin 


Contact of Sodium Hypochlorite with skin may 
cause dermal irritation. 


5.2.2 Eyes 


Contact of Sodium Hypochlorite with eyes may 
cause severe irritation leading to eye damage, 
especially at higher concentration. 


5.2.3 Ingestion 


Ingestion of Sodium Hypochlorite solution will 
cause burning of mouth, nausea, vomiting, delirium 
and coma. 


5.2.4 Inhalation 


Inhalation of Sodium hypochlorite vapour may 
cause irritation to the respiratory tract, nose and 
throat. Symptoms may include coughing and sore 
throat, bronchial irritation and pulmonary edema. 


5.3 Toxicity Information 


Available toxicity values are given below: 


a) TLV (TWA): 0.5 ppm as СІ 
b) STEL: 1 ppm as Cl, 
c) IDLH: 10 ppm as Chlorine 


а) 1р5 (rat), Dermal: 2 000 mg/kg 
LDso (rat), Oral: 89.10 mg/kg (100% 
Sodium Hypochlorite) 


e) LDL, (human) Oral: Not available 


f) LC (Rat), Inhalation: More than 10.5 
mg/kg 


g) Carcinogenicity: Not considered to be 
carcinogenic 


h) Reproductive Toxicity: Not Available 
j) Mutagenicity: Not Available 


5.4 Antidote 

No specific antidote available. 
5.5 Health Effects 

5.5.1 Signs and Symptoms 


Inhalation of Sodium hypochlorite vapour will cause 
wheezing, shortness of breath, headache, spasm, 
inflammation and edema of bronchi, pneumonitis. 
Ingestion of solution will cause burning of mouth, 
nausea and vomiting, delirium, coma. Contact of 
solution or vapour with the eyes will cause Redness, 
tearing, itching, and burning of the eyes. It may 
damage cornea, cause conjunctivitis and loss of 
vision. Exposure to skin will result in redness, 
blistering, burning, itching, and tissue destruction 
with slow healing. 


5.5.2 Acute Toxicity 


Liquid or spray mist may produce tissue damage 
particularly on mucous membranes of eyes, mouth 
and respiratory tract. Prolonged exposure may result 
in skin burns and ulcerations. Skin inflammation is 
characterized by itching, scaling, reddening, or 
occasionally blistering. Inhalation of the spray mist 
may produce severe irritation of respiratory tract, 
characterized by coughing, choking, or shortness of 
breath. Inflammation of the eye is characterized by 
watering and itching. 


5.5.2.1 Systemic effects 


Systemic toxicity is rare, but metabolic acidosis may 
occur after ingestion. 


5.5.2.2 Local effects 


IS 18099 : 2022 


Ingestion of Sodium Hypochlorite may cause burns 
to the mouth and throat, gastrointestinal irritation, 
nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea. Inhalation and 
ocular exposure to Sodium hypochlorite vapour 
results in burning of throat and lungs, eye and nose 
irritation, chest tightness, coughing and sore. 
Sodium Hypochlorite is corrosive and may irritate 
the skin or cause burning pain, inflammation and 
blisters. 


5.5.3 Chronic Toxicity 


Prolonged or extensive exposure may cause skin 
irritation and damage to the skin such as thickening, 
blackening or cracking. Repeated eye exposure may 
cause corneal erosion or loss of vision. If 
overexposed to the solution, there will be constant 
irritation of the eyes, nose, and throat. Over- 
exposure by inhalation may cause respiratory 
irritation and bronchitis. 


5.5.3.1 Systemic effects 

Systemic toxicity is rare. 

5.5.3.2 Local effects 

May cause severe burns and eye damages. 

6 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 
6.1 Availability and Use 


PPE is a device/appliance designed to be worn by an 
individual when exposed to one or more health and 
safety hazards. Personal Protective Equipment 
(PPE) are tools that ensure the basic health 
protection and safety of users but not a substitute for 
good engineering control such as safe working 
conditions and adequate ventilation. Two Types of 
PPEs are in use, namely, Respiratory PPE for 
protection of respiratory system and non-respiratory 
PPE for protection of head, eye, skin, foot, etc. 
Employers should assess the workplace where 
Sodium Hypochlorite is handled to assess if any 
health hazards are present or are likely to be present 
in the work area. In that case, the employers must 
select and provide proper PPE to employees and also 
ensure its use by the employee while doing work. 
Employees should be trained on all aspect of PPE 
including its selection, use, cleaning after use, 
proper care, maintenance and storage. 


6.2 Non-Respiratory Equipment 
6.2.1 Eye and Face Protection 


Where there is a reasonably foreseeable risk of eye 
injury, suitable goggles (splash resistant chemical 
safety goggles) eyecup or cover types eye protectors 
should be worn. If protection to the whole face 
including mouth, nose and eyes is required, face 
shield should be used. Maintain eyewash and drench 
shower equipment in work area (see IS 8520). 


IS 18099 : 2022 


6.2.2 Head Protection 

Protective hats are used for head protection against 
impact blows and in some case electric shock. 
Class C hard hats can be used for handling Sodium 
Hypochlorite but it does not offer electrical 
protection (see IS 8807). 


6.2.3 Foot and Leg Protection 


Workers should use appropriate foot guards, safety 
shoes, or Rubber boots for protection of feet and legs 
(see IS 10667). 


6.2.4 Body, Skin and Hand Protection 


Employees should wear protective clothing made 
from rubber, vinyl, neoprene or PVC when handling 
sodium hypochlorite solution. Protective clothing 
includes full-length gloves, aprons, gowns, coveralls 
and boots. Employees should also wear Standard 
work clothing closed at the neck and wrist while 
wearing impervious equipment. Protective clothing 
protects the skin or personal clothing from contact 
with Sodium Hypochlorite solution and prevents 
spread of contamination. Contaminated clothing 
should be removed and discarded or laundered (see 
IS 8519). 


6.3 Respiratory Protection 


Respiratory protective equipment (RPE) protects 
workers against exposure to dusts, gases, fumes and 
vapours. The choice of RPE depends on the air 
contaminants concentration, duration of exposure 
and physical and chemical nature of the chemical 
handled. 


Respirator Selection should be done on the basis of 
Assigned Protection Factors (APFs). Maximum Use 
Concentrations (MUCs) from which an employee 
can be expected to be protected when wearing a 
respirator, is determined by multiplying the APF for 
the respirator by the exposure limit. 


Two types of Respiratory Protective Equipment 
available, namely, air purifying respirator (filtering 
device) and airline respirators (breathing apparatus). 


a) Respirator (filtering device) 


Uses filters to remove contaminants in the 
workplace air, there are two main types: Non- 
powered respirators & Powered respirators. 


b) Breathing apparatus (BA) 


Needs a supply of breathing-quality air from an 
independent source (e.g. air cylinder or air 
compressor). 


6.3.1 Respiratory Equipment 
Respirator selection (upper limit devices). 
а) 1 mg/m? 


Chemical cartridge gas Mask Respirator 
with a full face-piece. 


b) 2.5 mg/m? 
(i) Power air-purifying respirator 
(1) Supplied air respirator operated in а 
continuous flow mode. 


с) 5 mg/m? 

а) (i) Supplied air Respirator with a full face- 
piece/SBA 
(1) Air purifying full face-piece respirator. 
200 mg/m? 


Supplied air respirator with a full face- 
piece and operated in a pressure demand or 
other positive pressure mode. 


e) Emergency or planned entry in unknown 
concentration 
Self-Containing Breathing Apparatus 
(SCBA) with full face-piece and operated 
in a pressure demand or positive pressure 
mode. 


f) Escape Gas mask 


(i) Air purifying full face-piece respirator 
(1) Self-contained breathing apparatus. 


7 STORAGE, HANDLING, LABELLING AND 
TRANSPORTATION 


7.1 General 


Sodium hypochlorite solution is corrosive to eyes, 
skin and mucous membranes. All persons should be 
trained in handling of sodium hypochlorite and 
should wear appropriate personal protective 
equipment. 


7.2 Storage 


7.2.1 Sodium hypochlorite should be stored away 
from direct sunlight in shaded area at temperatures 
below 15 °C. pH of sodium hypochlorite solution 
should be maintained above 10. Large storage areas 
should have appropriate ventilation. No other 
material should be stored along with sodium 
hypochlorite. 


7.2.2 Tank for Storing Sodium Hypochlorite 
Solution 


Sodium hypochlorite solution is stored in 
polyethylene, HDPE, XLPE (cross-linked 
polyethylene), FRP (fiberglass reinforced plastic), 
and chlorobutlyl rubber-lined steel storages Tanks. 


Storage tanks may be insulated with polyurethane 
foam or cellular glass to keep the product cool to 
prevent decomposition. Secondary containment in 
the storage area is required to contain the Sodium 
Hypochlorite solution in case of leak or accidental 
spillage. 


7.3 Handling 


Contact of Sodium Hypochlorite with eyes, skin or 
clothing should be avoided. Containers should be 
labelled and kept closed and protected from physical 
damage. Containers should be checked regularly for 
leaks or spills. 


7.3.1 Piping 


Structural strength and chemical resistance are the 
two factors which determine the selection of piping 
materials for Sodium Hypochlorite solutions. Steel 
pipe lined with polypropylene, PVDF, PTFE, or 
similar thermoplastics may be used where piping 
systems may Бе subject to physical stress. 
Fiberglass, CPVC and PVC is suitable for piping 
system in lighter stress situations. 


7.3.2 Valves 


PTFE or PVC lined quarter-turn plug or ball valves 
are recommended for service. 


7.3.3 Pumps 


Titanium or plastic lined pumps are recommended 
for service. 


7.3.4 Venting/Overflow System 


To eliminate excessive pressure or vacuum while 
filling or discharging the tank, a venting system 
must be provided. Piping should be installed to 
direct the overflowing solution away from personnel 
into a containment area. 


7.3.5 Gauging Devices 


Storage tanks should have a level indicating device 
for measuring liquid level. An independent, back up 
level sensor should be used to prevent tank overflow 
in the event of a level gauge failure. 


7.4 Labelling 
7.4.1 General 


Each container should carry an_ identifying 
label/placard. Tank cars should have emergency 
information panel as required by regulations. 


7.4.2 The storage containers shall be labelled or 
marked to identify: 


a) The contents of the container; 


b) The name and address of the manufacturer or 
importer of the hazardous chemical; and 


с) The physical, chemical and toxicological data 
as per the criteria given in the relevant Schedule 
of the Manufacture, Storage and Import of 
Hazardous Chemicals Rules 1989. While 
referring to the statutes, the stipulations given in 
the subsequent amendments of those statutes 
shall be taken into account. 


IS 18099 : 2022 


7.5 Transport 


Customers should handle and unload sodium 
hypochlorite containers safely and must comply 
required add regulations for the same. 


Tank Cars are used for bulk transportation of 
Sodium Hypochlorite. For small quantities, 
containers with capacities of 500 ml to 20 1 are 
usually used. 


7.5.1 Unloading of Tankers 


Unloading of Sodium Hypochlorite solution from 
the tank car to customers’ storage tank can be done 
by any one of the following methods: 


a) By Gravity; 
b) By Pumping; and 
c) By compressed Air. 


The truck should be placed accurately and levelled. 
Stoppers/pegs should be used to avoid movement of 
truck during unloading. Supplier's instructions for 
unloading should always be followed and all caution 
markings on both sides of trucks should be read and 
observed. Unloading stations should be equipped 
with safety showers. 


7.5.2 Unloading Drums/Carboys 


Carboys should not be dropped or allowed to strike 
each other and shall be unloaded on the pallet. 
Proper PPEs should be used while unloading. 


7.5.3 Driver 


Trained drivers possessing valid driving license 
should only transport Sodium Hypochlorite tank 
cars. Driver should carry transport emergency card 
(TREM) card when vehicle is on road. 


7.5.4 If transport of the hazardous chemical is 
involved it shall be carried out in accordance with 
the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989. While 
referring to the statutes, the stipulations given in the 
subsequent amendments of those statutes shall be 
taken into account. 


8 SPILLAGE, LEAKAGE AND WASTE 
DISPOSAL 


8.1 General 


All personal attending to control spill/leak should 
use proper personal protective equipment while 
handling sodium hypochlorite. 


8.2 Spillage 
8.2.1 General Information 


General public should be prohibited to not enter into 
the affected area. Unrelated and unprotected 
personnel should be kept away from the affected 


IS 18099 : 2022 


area and be advised to stay upwind of spill area. 
Avoid Contact with spilled product. 
Prevent entry of spilled sodium hypochlorite into 
sewers, open drains and waterways. Notify the 
incident to proper authorities. Carefully plan 
response and proceed with caution. 


8.2.2 Land Spill (Spill on Land) 
8.2.2.1 Containment 


Sodium hypochlorite solution spilled on land may be 
contained by building dykes or barrier using earth, 
and or similar inert materials. Recover spilled 
Sodium hypochlorite as much as possible and cover 
the spilled area with sand. 


8.2.2.2 Consequence 


Chlorine gas will be released from the spilled 
Sodium hypochlorite and can affect human beings, 
animals and environment of the surrounding area. 
Chlorine gas may travel further in the down wind 
direction if large quantity of sodium hypochlorite 
leaks. 


8.2.2.3 Mitigation 


The contaminated soil from the spilled area should 
be removed and send it to hazardous waste disposal 
site. 


8.2.3 Water Spill (Spill on Water) 
8.2.3.1 Containment 


Spilled sodium hypochlorite will mix with water and 
chlorine will be liberated. Chlorine can be 
neutralised with Sodium sulphite, sodium bisulphite, 
sodium thiosulfate, hydrogen peroxide, and sulphur 
dioxide. 


8.2.3.2 Mitigation 


In case of spillage of large quantity of sodium 
hypochlorite into water body, the water of the 
affected water body may be unfit for consumption 
and may affect the aquatic life because of high 
chlorine content. Stop use of contaminated water. 
Notify proper authorities to stop water intake or to 
monitor water for contamination. 


8.3 Leakages 
8.3.1 General Information 


In case of a spill or leak, stop the leak as soon as 
possible. 


8.3.2 Leak from the Truck 


The leaking tanker should be emptied out to another 
empty tanker or to a storage tank. 


8.3.3 Caution 


Persons handling leaking sodium hypochlorite 
tankers should wear proper personal protective 
equipment. 


8.4 Waste Disposal 


8.4.1 Contaminated sodium hypochlorite solutions 
should be neutralised with any of the neutralizing 
chemicals such as sodium sulphite, sodium 
bisulphite, sodium thiosulfate, hydrogen peroxide or 
sulphur dioxide. The neutralised waste sodium 
hypochlorite can be discharged to effluent treatment 
plant or sewers. 


8.4.2 Soils contaminated with sodium hypochloite 
should be disposed as hazardous waste. 


8.4.3 Returnable carboys/jars should be thoroughly 
washed inside and outside with water before 
returning. Non-returnable containers, before 
scrapping should be thoroughly washed with water. 


9 FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE FIGHTING 
9.1 General Information 


Sodium hypochlorite is not combustible but is a 
strong oxidizer which enhances the combustion of 
other substances. During a fire, irritating and highly 
toxic gases such as sodium oxide and chlorine may 
be generated by thermal decomposition or 
combustion. Wear proper protective equipment 
including respiratory protection while entering fire 
area. Wear a self-contained breathing apparatus 
(SCBA) and full protective gear to prevent contact 
with thermal decomposition products and also wear 
appropriate protective clothing to prevent contact 
with skin and eyes. 


9.2 Prevention 


9.2.1 Fires are controlled by exclusion of air, using 
water spray, dry chemical and carbon dioxide 
extinguishers. In case of fire in the surroundings, 
extinguish fire using appropriate extinguishing 
media suitable for type of surrounding fire. Use 
water in flooding quantities as fog. Use water spray 
to keep fire-exposed containers cool. 


9.2.2 Move container from fire area if without risk. 
Apply water from as far a distance as possible to 
keep fire-exposed containers cool. 


9.3 Fire-Fighting 


Use water spray, dry chemical, carbon dioxide, or 
appropriate foam. Do not use a heavy water stream. 
Use water spray or fog for cooling exposed 
containers. 


10 TRAINING 


10.1 Safety in handling of sodium hypochlorite 
depends upon the effectiveness of employee 
education, training and supervision. Employee 
education and training should emphasize the need of 
handling sodium hypochlorite according to the 
methods outlined in the manual/work instruction. 
Employees should be trained to prevent spilling or 
splashing, leaks, inhalation of the vapour or 
ingestion. 


10.2 All new employees should be instructed 
thoroughly for proper handling of sodium 
hypochlorite before being placed on the job. Older 
employees should be re-instructed periodically. 


10.3 Each employee should know the location where 
PPE is stored. Also the employees should be aware 
of the locations of safety showers, fountains for 
flushing the eyes provided within the plant. 
Employees should be trained for use of various PPEs 
and the purpose of their use. Employees should also 
be trained for the maintenance and upkeep of PPEs. 


10.4 Only reliable, dependable and properly trained 
employees should be given the responsibility of all 
operations involving storage, handling, transport 
and emergency management involving sodium 
hypochlorite. 


10.5 Employees should be instructed to report to the 
proper authority/immediate supervisors regarding 
any suspected leaks or equipment failure. Each 
employee should be trained on emergency 
procedures and the first-aid measures. Employees 
should be trained to apply first-aid in case of contact 
with or exposure to sodium hypochlorite vapour. 


11 HEALTH MANAGEMENT, FIRST-AID 
AND MEDICAL TREATMENT 


11.1 Health Monitoring 
11.1.1 Personal Hygiene 


It is desirable that employees should bathe daily 
after finishing their work. Employees should report 
to medical department if they observe any abnormal 
condition in their skin, eye, chest or if they 
experience any difficulty in their respiratory system 
(breathing, coughing, etc). 


11.1.1.2 Employees should neither store nor eat food 
in the sodium hypochlorite storage and handling 
area 


11.1.2 Examinations 
11.1.2.1 Pre-placement medical examination 


Pre-placement medical examination is directed 
towards eliminating workers suffering from 
bronchitis or other respiratory diseases to work in 
the sodium hypochlorite work environment. 


11.1.2.2 Medical examination 


All employees working in the Sodium Hypochlorite 
work environment should undergo routine annual 
medical examination. In addition to routine medical 
check-up, chest X-ray should also be done on annual 


basis for employees who are over exposed to sodium 
hypochlorite. 


IS 18099 : 2022 


11.2 First Aid 


11.2.1 General 


First-aid treatment should be started at once in all 
cases of contact with sodium hypochlorite; serious 
injury may result if delayed. All affected persons 
should be referred to a physician even when the 
injury appears to be slight. Physician should be 
given detailed account of the accident. If the affected 
person is unconscious, do not give anything by 
mouth. First aiders are at risk of exposure to sodium 
hypochlorite and therefore the first aiders should 
wear proper PPEs when attending to affected 
persons. 


11.2.2 Contact with Skin 


Take off all contaminated clothing and rinse skin 
immediately with plenty of water for 15-20 min. If 
irritation persists, repeat flushing. Call a 
physician/doctor for treatment and advice. Share the 
product label or material safety data sheet (MSDS) 
with the physician for medical treatment. Wash 
contaminated clothing before reuse. 


11.2.2.1 Contact with Eyes 


Hold eye open and rinse slowly and gently with 
plenty of water for 15-20 min. Remove contact 
lenses, if present, after the first 5 min, then continue 
rinsing eye for 10-15 min. Call a medical 
physician/doctor for further treatment and advice. 


11.2.2.2 Ingestion 


Do not induce vomiting. Get medical aid 
immediately. If victim is conscious and alert, give 2- 
4 cupful of milk or water if able to swallow. Dilute 
immediately by giving milk, melted ice cream, 
starch paste or antacids such as milk of magnesia. 
Avoid Sodium bicarbonate because of carbon 
dioxide release. Do not give anything by mouth to 
an unconscious person. If spontaneous vomiting 
occurs, have victim lean forward with head down to 
avoid breathing in of vomitus, rinse mouth and 
administer more water. 


11.2.2.3 Inhalation 


Get medical aid immediately. Remove from 
exposure and move to fresh air immediately. Assure 
fresh air breathing. Allow the victim to rest. If not 
breathing, give artificial respiration. If breathing is 
difficult, oxygen to be administered by trained 
person. If person is not breathing, call an ambulance. 
Give artificial respiration, preferably mouth-to- 
mouth if possible. Call a poison control centre or 
medical physician for further treatment & advice. 
NOTE — While consulting Doctor or Medical person for 


further treatment medical advice share the MSDS and 
product Label. 


IS 18099 : 2022 


11.2.3 First-Aid Kit 


First-Aid kit should contain the following items in 
addition to items normally kept in the first-aid kit. 


a) 0.5 per cent silver nitrate solution, 

b) Sofratulle sterilized gauzes, and 

c) Silver sulpha ointment (if patient is not 
allergic to sulpha drugs). 


Basic first-aid manual or instruction booklet may be 
kept in the first-aid kit. The medicines kept in the 
first-aid kit should be checked regularly for expiry 
date and replace as required. 


11.3 Medical Treatment 


Pre-existing medical conditions may be aggravated 
by exposures affecting target organs. Probable 
mucosal damage may contraindicate the use of 
gastric lavage. In addition to the alkalinity of this 
product, the continued generation of chlorine gas 
after ingestion can damage further the stomach 
mucous, depending on the amount ingested. 
Consideration may be given to removal of the 
product from the stomach, taking care to avoid 
perforation of oesophagus or stomach. An ounce of 
[percent sodium thiosulfate or milk of magnesia is 
helpful. Physician should treat symptomatically and 
supportively. 


11.3.1 Treat skin burns by cleaning the affected area 
with soap and water. 


11.3.2 If bleach gets into the eyes, the person should 
first flush the eyes with water and then seek medical 
attention. 


12. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 


Sodium hypochlorite is classified as a Class 8 
Dangerous Good. When handling concentrated 
Sodium Hypochlorite solutions, appropriate 
precautions should be taken. Very serious allergic 
reaction to sodium hypo is unlikely, but if it occurs 
seek immediate medical attention. Symptoms of a 
serious allergic reaction may include rash, 
itching/swelling (especially of the 
face/tongue/throat), severe dizziness, trouble in 
breathing. Unauthorised and untrained employees 
should not be permitted in areas where sodium 
hypochorite is being handled. 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
CPVC Chlorinated Polyvinyl 
Chloride 
LCs Lethal Concentration 50 
Гр! Lowest Lethal Dose 
Ср Lethal Dose 50 
HDPE High Density Polyethylene. 
IDLH Immediately Dangerous To 
Life or Health 
PTFE Polytetrafluoroethylene 
PVDF Polyvinylidene fluoride 
PVC Polyvinyl Chloride 
STEL Short Term Exposure Limit 
TLV/TWA Threshold Limit Value/Time 
Weighted Average 


XLPE Cross-linked polyethylene 


IS 18099 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


Organization(s) 


In Personal Capacity 
Alkali Manufacturers Association of India, Mumbai 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Centre for Fire, Explosives and Environmental Science, 
Gol, Ministry of Defence 


Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 


Crop Care Federation of India, New Delhi 


Defence Research and Establishment, (DRDO), Gwalior 


Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Gol 
Department of Space ISRO), Bengaluru 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour 
Institutes, Mumbai 


Gas Industries Association 


Hindustan Unilever Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


SHRI K. S. RAMPRASAD (Chairperson) 
SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI H. S. DAs (Alternate) 


MISS GARIMA SINGH 
SHRI NISHITH GOSH (Alternate) 


DR M. SURIYANARAYANAN 


SHRI S. P. DOBHAL 
DR AARTI BHATT (Alternate) 


DR DANDAMUDI USHARANI 
DR PRASANNA VASU (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. KARLEKAR 
DR J. C. MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


DR PRABHAT GARG 
DR VIRENDRA VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


DR VISHAL CHOUDHARY 


SHRI MURALEEKRISHNAN R. 
Ms LAKSHMI V. W. (Alternate) 


SHRI H. M. BHANDARI 
SHRI P. G. SATPUTE (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KHER 
SHRI ANOOP TANDON (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY HARLAKA 
SHRI RAKESH WADALKAR (Alternate) 


DR C. NANDI 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR BANKUPALLI SATYAVATHI 
DR SRIPADI PRABHAKARC (Alternate) 


DR NEERAJ ATRAY 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR КАМОЛА (Alternate) 


DR SACHIN GUNTE 


PROF SANDIP ROY 


DR D. K. PATEL 
DR SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


DR K. K. SATPATHY 


PROF (DR) G. D. YADAV 
DR B. M. BHANAGE (Alternate) 


IS 18099 : 2022 


Ministry of Environment and Forest, New Delhi 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 


National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad 


National Institute of Technology, Thrichi 


National Safety Council, Navi Mumbai 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate (Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas), Delhi 


Pesticides Manufacturer and Formulators Association of 
India 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation, Nagpur 


Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


Tata Chemicals Ltd, Mithapur, Distt, Jamnagar 


In personal capacity (-4/2/6, Parijat C.H.S., Spaghetti, 
Sector-15, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, 410210) 


BIS Directorate General 


SHRI VED PRAKASH MISHRA 
DR DINESH RUNIWAL (Alternate) 


DR VIJAY У. BOKADE 
DR M. MUTHUKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR B. RAVICHANDRAN 


PROF S. Р. SIVAPIRAKASAM 
SHRI D. SREEJITH MOHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI A. Y. SUNDKAR 
SHRI K. D. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDAR M. MAHAJAN 


DR ARCHANA KUMARI 
DR SANDIP SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. JHALA 
DR YOGESH KHARE (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAMMAD 
SHRI DEVANG MEHTA (Alternate) 


DR JAGDISH KUMAR 


DR DEEP SHANKAR CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI SNEHASHISH A. CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI D. К. THAKUR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SOUNDARARAJAN 


SHRI AJAY К. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT) [REPRESENTING 


DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Ms SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:CHD 07 (18576). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : СІ.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


