WAT AA IS 16364 : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


weld AI antes 
(Ta J sit) 


Hydrometric Uncertainity — 
Guidance (HUG) 


ICS 17.120.20 


© BIS 2017 


ada AM At 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF TS, 9 Fg WAL AM, ae feeeit-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2017 Price Group 11 


Hydrometry Sectional Committee, WRD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hydrometry 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


The quality of measurable knowledge is stated in terms of measurement uncertainty. The internationally agreed 
method for assessing measurement quality is the Guide to the estimation of uncertainty in measurement (GUM). 
Without this uniformity of measurement standards, equitable sharing of the environment is not possible and 
international obligations to care for the environment would be weakened. 


The essential purpose of the GUM is that a statement of the quality of a measurement result will be presented 
with all measurements described in technical standards. Without this, no two measurements can be compared or 
standards set. Whereas the GUM is a reference document serving the universal requirements of metrology, this 
standard on hydrometric uncertainty guidance (HUG) is specific to hydrometry, that is to the measurement of the 
components of the hydrological cycle. It borrows from the GUM the methods that are the most applicable to 
hydrometry and applies them to techniques and equipment used in hydrometry. 


The GUM defines standard uncertainty of a result as being equivalent to a standard deviation. This can be the 


standard deviation of a set of measured values or of probable values. This is broadly similar to the approach used 
in error analysis that preceded the uncertainty technique. However, the GUM provides additional methods of 
estimating uncertainty based on probability models. The two approaches are equivalent but uncertainty requires 
only a knowledge or estimate of the dispersion of measurement about its mean value, and not the existence of a 
true value. It is assumed that a careful evaluation of the components of measurement uncertainty brings the mean 
value close to a probable true value, at least well within its margin of uncertainty. 


In more general terms, uncertainty is a parameter that characterizes the dispersion of measurable values that 
can be attributed to their mean value. 


By treating standard deviations and probability models as if they approximated to Gaussian (or normal) 
distributions, the GUM provides a formal methodology for combining components of uncertainty in measurement 
systems where several input variables combine to determine the result. 


Within this formal framework, the GUM can be consistently applied to a range of applications and, thereby, be 
used to make meaningful comparisons of results. 


This standard seeks to promote an understanding of the nature of measurement uncertainty and its significance in 
estimating the ‘quality’ of a measurement or a determination in hydrometry. 


Hydrometry is principally concerned with the determination of flow in rivers and man-made channels. This 
includes— 


a) environmental hydrometry, that is the determination of the flow of natural waters (largely concerned 
with hydrometric networks, water supply and flood protection), 


b) industrial hydrometry, that is the determination of flows within industrial plants and discharges into the 
natural environment (largely concerned with environment protection and also irrigation). 


Both are the subject of international treaties and undertakings. For this reason, measured data needs to conform 
to the GUM to assure that results can be compared. 


Hydrometry is also concerned with the determination of rainfall, the movement/diffusion of groundwater and the 
transport by water flow of sediments and solids. This standard is concerned with flow determination only. 


The results from hydrometry are used by other disciplines to regulate and manage the environment. If knowledge 


(Continued to Third Cover) 


IS 16364 : 2017 


Indian Standard 
HYDROMETRIC UNCERTAINITY GUIDANCE (HUG) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard provides an understanding of the nature 
of measurement uncertainty and its significance in 
estimating the ‘quality’ of a measurement or a 
determination in hydrometry. 


It is applicable to flow measurements in natural and 
man-made channels. Rainfall measurements are not 
covered. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 
1191 : 2003 Hydrometric determinations — 
Vocabulary and symbols (second 
revision) 
1192 : 1981 Velocity area methods for 


measurement of flow of water in 
open channels (first revision) 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given in IS 1191 and the following apply. 


3.1 Standard Uncertainty — Uncertainty of the result 
of a measurement expressed as a standard deviation. 


3.2 Type A Evaluation of Uncertainty — Method of 
evaluation uncertainty by the statistical analysis of a 
series of observations. 


3.3 Type B Evaluation of Uncertainty — Method of 
evaluation uncertainty by means other than the 
statistical analysis of a series of observations. 


3.4 Combined Standard Uncertainty — Standard 
uncertainty of the result of a measurement when that 
result is obtained from the values of a number of other 
quantities, equal to the positive square root of a sum 
of terms, the terms being the variances or covariances 
of these other quantities weighted according to how 
the measurement result varies with changes in these 
quantities. 


3.5 Expanded Uncertainty — Quantity defining an 
interval about the result of a measurement that may be 
expected to encompass a large fraction of the values 
that could be attributed to the measurand. 


3.6 Coverage Factor — Numerical factor used as a 
multiplier of the combined standard uncertainty in 
order to obtain an expanded uncertainty. 


4 SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS 


(0A coefficient representing the effects of 
non-uniform energy (velocity) in a 
channel 

VV Vez angles between boat axes and the x axis. 

(0 standard deviation 

Ax, A'Y dispersion of measurement from the 


mean value of the set of x, y 
measurements for a symmetric 
distribution: Ax = 0.5 (Xmax — X min)» ete. 


A'x*, A'x + dispersion about the mean value, x 7 
for an asymmetric distribution of 
measurements where Ar” = ag -x ) 
and A’x” =(X— Xy ) 

A small difference in a measured quantity 
AQ, Ah, AT, etc 

Ay, Az notional small distances in the y and z 
directions at a cross-section in the 
channel 

De, in the dilution method, the downstream 
mixed change (c,, c,) of concentration 
of the tracer 

A, A(z), A(h) cross-section area (in the y, z plane) of 
the flow 
channel width 

b contracted channel width or flume 
throat width 

Cy dilution method, the background 
concentration of tracer 

Cr dilution method, the feed concentration 
of tracer 

Ci dilution method, the downstream mixed 
concentration of the tracer 

Ç discharge coefficient 

G; velocity coefficient 

d, deviation of an measurement (the ith 


measurement of a series) from the mean 


IS 16364 : 2017 


Q 


T 
T, 


n 


U(x), UQ) 


uP), UL) 


u(x) 


value of that series 

datum elevation of a range measuring 
device 

relationship between head, h, and cross- 
section area, A 

multiplying factors to be applied to the 
summation of velocity-area elements to 
account for the approximation of a 
summation process to a true integration 
of continuously varying parameters 
gravitation acceleration 

head of water relative to a defined 
datum level in the channel 

total head relative to a defined datum 
level in the channel 

indices of a count į = 1 ton, or j = 1 to 
m of a series 

false measurement detection factor 
constant of a flow determination 
equation for a weir or flume 

constants for the determination of flow 
by the dilution method 

dilution method, the mass of tracer 
introduced into the stream 

exponent of a flow determination 
equation for a weir or flume 

number of measurement in a series 
probability function 

flow 

estimated flow passing close to 
boundaries or any region where 
measurement cannot be determined by 
the primary means 

dilution method, the flow of tracer into 
the stream 

standard deviation of a set of 
measurements 

factor to be applied to small numbers 
of samples to enable the standard 
deviation to be representative of large 
number of samples (see Annex A) 

in the dilution method, the interval 
during which a change in concentration 
is detectable 

absolute temperature, in Kelvin 
Grubbs’ test parameter 

uncertainty of measured variables x, y, 
etc 

the combined uncertainty of determined 
results p, q, etc 

the percentage uncertainty of a 
measurement of any quantity x 


Uss measurement uncertainty expanded to 
the 95% level of confidence 

V; mean velocity through a yx plane 
intersecting a channel cross-section of 
the channel 

Viy.» velocity in the x direction at point y, z 
in the channel 

zy 

V water velocity vector relative to channel 

pe 

V, boat velocity vector relative to the 
channel 

v water velocity vector relative to boat 

ie V,, Vv. water velocity components relative to 

boat along boat coordinate axes 

Vix » Voy » Vez components of boat velocity relative the 
boat axes 

Yao Vago Ya angles between boat axes and the 
channel x axis 

XYZ channel coordinates 

Ba ede boat coordinates 

xy measurable variables 


In this standard, the term “uncertainty” refers to 
measurement uncertainty and the following forms of 
equation are used to signify 


— a sum of n values of x 


— adifference, Af(x) in the function, f(x)due to 
a small change, Ax in the value x 


car 


Af (x) FA 


Ax, 


— a value of an integral, F, of a function, f(x) 
between, x = x,, and x = x, 


F= Jrda. 


5 ISO/IEC GUIDE 98 (GUM) — BASIC 
DEFINITIONS AND RULES 


5.1 
This 


General 


section summarizes the methods described in the 


GUM for the expression of uncertainty in 


mea 


surement. For a general introduction to 


measurement uncertainty, refer to Annex A. 


5.2 
The 


The Uncertainty of Sets of Measurements 


GUM describes measurement uncertainty as a 


value that characterizes the dispersion of measurements 


that could reasonably be attributed to the result. The 
GUM goes on to define standard uncertainty as 
uncertainty expressed as a standard deviation, s. 


So, for a set of n measurements, uncertainty is related 
to the difference between each measured value, x,, from 
the average value, x, of the set. The standard deviation, 
and hence the uncertainty, u(x), is: 


u(x) =5 = fale +(x-x,) +(x- zA 


n-1 +.....( —X 


where components (¥—.x,) are the deviation of the 


ith measurement, x,, from the mean value, x . Or, more 
concisely: 


1 n 49 
u(x)=s= |] — Eid AD 


where d,=x-x; is the deviation of the ith 


measurement from the mean value, x and 


po 1 n 
x = ae wee (2) 


The larger the number, n, of measurements used to 
calculate the mean value, x the greater is the 
expectation that the mean value approaches the ‘true’ 
value. Therefore, the uncertainty of the mean value, 


u(x ) decreases as the number of measurements, n, 


increases. The GUM relationship for this is 


1 
A ©) ....(3) 


5.3 Random and Systematic Effects 


Equation (3) applies only to the random variations of 
the measured quantity. This random effect is 
determined from the measured data and, as such, is 
evaluated after a set of measurements have been taken. 
Random effects can be determined from analysis of 
the historic data or by the instrumentation itself if it is 
designed to analyse the data in real time. Random 
effects diminish the average value of a set of n 


measurements by the factor Random conditions 


1 
vn 
often exist as natural turbulence. However, random 
variation can sometimes occur through human 
interpretation of a reading of an indicator, such as a 
staff gauge. 


Uncertainties that are inherent to the measurement 
equipment or to the method are systematic. Systematic 
effects cannot be diminished by the use of Equation (3). 


IS 16364 : 2017 


During each measurement session, systematic effects 
can usually be taken as constant for the measurement 
device. Systematic components are 


a) assessed as part of an installation or 
commissioning procedure, and/or 


b) specified beforehand for the equipment by the 
manufacturer (see 9). 


See A-6 for more information on random and 
systematic effects. 


For the evaluation of the uncertainty of a continuous 
process, include unsteady effects as a random 
component. The quantity being measured may be 
varying slowly during the measurement process. This 
will widen the dispersion of measured values and hence 
add to the assessment of the random component. Such 
variation shall be part of the randomness of the 
measurement. If during the measurement process the 
rate of change is such that it significantly exceeds the 
natural dispersion of measurements, then the result 
shall be discarded. 


5.4 Uncertainty Models — 
Distributions 


Probability 


In hydrometry, measurements are often made using 
automated instruments. They have a margin of 
measurement within which measured values can vary 
randomly in steady conditions. If this uncertainty is 
inherent to the measurement process, it is a systematic 
component. It is commonly expressed as a probability 
distribution. Probability distributions have standard 
deviations about the mean value which are equivalent 
to the standard deviation of discrete measurements as 
defined above. The probability distributions equivalent 
to 


Equations (1) and (2) are 


ORORO oc) 


and 


x= [0 x p(x)ax TE 


where p(x) is a probability function and d is the 
dispersion (see Annex A) . 


5.5 Combining Uncertainties — The Law of 
Propagation 


The GUM also defines a rule for combining 
uncertainties from several sources. It is called “the law 
of the propagation of uncertainties’. For a relationship, 
f, between a result, y, and variables, x,, x,.... x, defined 
as y =f) x), X .... Xp the combined uncertainty, u, 
(y), of y is 


IS 16364 : 2017 


i=n 


no =S KA 


or 


2 2 
f) f) 
u, 7 -|Zu [Zue] +... 
x, Ox, 
of ) 
+| ~—u(x,) | (6A) 
Ox, 
where x), X .... x, are independent variables. 


Equation (6A) applies only where the variables x,, x, 

.. X, are uncorrelated, that is if variable x, changes 
value, no other x variable is affected by that change. If 
two or more variables x do influence each other (that 
is they are correlated), then an additional component 
of uncertainty exists. Equation (6A) then becomes 


2 (9 2 incl Jon OF g 
u(y) ca) +2 2 > S u(x) 
...(6B) 


Almost all hydrometric uncertainty estimations require 
the use of the simpler form, that is Equation (6A). 


The components can be random or systematic. The 


of 


partial derivatives ae are referred to as ‘sensitivity 
x 


n 


coefficients’. 


5.6 Expressing Results 


Equation (6A) expresses the final result in terms of 
standard uncertainty. For the Gaussian probability, 
used as a model distribution for general analysis, one 
standard deviation covers only 68 percent of the range 
of possible results. This means that for a result 
expressed as 


Flow rate = 10.8 I/s + 0.6 I/s 


or 


Q=Q+u(Q) 


Only 68 percent of the measurement will lie between 
10.2 1/s and 11.4 1/s. Almost one third of the 
measurement can be expected to lie outside this band. 
Such a statement is of little value in hydrometry. A 
more meaningful statement is required that will cover 
a larger portion of possible results. 


Clause A-9 defines expanded uncertainty. By 
expanding the margin of uncertainty, a greater portion 
of the expected range of measurements is covered. For 
the Gaussian probability distribution, it can be shown 
that by doubling the uncertainty margin, 95 percent of 
expected measurements are covered. 


The same result expressed in the form 


Flow rate = 10.8 Vs + 1.2 Vs at the 95 percent 
confidence level 


or 


Q=0+U,; (Q) 


means that 95 percent of the measurements are 
expected to lie between 9.6 1/s and 12.0 I/s. This is a 
more practical expression of the result. 


In hydrometry, all measurements shall be expressed at 
the 95 percent confidence level with a statement of 
the form: 


Quantity = Value + uncertainty at the 95 percent 
confidence level 


or 


Quantity = Value + percentage uncertainty at the 95 
percent confidence level 


Refer to A-9 for more detail. 


6 OPEN CHANNEL FLOW — VELOCITY 
AREA METHODS 


6.1 General 


Figure | shows the coordinate system used in this 
standard with orthogonal axes x, y, z. The mean velocity 
is calculated in the x direction. The xy-plane is 
horizontal. The z axis is vertical. Note that a velocity 
V vector representing the mean velocity does not have 
to align with the x axis. The flow in the channel can be 
determined from velocities passing obliquely through 
an intersecting yz plane. 


The origin of the coordinate system may be located at 
any point relative to the channel but is typically located 
at the hydraulic datum for weirs and flumes or, for 
velocity-area methods, on a gauge datum alongside 
the stream. 


For example, vertical measurement can be h(z), 
expressed from a hydraulic datum relative to the z0 
coordinate system origin. 


The determination of flow in open channels requires 
the following: 


a) the determination of the mean velocity V, 
across the channel section; and 


b) the measurement of the cross-section area 
A(h), in the yz plane, through which the flow 
passes; h is the water depth. 


The product of these two quantities is the discharge, Q. 


Q=V,A(h) 


Xx 


Fic. 1 Co-ORDINATE RELATIONSHIP AT A CHANNEL 
CROSS-SECTION 


6.2 Mean Velocity, V, 


x 


The evaluation of mean velocity shall deal with the V, 
variability with respect to position, y,z, across the V, (y, 
z, t) channel and with respect to time, t. At the walls, 
friction slows the mainstream velocity to zero which 
causes steep velocity gradients to occur, illustrated in 
Fig. 2. Velocity gradients and shear stress within the 
body of the flow induce vortices which causes turbulent 
conditions. Turbulence exists in a moving body of 
water even when the water surface appears tranquil. 


The evaluation shall therefore scan the cross-section 
while integrating and averaging the velocity component 
in the x direction. The flow can be steady and hence 
V, can be constant, but turbulence causes the local 
value of V,(y, z, t) to be unsteady. 


MN 


Fic. 2 TYPICAL CURRENT PROFILES AND CONTOURS 


IS 16364 : 2017 


6.3 Velocity-area Determination 


The quantity, V, is determined across the channel from 
instantaneous point velocities, V (y, z, t). In this 
subclause, it is assumed that steady flow conditions 
prevail. If the flow does not vary with time, t, during 
the integration process, then 


Q= Í V.(y,z)dA EEGA) 


The ‘arithmetic’ method of integration is summation 
of velocity through notional stream tubes of defined 
area. 


This is typically done by dividing the cross-section 
into a number of horizontal segments or vertical 
segments, then measuring velocity at frequent intervals 
along the centreline of each segment to determine the 
segment mean velocity. Flow through the segment is 
the mean velocity through the segment multiplied by 
the segment area. The flows through each segment are 
summated to give the total flow in the channel. 
Therefore, Equation (7) becomes 


Q=FF, X X V, (yzi Az Ay; +Q, nate) 
where 
F is a factor, often assumed to be unity, 


y 
relating the discrete summation in the y 


direction to an ideal integration of a true 
continuous velocity profile; 


F is a factor, often assumed to be unity, 
relating the discrete summation in the z 
direction to an ideal integration of true 
continuous velocity profile; and 


0, represents perimeter flow passing between 
the region of segments and the channel 
boundary. 


The summation method divides the area into m x n 
rectangular stream tubes of height, Az; and width, Ay, 


A set of Ay; stream tubes makes up each horizontal 
segment, and a set of Az; stream tubes makes up each 
vertical segment. For small values of m or n, special 
consideration shall be given to the Fy and F, functions. 


The uncertainty of these factors is systematic to the 
summation process. 


The term Q, is the flow passing through a perimeter 
region that exists close to the channel floor and walls 
and the water surface where the velocity, V,(y; Zi), 
cannot be reliably determined. This can be due to the 
coarse. 


y-z resolution of the measuring device, the presence 
of steep velocity gradients through a boundary region 
or interference from the walls on the measurement 


IS 16364 : 2017 


process (sonar reflections for example). In the 
perimeter region, the flow is estimated by extrapolating 
velocity profiles determined in the body of the flow. 


6.4 Stationary Determination of Velocity 
6.4.1 General 


There are two methods of scanning the velocity 
profiles: 


a) stationary scans where the scanning device is 
static relative to the x,y,z coordinates when 
measurement are made; and 


b) moving scans in which the scanning device 
moves across the channel at a known velocity. 


6.4.2 Vertical Segments 


A range of meter types may be used to determine point 
velocities within vertical segments. Various techniques 
are used to assess the mean velocity within each 
segment: single point, three points, five points, 
continuous lower/raise traverse. 


The Doppler sonar provides a method of ‘snapshot’ 
integration along vertical segments by rapidly 
recording and processing velocities at a sufficient 
number of points to minimize the integration 
uncertainties. 


Equation (8) then becomes 
O=F EY TAY, (y,) Ay, +, (9) 


where V, (Ja) is the processed mean value by 
automated summation (integration) of the velocities 
in the jth vertical segment. The Doppler sonar is also 
used in small channels where only a single vertical 
profile is integrated. In such cases, special attention 
shall be given to the evaluation of F, y and the area term, 
h,Ay,. 


6.4.3 Horizontal Segments 


An alternative method of ‘snapshot’ integration is to 
divide the cross-section into horizontal segments. The 
mean velocity is determined in each horizontal segment 
and hence the flow through each segment. This method 
is often used with transit-time sonar. 


Equation (8) then becomes 


Q=F F}, bV, (z,)Az, +0, ...(10) 


where 


the processed mean value derived from 
scanning the velocities in the jth horizontal 
segment; and 


SI 
—~ 
A 
— 

ll 


> 
Il 


the length of the jth segment across the 
channel. 


Compared with vertical segment methods, relatively 
few horizontal segments are used: F, is not unity. Its 
value and its uncertainty shall be determined from 
‘typical’ velocity profiles at the site. 


6.5 Moving Determination of Velocity 


NOTE — The complex nature of the measurement process 

described here is either rationalized as a tabular procedure in 

the relevant standard or incorporated into equipment. 
Acoustic Doppler Current Profilers (ADCPs) scan from 
a moving boat to determine the velocity of the boat 
and the velocities of the flow relative to a boat 
coordinate system. 


Two additional components are required to be 
determined. They are 


L 
a) the boat velocity vector, V,, relative to the 
channel coordinates, x,y,z; and 


b) the alignment of the boat coordinates, x’, y', z’ 
relative to the fixed, x,y,z axes. 


L 
The boat velocity vector, V,, can be determined using 


GPS or by bottom tracking when the floor of the stream 
is static. Note that the boat velocity need not be parallel 
to the y' axis of the boat. 


L 
If the velocity of the water relative to channel is V, 
then the velocity of the water relative to the x'y'z' axes 
L I L fi 
oftheboatis V’=V+ V, where V’ isa velocity vector 


of the water relative to the boat. Note that ‘ denotes 
“relative to the boat”. 


In the two dimensional space of Fig. 3, this can be 
expressed in components relative to the boat coordinate 
system as 

(VeV ) E (v -Vw Vy — Vay) 


Ks 


Fic. 3 2D VELOCITY VECTOR AND COORDINATES 


Alignment of the boat axes, xy’ relative to the channel 
coordinates, x,y, can be expressed as direction angles 
Yao Yzy Where cos (Yy)? + COS (Yyy) = 1 


In the three-dimensional space of Fig. 4, these 
relationships become 


(Ve Vy Vy) = (Ve -Ve Vi — Vays Ve — Va) 


by’? 


Yoo Yayo Yxz are the direction angles relative to the boat 
axes, x’, y', z’ of the channel x axis where cos (Vex)? + 
cos (Yyy)? + cos (Ya) = 1. The velocity component of 
the flow along the channel x axis is 


V, = (Vl — Vp Joos Y, + (Vy — Voy cosy, 
+(V,-V,,,)cosy, (11) 


or 


V, (hzi) IVA (3:2) - Vo (2z) Jeos| Ya (hzi) 
Vy (izi) |cosf Yx (»:2;)] 
+[ V2 (izi )- Vor (izi) Joos] Ye (9:21) 


(12) 


Equation (12) is a general statement for determining 
the velocity components for Equation (8) with the 
relative velocity resolved along the x axis from y’z’ 
scans. 


+[ v y;Z i) 


The relationship is simpler when the boat has no yaw 
or pitch component, that is y,, = 90. In this situation, 


cos Y,, = 0 and cos| Yy (iz )] = sin] ya. (y.z; )] . So, 


Equation (12) becomes 


V, (¥,2;)= [v (yzi )- Vox (9:2; ) Joos) vx (yzi )] 
+[V (2zi )- Voy (izi) [sin Ya (3:25) | .--.3) 


6.6 Velocity-area Uncertainties 
6.6.1 Stationary Scans 
6.6.1.1 General 


Equation (8) can be applied to propeller or manual EM 
methods, or automated methods such as ultrasonic 
Doppler, transit time or echo correlation. Each segment 
Ay; - Az, has a portion of area uncertainty together with 
the uncertainty of each velocity determination, V, (y, 


z). 


There is also uncertainty associated with the F, and F, 
factors that relate the discrete summations in the y and 
z directions compared to the theoretical integration of 
true continuous velocity profiles. The terms F, and F, 


IS 16364 : 2017 
y 


Fic. 4 3D VELocity VECTOR AND BOAT 
CO-ORDINATES 


can also include any effects on the integration process 
of unsteadiness of V, (y, z, £). 


The general uncertainty relationship is derived from 
Equation (6). Refer to Annex A for examples of 
combining uncertainties. 


In terms of percentage uncertainties, u*(x), Equation 
(8) becomes 


w (OY = DP DIV, L (BY 
FY JEZI Sa) anaz) 


w (any sur (azi) )J ulo, 


(14) 


[e (v, (yiz; J + 


where 


u (F y) = the percentage uncertainty inherent in the 
integration of a continuous velocity profile 
by a summation of discrete determinations 
along a line in the y direction; 


u'(F,) = the percentage uncertainty inherent in the 
integration of a continuous velocity profile 
by a summation of discrete determinations 
along a line in the z direction; and 


IS 16364 : 2017 


V.Q7z))= the total uncertainty of the velocity 
determination. 


These include 


w [v(x] al i [Moz] -09 


where 


* 


uy, =the uncertainty of the velocity 
measurement device specified by a 
calibration certificate. Note that the value 
of u`, is a systematic effect which can vary 
with V, u“, is a component of uncertainty 
relating to the unsteady nature of flow in 
channels: see below; 


u“ (Ay,) = the total width measurement percentage 
uncertainty of the means and method used 
to define channel width. The same 
percentage can be applied to individual 
segments. Thus 


uw’ (Ay,) =u" (B) 


or can be estimated for each segment 
individually. 


.....(16) 


u (AQ, ) =the estimated uncertainty of flow passing 
outside the area of the segments; 


u (Az 3) = the depth measurement uncertainty of the 


equipment and method used to define 
segment depth. 


These include 


* 


u (Azi) =u (azi) +u; (Azi) +u (Az; Ù 07) 


where 


u (Az, ) = the systematic effect of the depth 


measurement equipment specified by a 
calibration certificate; note that the value 


of u (Az; ) can vary with h(z); 


u, (Az j ) = the uncertainty of the datum setting of the 
depth measurement apparatus; 
w (Az; ) = arandom component of uncertainty (see 


6.6.1.2). 
6.6.1.2 Random and systematic effects 


Random effects are determined by collecting sets of 
data from which a standard deviation can be determined 
using Equation (1) or Equation (3). This applies to 


velocity component w|Y, (xz )] and the depth of 


water u'(z) across the channel. 


Systematic effects are u"(F,), u'(F,), uw. [V. Org], ue 
(Az;), ua (Az;) and u'“(A,) for which a probability 
distribution and realistic measurement dispersion 
values are required. (See 9). 


Refer to Annex A for more information on random 
and systematic effects. 


6.6.2 Additional Factors — Moving Scans 
For moving scans with ADCP, the velocity component, 
V,(yizi) in Equation (14) needs to include additional 


L 
terms for the boat velocity, V,, and for the alignment 
of the boat axes with the x,y,z axes. From Equation (11), 


V, =(V} -Vx cosy, + (v; -Vy )cos Y, 


HV; yA Vaz )cos Yz 
Using Equation (6A), 


2 


[uV = [Vo cos(y, Ju (V )] 


ul V, (yiz )] is evaluated for each i,j cell. 


Even simplifying the relationship by assuming that the 
roll and pitch of the boat is very small so that cos (‘,) 
= 0 and cos (y,) = sin (Y,) does not significantly reduce 
the complexity of these relationships. 


6.6.3 Random and Systematic Effects 
6.6.3.1 Random effects 


I 
The additional random components are from V,, and 
Vx Vy Ve 


The movement of the boat shall be sufficiently slow 
and steady in comparison with the measurement rate 
that local values of V, (y;,z;) are randomly dispersed 
about a mean value for each cell i,j. Such a set of 
random measurements shall be used to identify random 
effects from Equations (1) and (3). If each ij 
determination is recorded, this can be done on 
completion of a transect. 


6.6.3.2 Systematic effects 


Į 
The means of determination of V, and of Yx, Yy, Y, have 


additional uncertainties for which a probability 
distribution and realistic estimates of the dispersion of 
detectable values are required. 


u[ V, Q;z;)] is a systematic effect relating to measuring 
velocity in the i,jth cell. The systematic effects are 
determined using the above equation where u(V,), 
u(V,), u(V,,,), etc. and the alignment angle uncertainties, 
Yo Yy Y- are defined in the product specification as 
probability distributions with dispersion limits. 


Refer to Annex A for more information on random 
and systematic effects. 


6.6.4 Determining Uncertainty for Moving Scans 


It can be seen that analysis of ADCP systems through 
partial derivatives of Equation (6A) is complex. A 
simpler and more rigorous method can be used based 
on numerical methods rather than mathematical 
analysis. One such method, advocated in Supplement 
1 to the GUM, is the Monte Carlo Simulation. Refer to 
Annex B. 


Monte Carlo Simulation can be used to predict the 
uncertainty of complex systems, such as an ADCP 
system, from Equations (8) and (13) using model 
probability distributions and a realistic dispersion of 
values. 


The following components are required to be modelled: 


a) to determine V, and u(V,) for i,j values 


D YoY Y 
2) Vao Voy Vov 
3)) Vag Van Vin 
b) to determine Q for i,j values 
D FoF, 
2) Ax, Ay, and 
c) around the perimeter 


Qp. 


The simulation can relate the dispersions to a value 
representing a systematic component plus a value from 
the measured data which represents a random 
component. Unless there is evidence of a particular 
probability distribution, the simulation shall use 
rectangular distributions. 


This method is a simulation of a measurement process 
and does not need to use actual measurements. To use 
this method to determine the uncertainty with Equation 
(12), the dispersions of measured values are assessed 
from recorded data and then used with a model 
probability distribution to determine a result for u"(0)?. 


IS 16364 : 2017 


6.7 Integration Uncertainties [ (F, bu' (F )] 


YA 


6.7.1 General 


Annex E of IS 1192 provides tables of values for u” (F. y) 
and u'(F,) with Table E.4 stating the values of 
integration uncertainty for a range of numbers of point 
measurement within a segment and with Table E.6 
stating the values of integration uncertainty for a range 
of numbers of segments across the channel. 


These tables are to be used in Equation (8) and those 
derived from it. 


6.7.2 Vertical Scanning Uncertainties 


Manufacturers of equipment for scanning and 
integrating velocity profiles in vertical sections through 
the flow shall provide: 


a) u(F,) a calibration statement, estimations of 

measurement uncertainty derived by formal 
means based on verifiable dispersions of 
measurement and probability distributions in 
accordance with 9.3 in terms of two- 
dimensional fully developed velocity profiles 
using mean-section velocity as reference 
velocity; 
Ultrasonic Doppler and echo correlation 
methods shall include a statement of the 
particle characteristics to which the 
uncertainty statement applies. 

b) u(F,) the one or several vertical scans have 
to be extrapolated horizontally to define a 
velocity profile for the channel. This may be 
done by modelling the channel profile, usually 
a parabolic relationship using a power 
coefficient, n. Factors determining the 
coefficient n include 
1) channel length, geometry and aspect 

ratio, 
2) channel wall roughness, 
3) the Reynolds number of the flow in the 
channel. 
Suppliers of such equipment shall provide data 
equivalent to Table E.4 of IS 1192 for their 
recommended method of interpolation/extrapolation, 
taking into account an appropriate range of factors 
listed above. 


6.7.3 Horizontal Scanning Uncertainties 


Manufacturers of equipment for scanning and 
integrating velocity profiles in horizontal sections 
through the flow shall provide 


a) u(F,) a calibration statement, estimations of 
measurement uncertainty derived by formal 


IS 16364 : 2017 


means based on verifiable dispersions of 
measurement and probability distributions in 
accordance with 9.3 in terms of two- 
dimensional fully developed velocity profiles 
using mean-section velocity as reference 
velocity; 


b) W(F y) the one or several horizontal scans have 
to be extrapolated vertically to define a 
velocity profile for the channel. This may be 
done by modelling the channel profile, usually 
a parabolic relationship using a power 
coefficient, n. Factors determining the 
coefficient n include 


1) channel length, geometry and aspect 
ratio, 

2) channel wall roughness, 

3) the Reynolds number of the flow in the 
channel. 


Suppliers of such equipment shall provide data 
equivalent to Table E.4 of IS 1192 for their 
recommended method of interpolation/extrapolation, 
taking into account an appropriate range of factors 
listed above. 


6.8 Perimeter Flow Uncertainties, u (Q,) 


The velocity area method applies to the main part of 
the cross-section, the part in which the velocity is 
measurable within the margins of uncertainty for the 
equipment used. The measurements from such 
equipment may have to be discarded close to a 
boundary or where the shear rate is high. 


In these situations, the velocity shall be estimated using 
other means. These are described in the appropriate 
standard for that method. 


The estimation of uncertainty in these regions is 
problematic. Any statement shall include the critical 
thinking on which the estimate is based. It is unlikely 
that uncertainties below 20 percent can be justified for 
the total perimeter flow. A norm of 40 percent can be 
taken as a safe estimation unless there is evidence to 
the contrary. 


Such estimates can overwhelm the estimated 
uncertainty of the main body of the flow. To minimize 
the effect of u(Q,) on u(Q), equipment should be used 
that can minimize the perimeter region. This also has 
the effect of minimizing the mean velocity with the 
perimeter area, thus minimizing Q,. 


7 OPEN CHANNEL FLOW — CRITICAL 
DEPTH METHODS 


7.1 General 


When flow passes through a hydrometric structure, a 


weir flume or notch, a unique relationship exists 
between the upstream water level and the flow, and 
that relationship is largely independent of the velocity 
profile approaching the structure and conditions 
downstream of it. Analysis shows that by accelerating 
the flow at a hydrometric structure, the velocity 
distortions are greatly reduced and that, for practical 
purposes, the velocities adopt a geometrically 
consistent pattern for each class of weir or flume. This 
is shown in Fig. 5 for a rectangular flume. 


Key 
H — total head 
hc —critical depth 
Fic. 5 RECTANGULAR FLUME 


A unique relationship therefore exists between the 
upstream water level, the cross-section of the 
accelerated flow and the mean velocity in the 
accelerated section. This relationship is the basis of 
the critical depth method. 


7.2 Head and Geometry Determination 


From critical depth theory, the flow through a flume 
or over a weir can be expressed in the form 


Q = KC Cbh" ....C18) 
where 

K = aconstant, 

C = a predetermined calibration or discharge 
coefficient, 

C, = a velocity coefficient, 

b = a geometric scale factor, 

h = the head of water; and 

n = a parameter with a normal value of n = 1.5 


for rectangular cross-sections and n = 2.5 
for v-shaped cross-sections. 


The uncertainty expression for this Equation follows 
the example given in Annex A for an Equation of the 
type r = Ba)". 


u (QY =u (CF +u (Cy +u (by + [nw (a) 
....(19) 


The component Cv is defined as 


....(20) 


where H is the total head. 


In current standards, the u"(C,) value is assumed to be 
zero. This is also the case in this version of the HUG, 
but u"(C,) should not be assumed to be negligibly small. 
Refer to 7.3 with respect to the variability of energy 
distribution in the channel, œ. 


Equation (20) cannot be directly applied because H is 
not a directly measurable quantity (unless the 
hydrometric structure is immediately downstream of 
a reservoir). Water surface level and hence h; is 
substantially constant after the flow has travelled in a 
straight path for a short distance. For this reason, it is 
normal practice to measure h, and then compute H from 


y? 
H=h+0a— ...(21) 
28 
where 
V, = the mean approach velocity, 
h, = the head of water in the upstream channel, 
a = a coefficient related to the velocity 


distribution in the approach channel and is 
defined by a mass-weighted relationship: 


asf, [Ma (v.z) aa, 22) 
xl a 


OG is related to a non-uniform distribution of velocity 
in the approach channel. 


7.3 Iterative Calculation 


In Equation (21), V,, is derived from the relation 


Q 
A, (h) 


Because V is a function of the flow rate, Q, these 
equations can only be solved by iteration. The process 
begins by setting H = h, (h, being the measured 
quantity), then calculating O from Equation (18), then 


V, = 


...(23) 


V, from Equation (23), and then re-estimating H from 


Equation (21) with a before repeating the cycle. The 
process continues until converged values are achieved 


for H and for V, for the given measured quantity h}. 
7.4 Evaluating Uncertainty 


Equation (19) defines the relationship for evaluation 
of u*(Q) for a weir, flume or notch. 


IS 16364 : 2017 


u(C) — The value u’(C) is defined by the 
characteristics of the particular 
hydrometric structure set out in 
International Standards for each 
particular hydrometric structure. It 
quantifies a systematic effect by the type 
B method, normally stated in 
hydrometric standards at the 95 percent 
confidence level as a Gaussian 
distribution. The value shall be 
transformed to the 68 percent level of 
confidence (that is half the value) before 
being used for the calculation of 
uncertainty. The value of u*(C) varies 
with head h, progressively increasing as 
h diminishes. 

In this version of the HUG, u*(C,) = 0 
(this may not be justifiable for flows with 
a high approach velocity). 


u(C,)— 


u'(b) — This represents the uncertainty of the 
geometry of the hydrometric structure, 
throat width, crest length and horizontal 
alignment, V-angle, etc. The value is 
determined by measurement and should 
be stated as a dispersion and probability 
distribution. 

u'(h) — The value of head measurement 
uncertainty is related to the type of 
measurement system used (float, 
ultrasonic, etc) (see 9). The value is taken 
from the manufacturer’s specification, 
specified in terms of probability 
distribution and dispersion of A. 

The value of u*(h) shall include a 
component of datum uncertainty. 

The percentage head measurement 
uncertainty increases steeply as the head 
approaches zero. 


This is a constant value, that is the 
exponent of h from Equation (18). 


8 DILUTION METHODS 


8.1 General 


There are two dilution methods: 


a) amethod that maintains a continuous feed of 
tracer of known concentration, the flow being 
determined by the ratio of the known 
concentration with a measured fully mixed 
concentration in the stream; and 

b) a method that determines the flow from the 
dilution of a known mass of tracer added 
instantaneously to the stream, the flow being 


determined by integrating the mixed 


IS 16364 : 2017 
concentration of the tracer to determine its 
mean dilution. 


Both methods rely on the stream to thoroughly mix 
the tracer between the point where the tracer is added 
and the point where its concentration is measured. 


8.2 Continuous Feed 


The flow in the stream Q is determined by 


Ci Cn 
Q=0,k,k, — (24) 
Cu Cp 
where 
Q, = the flow of tracer into the stream, 
c, = the background concentration of tracer, 
Cr = the feed concentration of tracer, 
Cm = the downstream mixed concentration of the 
tracer, 
k, = amixing factor (approaching 100 percent), 
and 


k, = a factor (approaching 100 percent) to 
account for any degradation of the tracer 
while in contact with the stream. 


The datum uncertainty of the measurement 
concentration, Dc,, can be eliminated if the difference 
between the mixed stream concentration, c,,, and its 
background level, c,, is measured: Dc, = Cm — Cp. If 
the background concentration is very low compared 
to the feed concentration, that is c, << cy then Equation 
(24) becomes 


Cc, — De 
Q= Q,k,k, pe 


....(25) 
For the purpose of estimating uncertainty, this Eguation 


can be further simplified by assuming that cy >> Cm 
from which it follows that 


Cy Qr 


w (Qy =u (Q, y +u (k, y Fu (k, y 
+u (cr y +u (De, y ...(26) 


The value of all measured concentrations shall be 
tabulated from a prior calibration using procedures 
described in 10. The value of u*(c) can vary with the 
measured concentration, c. 


8.3 Transient Mass 


The flow in the stream, Q, is determined by 


M 


Q= —— ...(27) 
kik, j (Dc, )dt 
where 
M = the mass of tracer introduced into the stream; 


Dc, = the downstream mixed change (c,, — c,) of 
concentration of the tracer; 


k; = a mixing factor (approaching 100 percent); 


k, = a factor (approaching 100 percent) to 
account for any degradation of the tracer 
while in contact with the stream; 


t,,t,= the interval during which a change in 
concentration is detectable. 


From Equation (27), 


M 
=— ....(28) 
kik,S 
where 
S = the sum of the product of concentration and 
time-increment 
WA 
Se FGA (29) 
and 
N = the number of summation intervals; 


De» 


> Q+Q, 


Fic. 6 ContTINUOUS FEED DILUTION METHOD 


IS 16364 : 2017 


a > o 
Va 


Fic. 7 TRANSIENT Mass DILUTION METHOD 


At. 


1 


the time increment. For equal increments, 


At, en) A) 
N 


From which it follows that 
u (Q) =u (MÝ Fu (k, y Fu (k, y Fu (sy 


...(30) 


and 


2 


1 
SI iPr 


u SY =u" At) + 
(S) =u (Ar) F De, 


BD 


9 HYDROMETRIC INSTRUMENTATION 


9.1 Performance Specifications 


To have confidence in measurement eguipment, it is 
necessary to verify the performance specified by the 
manufacturer. A plain statement of uncertainty is not 
as easily verified as the eguivalent statement by which 
measurement dispersion, A'r is defined together with 
a probability distribution. Common probability 
distributions are listed in Table 1. 


Refer to Annex A (A-2 and A-3) for a derivation of 
the relationships of Table 1. The forms of the triangular 
and rectangular distributions are shown in Fig. 9. 


9.2 Validity of Uncertainty Statements 


Hydrometric instrumentation is used both in the 
laboratory and in the field. Not all instruments are 
suited for field use because extremes of environment 
can influence the measurement performance. 
Equipment rated only for laboratory use should not be 
used in the field. For this reason, a product specification 
shall include, in addition to the statement of 
measurement uncertainty, a statement defining the 


13 


Table 1 Probability Distribution 
(Clause 9.1) 


Probability Uncertainty Derived from 
Distribution Annex A 
a) (2) (3) 
Triangular 1 Equation (39) 
u (x) =——Ax 
v6 
Rectangular 1 Equation (39) 
u ( x) == Ax 
3 
Bimodal u(x) =A'x Equation (39) 


Tabular distribution Equation (39) 


u(x)=u' (Table) A'x 
operating environment in which the uncertainties are 
valid. This ensures that the claimed uncertainty is 
realistic for hydrometric purposes. 


A validity statement shall list all known influences on 
measurement performance that can increase 
measurement uncertainty above 0.2 percent at the 68 
percent confidence limit (or 0.4 percent at the 95 
percent confidence limit). Factors common to all 
environmental measurements shall be stated as in the 
example in Table 2. 


If a combination of factors together do affect 
measurement performance, while the same factors 
individually do not, those factors that apply in 
combination shall be stated. 


If the influence has an unclassified probability 
distribution, the manufacturer shall state a method for 
combining the stated uncertainty with other 
components of measurement uncertainty. 


If a product’s measurement processes is susceptible to 
environmental and other factors, as indicated in the 
example above, such information shall be illustrated 


IS 16364 : 2017 


Table 2 Environmental Factors 
(Clause 9.2) 


Environmental Factor Effect Uncertainty Statement Dispersion or (Uncertainty) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 

Ice yes Measurement invalid 
Rainfall yes Rectangular probability distribution 0.4 % 
Snowfall yes Measurement invalid 
Humidity yes Triangular probability distribution 0.2 % 
Temperature no 
Wind speed yes Rectangular probability distribution 0.3 % 
Solar radiation yes Unclassified probability distribution (0.1 % uncertainty) 
Water surface waves yes Rectangular probability distribution 15 % wave height 
Water turbidity no 
Water-surface active agent no 


Other factors (product- and application-specific) 


by a representative example of the measurement 
performance in the presence of these influences. 


Hydrometric equipment shall have the means for, and/ 
or description of, a performance verification procedure 
to ensure that the performance of a measurement 
system can be verified in the environment where it is 
deployed. 


9.3 Manufacturer’s Performance Specifications 


The presentation of the measurement performance of 
equipment requires a unifying framework to allow one 
product to be compared with another or one 
measurement system to be compared with another. 


Measurement performance specifications shall state 
clearly the confidence limit to which they apply. This 
may be the standard uncertainty, in which case the 68 
percent confidence limit shall be stated, or more 
commonly, the statement may be at the 95 percent 
confidence limit. 


The 95 percent confidence limit is the norm for 
hydrometry performance specifications. 


Note that before combining type A or type B 
estimations with uncertainty values at the 95 percent 
confidence limit, these values shall first be converted 


by using a coverage factor k (typically k = 2) to values 
at the 68 percent confidence limit. The subsequent 
result can then be expanded to the 95 percent 
confidence limit using a coverage factor k = 2. 


The determination of systematic effects is by repeated 
measurement under steady conditions. The standard 
deviation of a set of ‘static? measurements defines the 
systematic component of the device’s measurement 
uncertainty. 


This specification requires the maximum and minimum 
rating of the equipment to be stated. The maximum 
rating is then used to define 25 percent, 50 percent 
and 75 percent of maximum ratings. To each of these 
five ratings, a measurement uncertainty is specified 
for the product. 


These are to follow the pattern set out in Table 3. 


The manufacturer shall provide a table with more 
columns if the uncertainty characteristic cannot be 
adequately interpolated (by linear interpolation) by five 
points. 


9.4 Performance Guide for Hydrometric Equipment 
for Use in Technical Standard Examples 


Examples are given in Table 18. 


Table 3 Maximum and Minimum Ratings 
(Clauses 9.3, 10.1 and 10.2.2) 


Probability 


Corresponding Dispersion of Measurement 


Distribution 


Measured values from the instrument | | 
Measurement uncertainty (percent) | | 
Environmental factor 


Environmental factor 
Environmental factor 
etc. || 


Total measurement uncertainty (percent) 


25 % Max | 50 % Max | 75 % Max | Max 


Many of the values presented in this table are 
provisional. They are intended to be norms of 
performance for the technology. Values are to be 
defined by consensus between users and should be 
representative of the broad range of equipment 
available. A formal testing programme can be required 
to establish the table entries. 


When using Table 18, the following shall be noted. 


a) The percentage uncertainty for head 
measurement cannot be specified by the 
equipment manufacturer. It shall be derived 
from a relationship of the form. 


where u(E) is the uncertainty of the relative 
datum. 


where u(R) is the uncertainty of range/ 
extension. 


b) 


c) The performance figures assume precise 
compensation for the effects of temperature 
on sonic velocity. The following formula is a 
practical approximation: 


Sonic velocity = 20.08 


,/ Absolute temperature of air 


If unsteady conditions exist, a time-dependent 
component of uncertainty shall be defined. 
Instrumentation without this capability shall 
require a manufacturer’s statement of 
uncertainty relating to unsteady conditions. 


d) 


10 GUIDE FOR THE DRAFTING OF 
UNCERTAINTY CLAUSES IN HYDROMETRIC 
STANDARDS 


10.1 General 


The main purpose of this specification is to simplify 
the drafting of hydrometric standards so that they meet 
the requirements of the GUM. This is a significant task: 
publication of the HUG is only one part. 


In accordance with former practice in hydrometry, the 
statement of the result of an uncertainty estimation shall 
be at the 95 percent confidence limit. However, care 
must be taken when combining uncertainties because 
Type A and Type B estimation methods derive 
uncertainty at the 68 percent confidence limit and an 
instrument’s performance is normally stated at the 95 
percent confidence limit. 


15 


IS 16364 : 2017 


This issue shall be emphasized, and illustrated by 
example in the drafted uncertainty clauses. 


Measurement performance shall be stated in the terms 
set out in Table 3, not in any other way. 


Standards which have classified measurement 
performance into categories such as Class 1, Class 2, 
etc, are not acceptable. Classifications can introduce 
confusions which can lead to poor choice of equipment. 
Intellectual commitment is required to select the 
appropriate equipment and method. 


10.2 Equipment, Methods and Measurement 
Systems 


10.2.1 General 


Flow is not a measurable quantity, it is determined from 
the measurement of other parameters such as velocity, 
depth, width and from the mass/concentration of a tracer. 


10.2.2 Equipment 


Equipment used for the measurement of parameters that 
determine discharge shall state measurement 
uncertainties in accordance with Table 3. Furthermore, 
“Hydrometric equipment shall have the means for, and/ 
or description of, a performance verification procedure 
to ensure that the performance of a measurement system 
can be verified in the environment where it is deployed”. 


Equipment standards may state the expected 
performance for the equipment type as described in 
that standard. 


Where such verification is not available, an analysis of 
the component uncertainties may be used as a basis for 
a provisional statement of performance. Provisional 
statements should declare that they are an ‘Estimated 
performance, not based on formal ISO evaluation’. Note 
that a ‘means for performance verification’ is required. 


10.2.3 Methods 


Methods have components of uncertainty. Some of 
these components require special attention, for example 
the evaluation of perimeter flow uncertainty, u” (Q,). 


Additional data is required for any measurement system 
that does not determine flow across the total section of 
the channel. Where the method is incorporated within 
the product, as with ADCP equipment, sufficient 
information shall be disclosed to enable independent 
evaluation of Q, and u“ (Q,). 


10.2.4 Systems 


Hydrometric structures and dilution equipment are 
examples of measurement devices that have a method 
of use which together define flow measurement 
systems. 


IS 16364 : 2017 


Hydrometric structures are the primary component of 
a measurement system which requires a measurement 
of head to determine the flow. 


Standards for hydrometric structures shall illustrate the 
measurement method by means of examples using one 
or more head measurement devices listed in Table 18. 
The estimation of measurement uncertainty shall 


include systematic effects that define datum elevation 
of the head measurement device. 


Standards for hydrometric systems shall include an 
uncertainty budget representative of typical 
measurement conditions over a tabulated range of 
flows including minimum flow, 25 percent, 50 percent, 
75 percent and maximum flow. 


ANNEX A 


(Informative) 


INTRODUCTION TO HYDROMETRIC UNCERTAINTY 


A-1 BASIC DEFINITIONS AND RULES 


A measurement can never be truly exact: measured 
values always have a margin of uncertainty. So a 
measurement value should not be stated without an 
accompanying indication of its quality. The standard 
way of doing this is with a statement of its uncertainty. 


The GUM (ISO/IEC Guide 98) describes measurement 
uncertainty as a value that characterizes the dispersion 
of measurements that could reasonably be attributed 
to the result. The GUM goes on to define standard 
uncertainty as uncertainty expressed as a standard 
deviation. 


This definition has three features: 


a) uncertainty can be quickly determined from 
a set of measurements; 

b) uncertainty can be modelled for a 
measurement process; and 

c) a ‘law of propagation of uncertainties’ can 


be used to combine uncertainties. 


For a set of measurements, uncertainty is related to 
the difference between each measured value, x; from 


an average value, x, of the set. The standard deviation, 
and hence the uncertainty,u(x) is 


1 | (x-x, ) +(%-x, ) +(—x, )+ ; 
(em) 


where components x-— x, are the deviation of the ith 


measurement, x; from the average value, x. 


Or, more concisely 


(32) 


16 


where d,=x-—x, is the difference of the ith 
measurement from the average value, x 


and 


— lyn 

= PH Xi 
The larger the number n of measurement used to 
calculate the mean value, x the closer it can approach 
a ‘true’ value. Therefore, the uncertainty of the mean 
value, u(x ), reduces as the number of measurements, 
n, increases. The GUM relationship for this is 


...(33) 


...(34) 
Under steady conditions, repeat sets of n measurements 


can be used to determine a mean value with a Ta, 
n 


reduction of measurement uncertainty. An instrument 
capable of working on a sequence of measurements 
representing the variability of the parameter being 
measured, can take advantage of this. However, this 
process only applies to random effects on the input 
quantity. Uncertainties that are inherent to the 
measurement process (systematic effects) are not 
reduced in this way. 


The GUM defines a rule for combining uncertainties 
from several sources, the ‘law of propagation of 
uncertainties’. For a relationship f between a result y 
and dependent variables x,, x,,....x, in which y = f(x,, 
X>,....X,), the uncertainty of y is 


u ()=¥] Luc | 


i=l 


or 


Code Zuo EZA 
of 
ie JEE) (35) 


where the variables x,, x, ...x, are independent 
variables. 


Equation (A.4) applies only where the variables x; are 
uncorrelated, that is if variable xi changes value, no 
other x variable is affected by that change. If two or 
more variables x do influence each other (that is they 
are correlated), then an additional component of 
uncertainty exists. Equation (35) then becomes 


PA 
A i=n of i=n—-1 j=n of of 
u, (y=>d J u(x) +25 È ax ae, WA) 


i=l i i=l j=it 


Almost all hydrometric uncertainty estimations require 
the use of the simpler form, that is Equation (35). 


This law means that uncertainties are combined as root- 


sum-squared values. The partial derivatives £ are 
x 


referred to as sensitivity coefficients. The result u(y) 
can be more sensitive to some variables, x, than to 
others. For example, in percentage terms the flow 
through a V-notch is 2.5 times more sensitive to 
uncertainty of head measurement than it is to 
uncertainty of the angle of the V. 


A-2 INTRODUCTION TO THE DEFINITIONS 


A-2.1 General 


The definitions given in the previous clause can be 
interpreted using examples. 


Table 4 lists a set of measurements (n = 20) to 
determine the width of a section of a rectangular 


channel. Equation (33) determines the mean width, x, 


from values, x; measured at different positions, selected 
randomly from the channel. 


Table 5 Width Measurements 


IS 16364 : 2017 


Table 4 Sample Width Measurements of Channel 
(Clause A-2.1) 


i index xi value d =¥ -x a 
i 


i a 
i 


1 1 203 4.35 18.922 5 
2 1 220 -12.65 160.022 5 
3 1218 -10.65 113.422 5 
4 1193 14.35 205.922 5 
5 1210 -2.65 7.022 5 
6 1 194 13.35 178.222 5 
7 1 206 1.35 1.8225 
8 1185 22.35 499.522 5 
9 1 227 —19.65 386.122 5 
10 1197 10.35 107.122 5 
11 1 225 —17.65 311.522 5 
12 1219 -11.65 135.722 5 
13 1210 -2.65 7.022 5 
14 1 194 13.35 178.222 5 
15 1 221 -13.65 186.322 5 
16 1 209 -1.65 2.722 5 
17 1 205 2.35 5.522 5 
18 1 204 3:35 11.222 5 
19 1197 10.35 107.122 5 
20 1210 —2.65 7.022 5 


x =1207.4 
a 1 "(d,) — 11.8 
nea? 


From Table 4 and using Equation (33), the best estimate 
of channel width, its mean value, is x = 1 207.4 mm. 
The standard deviation is calculated using Equation 
(32) to be 11.8 mm. This is the uncertainty of the 
measured values. The uncertainty of the average 
channel width from this set of measurements is reduced 


by the factor os where n = 20. So, the uncertainty 


vn-1 


of the mean value of channel width is 2.6 mm. 


In Table 5, the same 20 measurements have been sorted 
into size bins of width 5 mm. 


A-2.2 Data Histograms 


The same data can be represented as a histogram where 
individual values are not explicitly given but are 
represented by counts in the bins. Each item in the bin 
is taken to have the mean bin value. 


Grouped into 5 mm Bins (n = 20) 


(Clause A-2.1) 


1185 1190 1195 1 200 1 205 1210 1215 1 220 1 225 
to 1 190 to 1 195 to 1 200 to 1 205 to 1210 to 1215 to 1 220 to 1225 to 1 230 
1212 
1 192 1 208 1214 
1 193 1 199 1 203 1 206 1214 1215 1221 
1189 1192 1 198 1 203 1 206 1211 1219 1 220 1 225 


17 


IS 16364 : 2017 


Table 6 Width Measurements Grouped as a Histogram into 5 mm Bins (n = 20) 


Larger sets of data can reveal a distinctive shape to the Table 4. 
grouping; for example Table 7 shows a histogram with 
a larger number of counts of measurements (up to 8 in 
some of the bins) for the same channel as that of 


Table 8 is another rectangular channel of different size 
with different distribution of measured values. 


Table 7 Channel 1 Width Measurements Grouped as a Histogram into 5 mm Bins (n = 78) 


Mean Bin | Mean Bin | Mean Bin | Mean Bin | Mean Bin | Mean Bin | Mean Bin | Mean Bin | Mean Bin | Mean Bin | Mean Bin 


IS 16364 : 2017 


Table 9 Shaft Encoder — Float Level Measurements Grouped as a Histogram 0.001 m Bins (n = 64) 


Table 9 is a set of output signal recordings over a short 
period of time for a shaft encoder measuring the level 
of a float. 


The definition of uncertainty from Equation (32) can 
be expressed in terms of measurements allocated to 
bins in a histogram. If the set of n measurements is 


grouped into k bin sizes, each of width go and in 


the jth bin there are m; measurements, then 
k 
jal =n. 
So, 
k 2m. 
u(x)=4 X (a) — 336) 
j n-1 
Also, 
mM. 
$‘ =l 37) 
=n 


where d; is the deviation of the jth bin from the mean 
value, x. 


19 


Presenting measured data as sorted histograms shows 
the distribution of measured values between the 
smallest and largest. 


Equation (36) can be applied to the histograms of Table 
7,8 and 9. The results for the three histograms of Table 
7, Table 8 and Table 9 calculated in this way, are 
summarized in Table 10. 


Table 10 Results derived from Tables 7, 8 and 9 
using Equation (36) 


Shape Mean Dispersion —A’x,Ax Standard 
Value x Deviation 
a) (2) (3) (4) 

Table 7 1 207.05 —24.55 to 25.45 15.57 
‘Rectangular’ 
Table 8 956.99 —24.49 to 25.51 12.24 
‘Triangular’ 
Table 9 0.531 3 —0.003 8 to 0.004 2 0.002 14 
“Bimodal’ 


An inappropriate choice of the probability distribution 
can affect the determined uncertainty value. Where a 


IS 16364 : 2017 


choice is possible, the selection shall be justified. Where 
there is no clear choice, a rectangular probability 
distribution shall be used. 


These histograms are close approximations to 
probability distributions. The probability distribution 
enables the mean value and the standard deviation to 
be determined from the range of measurements each 
side of the mean, that is from the dispersion. 


This is very significant for estimating the systematic 
component of the measurement uncertainty of sensors. 
Systematic effects are determined beforehand by 
testing the sensor under steady conditions in an 
environment similar to the one in which it is to be used. 
The results determine the dispersion of values in these 
conditions and define a probability distribution for the 
results. The two in combination define the systematic 
component of uncertainty of a sensor measurement in 
that environment. 


A-3 MEASUREMENT HISTOGRAMS AND 
PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS 


The shapes outlined in Tables 7, 8 and 9 approximate 
to rectangular, triangular and bimodal probability 
distributions. Figure 8 shows distributions for two sets 
of measurements, one for a small set, m = 4, sorted 
into large bins, the other for a larger set, m = 20 sorted 


mMm. 
into small bins.The ratio — is the proportion of the 
n 


total number of measurements, m, in the jth bin. This 
ratio is the probability that a measurement is in the jth 
bin. 


The histograms are from a small set of data, m = 4, 
sorted into large bins and from a larger set of data, m 
= 20, sorted into smaller bins. The probability 
distribution is a continuous line. It is a model 
distribution equivalent to an infinite number of 
measurements distributed into infinitesimal bins. 


For large numbers of measurements, n — 1 > n . The 
summation can be represented as an integral for large 


numbers of measurements in bins of size dx = Ar ; 
n 

So, the average, x’, is 

25 A’x 

=) x p(x) dx .. (38) 
and 

u(x) = (fia Ý. p(x) dx 39) 
where 

d(x) akoy 


p(x) is a probability function. 


20 


Key 
1 m=4 A — probability, in percent 
2 m=20 B — measured value 


Fic. 8 HistoGRAMs For Two SETS OF 
MEASUREMENTS AND A PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTION 


As the relationship Y wsi applies to sets of 
n 


measurements, so the relationship 


RE Ax 
eS J.P) dr 21 


applies to the probability function. The uncertainty 
expressed in Equation (40) is the standard deviation 
of the probability function for the measurement process 
it describes between the limits x = A’x and x =—A’x. 


....(40) 


Equation (38) gives the same results as those derived 
from the histogram Equation (36) for large data sets 
with small bin sizes. Probability distributions are 
exactly equivalent to data histograms for determining 
uncertainty. 


A-4 PROBABILITY MODELS 


A-4.1 General 


There are four probability distributions commonly used 
to calculate measurement uncertainty. They are 


rectangular probability distributions, 
— triangular probability distributions, 
bimodal distributions, and 


Gauss distributions. 


P(x) 
1,2 


1,0 


0,8 


0,6 


0,4 


0,2 


Key 


—e— A normal (Gauss) distribution 


-=== B triangular distribution 

C rectangular distribution 
"===—D _ unit area under distributions 
“— »— E _ one standard deviation 


—e— F +one standard deviation 


i 
iN 


IS 16364 : 2017 


2,5 3,0 


3,5 


Fic. 9 COMMON PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS 


The common probability distributions are shown on 
Figure 9. All have the same area beneath their function 
line: the area is unity as required by Equation (40). 


The Gauss distribution is of little practical significance 
in hydrometry because its dispersion is infinitely wide 
(the distribution approaches zero probability but never 
reaches it). It is referred to as the ‘normal’ distribution. 
The ‘normal’ distribution does not exist in practical 
science but is commonly used as a theoretical device. 
Note, it can be seen that the Gauss distribution can be 
approximated by the triangular distribution which has 
defined dispersion of values. 


One value of the Gauss distribution is used in defining 
the concept of confidence limit. In the HUG, the term 
‘Gauss’ distribution is used instead of ‘normal’ to avoid 
the suggestion that ‘normal’ distributions exist in 
hydrometry. The Gauss distribution is considered 
further in A-9. 


The vertical lines indicate the standard deviation for 
the three distributions shown: all have the same 
standard deviation. The vertical lines also indicate the 


21 


bimodal distribution. The bimodal has infinite 
probability at these lines and zero probability 
elsewhere. 


In accordance with Equation (39), the area under each 
line (including a bimodal distribution) is one unit of 
area as depicted by the inner tall rectangle. 


A-4.2 Probability 
Considerations 


Models General 


The distribution of measurements can be modelled if 
the shape of the distribution is always repeatable. In 
other words, when random measurements are repeated, 
they have similar distributions within their dispersion 
A'r about the mean value, x. 


The rectangular, triangular and bimodal distribution 
models are able to meet most of the requirements. 
Others can be derived and used if they represent the 
distribution more realistically. 


Rectangular and triangular probability distributions are 
the natural forms for human estimation of readings 
from measurement devices such as rulers, staff gauges, 


IS 16364 : 2017 


verniers, etc. The choice between using rectangular or 
triangular is based on what seems probable to the user. 
If in doubt, a rectangular model shall be used. 


Measurement instruments can be tested to determine 
their true dispersions under steady conditions. The 
effect of environmental factors can also be assessed at 
the same time. The scatter of measurements need not 
match that of a rectangular or triangular probability 
distribution, but it should be sufficiently well defined 
and repeatable that a standard deviation can be 
determined for any span of dispersions. 


If an instrument shows small sensitivity to 
environmental changes, these changes shall be 
accommodated by defining a wider dispersion of 
measurement. The determined uncertainty then applies 
to a stated range of environmental conditions. 


It is essential that all measurement processes have 
repeatable probability distributions. Any instrument 
that is susceptible to external factors which make its 
performance unpredictable will have indeterminate 
uncertainty. Such instruments shall not be used for 
hydrometry. 


A-5 ADJUSTMENT FOR SMALL SET OF DATA 
— THE t, FACTOR 


The probability diagram results from a hypothetically 
large number of measurements and defines the 
dispersion Ax. If the set of measurements is very small, 
then the smallest and largest values may not be 
represented. Therefore, the uncertainty for small 
samples could be underestimated. This problem is dealt 
with by adding a factor te to Equation (1) to increase 
u(x) for small sets of measurements. 


=a) 


(41) 


u(x)=t 


Values of te are shown in Table 11 for numbers of 
measurements (minimum 2). 


Table 11 Values of t, 


Number n te 
2 1.84 
3 1.32 
4 1.20 
5 1.14 
6 1.11 
8 1.09 
10 1.08 
12 1.07 
15 1.03 
20 1.03 


A-6 RANDOM AND SYSTEMATIC EFFECTS 


The terms random and systematic are used in standards 


22 


to distinguish between (a) effects that represent an 
inherent dispersion of measured values under steady 
conditions, and (b) systematic effects that are part of 
the measurement procedure or apparatus. 


For example, in hydrometry, the following systematic 
effects exist: 


a) in setting the datum elevation of a head 
measurement device (float encoder, ultrasonic 
range sensor, staff gauge, etc). If its existence 
is known or suspected, then steps are taken 
to eliminate datum uncertainty to a level at 
which it exists only as a residual random 
component; 

b) with a ruler used for measuring distance (here 
uncertainty is both in the ruler’s calibration 
and in the use of the ruler); 

c) in any calibration certificate (velocity probe, 
laser ranging device, etc). This requires 
traceability to international standard 
measurements, supported with the 
development of an uncertainty budget for the 
calibration certificate in accordance with the 


GUM. 


where an algorithm is used to transform a 
measured parameter into another quantity. 


d) 


Systematic effects remain constant for the 
measurement process whereas random effects can vary. 
Note that the GUM does not have different procedures 
to treat random and systematic effects. Both are 
assumed to exist as dispersions around the determined 
value. 


Tables 5 and 6 are of channel width measurements. 
These are measurements taken randomly within the 
channel. Both tables show results with a resolution of 
1 mm. The measurement device, a ruler or a laser 
ranging device, will have a margin of uncertainty of 
its own: a systematic component. Assume the 
dispersion of systematic effects about the recorded 
values is 0.5 mm. Without more information on the 
dispersions, it shall also be assumed that the probability 
diagram is rectangular. Therefore, the systematic 
uncertainty of the measurement process is 


u(x)= 10.5 =0.29 mm 
3 


This does not significantly add to the channel width 
uncertainties of 15.8 mm and 12.3 mm for the channel 
data of Tables 5 and 6. However, situations can exist 
where the systematic effect is significant and the 
uncertainty shall be added according to the law of 
propagation [see Equation (37)]. 


Another common source of uncertainty lies in setting 


the datum of a level measurement system. The float- 
encoder system of Table 9 has been datumed relative 
to the invert of a channel. The fixed elevation of the 
encoder is estimated to be within 2.5 mm of the true 
value relative to a hydraulic datum of the channel. A 
dispersion of 2.5 mm is therefore assumed. In this case, 
care having been taken, a triangular probability 
distribution is considered to be appropriate. The 
systematic component of the head measurement, u(x,) 
attributable to its datum is therefore 


(x)= fix25=102 mm 


This is significant compared with the random 
uncertainty, 2.2 mm, of the encoder signal. 


These uncertainties are combined according to 
Equation (35). 


u (x)= u(x) +u(x,) =1.06 mm 


A-7 SUMMARY — TYPE A AND TYPE B 
ESTIMATION METHODS 


The fundamental definition of measurement 
uncertainty is standard deviation. This applies to sets 
of measurement results. Measurement uncertainty also 
exists within the measurement process that measures 
each value. This is a systematic effect. The systematic 
component has to be pre-estimated in another way 
using a probability distribution. Clause A-3 shows both 
methods are equivalent. 


The GUM classifies these two methods of estimation: 


a) Type A: a statistical method using a set of n 
discrete random measurements by 


i 


a — 1 n 
1) evaluating the mean value x=— Dx, , 
n 


2) determining the set of deviations from the 
mean d,=x—x,, 


3) determining the standard deviation 


u(x)=t, (a i ; 


Type B: a non-statistical method, based on 
probability by 


b) 


1) identifying the maximum and minimum 
values of x to determine 2A 'x; 

2) selecting or declaring a probability 
distribution, p(x) of the deviation; and 

3) determining the standard deviation from 


w(x)= ff dC) paar 


23 


IS 16364 : 2017 


For the sake of clarity and completeness, all Type B 
statements shall be a declaration of the expected 
dispersion of measurements and the associated 
probability distribution. This shall also apply to manual 
estimates of measurement uncertainty. It is easier to 
verify that measurements are within a specified 
dispersion of values. This is particularly true of 
complex systems requiring multiple inputs. 


A-8 GAUSS PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTION 


Figure 10 shows the Gauss distribution with a 
probability function defined as 


ey 


20? 


exp ...(42) 


paa 
ov2n 
The function implies infinite dispersions so, for 
hydrometry, has little practical value. However, this 
function does meet the conditions required in Equation 
(40). By using the function in Equation (39) and 
integrating from x = —œ to x = +00, the standard 
deviation is found to be equal to o. 


u(x) =O 


This feature makes the Gauss function particularly 
useful. It provides a rationale for combining and 
manipulating uncertainties. For example, the following 
processes can be verified using the Gauss function for 
randomly varying values of x: 


the addition of uncertainties as root-sum 
squared values; 


defining the uncertainty of the mean value of 


_ oO 
a set of n measurement as x =—; and 
n 


defining confidence limits for an uncertainty 
statement. 


However, it remains an artificial probability 
distribution. If used to represent large numbers of 
inputs, such as exist in acoustic Doppler systems, the 
combination of uncertainty using the law of 
propagation can produce erroneous estimates of 
uncertainty. 


An alternative method, based on numeric methods, is 
a more rigorous approach. This method is known as 
the Monte Carlo Simulation. 


A-9 EXPANDED UNCERTAINTY, U(X), 
CONFIDENCE LIMITS AND COVERAGE 
FACTORS 


Using the Gaussian distribution, it can be shown that 
uncertainty derived from Equation (42) covers only 
68 percent of the values represented by the function, 
32 percent are dispersed beyond the one standard 


IS 16364 : 2017 


Key 

A — probability density 

B — best estimate (arithmetic mean) 

C — 68 percent chance that true value is within this 


range 

D — 95 percent chance that true value is within this 
range 

E — value 


F — one standard deviation 
G — two standard deviation 


Fic. 10 CONFIDENCE LIMITS 


deviation lines (see Fig. 10). This means that a 
significant portion of measurements will lie outside 
the stated band of uncertainty. 


The GUM introduces the concept of ‘expanded 
uncertainty’ and ‘level of confidence’. Again, this is 
based on the Gauss function. If the stated uncertainty 
is extended to double its value, from one standard 
deviation to two standard deviations, the area under 
the probability function with the expanded limits 
increases from 68.27 percent of the total area to 95.45 
percent (68 percent to 95 percent ). 


Expanded uncertainties at the 95 percent level of 
confidence are written in capitals (U,;) and are related 
to standard uncertainty simply as 


U,, = 2u (x) 


By doubling an estimate of standard deviation, 
confidence levels can be stated at the 95 percent level 
of confidence instead of 68 percent . 


To express the uncertainty at the 95 percent level of 
confidence, a factor, the coverage factor k, is applied 
to the computed value of standard uncertainty. As 
indicated, for a normal probability distribution, 95 
percent of the measurements are covered for a value 
of k = 2. The same approximation applies to all other 
types of distribution. 


24 


For Type A estimations, this applies to large sets of 
measurements only. Small sets require an adjustment 
factor, the ¢ factor. An expanded version of Table 11 
is shown as Table 12 in which te includes different 
confidence limits. 


Table 12 ¢, Factors at 68 percent , 95 percent 
and 99 percent Confidence Levels 


le 


Number n 68 percent 95 percent 99 percent 
Level Level Level 
2 1.84 12.71 63.66 
3 1.32 4.30 9.92 
4 1.20 3.18 5.84 
5 1.14 2.78 4.60 
6 1.11 2.57 4.03 
8 1.08 2.36 3.50 
10 1.06 2.26 3.25 
12 1.05 2.20 Sell 
15 1.04 2.14 2.98 
20 1.03 2.09 2.88 


NOTE — For small sets, the relationships between the factors 
is not equal to the coverage factor k 2 or k = 3. For this reason, 
the GUM requires all estimations of uncertainty to be as standard 
deviations, k = 1. Only after the uncertainties have been 
combined [refer to Equation (41)] is a coverage factor applied 
to represent the final result at the appropriate level of 
confidence. 


In hydrometry, results are presented and stated at the 
95 percent level of confidence as U,;(x). 


A-10 EXAMPLES OF COMBINED 
UNCERTAINTY CALCULATION, Uc 


For most measurement systems, the measurement 
results p, g, r, s are derived from several variables. 
Examples are: 


Example A p=Ax + By-C, 
Example B q= a 

z 
Example C r = Bxy" 
Example D s=p+r 


where x, y and z are primary variables and A, B, C, n 
are constants. 


Uncertainty of results is written with the suffix ‘c’ as 
follows: u.(p), u.(q), u(r), u.(s). Their values, due to 
uncertainty of primary measurements, u(x), u(y), u(z) 
are determined by their sensitivity to the primary 
variables which are expressed as partial derivatives 
with respect to each primary variable. That is, restating 
Equation (3) here: 


gdh Ooi Val OF be ca) x.) 
u(y) i map) i wap) Purns {3 We] 


From which 


Example A 


u (p) 1 2 2 2 
> = See E (au) + Bu(y) +Cu(z) ) 
Example B 


Example D 
wo) (Buo aa 
O i [alent o 


25 


IS 16364 : 2017 


(Au(x} +Bu(y) + Cu(z) ) 
Ax + By—Cz 


of DY (200) 
x y 


, illustrates how more complex 


u, (s 

The last example, ——— 
s 

relationships are developed. 


A-11 DETECTION AND HANDLING OF FALSE 
MEASUREMENTS 


A technique is sometimes needed to discriminate 
between authentic measurement and the occasional 
false reading that can occur under turbulent 
measurement conditions. 


The method proposed here is the Grubbs test. This test 
is based on the Gauss probability distribution. 


A set of n measurements x,, X,....x,....x, has one 
measurement x; that is suspect. If the value 


exceeds the value for T „in Table 12 for the particular 
value number, n, of measurements, then that 
measurement can be discarded. s and x are defined 
by Equations (1) and (2). 


Table 13 Grubbs’ Test Parameter T, 


Number, n, of Th 
Observations 95 percent Confidence Level 
4 1.48 
5 1.71 
6 1.89 
7 2.02 
8 213 
9 2.21 
10 2.29 
12 2.41 
14 2.51 
16 2.59 
18 2.65 
20 2.71 
30 2.91 
40 3.04 
50 3.13 
100 3.38 


IS 16364 : 2017 


ANNEX B 
(Informative) 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MONTE CARLO SIMULATION (MCS) 


B-1 GENERAL 


Monte Carlo Simulation is an alternative and valid 
method for determining hydrometric uncertainty. 


ISO/IEC Guide 98, Guide to the expression of 
uncertainty in measurement (GUM) — Supplement 1: 
Propagation of distributions using a Monte Carlo 
method, introduces the Monte Carlo method as a formal 
alternative to the analytical methods of the GUM. 


Instead of combining uncertainties according to the 
law of propagation of uncertainties [see Equation (35)], 
MCS works directly with the equations that define the 
measurement process, y = f (x, X)...X,...x,). For each 
input parameter x; a random value is generated. A first 
set of random values is then used to compute a 
simulated result y, The process is repeated many times, 
m, to generate m simulations y = f (Y1, y>...)j---Ym) and 
from these simulations, the standard deviation for y is 


determined together with a mean value y using 
Equations (1) and (2). 


This is appropriate where many input variables 
(measured parameters) are involved as, for example, 
with pulse-echo measurement methods. These methods 
can have complex equations, y = f (x,, x,...x,), with 
signal inputs x; which have peculiar probability 
distributions, that is distributions other than 
rectangular, triangular, etc. 


The MCS method proceeds in the following sequence 
of steps: 


Step 1 Select random values (see below) for each 
input variable, the x values, of the equation 
defining the quantity to be determined, y =f 
(Xi; X>...X;...x,), the selection being within 
the dispersion of each x variable, each 
selection representing the probability 


distribution of that variable. 
Step 2 Calculate a value for y from the equation. 


Step 3 Repeat the process m times to generate a 
random set of m results. 


Step 4 Use Equations (1) and (2) to calculate the 
resultant uncertainty, that is 


1 m 2 


m—| 


u(y) 


where d, =y—y, 


n 


ee 
and Y= 2 Ji 
n 


26 


In selecting the random values, Step 1, the procedure 
gets its name, Monte Carlo. The selection process is 
not unlike rolling dice. 


Normal dice have six sides, each marked with a unique 
number, 1 to 6. The expectation of throwing any one 
of these numbers is exactly equal: it is 16.66 percent. 
A die with the following numbers written on its six 
sides is a ‘loaded’ die of the type used in MCS to mimic 
a probability distribution. 


Table 14 
Sidel Side2 Side3 Sided Side5 Side 6 
124 125 126 125 125 126 


A probability distribution for this die would be 
according to the grouping in Table 15. 


Table 15 
125 
125 126 
124 125 126 


From which it can be seen that there is a 50 percent 
chance of throwing a 125, a 33.33 percent chance of a 
126 and the usual 16.66 percent chance of a 124. 


When MCS is modelled in a computer, the ‘loaded 
dice’ have many more sides which are loaded to create 
the required probability distribution. For example, 
Tables 7 and 8 can be modelled as 78-sided dice. For 
Table 8, there would be only eleven numbers, from 
932.5 to 982.5, in 5 mm increments, which represent 
the eleven bins. These are distributed over the 78 faces 
according to the quantity in its bin as indicated in 
Table 16. 


This particular die, if ‘thrown’ a large number of times, 
would reproduce the triangular probability distribution 
shown on Table 8. A smoother distribution would 
require more bins and therefore more faces on the die. 


B-2 A FLOW MEASUREMENT EXAMPLE — 
HYDROMETRIC STRUCTURE WITH AIR- 
RANGE ULTRASONIC HEAD MEASUREMENT 


To illustrate the method, Equation (18) has been 
simplified by omitting the velocity term. The flow 
passing through a rectangular flume can be 
approximated by 


IS 16364 : 2017 


Table 16 
Value on Face 932.5 937.5 942.5 947.5 952.5 957.5 962.5 967.5 972.5 977.5 982.5 
Number of Faces 2 5 6 10 10 13 10 8 7 4 2 
Q = KCbh'° R,.¢ = range measured by the sensor when being 
where datumed relative to the reference plate. 
Keer Therefore, the equation to be used in the simulation is 
C = discharge coefficient determined by Q = KCb(H + Re- R) ....(43) 
standard calibration, where R is the primary variable. 
b = flume throat width, and 


The uncertainty of R is expressed as a percentage. The 
h = head of water approaching the flume. invariant parameters C, b, H, and R, each have a 

In this example, the head of water is determined by an systematic component of uncertainty. 

air-range ultrasonic sensor that subtracts the measured 

range, R, from its elevation, E, above the hydraulic 

datum (the base of the flume’s throat). So, 


The primary variable and the other parameters are to 
be allocated probability distributions. With predefined 
values of uncertainty, the limits on the dispersion of 
h=E-R possible measurement values can then be determined. 


The elevation, E, is determined by positioning a The values used in the example are given in Table 17. 


reference plate in the ultrasonic path The range, R, is variable. The uncertainty value given 
E=H +R; to its measurement is a systematic effect. This example 
assumes that the water surface is flat. If, however, 
where surface waves were present on the surface, then an 
F „p = elevation of the reference above the additional random component of uncertainty would 
hydraulic datum, and exist and would have to be included. Such a component 
Table 17 
Parameter Value Uncertainty Probability Resultant Dispersion 
Distribution 
Range, R Variable u (R) = 0.5% Rectangular 0.43 % 
Coefficient, C 0.970 u (c) =3.5% Triangular 0.041 
Throat width, b 150 mm 0.5 mm Rectangular 0.43 mm 
Reference range, R, of 312 mm u'(R) = 0.5% Rectangular 0.43 % 
Reference elevation, Href 554 mm 1.0mm Triangular 1.22 mm 


a) b) c) 


h = 0.100 m h = 0.200 m h = 0.300 m 
Q =7.81/s Q = 22.1 Vs Q = 40.7 Vs 
3s (Q) 7.55 % us (Q) 3.52 % 55 (Q) 2.35 % 


Fic. 11 RESULTS FOR THREE SETS OF SIMULATED CALCULATONS OF Q USING Equation (43), EACH SET 
CoMPRISING 1 000 SIMULATIONS 


27 


IS 16364 : 2017 


14% 


DA 


02 


0.3 


Fic. 12 PLot oF RESULTs oF Fic. 11 


would not be expressed as a percentage of range, but 
as a percentage of head. 


Each of these parameters is independent and, therefore, 
each simulated value should not share its random 
selector with any other parameter. Figure 11 shows 
the result for three sets of simulated calculations of Q 
using Equation (43), each comprising 1 000 
simulations. These sample calculations are used to 
determine Q and u(Q) from their standard deviations. 


The results, including those for intermediate values of 
head, h, are shown on Fig. 12. 


The numerical methods of Supplement 1 to the GUM 
provide an alternative to analytical methods described 
in the primary document, the GUM. The GUM is based 


28 


mainly on methods derived using Gaussian probability 
distributions and methods of combining uncertainties 
based on a first order Taylor series approximation. Both 
these simplifications are avoided when using numerical 
methods. 


MCS can be used to cross-check analytical derivations 
of uncertainty. 


For complex systems, the approximations of the GUM 
have a cumulative effect which can misrepresent the 
resultant determination of uncertainty. MCS provides 
a practical way to avoid such misrepresentation. An 
assessment of the performance of measurement 
systems such as ADCP is more rigorous when using 
numerical methods. 


67 


ANNEX C 
(Informative) 
PERFORMANCE GUIDE FOR HYDROMETRIC EQUIPMENT FOR USE IN TECHNICAL STANDARD EXAMPLES 


Information on using Table 18 is given in 9.4. 


Measurement 
Technologies 


Table 18 Performance Guide for Hydrometric Equipment for Use in Technical Standard Examples 
Comment Norms of Measurement Performance for Use in Worked Examples 
Installed Equipment to have Corresponding Values Certified by Manufacturer 
_— ee ucxuwWO -oc—qewnrnm 


Nominal Rating of the Measurement Equipment Corresponding Measurement Uncertainty 


Uncertainty Options 


(95 percent Confidence Level) 


Velocity (continuous) Min 25 percent | 50 percent |75 percent Max Min 25 percent] 50 percent | 75 percent Max 
Point Propeller Calibration certificate Rectangular 0.080 m/s 0.750 m/s | 1.50 m/s | 2.250 m/s | 3.000 m/s | 0.0016 | 0.014 m/s| 0.004 m/s | 0.004 m/s | 0.006 m/s 
Velocity m/s 
Electro- Calibration certificate Rectangular 0.080 m/s 0.750 m/s | 1.550 m/s | 2.250 m/s | 3.000 m/s | 0.006 m/s | 0.020 m/s | 0.020 m/s | 0.030 m/s | 0.040 m/s 
magnetic 
Path Transit time |Sonic velocity Rectangular 0.030 m/s 0.250 m/s | 0.250 m/s | 0.750 m/s | 1.000 m/s | 0.006 m/s | 0.010 m/s | 0.014 m/s | 0.014 m/s | 0.020 m/s 
velocity ultrasonics |Path angle 
Ultrasonic | Particle-dependent Rectangular 0.030 m/s 0.250 m/s | 0.250 m/s | 0.750 m/s | 1.000 m/s | 0.006 m/s | 0.010 m/s | 0.014 m/s | 0.014 m/s | 0.020 m/s 
doppler low velocity 
resolution 
Echo Particle-dependent Rectangular 0.030 m/s 0.250 m/s | 0.250 m/s | 0.750 m/s | 1.000 m/s | 0.006 m/s | 0.010 m/s | 0.014 m/s | 0.014 m/s | 0.020 m/s 
correlation 
Section Electro- To be calibrated in Rectangular 0.030 m/s 0.250 m/s | 0.250 m/s | 0.750 m/s | 1.000 m/s | 0.006 m/s | 0.010 m/s | 0.014 m/s | 0.014 m/s | 0.020 m/s 
velocity magnetic situ 
Relative datum (to be Manual process Triangular or |Not 0.500 m 1.000 m | 1.500m | 2.000 m 0.003 m 
applied to all methods) Rectangular applicable 
In-contact |Encoder/float | Requires regular Bimodal Applicable | Extension | Extension | Extension} Extension 0.006 m 
methods system” maintenance 1.250 m 2.500 m | 3.750m | 5.000 m 
Pressure Datum value drift Rectangular 0.010 m 0.500 m 1.000 m | 1.500m | 2.000 m 0.006 m 
transducer 
Ultrasonic | Surface wave effects YES |Rectangular 0.050 m 0.500 m 1.000 m | 1.500m | 2.000 m 0.003 m 
Non- Air-ranging |Surface wave effects YES |Rectangular Range Range Range Range Range 
contact ultrasonic? | Air temperature? 0.300 m 1.250 m 2.500 m | 3.750m | 5.000 m 0.075 m 
methods (Pulse echo [Surface wave effects Rectangular [Range Range Range Range Range 
radar 0.300 m 1.250 m 2.500 m | 3.750m | 5.000 m 0.050 m 


> PICOT SI 


LTOT 


(03 


Table 18 — Concluded) 


Measurement Comment Symbol | Uncertainty Options Norms of Measurement Performance for Use in Worked Examples 
Technologies Installed Equipment to have Corresponding Values Certified by Manufacturer 
Nominal Rating of the Measurement Equipment Corresponding Measurement Uncertainty 


(95 percent confidence level) 


Cross-section profile (distance measurement) 


Sonar or dip gauging / Rectangular [0.500 m 5.000 m | 10.000 m | 15.000 m | 20.000 m | 0.040 m | 0.080 m | 0.120m | 0.200m | 0.400 m 
GPRS (General Packet 

Radio Services) or 

tracking 


Man-made Manual measurement Triangular or |Not 0.500 m | 1.000m | 1.500m | 2.000m | 0.002 m | 0.002 m | 0.003 m | 0.003 m | 0.003 m 
rectangular applicable 


Many of the values presented in this table are provisional. They are intended to be norms of performance for the technology. Values are to be defined by consensus between users and should be representative 
of the broad range of equipment available. A formal testing programme may be required to establish the table entries. 


1) Percentage uncertainty for head measurement cannot be specified by the equipment manufacturer. It shall be derived from a relationship of the form u'(h)= EN AY where u(E) is the 
uncertainty of the relative datum. 


2) u'(h)= ae where u(R) is the uncertainty of the range/extension. 


3) 


The performance figures assume precise compensation for the effects of temperature on sonic velocity. This formula is a practical approximation: sonic velocity = 20.08 J Absolute temperature of air 


4) Ifthe unsteady conditions exist, a time-dependent component of uncertainty shall be defined. Instrumentation without this capability shall require a manufacturer’s statement of uncertainty relating to 


unsteady conditions. 


> Y9C9T SI 


LTOT 


(Continued from Second Cover) 


is required of biomass, sedimentary material, toxins, etc, the concentration of these components is determined 
and their uncertainty estimated. The uncertainty of mass-load can then be determined from the uncertainty of 
flow determination. The components of this calculation are made compatible through compliance with the GUM. 


For practitioners of hydrometry and for engineers, the GUM is not a simple document to refer to. The document 
has been drafted to provide a legal framework for professional metrologists with a working knowledge of statistical 
methods and their mathematical representation. 


This standard, although simplifying the concepts, in no way conflicts with the principles and methods of the 
GUM. Accordingly, this standard interprets the GUM to apply its requirements to hydrometry in a practical way, 
and, hopefully, in a way accessible to engineers and those responsible for managing the environment. In addition, 
this standard introduces and develops Monte Carlo Simulation, a complementary technique, which has benefits 
for hydrometry, insomuch as complex measurement systems can be represented realistically. 


In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from ISO/TS 25377 : 2007 
“‘Hydrometric uncertainty guidance (HUG)’. Main changes made in this standard from existing ISO/TS 25377 : 
2007 are as follows: 


a) Inclause4, V , denotes water velocity relative to channel; and V’ denotes water velocity relative to 
boat. 

b) In A-2.1, value of mean value x was changed to 1 207.4 mm. 

c) In A-2.1, value of standard deviation was changed to d? = 11.8 mm. 

d) In A-6, value of u/(x) was changed to 1.06 mm. 

e) In A-2.1, factor ni substitutes 1/(n — 1) 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated. Expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 01 (0601). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.IL.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


