(Reaffirmed 2012)

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PLANNI'NG AND DESIGN OF PORTS AND HARBOURS
`PART I (

SITE INVESTIGATION

First Revision )
.
Representing Ministry of Shipping & Transport, New Delhi

Ports and Ha&ours Sectional Committee, BDC 66
Chairman

Bngo 0. P.
SHnI

NARULA

Members Mormugao Port Trust, Mormugao M. BALASURRAMANIAM Madras Port Trust, Madras SHRI U. R. BALASUBRAMANI~M SHRI V. V. SESHADRI ( Alternate ) Pre-investment Survey of Fishing Harbour, SERI N. P. BHAKTA Bangalore SHRI H. V. RAMASWAMY ( A&mate ) Hydraulic Study Department, Ports Commissioners, DR S. K. BHATTACHARJEE Calcutta DR S. K. NAQ ( Alternate) Public Works Department, Government of SHRI R. K. BUDHBHATTI Gujarat _ SHEI B. P. KUKADIA (Alternate) Calcutta Port Commissioners, Calcutta SHRI I. G. CHA~KO SHRI R. C. GHOSH (Alternate ) Rodio Foundation Engineering; and Hazarat k SHRI A. H. DIVANJI Co, Bombay SHRI A. N. JANQLE (Alternate) Consulting Engineering Services India Pvt Ltd, Snar K. K. FRAYJI New Delhi SERI S. GEOSH ( Alternate ) Bombay Port Trust, Bombay SHRI S. R. GAITONDE Braithwaite Burn & Jessop Construction Ltd, SEEI A. GHOSHAL Calcutta ( Continaed on pegs 2 ) @ Co/+ght INDIAN STANDARDS 1974 INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyri,qht Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an iufringcment of copyright under the said Act.

rnd65l(Partf)-1914
( Co&wed from #age1)
Representing Central Water & Power New Delhi Commission (

iUmnbcrs
SlrxI C. V. COLE

CWPRS),

Da Z.S. TAMPORE (Altnnafc) RICA~-ADM V. M. KATDABE Indian Navy ( Ministry of Defence ) LT-COL P. S. SETTLE (Alternate ) Calcutta Port Commissioners ( Marine DepartSHRI B. L. MITAL ment ), Calcutta C&r. P. N. BATRA ( Alternate ) Engineers India Limited, New Delhi Snnx T. K. D. MUNSI SHY H. S. CBEEMA (Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, Beta p. H. NARURKAR New Delhi f/r_cO~ OYBIR SIN~H ( Alternate ) School of Planning, Ahmedabad 9s~ H~smuxx P. OZA Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay Swrr B. K. PANT~AXY Visakhapatnam Port Trust, Visakhapatnam Snnr 0. S. RAMXAH $xn]: H. R. LAXMINARAYAN (Alternate ) Howe ( India ) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Sttrtz 8, R. ROES~LER 8~x1 H. NANDI ( Alternafe ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member ) Susr D. AJITBA SIMHA, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary Sxnr G. RAMAN Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

Is:465l(PartI)-4974

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PLANNING AND DESIGN OF PORTS AND HARBOURS
PART I SITE INVESTIGATION

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) ( First Revision ) ,&as adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 March 1974, after the draft finalized by the Ports and Harbours Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 A great need has been felt for f@rmulating standard recommendations This standard is one of relating to various aspects of waterfr.ont structures. a series of Indian Standards proposed to be formulated on this subject. IS : 465 1 ( Part III )-1974* relates to/loadings. This Part deals with site investigation. This standard was published in 1967 mainly to cover provisions regarding soil investigations and other allied data useful for the design of port and harbour structures. In the first revision the subject has been covered comprehensively to include all aspects related to collection of data needed for the planning and design of such structures. 0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or ~analysic, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2 - 1960-j-. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard (.Part I) deals with site investigation and collection of data necessary for the planning, design and construction of marine structures of ports and harbours after selection of a suitable site for the port. *Code of practice for planning and design of ports and harbours: Part III Loading (firstrcvisim ) .
tRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ) .

3

Is:4651

(Part

I)-1974

1.2 The information required is grouped under the following headings: a) Survey ( see 3 ), b) Meteorological c) Oceanographic data ( see 4 ), data ( see 5 ), t

d) Geological data ( see 6 ) , e) Soil investigation (see 7 ), f) Seismic data (see 8 ), and g) Local resources (see 9 ). 2. GENERAL 2.1 A brief description of the site including its latitude, longitude, geographical location, accessibility, etc, should be given. Historical background of the area, purpose of the project, type of hinterland and communications may also be briefly described. 2.2 Available Information -Wherever possible, advantage should be taken of existing local data on tides, storms, wave heights, littoral drifts, mud banks, etc, and records of previous investigations in the vicinity and The behavidur of existing structures which may information compiled. be of similar nature to the ones proposed, and the influence of the soil and water on the materials of construction should be studied and recorded, At such places, site exploration, soil investigation and the examination of the materials of construction may be limited to confirm the site data that may * be expected in the neighbourhood of proposed work. 3. SURVEY 3.1 Topographical survey of adequate area covered by the project is the first reqtiirement and should be obtained at the earliest. Survey maps of `scale 1 : 50000 and contour interval of 20 m are required for general The recommended scales for survey maps for detailed planning planning are 1 : 5 000, 1 : 2 500 and 1 : 1250 with contour interval of one metre. In no case shall the survey maps for detailed planning be of scale less than 1 I 5 000 with contour interval of one metre, depending however on topography of the area. 3.2 Hydrographic survey charts for the coastal region extending to continental shelf ( up to the line at which the depth of water is 200 m ) and of scale 1 : 50 000 or 1 : 25 000 ( whichever is availahle ) are required for general ,blanning. Hydrographic charts required for detailed pIanning shall be drawn PO a scale as large as possible but in no case shall be less than 1 : 5 000. Recommended scales are 1 : 2 500 and 1 : 1250.

4

IS : 4651( Part I ) - 1974 4. METEOROLOGICAL 4.1 Meteorological a) b) c) d) e) f) DATA

data to be collected should cover the fol$wing:

Winds, Cyclones, Rainfall, Relative humidity, Temperature, and Barometric pressures. 4.2 Winds -For preliminary studies, information may be obtained froin the available meteorological recordsof the area. Recording of velocity and direction of wind at the proposed site shall be obtained by installing continuous and self-recording anemometers. The data shall be collected for at least a period of one year and shall also be correlated with fhe data available at places nearest to the site. From the data so collected wind roses should be prepared for each month in the form given in Fig, 1 and presented as shown in Fig. 2. 4.3 Cyclones - Information should be compiled regarding track of cyclones. The velocity of maximum winds, radius of maximum wind velocity, duration, pressure drop at `the cyclone centre and speed of movement of cyclone centre From this a design cyclone is adopted and waves that could is required*. ,_be incident at a place computed. 4.4 Rainfall - Data on rainfall as available should be collected from Indii Meteorological Department for a minimum period of 3 years as follows: a) Annual aveqge rainfall, b) Months in-which the maximum rainfall occurs, c) Maximum intensity of rainfall and duration, and d) Average number of wet days in a year. 4.5 Relative Humidity - Data on the maximum, mean and minimum relative humidity for every month shall be obtained ~fora minimum period of five years. 4.6 Temperatu+e* - The normal ambient air temperatures with emphasis on daiIy and seasonal variation may be noted. 4.7 Barometric Pressures - Data on monthly average barometric pressures should be collected for the nearest site from the India Meteorological Department, *Information given in ` Handbook of cyclonic storms `, ` Tracks of storms and depressions in the Bay of Bengal and Arabian Sea - 1964, and Synoptic charts `, issued by the India Meteorological Department.

5

ISr4651(PartI)-lw4
5. ChEANOGRAPHIC 5.1 Oceanographic DATA

data to be cohected should cover the following:

4 Tides, W Waves
4

( wind waves and swells ),

storm surges,

4 Currents, 4 Salinity, f) Sea water temperature, d Suspended Ioad, and h) Sea bed.
from Port Authorities or Geodetic and Research Branch, Survey of India or Hydrographic Department ofthe Indian Navy, including any local information specific to the site of the works should be obtained. Based on this the data as given in Fig. 3 should be compiled and presented.
NOTE 1 -Data
over a full meionic cycle of 19 years will be useful. on tidal bores, if any, in the area should also be collected NOTE 2 -Information and included in the above data.

5.2 Tides 5.2.1 Record of the tidal information, over as long a period as possible

5.2.2 For most of the For a may be adopted. furnished by the Survey indicated in 52.1, at least

ports, the information on tides is available* and new place, tide tables could be predicted and of India on request. To compile information as two years observed records should be studied.

5.2.3 For important structures, tide levels expected at a particular pIace may be required. For this purpose tides for at least 3 months shall be observed and correIation established between the observed tides and the predicted tides for the harbour in general. 5.3 Waves 5.3.1 For planning and preliminary design purposes, `wave data collected by ships plying in the area can be obtained from the India Meteorological Department. 5.3.2 Wave heights can also be computed by hind casting studies using the storm data and synoptic charts from the India Meteorological Department . 5.3.3 For important projects, wave recorders may be installed and infor-_ , mation collected on wave height and period for at least 2 years. Separate >vave recorders shouId be installed for long period and short.period waves. *From the Indian Tide Tables published yearly by the Survey of India, Dehra Dun.

6

SYMBOL FOR BEAUFORT NUMBER SCALE 10 `5 HHHHH 0 SCALE IO I PERCENT 20

BEAUFORT

SCALE OF WIND FORCE

\
BEAUFORT NUMBER DESCRIPTION

VELOCITY

1 / In km/h
(3) Less than 1.9 In Knots

(1) 0 1

--

--j

(2) Calm Light air Light breeze -Gentle breeze Moderate breeze Fresh breeze Strong breeze Moderate gale Fresh gale Strong gale Whole gale Storm Hurricane

I

i

(4) Less than 1

l-9 to 6
7 12 20 30 40 51 ,, 11 ,, 19 ,, 29 ,) 39 ,250 ,, 61

1 to 3
,4 ,, 6 7 ,1 10 11 ,, 16 17 ,, 21 22 ,, 27 28 ,, 33 34 41 48 56 64 2, 40 ,, 47 ,, 55 ,, 63 and above

2
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

62 3, 74 75 3, 87 88 >>102 103 ,, 117 118 and above

1

Fro.

1

TYPICAL

ROSE DIAGRAM

FOR WIND

FORCE

SPACE FOR BEAUFORT SCALE OF WIND FORCE

ROSE DIAGRAMS FOR JANUARY TO DECEMBER

w BEAWORT NwBEI; `SCALE PERCENT -

-E

FOR NOIES

ROSE DIPGRAM FOR WIND. FOIKE

NOTE 1 -The centre figure in each rose diagram should indicate the number of observations of the wind force during the years 19 . . . . .to 19. . . . . . ( inclusive ) except where otherwise noted. NOTE 2 -The direction of wind is towards the centre of the rose diagram.

at......h

NOTE 3 - Size of sheet for rose diagram for wind force is Al ( 594 x 1841).

FIG. 2

PRESENTATION OF ROSE DIAGRAMS FOR WIND FORCE

Fro. 3

FORMFORPRESENTINGTIDAL by

INFORMA~ON visual observation~aerial

5.3.4 Wave direction may be obtained photographs and with pairs of wave recorders.

5.3.5 From the data collected as above, design wave parameters should be worked out after drawing refraction/diffraction diagrams for the type of .. structures, 5.3.6 Rose diagrams of wave heights and periods may be prepared in the form given in Fig. 4 and presented as shotvn in Fig. 5. 5.3.7 Long Period Waves- For the.- measurement of long period waves, separate long period wave recorders should be installed and at least one year's record obtained. Where such time is not available, wave records during months when cyclones may occur in the fetch area may be taken. For accurate assessment of incidence of long period waves separate wave recorders arc required; however, a rough assessment can be made from wind wave/ swell recorders or even from tide gau_ges which plot curves on a graph sheet. From such records the periodic time range of long period waves could be assessed and recorded. 5.4 Storm Surges - Storm surges may be inferred from tidal gauges, if the gauges had functioned through the period of storm. In addition some special instruments can be installed for recording storm surges. They can also be calculated from synoptic charts.

9

KEY PLAN SHOWING THE PLACZ OF OBSERVMION

LEGEND WAVE HEIGHT IN METRES

ROSE JANUARY

DIAGRAMS FOR TO DECEMBER

!I_ PERCENT SCALE OF, FREQUENCY SPACE FOR NOTES

ROSE DIAGRAM FOR WAVE HElGHlS

NOTE1 -The centre figure in each rose diagram should indicate the number of observations of heighi of waves observed during the years 19. . . . . .to 19. . . . . . ( both inclusive ) except where otherwise noted. NOTE2 - Direction of the waves is towards the centre of rose diagram. NOTE3 - Size of sheet for rose diagram for wave height is Al (594 x 841). 5A Rose Diagrams for Wave
Heights-

t: ..

FIG. 5 TYPICAL PRESENTATIONOF ROSEDIAGRAM FOR WAVE HEIGHTS AND WAVE PERIODS- Contd

KEY PLAN SHOWING THE PLACE OF OBSERVAllON

c I3

NOTE 1 -The centre figure in each rose diagram should indicate the number of observations of wave periods observed during the years 19. . .. . .to 19. . .. . . (both inclusive) except where otherwise noted. NOTE2 -Direction of wave is towards the centre of the rose diagram.

NOTE3 - Size of sheet for rose diagram for wave period is Al ( 534 x 841 ), 58 Rose Diagrams for Wave
Period

FIG.

5

TYPICAL PRESENTATION OF ROSE DIAGRAM FOR WAVE HEIGHTS AND WAVE PERIODS

IS : 4651-( Part I ) - 1974 5.5 Currents 5.5.1 The direction, strength and duration of current ~during compiete tidal cycles at maximum spring and neap tide over a year should be recorded. In riverine ports where there is fresh water discharge, current pattern at highest expected flood should be assessed and recorded, Current pattern at the specific location of struttures, should also be assessed for a period of at least one year for purposes of alignment of berth, dock entrances, moorings, etc.

5.5.2 Current readings should be taken at a minimum of three points preferably at depths of 0'1 d, 0'5 d and 0'9 d where d is the depth of water, and recorded. 5.6 Sea Bed - Classification of sea bed material in the vicinity of structures and approaches and up to an area in the sea where depth of water is 6 m more than the maximum depth for which the harbour is being designed, should be ascertained and recorded. Sea bed slope w.hich is also a design parameter may be ascertained from hydrographic survey charts. 5.7 Suspended Load, Salinity and Temperature
5.7.1 These observations shall be carried out both during the dry and wet seasons at different locations in the harbour and channels over the full tidal cycle during neap and spring tides. The suspended load and salinity shall be measured at depths of 0' 1 d, 0'5 d and,0'9 d below the water leve1 ( where d is the depth of water) at every houri"during the tide cycle. Salinity and suspended load should be assessed from the water samples collected at these depths. Salinity may also be measured at the site by using direct meters which are available for this purpose. Sea water temperature shall also be measured during these observations.

5.7.2 The quantum of littoral drifts may be- estimated from observations at nearby harbour sites over a period of at least one year. The direction of drifts at the site may be ascertained from radio flourescent tracer studies and other observations of the coast line in the vicinity of the structure, such as dredging records, shore Iine changes, accretion errosion, wave data and the orientation of river mouths. These studies may be conducted up to a location where the depth of water is 12 m more than the design depth, 6. GEOLOGICAL
DATA 6.1 Any detailed published

information on the geological condition of the area of the project, if availabIe, shouId be carefully studied.

6.2 Geophysical Survey - The geophysica1 survey method of locating base rock aims at giving a continuous record of strata. Geophysical survey by seismic refraction method may also be resorted `to find out more reliable information about the strata.
13

IS t 4651( Part 1) - 1974
6.2.1 Stratijication Survey by High Resolution S&mic Projling ( Known This may be suitably used to determine the Commonly as Sparker Survey)thickness of the various sediment layers and disposition of underlying bedrock. It may also be used to map the top of the first compacted layer and to check the water depths. 6.2.1.1 A first interpretation can be made on the spot from the onboard cross sections. Consequently, the survey programme can be modified, while operating. FinaIly, a geophysical interpretation is made by preparing a location map and a cross-section showing the stratification of various layers and pointing out the main geological features. During or after the survey it is common practice to select some locations for shallow and deep corings. A correlation is obtained between the findings of the seismic survey and the actual soils encountered during coring. 6.3 Compilation of Geological Datageology of the area should be compiled: Type of bedrock a> of formation; including The following data about the

information

on its origin

and method area of

b) cl

Any faults, fissures, the project; and

folds and other unconformities

in the

Crushing strength and other properties of the rock in the project area and its suitability for use in marine works.

7. SOIL INVESTIGATION In a site which has been partLIly developed enquiries should be made regarding the past structures layout of pipes and obstructions likely to be met in the area for new works. Enquiries should also be made regarding oId creeklets, excavated -pits, etc, which might have either silted up or reclaimed. This information will be particularly useful in -deciding the number and location of trial pits and borings; and assessing in general, the likely soil strata that may be met with. .7.2 Subsurface Exploration

7.1 Earlier Uses of the Site-

7.2.1 It is not practicable to standardize the disposition and spacing of borings required for subsurface investigation as these depend upon the type of structure and the nature of the site. Broadly speaking the number of bore .holes should be sullicient to give a picture of the probable variation in the subsu'rfacc strata over the site and their depth should be such as to include all strata likely to ;Ill'cct the stability of the structure. Any soft strata encountered below foundation level should receive special study. 7.2.2 A few sul~surface soundings like the standard penetration test and the cone penetration test may be conducted. The cone penetration test should 14

XS : 4651(

Part I ) - 1974

be conducted in conjunction with at least one bore hole with sampling for correlation of soil type with the penetration resistance obtained from soundings. 7.2.3 The subsoil investigation to IS : 1892-1962". should be carried out generally according

7.2.4 Initially the main borings may be along the top edge of the shore. These borings may be spaced 50 nr apart and taken to a .depth of 3 m into hard strata or a depth equal to twice the difrcrence in the elevation of the ground surface on tither side of the structure ( see Fig. 6 ). In a few cases, the borings may be taken deeper to investigate the nature of the underlying strata. It is desirable to USC large diameter bores in reclaimed areas and where embedded boulder layers arc encountered, depending on the size of the project. 7.2.5 The intermediate borings of the first order may be further drilled after the findings of the principal borings are known, to a depth at which the known uniform soil layer, identified by the principal borings, is encountered, here also the spacing of the borings may be 50 m. 7.2.6 The intermediate borings of the second order may be drilled only when there is a considerable change in the upper layers. Normally, they are also Iocatcd at 50 m spacing but off the areas as shown in Fig. 5. The spacing could be reduced if the subsoil conditions so recluire it. The boring depth depends on the result of the preceding borings and should extend at least to twice the design depth. 7.2.7 Depth of Exploration for Channels and Dredging - For this purpose the bore holes should be extended to a known geologica fbrmation below the dredged depth or the minimum of five metres beyond the design dredged depth whichever is less. 7.2.8 Bore hole data shouId be presented in the form of bore hole logs along with important longitudinal and cross-sectional soil profiles and bore holes location plan. A recommended pro forma for bore hole logs is given in Appendix A. 7.3 Mean Ground Water Level in Tidal Areas - This should be ascertained over a yearly cycle on the entire site under reference or may be assumctl to lit at allout 0'30 m above the mean tides kvater level. With a stroqgSc`r ground \~nt~,rinllus from the short, the m&n water level may lie higher as ii1 rairl): s~as0I1 nlttl in arc`as will1 poor drainage characteristics. 7.4 The results of licld tcsls ad those oi)tainctl from laboratory investigati&s sl~oulcl IX compilctl and propcrtics of iclcntificcl strata tabulated for use in design work.

MAIN 8ORIN6S IN 4 OF WALL

H = Difference

in elevation of ground surfaces.

FIG.

6 LAYOUT

OF BORINGS FOR WATER FRONT STRUCTURES -IN DOCKS AND HARBOURS

16

fs:4651(PartI)-1914 8. SEISMIC DATA 8.1 Past data regarding seismic activity in the particular site may be collected for use in design ( SCG IS : 1893-1970* ) . 9. LOCAL REsowRcEs 9.1 This section deals with construction resources only. may be men, materials and machme. Local resources

9.2 Materials - A comprehensive assessment of the availability of the local construction materials and their costs should be made as regards to the following: a) Types of material like bricks, stones, timber, etc; b) Existing and proposed quarries; and c) Facilities for transport of materials by rail, road or other modes of transport. 9.3 Manpower Resourcesm- The availability of the following should. be judged and prevailing rates of daily wages recorded: a) Skilled labour, trade-wise;
l

*b) Unskilled labour; and c) Availability of local construction ag%ncies with their resources.

of earth-moving and other 9.4 Plant and Equipment -Availability machinery and workshop facilities with the IocaI bodies like Public Works -Department, etc, should be assessed so that advantage could be taken of these Facilities in the initial stages of the project till the project machinery arrives and workshop faciIities are set up. 9.5 Water and Power-The -availability of water and power for the proposed facility and construction purpose should be ascertained and recorded. 9.6 Local Rates - For costing purposes, local schedule of rates of material, labour, transportation, hiring of plant, etc, should also be collected. 10. OTHER INFORMATION ._ & Before deciding the preliminary design of the proposed information on the following aspects should also be collected:
','

work,

a) Availability landownership of land for acquisition in the entire area of the port. `Criteria for earthquakeresistant design of structurea( second miri~n 17
).

4s: 4651 ( Part I ) - 1974 b) Map indicating areas of inundation during highest high tide. c) Pollution and environmental effects: i) Measurement of existing poliution level, and ii) Pollution limit standards laid down by local bodies and other authorities. d) Any existing/proposed master plan for the development of the area including hinter-land development. e) Other information useful in the general planning of the port area, such as investigations of any river/stream which has outlet in the harbour, investigations regarding the river requiring diversion, etc. 11. REP'ORTING OF SITE DATA /

11.1 A summary of site data may be reported on a form as suggested and given at Appendix B for easy assimilation.

18

APPENDljX A ( Clause 7.2.8)
PRO FORMA
i) ii) iii) Client's name:

FOR BORE HOLE

LOG

Name of the job: Name of the agency doing investigation: Ground surface level: Type of boring: Diameter Inclination: -~_~_.._~__
SYMBOL

Location: Boring No. : Soil sampler Date started: Date completed: - -___-.SAMPLING T--A-7 Type Sample No. DEPTH STANDARDGROUND REAND PENETRA- WATER YA.RKS THICK- TION TEST OBSERNESS OF NO. OF VATION SAMPLE BLOWS-N (15) (16) (17) (18)

of boring:

used:

SL

No.

DESCRIPTIONOB STRATA

SOIL

GLASSIFIOATION

DEPTH DEPTH TBICKPERCENTAGEOF FROM OF NEBS OF CORE RECOVERY GROUND STRATUM -----h-----7 CORE 20 40 GO 80 100 SURFACE m `m m (5) (`5) (7) (8) (9) (lo) (11) (12)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(13)

(14)

-_-.___
Legends ii) n for different types of samples: sample ,ample iii) iv) CW Core Water sample v) Pvi) DL Penetrometer Large

--

i) U-Undisturbed Disturbed

test

disturbed sample

19

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS:4651(PartI)-1974

APPENDIX B ( Clause 11.1 ) PRECISE DATA FORM FOR PREPARATION
HARBOUR ENGINEERING
NOTE This form is designed project.

OF A DOCK ~PROJECT
Many

AND

to serve as a check list.

items may

be

inapplicable for a particular B-l. TERMS
a)

OF REFERENCE authority/client.

Administrative

b) Purpose of the scheme/project. c) Design ships required to be catered for with all relevant parameters. d) Number of ships likely to use Dock/Harbour facility at one time. e) Duration of use during calendar year, whether all weather or fair weather only. f ) Permanently/Estimated life of structures required. g) Summary of requirements: 1) Proposed approach channel/Entrance channel bearings, widths and dredged depths and turning circles; 2) Wharfage/Berthage in linear metres and special requirements, if any; 3) Dock harbour facilities like cranes, capstans and services, such as water ( fresh/salt ), electricity ( ac/dc ) , compressed air, fuel oil, bunkering and so on; 4) Shore facilities like workshops, administrative blocks, passenger transit lounges, warehouses, transit sheds and open storage area, etc; and 5) Any special requir&&ts, pollution control h) Time of completion allowed. B-2. SITE DATA such as anchorages, navigational aids,

B-2.1 Location

4. Designation of b) Latitude and
Mercantile

site;

longitude ( Survey of India, Map sheet No. or Marine Department Map with coordinates ); 21

Is:

4651 (Part I)-

1974

`-

c) Altitude; and d) Hinter-land characteristics including neighbouring towns or villages, and prominent local features. %2.2 Communications a) Existing highways with particular reference to state and national highways; b) Railway gauge ( sidings and other facilities ); c) Inland waterways ( quantum of barge and lighterage traffic ); and d) Air routes, B-2.3 Survey-Topographicai B-2.3.1 Tofographical
a) Plan showing G'I'S bench marks, cardinal points with coordinates

Maps and Hydrographic charts

for triangulation ( scale 1 : 50000 );

b) Contour plan with contour interval 1 metre ( scale not less than 1 : 5 000; 1 : 2 500 or 1 : 1 250 preferable ); c) Auxiliary plan showing relative heights of important landmarks; and d) Relief maps. B-2.3.2 Hydrographic a) Sounding chart of coastal region ( scale 1 : 50 000 or 1 : 25 000 ); b) Sounding chart of shore region ( scale not less than I : 5 000; 1 : 2 500 or 1 : 1 250 preferable ) showing sounding at two metre intervals; and c) Genera1 plan showing location and description of shore fixes and other defined areas, such as dumping places. B-2.4 Meteorological Data B-2.4.1 Winds a) Wind roses - direction/frequency, b) Combind direction and frequency wiih roses with velocity superimposed; and c) Velocity data with frequency and intensity represented on Beaufort scale.

22

IS:4651(PartI)-1974 B-2.4.2 Cyclones
a) Tracks of severe cyclones (traces). b) Characteristics of design cyclone of frequency: 1) Maximum wind velocities in km/h, 2) Radii of maximum winds in km, 3) Pressure drop at eye of cyclone in mm of mercury, 4) Speed of movement of eye of cyclone in km/h, and 5) Height of wave generated by the design cycIone at deep sea. B-2.4.3 Rainfall a) Annual total rainfall ( average ) b) Months of maximum rainfall c) Maximum intensity ( mm per hour ) d) Average number of wet days per year B-2.4.4 Relative Humidity a) Maximum for every month, b) Mean for every month, and C) Minimum for every month. B-2.4.5 Temperatures-Daily B-2.4.6 Barometric Pressures a) Mean for every month year-wise, and b) AnnuaI mean year-wise. B-2.5 Oceanographic and seasonal variation. I

i r

i

To be given in statement form for at least 3 past years

Data

B-2.5.1 General Tidal Data for the Place
a) Lowest low water recorded, b) d) d) e) f) g) Mean Mean Mean Mean Mean Mean lower low water spring, low water spring, low water *leaps, sea level, high water neap, high water springs,

h) mean higher high water springs, and j ) , Highest high water level recorded.

23

IS:465l(PartI)-1974 B-2.5.2 Tide-table (predicted levels ) for the areajjlace
B2.5.3 B-2.5.4 Observed tidal record of preceding 2 years in the area ride Data for a Sjeczjic Site over a 12 month period, and

a) Observed tidal records for it 3 month period for specific structures, b) Bore tides for estuarine harhours c) Any abnormal tidal phenomena. B-2.5.5 Waves a) Frequency of occurrence for design storm; b) Fetch; c) Maximum wave heights.and direction: wind waves and swell; d) Significant wave height, period and length for each type; e) Location of wave recorders and output; f) Wave roses of observed waves; g) Local storm surge and harbour resonance data if available; and h) Long-period wave data. B-2.5.6 Local Currents a) Charts showing tidal current direction and velocity at springs and neaps for the general area; b) Modification in current pattern due to floou discharges for riverine ports; c) Current metre observations at depths of 0' 1 d, 0'5 d and 0'9 d from surface for a particular location/site under reference; and d) Radio active-tracer B-2.5.7 studies for circulation pattern over the area. Suspended Load, Salinity and Temperature

a) Wet and dry season observations for silt charge at depths of 0' 1 d, 0' 5 d and 0'9 d below,.water level for area in general; b) Littoral drift - yearly cyc!ic observations; c) Hourly observations $$ percentage ( graphic ) for the sit&!;and . content of silt and salinity

d) Seasonal ~observation ( monthly ) for variation of silt and salinity content ( ppm and sp gr observations respectively ) ( graph ) ( for the site ) . B-2.5.8 Sea-Bed Characteristics of bed-slope. 24 a) Sea-bed composition, and b) General characteristics

IS:465l(PartI)-19i4 B-2.6 Geological Data a) Published
( Reference b) Geophysical 1) Location

geomorpholog y site information about geology, of pamphletsjperiodicals/pubhcations ).
survey of site: and category of base rocks; and folds, unconformities, dip,

2) Bed rock chara.cteristrcs;

3) Geological features like faults, strike, ctc, observed at site.
C)

Quarry sites:
1) Location 2) Distances of quarries, from site of work, and

3) Type of rock and its crushing,strength, 4) .Type of rock formations.

R-2.7 Subsurface Data
a) Plan showing location and distribution of main borings mediate boring of first and second order, b) Bore hole logs, c) Longitudinal and cross-sectional profiles, and inter-

d) Table of properties of soil strata found at site, e) Summary of test results for soil characteristics, f ) Ground water level data over entire site with yearly variation, and g) F.ecord of artesian head of water in pervious layers and pumping lout test results. B-2.8

Seismic Data
a) Design horizontal acceleration coefficient, and b) Design vertical acceleration coefficient,

B-2.9 Location of Resources 52.9.1
Materials and proposed quarries with yields; materials; and crmrnt by rail.

Existing

Construction

Facilities for transportation of materials like strrl, road and by other means of transportation.

AMENDMENT NO. 1
TO

JANUARY

1976

IS : 4651 ( Part I )-1974 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PLANNING AND DESIGN OF PORTS AND HARBOURS
PART I SITE 1NVESTlGATlON

( First

Revision )

$lorrigendum (Page 9, Fig. 3 ) -Substitute the figure on page 2 of this amendment for the existing figure.

AfiENDMEiT NO.. 2 TO

MARCH 1980

IS:4651(Part I)-1974 CODE OF PRACTICE ruti PLANNING AND DESIGK OF PORTS AND HARBOURS PART I SITE INVESTIGATIOti Revision)

(First

Alterations ------

(Page 15, chse 7.2.3, line 2) - Substitute 'ls:l8g&lgTg* for '16:18g+lg62"'. (Page 15, foot-note with lyf murk) - Substitute the following for the existing foot-note: '*Code of practice for sub-surface invdstigation for foundations (first rev&3ion).' (Page P7,,cZau8e .8.1, line 2) - Substitute +Is:l8g+lgT5* -fop `Is:18g3-197o*`. (Page 17, foot-note with `*' mark) - Substitute the following for the existing foot-note: '*Criteria for earthquake resistant design of structures (third revision).'

(BDC 66)

Elmma Ofwf

Prsss, DslM, India

