Waa Wah IS 1293 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


ті sie wa et атата wan 
+ feu 250 alice de at еа 
acca ате эїї 16 YN de 
ait tea axe ӘТ GT sit 
nhe- — Тат 
( lem qmm ) 


Plugs and Socket-Outlets for 
Household and Similar Purposes 
of Rated Voltage up to and 
Including 250 V and Rated 
Current up to and 
Including 16 A — Specification 


( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 29.120.30 


O BIS 2019 


чт res em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
e HAF 444, 9 Farge WHC HM, Чї І5еей-110002. 
7 МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2019 Price Group 17 


Electrical Wiring Accessories and Sectional Committee, ETD 14 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Electrical Wiring Accessories Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1958 and revised in 1967, 1988 and 2005. This revision has been undertaken 
to bring it in line with latest International practices. This standard covers the requirements and test methods for 
plugs and fixed or portable socket-outlets for a.c. and with and without earthing contact with a rated voltage 
above 50 V, but not exceeding 250 V and a rated current not exceeding 16 A intended for household and similar 
purposes for indoors and outdoors. This standard also covers plugs incorporated in cord sets and to plugs and 
portable socket-outlets incorporated in cord extension sets. 


This edition includes the following significant technical changes with respect to the previous edition: 


Deletion of 10 A current ratings in Table 2- Preferred Combination of Types and Ratings 
Phase out of plugs and socket outlets of 16.5 mm pitch for 2.5 A socket design. 

Deletion of 5-pin design 

Deletion of Design A and Design B 

Additional gauges requirement (see 10.3) 

Deletion of oval shape socket-outlet design 

Requirement for floating terminal have been added (see 11.4) 

Clause 12.3.11 includes additional measurements for voltage drop in each screwless terminal. 


Seige аі Ox ee a a 


New construction requirements for socket contacts and pins of socket contacts have been added (see 13.2) 


= 
о 


. New construction requirements for screw less terminals have been added (see 13.4) 


— 
— 


. New requirements for pins of portable accessories have been added. (see 14.3) 


— 
N 


. Clause 14.10 has been modified to include requirements for non-rewirable non-moulded on accessories 
and for non-rewirable moulded-on accessories. 


— 
чә 


. Clause 14.12 has been modified to ensure the retention of covers, cover-plates of rewirable portable 
accessories & non rewirable non moulded on portable accessories 


+ 


. Clause 16.1 has been modified to include the requirements for portable socket-outlets. 


— 
сл 


. Clause 16.2 has been modified to include the new requirements for protection provided by enclosures. 
. Clause 19 has been modified. 


New test requirement added to ensure zero strain on non rewirable plugs and non rewirable portable 
sockets (see 23.1) 


18. Clause 23.2 has been modified to to include the new requirements. 


= = 
= су 


19. New clause 24.14.3 has been included to ensure the retention of cover & cover plates for plugs & 
portable socket-outlets 


20. New clause 24.19 has been added for the compression test subjected to the shrouds of portable socket- 
outlets 


21. New Annex A has been added as an example of membrane and grommets. 
22. New Annex D has been added for the requirements of switches incorporated in portable socket-outlets 


23. New Annex E has been added for alternative gripping tests. 


In case of two pin plugs and socket outlets, the user must ensure proper earthing practices in their wiring installation 
in line with IS 732 : 2018 ‘Code of practice for electrical wiring installations (fourth revision)’ and IS 3043 : 1987 
‘Code of practice for earthing’. The use of two pin plugs are restricted only for Class II appliances. 


This standard is based on IEC 60884-1 (2013) ‘Plugs and socket outlet for household and similar purposes — 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


PLUGS AND SOCKET-OUTLETS FOR HOUSEHOLD 
AND SIMILAR PURPOSES OF RATED VOLTAGE UP TO 
AND INCLUDING 250 V AND RATED CURRENT UP TO 

AND INCLUDING 16A — SPECIFICATION 


(Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard applies to plugs and fixed or portable 
socket-outlets for ac only, with and without earthing 
contact, with a rated voltage not exceeding 250 V and a 
rated current not exceeding 16 A intended for household 
and similar purposes, either indoors or outdoors. 


The rated current is limited to 16 A maximum for fixed 
socket-outlets provided with screwless terminals. 


This standard does not cover requirement for flush 
mounting boxes, however it covers only those 
requirements for surface-type mounting boxes which 
are necessary for the tests on the socket-outlet. 


This standard applies also to plugs incorporated in cord 
sets and to plugs and portable socket-outlets 
incorporated in cord extension sets. It also applies to 
plugs and socket-outlets which are a component of an 
appliance, unless otherwise stated in the standard for 
the relevant appliance. 


This standard does not apply to, 


a) plugs, socket-outlets and couplers for 
industrial purposes. 


b) appliance couplers. 


c) plugs, fixed and portable socket-outlets for 
extra low voltage (ELV). 
NOTE — ELV values are specified in relevant ELV 
standard, if any. 

d) fixed socket-outlets combined with fuses, 
automatic switches, etc. 


In locations where special conditions prevail, as in ships, 
vehicles and the like, and in hazardous locations, for 
example, where explosions are liable to occur, special 
constructions may be required. 


NOTES 

1 General requirements for mounting boxes are given in IS 14772. 
2 Socket-outlets with pilot lights are allowed provided that pilot 
lights comply with the relevant standard, if any. 

3 Plugs and socket-outlets complying with this standard should 
be suitable for use at ambient temperatures not normally 
exceeding +45 °C, but their average over a period of 24 h 
reaches a temperature +40 °C, with a lower limit of the ambient 
air temperature of —5 °C. 


4 Socket-outlets complying with this standard are only suitable 
for incorporation in equipment in such a way and in such a place 
that it is unlikely that the ambient surrounding the socket- outlet 
reaches a temperature exceeding 45?C. 


5 only plugs and socket outlets of dimensions as per Annex B 


are covered under the scope of this standard. 


6 Requirements for 25 A is under consideration. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards are necessary adjuncts to this 


standard: 


IS No. 
292 : 1983 
694 : 2010 


1401 : 2008 
1885 (Part 74) : 
2012 


2824 : 2007 


3854 : 1997 
4160 : 2005 


9000 (Part 5/Sec 1 
and 2) : 1981 


9000 (Part 7/Sec7) : 


2006 


Title 
Leaded brass ingots and castings 
polyvinyl chloride insulated 
unsheathed and sheathed cables/ 
cords with rigid and flexible 
conductor for rated voltages up to 
and including 450/750 V 
Protection of persons and 
equipment by enclosures - Probes 
for verification 
Electrotechnical vocabulary: 
Part 74 electrical and magnetic 
devices 
Method for determining of the 
proof and the comparative tracking 
indices of solid insulating materials 
Switches for household and similar 
fixed-electrical installations 
Interlocking switch socket 
outlet — Specification 
Basic environmental testing 
procedures for electronic and 
electrical items : Part 5 Damp heat 
(cyclic) test 
Basic Environmental testing 
procedures for electronic and 
electrical items : Part 7 Impact 
Test, Test Eh: Hammer tests 


9968 (Part 1) : 1988 Elastomer insulated cables: Part 1 


10322 (Part 5/ 
Sec 7) : 2017 


For working voltages upto and 
including 1 100 V 

Luminaries: Part 5 Particular 
Requirements, Section 7 Lighting 
Chains (first revision) 


IS 1293 : 2019 
IS No. 

11000 (Part 2/ 

Sec 1) : 2008 


14340 : 1996 


14763 : 2000 


14772 : 2000 


IS/IEC 60320 


IS/IEC 60529 : 
2001 

IS/IEC 61058 

(Part 1) : 2000 


IEC 60068 (Part 2/ 


Sec 31) : 2008 


Title 
Fire hazard testing : Part 2 Test 
methods, Section 1 Glow-wire 
apparatus and common test 
procedure 
Brass for current carrying parts in 
electrical wiring accessories 
Conduits for electrical purposes 
— Outside diameters of conduits 
for electrical installation and 
threads for conduits and fittings 
General requirements for enclosures 
for accessories for household and 
similar fixed electrical installations 
[Superseding IS 5133 (Parts 1 and2)] 
(All parts) Appliance couplers for 
household and similar general 
purposes 
Degrees of protection provided by 
enclosures (IP Code) 
Switches for appliances 


Environmental testing — 
Part 2-31: Tests — Test Ec: Rough 
handling shocks, primarily for 
equipment-type specimens 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 1885 (Part 74) and the following shall apply. 


Fixed socket-outlet 


Plug (non-sewirable) 


Cord extension set 


NOTES 


1 Where the terms ‘voltage’ and ‘current’ are used, they imply 
r.m.s. values, unless otherwise specified. 


2 Throughout this standard the word ‘earthing’ is used for 
‘protective earthing’. 


3 The term ‘accessory’ is used as a general term covering plugs 
and socket-outlets; the term ‘portable accessory’ covers plugs 
and portable socket-outlets. Examples of the use of accessories 
are shown in Fig. 1A. 


4 Throughout this standard the term ‘socket-outlet’ covers both 
fixed and portable socket-outlets, except where the reference 
is specific to one type or the other. 


3.1 Plug — Accessory intended for frequent use by 
ordinary persons, having pins designed to engage with 
the contacts of a socket-outlet, also incorporating means 
for the electrical connection and mechanical retention 
of flexible cable(s). 


NOTE — For special purposes such as lighting chains [see 
also IS 10332 (Part 5/ Section 7)], two or three single-core 
cables can be connected within the plug. 


3.2 Socket-Outlet — Accessory intended for frequent 
use by ordinary persons having socket- contacts 
designed to engage with the pins of a plug and having 
terminals or terminations for the connection of cable. 


3.3 Fixed Socket-Outlet — A socket-outlet which is 
intended to be connected to the fixed wiring. 


3.4 Portable Socket-Outlet — Socket-outlet which is 
intended to be connected to, or integral with one flexible 
cable, and which can easily be moved from one place 
to another while connected to the supply. 


3.5 Multiple Socket-Outlet — Combination of two 
or more socket-outlets. Example of portable multiple 
socket-outlet is shown in Fig. 1B). 


Plug and socket-outler 


Cable coupler 


Portable sockei-outlet 


Apphance niet 
inon +ewn able} š 


Appliance 


Plug (non-reveirable) 


— 


Connector Appliance coupter 


[non-rewirable] 


Fic. ТА DIAGRAM SHOWING VARIOUS ACCESSORIES AND THEIR USE 


2 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Fig. 1B Multiple Portable Socket Outlets (Table Type) 


3.6 Combined Socket-Outlets — A socket assembly 
with provision of plugging two or more types or rating 
of plugs but in which only one or two plugs can be 
plugged in at a time (Typical examples of combined 
Socket-outlets are shown in Fig. 1С). 


3.7 Socket-Outlet for Appliances — Socket-outlet 
intended to be built in or fixed to appliances. 


3.8 Rewirable Plug or Rewirable Portable Socket- 
outlets — Accessory so constructed that the flexible 
cable can be replaced. 


3.9 Non-rewirable Plug or Non-rewirable Portable 
Socket-Outlet — Accessory so constructed that it 
forms a complete unit with the flexible cable after 
connection and assembly by the manufacturer of the 
accessory (see 14.1). 


3.10 Moulded-on Accessory — Non-rewirable 


portable accessory the manufacture of which is 
completed by insulating material moulded around pre- 
assembled component parts and the terminations of the 
flexible cable. 


3.11 Mounting Box — Box intended for mounting in 
or on a wall, floor or ceiling, etc, for flush or surface 
application, intended for use with a fixed socket- 
outlet(s). 


3.12 Cord Set — Assembly consisting of a flexible cable 
fitted with a plug and a connector, intended for the 
connection of an electrical appliance to the electrical 
supply (Example of cord set is shown in Fig. 1А). 


3.13 Cord Extension Set — Assembly consisting of a 
flexible cable fitted with a plug and a single or multiple 
portable socket-outlets ( Example of cord extension 
set is shown in Fig. 1A). 


Fic. 1 COMBINED SOCKET-OUTLETS 


IS 1293 : 2019 


3.14 Terminal — Insulated or non-insulated connecting 
device serving for reusable electrical connection of the 
external conductors. 


3.15 Termination — Insulated or non-insulated 
connecting device intended for non-reusable electrical 
connection of the external conductors. 


3.16 Clamping Unit — Part or parts of a terminal 
necessary for the mechanical clamping and the electrical 
connection of the conductor(s). 


3.17 Screw-Type Terminal — Terminal for the 
connection and subsequent disconnection of a 
conductor or the interconnection of two or more 
conductors capable of being dismantled, the 
connection'n being made, directly or indirectly, by 
means of screws or nuts of any kind. 


3.17.1 Screw Terminal — Screw-type terminal in which 
the conductor is clamped under the head of the screw. 
The clamping pressure may be applied directly by the 
head of the screw or through an intermediate part, such 
as a washer, clamping plate or anti-spread device 
(Example of screw terminals is given in Fig. 2). 


3.17.2 Stud Terminal — Screw-type terminal in which 
the conductor is clamped under a nut. The clamping 
pressure may be applied directly by a suitably shaped 
nut or through an intermediate part, such as a washer, 
clamping plate or anti-spread device (Example of stud 
terminals is given in Fig. 2). 


3.17.3 Pillar Terminal — Screw-type terminal in which 
the conductor is inserted into a hole or cavity, where it 
is clamped under the shank ofthe screw or screws. The 
clamping pressure may be applied directly by the shank 
of the screw or through an intermediate member to 
which pressure is applied by the shank of the screw 
(Example of pillar terminals is given in Fig. 3). 


3.17.4 Saddle Terminal — Screw-type terminal in which 
the conductor clamped under a saddle by means of two 
or more screws or nuts (Example of saddle terminals 
are given in Fig. 4). 


3.17.5 Mantle Terminal — Screw-type terminal in which 
the conductor is clamped against the base ofa slot in a 
threaded stud by means of a nut. The conductor 1s 
clamped against the base of the slot by a suitably shaped 
washer under the nut, by a central peg 1f the nut is a 
cap nut, or by equally effective means for transmitting 
the pressure from the nut to the conductor within the 
slot (Example of mantle terminals is given in Fig. 5). 


3.18 Screw Less Terminal — Connecting device for 
the connection and subsequent disconnection ofa rigid 
(solid or stranded) or flexible conductor or the 
dismountable interconnection of two or more 
conductors capable of being dismantled, the connection 


being made, directly or indirectly, by means of springs, 
wedges, eccentrics or cones, etc, without special 
preparation of the conductor concerned, other than 
removal of insulation. 


3.19 Rated Voltage — Voltage assigned to the plug or 
socket-outlet by the manufacturer, which will be that 
specified in the standard sheet, if any. 


3.20 Rated Current — Current assigned to the plug 
or socket-outlet by the manufacturer, which will be that 
specified in the standard sheet, if any. 


3.21 Shutter — Movable part incorporated into a 
socket-outlet arranged to shield at least the live socket- 
outlet contacts automatically when the plug is 
withdrawn. 


3.22 Thread-Forming Screw — Tapping screw having 
air uninterrupted thread, which by screwing in, forms 
a thread by displacing material (Example of a thread- 
forming screw is shown in Fig. 6). 


3.23 Thread-Cutting Screw — tapping screw having 
an interrupted thread, which by screwing in, makes 
thread by removing material (Example of thread- 
cutting tapping screw in Fig. 7). 


3.24 Type Test — Tests carried out to prove conformity 
with the requirement of the specification. These are 
intended to prove the general qualities and design of 
the given type of plug or socket-outlets. 


3.25 Acceptance Test — Test carried out on samples 
taken from a lot for the purpose of acceptance of the 
lot. 


3.26 Routine Test — Test carried out on each item to 
check requirements, which are likely to vary during 
production. 


3.27 Class I Appliances — An appliance in which 
protection against electric shock does not rely on basic 
insulation only, but which includes an additional safety 
precaution in that accessible conductive parts are 
connected to the protective earthing conductor in the 
fixed wiring of the installation in such a way that 
accessible conductive parts cannot become live in the 
event of a failure of the basic insulations. 


3.28 Class II Appliances — An appliance in which 
protection against electric shock does not rely on basic 
insulation, only, but in which additional safety 
precautions, such as, double insulation or reinforced 
insulation are provided, there being no provision for 
protective earthing or reliance upon installation 
condition. 


3.29 Safety Extra Low Voltage (SELV) System — 
Nominal voltage not exceeding 32 V between 
conductors and between conductors and earth or, for 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Opuonal 
i 


Optional 


VA 


Screw terminals 
Screw requiring washer, clamping plate 
Of anti-spread device 
Optional 
Stud termunals 
Screw Terminals Stud Terminals 
Screws requiring washer, clamping A = fixed part 
piate or anti-spread devices B = washer or clamping plate 
C = anti-spread device 
D = conductor space 
E = studs 
Cross- Section of Conductor Accepted Minimum Diameter of Torque”) 
by the Terminal Conductor Space — dicm —. 
mm? mn One Screw or Stud Two Screws or Studs 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
Up to 1.5 1.7 0.5 _ 
Up to 2.5 2.0 0.8 _ 
Up to 4 2.7 1.2 0.5 
Up to 6 3.6 2.0 1:2 
Up to 10 4.3 2.0 1.2 


? The values specified apply to the screws covered by the corresponding columns in Table 1. 


The part which retains the conductor in position may be of insulating material provided the pressure necessary to clamp the 


conductor is not transmitted through the insulating material. 


The second optional space for the terminal accepting cross-section of conductors up to 2.5 mm? may be used for the connection 
of the second conductor when it is required to connect two 2.5 mm? conductor. 


Fic. 2 SCREW TERMINALS AND STUD TERMINALS 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Z 


D D 


Cross-section of Minimum Minimum Distance 
Conductor Accepted Diameter D g Between 
by the Terminal (or Minimum Clamping Screw 
mm? Dimension) of and End of 
Conductor Conductor 
Space when 
mn Fully Inserted 
mm 
One Two 
Screw screws 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
Up to 1.5 2.5 1.5 1.5 
2.5 (circular hole) 3.0 1.5 1.5 
2.5 (elongated hole) 2.5 x 4.5 1:5 1:5 
4 3.6 1.8 1.5 
6 4.0 1.8 1.5 
10 4.5 2.0 1.5 


Torque 
Nm 
| 1? 27 3” 

—— 2 = v P.... == — = 
One Two One Two One Two 
screw screws Screw screws screw screws 
(5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
0.2 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 
0.25 0.2 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.4 
0.25 0.2 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.4 
0.4 0.2 0.8 0.4 0.8 0.4 
0.4 0.25 0.8 0.5 0.8 0.5 
0.7 0.25 1.2 0.5 1.2 0.5 


? The values specified apply to screws covered by the corresponding columns in Table 1. 


The part of the terminal containing the threaded hole and the part of the terminal against which tire conductor is clamped by 
the screw may be two separate parts, as in the case of terminals provided with a stirrup. 


The shape of the conductor space may differ from those shown provided that a circle with a diameter equal to the minimum 
specified for D of the minimum outlines specified for the elongated hole accepting cross sections of conductors up to 2.5 mm?can 


be inscribed. 


Fic. 3 PILLAR TERMINALS 


three phase supply, not exceeding 18.5 V between 
conductors, and the no-load voltage not exceeding 38 
V and 22 V, respectively. 


3.30 Crimp Type Terminal — Termination having the 
means of permanent connection made by crimping the 
part of terminal itself. It may also be made out of sheet 
metal or solid metal. 


3.31 Base — Part of the socket-outlet supporting the 
socket- contacts. 


3.32 Live Part — Conductor or conductive part 
intended to be energized in normal use, including a 
neutral conductor, but, by convention, not a PEN 
conductor. 


IS 1293 : 2019 


55 


Z 


СА; 


B B 


еі с 
D D 
Key 
A = Saddle 
B = Fixed part 
C = Stud 
D = Conductor space 
Cross-section of Conductor Minimum Diameter D Torque 
Accepted by the Terminal of Conductor Space Nm 
mm? mm 
3.0 0.5 
Up to 6 4.0 0.8 
Up to 10 4.5 1:2 


Cross-Section of Conductor 


Minimum Diameter D 


Minimum Distance g Between Fixed 


Accepted by the Terminal of Conductor Space ” Part and End of Conductor When 
Fully Inserted 

mm? mm mm 
Up to 1.5 T. 1:5 
Up to 2.5 2.0 1:5 
Up to 4 27 1.8 
Up to 6 3.6 1.8 
Up to 10 4.3 2.0 


? The bottom of the conductor space must be slightly rounded in order to obtain a reliable connection. 


The shape of the conductor space may differ from that shown in the figure, provided that a circle with a diameter equal to the 


minimum value specified for D can be inscribed. 


The shape of the upper and lower faces of the saddle made different to accommodate conductors of either small or large cross- 


sectional areas by inverting the saddle. 


Fic. 4 SADDLE TERMINALS 


3.33 Cable Anchorage — That part of an accessory 
which has the ability to limit the displacement of a 
fitted flexible cable against pull, push and turning 
forces. 


3.34 Main Part — Assembly consisting of the base 
and other parts. This assembly is not intended to be 
dismantled at any time after manufacture. 


3.35 Grommet — Component used to support and 
protect the cable or conduit at the point of entry. 
NOTES 


1 It may also prevent the ingress of moisture or contaminants. 


2 Examples of membranes and grommets are shown in Annex A. 


3.36 Entry Membrane — Component or integral part 


of the accessory used to protect the cable which may be 
used to support the cable or conduit at the point of entry. 


NOTES 


1 An entry membrane may also prevent the ingress of moisture 
or contaminants and may be part of a grommet. 


2 Examples of membranes and grommets are shown in Annex A. 
3.37 Protecting Membrane — Component or integral 
part of the accessory that is not intended to be 
penetrated in normal use and is intended to provide 
protection against ingress of water or solid objects and/ 
or to allow the operation of an accessory. 


NOTE — Examples of membranes and grommets are shown in 
Annex A. 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Part of accessory 
with cavity for terminal 


NOTE — The value of the torque to be applied is that specified in col 4 or col 5 of Table 1 as appropriate. 


Fic. 5 MANTLE TERMINALS 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENT 


Accessories and surface type mounting boxes shall be 
so designed and constructed that in normal use, their 
performance is reliable and without danger to the user 
and surroundings. 


Compliance is checked by meeting all the relevant 
requirements and tests specified. 


5 GENERAL NOTES ON TESTS 
5.1 Tests according to this standard are type tests. 


5.1.1 Schedule of routine, acceptance and type tests 


are given in 31. Clauses 5.2 to 5.5 are applicable to 
type tests. 


5.2 Unless otherwise specified, the specimens are 
tested as delivered and under normal conditions of use. 


Non-rewirable accessories are tested with the type and 
size of flexible cable as delivered; those not 
incorporated in a cord set or a cord extension set or 
which are not a component of equipment shall be 
provided for testing, with at least 1 m of flexible cable 
of relevant specification. 


Non-rewirable multiple portable socket-outlets are 
tested with flexible cables as delivered. 


Table 1 Tightening Torques for the Verification of the Mechanical Strength of Screw-Type Terminals 
(Clauses 5.2, 12.2.5, 12.2.6, 12.2.7, 12.2.8 and 24.1) 


SI Nominal Diameter of Thread Torque 
No. mm Nm 
= 

(1) Q) (3) (4) (5) 

1) Up to and including 2.8 0.2 0.4 - 
ii) Over 2.8 up to and including 3.0 0.25 0.5 — 
iii) Over 3.0 up to and including 3.2 0.3 0.6 — 
iv) Over 3.2 up to and including 3.6 0.4 0.8 — 
v) Over 3.6 up to and including 4.1 0.7 1:2 1.2 
vi) Over 4.1 up to and including 4.7 0.8 1.8 1.2 
vii) Over 4.7 up to and including 5.3 0.8 2.0 1.4 


NOTES 


1 Column 3 applies to screws without a head if the screw, when tightened, does not protrude from the hole and to other screws 
which cannot be tightened by means of a screwdriver with a blade wider than the diameter of the screw. 


2 Column 4 applies to other screws which are tightened by means of a screwdriver and to screws and nuts which are tightened by 


means other than a screwdriver. 


3 Column 5 applies to nuts of mantle terminals which are tightened by means of a screwdriver. 


Fic. 6 EXAMPLE OF THREAD-FORMING SCREW 


Socket-outlet which does not comply with any accepted 
standard sheet specified in this standard are tested 
together with their corresponding boxes. 


Socket-outlets, which require a box to complete their 
enclosure, are tested with their boxes. 


The fixing screws of terminals, covers and cover plates 
shall be tightened with a torque equal to two-thirds of 
the values specified in Table 1 unless otherwise 
specified. 


5.3 Unless otherwise specified the tests are carried out 
in the order of the clauses, at an ambient temperature 
between 15°С and 40°C. 


In case of doubt the test are made at an ambient 
temperature of 27 + 5?C. 


Plugs and socket-outlets are tested separately. 
The neutral, if any, is treated as a pole. 


5.4 Three samples are subjected to all the relevant test 
(For the test of 10.6, three additional specimens are 
required). 


For the tests of 12.3.11, additional samples of socket- 
outlets having in total at least 5 screwless terminals are 
required. 


For the test of 12.3.12, three additional samples of 
socket-outlets are necessary: in each sample, one 
clamping unit is tested. 


For each of the tests of 13.22 and 13.23, three additional 
samples of separate membranes, or of accessories 
incorporating membranes, are required. 


For non-rewirable accessories, six additional samples 
are required for the test of 23.2 and 23.4. 


For the test of 24.10, three additional samples are 
required. 


For the test of 28, three additional samples may be 
necessary. 


5.5 Accessories are deemed not to comply with this 
standard, if there are more failures than that of one 
sample in one of the tests. 


If one sample fails ina test, that test and those preceding, 
which may have influenced the result of that test, are 
repeated on another set of samples of the number 
specified in 5.4, all of which shall then comply with the 
repeated tests. 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Fic. 7 ExAMPLE Or THREAD-CUTTING SCREW 


NOTES 

1 In general, it will only be necessary to repeat the tests which 
caused the failure, unless the sample fails in one of the tests 
of 20 to 22 inclusive, in which case the tests are repeated from 
that of 19 onwards. 

2 The manufacturer may submit, together with the number of 
samples specified in 5.4, the additional set of samples which 
may be needed should one sample fail. The testing authority will 
then, without further request, test the additional samples and 
will only reject if a further failure occurs. If the additional set of 
samples is not submitted at the same time, a failure of one sample 
will entail a rejection. 


6 RATINGS 


6.1 Accessories shall have a rated voltage not exceeding 
250 V. The preferred combination oftypes and current 
ratings is as shown in Table 2. 


Table 2 Preferred Combination of Types and Ratings 
(Clause 6.1) 


SI Type Rated Current 
No. A 

(1) (2) (3) 

i) 2P (non-rewirable plugs only) 2/5 

ii) 2P 6 
ш) 2P + D 16 


6.2 In a cord extension set, the rated current of the 
portable socket outlet shall be not higher and the rated 
voltage shall be not less than that of the plug. 


Compliance is checked by inspection of the marking. 
7 CLASSIFICATIONS 


7.1 Accessories Classification 


7.1.1 Accessories are classified according to the degree 
of protection against access to hazardous parts and 
against harmful effects due to the ingress of solid foreign 
object as described in IS/IEC 60529. 


7.1.2 Accessories are classified according to the degree 
of protection against harmful effects due to the ingress 
of water as described in IS/IEC 60529. 


7.1.3 Classification according to the provision for 
earthing, 


a) accessories without earthing contact; and 
b) accessories with earthing contact. 


IS 1293 : 2019 
7.1.4 Classification according to the method of 


connecting the cable, 


a) 


b) non-rewirable accessories. 


rewirable accessories; and 


7.1.5 Classification according to the type of terminals, 


a) accessories with screw-type terminals; 

b) accessories with screwless terminals for rigid 
conductors only; and 

c) accessories with screwless terminals for rigid 


and flexible conductors. 
7.2 Socket-Outlets Classification 


7.2.1 According to the degree of protection against 
electric shock when mounted as for normal use: 


a) Socket-outlet with normal protection 
(see 10.1); and 

b) Socket-outlet with increased protection 
(see 10.7). 


NOTE — Socket-outlets with increased protection may be socket- 
outlet with or without shutters. 


7.2.2 Classification according to the method of 
application/ mounting of the socket-outlet: 


Socket-outlets are classified according to the method 
of application/mounting of the socket-outlet in, 


a) surface-type; 

b) flush-type; 

c) semi-flush type; 

d) panel-type; 

e) architrave-type; 

f) portable-type; 

g) table-type (single or multiple); 
h) floor recessed type; and 

j) appliances type. 


7.2.3 Classification according to the existence of 
shutters, 


a) without shutters; and 
b) with shutters (see 10.5). 


7.2.4 Classification according to the intended use are, 


a) socket-outlets for circuits where a single 
earthing circuit provides protective earthing 
for connected equipment and exposed 
conductive parts of the socket-outlet, if any; 
and 

b) socket-outlets for circuits where electrical 
noise immunity is desired for the earthing 
circuit of connected equipment. The 
equipment earthing circuit is electrically 


separated from the protective earthing circuit 


10 


provided for the exposed conductive parts of 
the socket-outlet, if any. 


7.3 Plug Classification 
Plugs are classified according to the following class 
of appliances to which they are intended to be 
connected: 

a) Plugs for appliances of Class I; and 

b) Plugs for appliances of Class II. 
8 MARKING 


8.1 Accessories shall be marked with the following: 
a) 
b) 


c) 
d) 


Rated current, in A. 

Rated voltage, in V. 

Nature of supply as a.c. (Alternate current). 
Manufacture or responsible vendor's name, 
trade-mark or identification mark. 

e) Type reference which may be a catalogue 
number. 

NOTE — The type reference may be the series reference 
only. 

Country of manufacture. 

First characteristic numeral for the degree of 
protection against access to hazardous parts 
and against harmful effects due to ingress of 
solid foreign objects, if declared to be higher 
than 2, and for fixed socket-outlets higher than 
4 in which case the second characteristic 
numeral shall also be marked. 


g) 


h) Second characteristic numeral for the degree 
of protection against harmful effects due to 
ingress of water, if declared to be higher than 
0, and for fixed socket-outlets higher than 2 
in which case the first characteristic numeral 


shall also be marked. 


If the system allows plugs of a certain IP ratings to be 
introduced into socket-outlets having another IP rating, 
attention shall be drawn to the fact that the resulting 
degree of protection of the combination plug/socket- 
outlet is the lower of the two. They shall be stated in 
the manufacturer’s literature related to the socket- 
outlet. 


NOTE — The degree of protection are based on IS/IEC 60529. 


In addition, socket-outlets with screw less terminals 
shall be marked with the following: 


1) An appropriate marking indicating the length 
of insulation to be removed before the insertion 
of the conductor into the screw less terminal; 
and 

2) An indication of the suitability to accept rigid 

conductors only, for those socket-outlets 

having this restriction. 


NOTES 

1 The additional markings may be put on the socket-outlet, on 
the packaging unit and/or given in an instruction sheet which 
accompanies the socket-outlet. 

2 For two pin (two pole) plugs following information shall be 
given on the cartons: ‘Plugs of two poles are suitable for Class 
II appliances only.’ 


8.2 When symbols are used, they shall be as follows: 


А трете: Mm А 
КЭС ООЛО О О ОС qhaq V 
Alternating сішштепі............................. ac/~ 
Neuttal килке REPE eased ede eee N 
Protective earth................ нанынын Э) 
Degree of protection, when relevant 
ӘРКЕТ ІРХХ 


be installed on rough surfaces КОО ОООО Қ 
Terminal for hne (live)... ie eee L 


For screw less terminals: suitability to accept rigid 
conductors only 


NOTES 


1 Lines formed by the construction ofthe tools are not considered 
as part of the marking. 


2 In the IP code the letter “X” concerning protection against 
ingress of solid objects shall be replaced by the relevant number. 


For the marking with rated current and rated voltage, 
figures may be used alone. These figures shall be placed 
on one line separated by an oblique line or the figure 
for rated current shall be placed above the figure for 
rated voltage, separated by a horizontal line. 


The marking for nature of supply shall be placed next 
to the marking for rated current and rated voltage. 


NOTE — The marking for current, voltage and nature of supply 
may be, for example, as follows: 


16 A 250 V ac/~ or 16/250 V ac/~ or 16/250 ac/~ 


8.3 For fixed socket-outlets the following marking shall 
be placed on the main part: 


a) Rated current, rated voltage and nature of 
supply; 

Either the name, trade-mark or identification 
mark ofthe manufacturer or ofthe responsible 
vendor and the type reference shall be on the 
main part. 


b) 


c) Length of insulation to be removed before the 
insertion of the conductor into the screwless 
terminal; 

d) Anindication ofthe suitability to accept rigid 
conductors only for screwless terminals for 


those socket-outlets having this restriction; 


11 


IS 1293 : 2019 


e) The type reference, which may be a catalogue 
number 


Parts such as cover-plates, which are necessary for 
safety purposes and are intended to be sold separately, 
shall be, marked with either the name, trade-mark or 
identification mark of the manufacturer or of the 
responsible vendor and the type reference. 


The symbol for degree of protection against harmful ingress 
of water, if applicable, shall be marked on the outside of 
its associated enclosure so as to be easily discernible when 
the socket-outlet is mounted and wired as for normal use. 


Fixed socket-outlets classified according 7.2.4 (b) shall 
be identified by a triangle which shall be visible after 
installation unless they have an interface configuration 
which is different from that used in normal circuits. 


NOTES 
1 The type reference may be the series references only. 


2 Additional type references may be marked on the main part, or 
on the outside or inside of the associated enclosure. 


8.4 For plugs and portable socket-outlets, the marking 
specified in 8.1, other than the type reference, shall be easily 
discernible when the accessory is wired and assembled. 


Plugs and portable socket-outlets for equipment of Class 
II shall not be marked with the symbol for Class II 
construction. 


NOTE — The type reference of rewirable accessories may be 
marked on the inside of the enclosure or cover. 


8.5 Terminals intended exclusively for the neutral 
conductor shall be indicated by the letter N. 


Earthine terminals shall be indicated by the 
bol (|) 

symbol. | 

Wak 


These marking shall not be placed on screws, or any 
other easily removable parts. 


Terminals provided for the connection of conductors 
not forming part of the main function of the socket- 
outlet shall be clearly identified unless their purpose is 
self-evident, or indicated in a wiring diagram which shall 
be fixed to the accessory. 


The identification of accessory terminals may be 
achieved by, 


a) their marking with graphical symbols, 
b) alpha-numeric system, or 
c) theirphysical dimensions or relative location. 


Leads of neons or indicator lamps are not considered 
to be conductors for the purpose of this sub-clause. 


NOTES 


1 ‘Easily removable parts’ are those parts which can be removed 
during the normal installation ofthe socket-outlet or the assembly 
of the plug. 


2 Termination in non-rewirable need not be marked. 


IS 1293 : 2019 


8.6 For surface type mounting boxes, the marking may 
be made on boxes forming an integral part of the socket- 
outlet, having an IP code higher than IP4X, or higher 
than IPX2, the IP code shall be marked on the outside 
ofits associated enclosure so as to be easily discernible 
when the socket-outlet is mounted and wired as in 
normal use compliance is checked by inspection. 


8.7 It shall be indicated either by marking or in a 
manufacturer’s catalogue or instruction sheet in which 
position or with which special provisions (For example, 
box, type of mounting surface, plug, etc) the declared 
degree of protection of flush-type and semi-flush-type 
fixed socket-outlets having an IP code higher than ІРХО 
is ensured. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 
8.8 Marking shall be durable and easily legible. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the 
following test: 


The marking is rubbed by hand for 15 s with a piece of 
cloth soaked with water and again for 15 s with a piece 
of cloth soaked with petroleum spirit. 


NOTES 


1 Marking made by impression, moulding, pressing or engraving 
is not subjected to this test. 


2 It is recommended that the petroleum spirit used consist of a 
solvent hexane with an aromatic content of maximum 0.1 
percentage by volume, a kauributanol value of 29, an initial 
boiling point of approximately 65°C, a dry point of approximately 
69°C and a specific density of approximately 0.68g/cm?. 


8.9 BIS Certification Marking 


The accessories may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


8.9.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provision of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and 
the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The details 
of conditions under which the license for the use of the 
Standard Mark may be granted to the manufacturers 
or the producers may be obtained from the Bureau of 
Indian Standards. 


9 CHECKING OF DIMENSIONS 


9.1 The dimensions of plugs and socket-outlets are 
given in Annex B. Accessories and surface-type 
mounting boxes shall comply with the appropriate 
standard sheet and corresponding gauges (see Annex 
C) for plug and socket-outlets systems. 


Insertion of plugs into fixed or portable socket-outlet 
shall be ensured by their compliance with the relevant 
gauges given in Annex C. 


Compliance is checked by measurement and/or by 
means of gauges. The manufacturing tolerances of these 
gauges shall be as shown in Table 3, if not otherwise, 
specified. The most unfavorable dimensions shall be 
used for the design of the gauges. 


Socket-outlets are subjected, before the above checking, 
to ten insertions and ten withdrawals of a plug 
complying with the corresponding plugs as given in 
Annex B having the maximum dimensions for the pins 
following which dimensions are checked by 
measurement and/or by means of gauges. 


NOTE — In some cases (for example, distances between 
centres), it might be necessary to check both the extreme 
dimensions. 


9.2 It shall not be possible, within a given system, to 
engage a plug with, 


a) socket-outlet having a higher voltage rating 
or a lower current rating; and 

b) socket-outlet with a different number of live 
poles; exceptions may be admitted for socket- 
outlets which are specially constructed for the 
purpose to allow engagement with plugs of a 
lower number of poles, provided that no 
dangerous situation can arise, for example, a 
connection between a live pole and an earthing 
contact or the interruption of the earthing circuit. 


It shall not be possible to engage a plug for appliance 
of or of Class I with a socket-outlet exclusively designed 


Table 3 Gauge Tolerances 
(Clause 9.1) 


SI Gauge for Checking Gauge Tolerance 
No. mm 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Pin diameter or рїп thickness 0 
—0.01 
ii) Dimensions of entry holes corresponding to pin diameter and to distance between contact +0.01 
surfaces 0 
iii) Pin length and width 0 
—0.1 
iv) Pin spacing 0 
-0.0297 0 
v) Distance from the engagement face to pint of first electrical contact (for socket-outlet) 0 бї +0.05 
—0.05 0 
vi) Guiding elements + 0.03 


to accept plugs for Class II equipment. 


Compliance is checked by inspection or by manual test 
using gauges, the manufacturing tolerances of which 
shall be as specified in Table 3. 


In case of doubt the impossibility of insertion is checked 
by applying the appropriate gauge for 1 min with a force 
of 150 N for accessories with a rated current not 
exceeding 16A, or 250N for other accessories. 


Where the use of elastomeric or thermoplastic material 
is likely to influence the result of the test, it is carried 
out at an ambient temperature of 40 + 2°C, both the 
accessories and the gauges being at this temperature. 


NOTE — For accessories of rigid material, such as, thermosetting 
resins, ceramic material and the like, conformity to the 
dimensions as given in Annex B ensures compliance with the 
requirement. 


10 PROTECTION AGAINST ELECTRIC SHOCK 


10.1 Fixed socket-outlets, plugs when engaged and 
portable socket-outlets shall be so designed that, when 
they are wired and mounted as for normal use, live parts 
are not accessible, even after removal of parts which 
can be removed without the use of a tool. 


Live parts of plugs shall not be accessible when the plug 
is in partial or complete engagement with a socket-outlet. 


The specimen is mounted as for normal use: and fitted 
with conductors of the smallest nominal cross-sectional 
are and the test is then repeated using conductors of 
the largest nominal cross-sectional areas as specified in 
Table 4. 


For socket-outlets, the test probe b of IS 1401 is applied 
in every possible position. 


For plugs, the test finger is applied in every possible 


| d 


SAMPLE 
a) 


IS 1293 : 2019 


position when the plug is in partial or complete 
engagement with a socket-outlet. 


An electrical indicator with a voltage not less than 40 V 
and not more than 50 V, is used to show contact with 
the relevant part. 


For accessories where the use of elastomeric or 
thermoplastic material is likely to influence the requirement, 
the test is repeated but at an ambient temperature of 40 + 
2°C, the accessories being at this temperature. 


During this additional test the accessories are subjected 
for 1 min to a force of 75 М, applied through the tip of 
a straight unjointed test finger, test probe 11 of IS 1401 
of the same dimensions as the standard test finger. This 
finger, with an electrical indicator as described above, 
is applied to all places where yielding of the insulating 
material could impair the safety of the accessory, but it 
is not applied to membranes or the like and is applied 
to thin walled knock-out with a force of 10 N. 


During this test, the accessories, with its associated 
mounting means, shall not deform to such an extent 
that dimensions shown in Annex B which ensure safety 
are unduly altered and no live part shall be accessible. 


Each sample of plug or portable socket-outlet is then 
pressed between two flat surfaces with a force of 150 N 
for 5 min, as shown in Fig. 8. Fifteen minutes after 
removal of the test apparatus, the samples shall not show 
such deformation as would result in undue alteration of 
those dimensions shown in Annex B which ensure safety. 


10.2 Parts which are accessible when the accessory is 
wired and mounted as for normal use, with the exception 
of small screws and the like, isolated from live parts, 
for fixing main parts and covers or cover plates of 
socket-outlets, shall be made of insulating material; 
however the covers or cover-plate of fixed socket- 


STEEL PRESSURE PLATE 


%, = 
` ` „ 


Ж COW 


SAMPLE 


STEEL BASE 
b) 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 8 ARRANGEMENT FOR COMPRESSION TEST 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Table 4 Relationship Between Rated Current and Connectable Nominal Cross-Section Areas of Copper 
Conductors 
(Clauses 10.1, 12.2.1, 12.2.5, 12.2.7, 12.2.8, 12.2.11, 13.4, 24.2 and 27.1) 


SI Current and Type of 
No. Accessory 


Nominal Cross- 
Sectional Area 


(1) (2) (3) 
i) 2.5A/6A = 


ii) 2.5A/6A 
2P and 


From 1 up to 2.5 


Inclusive” 


(fixed accessory) 
iii) 2.5A/6A 
2P and -- 
° 
эра“ 
(portable accessory) 
iv) 16A 


NEU 


From 1.5 up to 2x2.5 
Inclusive 


2P+ 
(fixed accessory) 
v) 16A — 
CS 


= JJ 
2p- — 


(portable accessory) 


Rigid (Solid or Stranded) Copper 
Conductors” 


Flexible Copper Conductors 


Diameter of the 
Largest Conductor 


Nominal Cross- 
Sectional Area 


Diameter of the 
Largest Conductor 


Mm mm? Mm 
(4) (5) (6) 
= From 0.75 up to 1.73 

1.5 inclusive 
2.13 From 1 up to 2.5 2:21 
Inclusive? 
From 0.75 up to 1.73 
— 1.5 inclusive 

2.13 

== From 0.75 up to 1.73 


1.5 inclusive 


ana Aa 


D The terminal shall allow the connection of two 1.5 mm? conductors which have a diameter of 1.45 mm. 


2 The use of flexible conductors is permitted. 


outlets and accessible parts of portable socket-outlets 
may be made of metal ifthe requirements given in 10.2.1 
or 10.2.2 are fulfilled. 


10.2.1 Accessible metal parts are protected by 
supplementary insulation made by insulating lining or 
insulating barrier fixed to covers or cover-plates or to 
the body of the accessories, in such a way that the 
insulating linings or insulating barrier cannot be removed 
without being permanently damaged, or so designed that 
they cannot be replaced in an incorrect position and that, 
if they are omitted, the accessories are rendered 
inoperable or manifestly incomplete, and there is no risk 
of accidental contact between live parts and accessible 
metal covers or cover-plates, for example, through their 
fixing screws, even 1f a conductor should come away 
from its terminal, and if precautions are taken in order 
to prevent creepage distances or clearances becoming 
less than the values specified in Table 5. 


In the case of single pole insertion, the requirements 
given in 10.3 apply. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


The above lining or barriers shall comply with the test 
of 17 and 27. 


NOTE — Insulating coating sprayed on the inside or on the 
outside ofthe metal covers or cover plates is not deemed to be an 
insulating lining or barrier for the purpose of this sub-clause. 


10.2.2 Accessible metal covers or cover-plates are 
reliably connected, through, a low resistance 
connection; to the earth during fixing of the cover or 
the cover-plate itself. 


The creepage distances and the clearances between the 
live pins ofa plug when fully inserted and the earthed 
metal cover of a socket-outlet shall comply with items 
b) and g) of Table 5 respectively; in addition, for the 
case of single pole insertion, the requirement given in 
10.3 applies. 


NOTE — Fixing screws or other means are allowed. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the test of 
11.5. 


In the case of single pole insertion, the requirement 
given in 10.3 applies. 


10.3 It shall not be possible to make connection between 


14 


Table 5 Creepage Distance, Clearances and Distances through Insulating Sealing Compound 


IS 1293 : 2019 


(Clauses 10.2.1, 12.3.8, 13.7.2 and 27.1) 


SI Description mm 
No. 
i) Creepage distance: 
a) Between live parts of different polarity 4» 
b) Between live parts and 3 
1) accessible surface of parts of insulating material 3 
2) earthed metal parts including parts of earthing circuit 3 
3) metal frames supporting the main part of flush-type socket-outlets 3 
4) screws or devices for fixing main parts, covers or cover-plates of fixed socket- outlets 3 
5) external assembly screws, other than screws which are on the engagement face of plugs and are isolated 6? 
from the earthing circuit 6? 
c) Between pins of plugs and metal parts connected to them, when fully engaged, and a socket outlet of the 6? 
same system having accessible unearthed metal parts? made according to the most unfavorable construction? 
d) Between the accessible unearthed metal parts? of a socket-outlet and a fully engaged plug of the same system 
having pins and metal parts connected to them made according to the most unfavorable construction? 
e) Between live parts of a socket-outlet (without a plug) or ofa plug and their accessible unearthed or functional 
earthed metal parts? 
1) Сіеагапсе: 
f) between live parts of different polarity? 3 
g) between live parts and 3 
1) accessible surface of parts of insulating material 3 
2) earthed metal parts not mentioned under h) and j) including parts of earthing circuit, 3 
3) metal frames supporting the main part of flush-type socket-outlets 3 
4) screws or devices for fixing main parts, covers or cover-plates of fixed socket-outlets 3 
5) external assembly screws, other than screws which аге on the engagement face of plugs and are isolated 3 
from the earthing circuit 45 
h) between live parts and 6 
1) exclusively earthed metal boxes” with the socket-outlet in the most unfavorable position 6 
2) unearthed metal boxes, without insulating lining with the socket-outlet in the most unfavorable position 3 
3) accessible unearthed or functional earthed metal parts? of socket-outlets and plugs 
j) between livXe parts and the surfaces on which the main part of a socket-outlet 
for surface mounting is mounted 
k) between live parts and the bottom of any conductor recess, if any, in the main part ofa socket-outlet for 
surface mounting 
iii) Distance through insulating sealing compound: 
m) between live parts covered with at least 2 mm of sealing compound and the surface on which the main part of 4» 
a socket-outlet for surface mounting is mounted 2.5 


n) 


between live parts covered with at least 2 mm of sealing compound and the bottom of any conductor recess, if 


any, in the main part of a socket-outlet for surface mounting 


With exception of screws and the like. 


similar lighting sources with external resistor. 


a pin of a plug and a live socket-contact of a socket- 
outlet while any other pin is accessible. 


Compliance is checked by manual test and by means 
of the gauges in Annex B whose dimensions are the 
less favorable for this kind of test; the tolerances of the 
gauges shall be as specified in 9.1. 


For accessories with enclosures or bodies of 
thermoplastic material, the test made at an ambient 
temperature of 35 + 2?C, both the accessory and the 
gauge being at this temperature. 


For socket-outlets with enclosures or bodies of rubber 


15 


This value is reduced to 3 mm for accessories having a rated voltage up to and including 250 V. 


The most unfavorable construction may be checked by means ofa gauge which is as per Annex B to the system concerned 

This value is reduced to 4.5 mm for accessories having a rated voltage up to and including 250 V. 

Exclusively earthed metal boxes are those suitable only for use in installations where earthing of metal boxes is required. 

Clearances between live parts of different polarity are reduced to 1 mm between the lead wires in the pinch of a neon lamp or LED or 


or polyvinyl chloride, the gauge is applied with a force 
of 75 N for 1 min. 


For fixed socket-outlet provided with metal covers or 
cover-plates, a clearance, between a pin and a socket- 
contact, of at least 2 mm is required, when another pin, 
or pins, is (are) in contact with the metal covers or 
cover-plates. 


Compliance will be checked as per the gauge mentioned 
in Annex C. 


NOTE — Single pole insertion shall be prevented by the use of 
at least one of the following means: 


IS 1293 : 2019 


a)  Sufficiently large cover or cover-plate; and 


b) Other means (for example, shutters). 


10.4 External parts of plugs and portable socket outlets, 
with the exception of assembly screws and the like, 
current-carrying and earthing pins, earthing straps and 
metal rings around pins, and accessible metal parts 
fulfilling the requirements of 10.2.1 or 10.2.2 shall be 
of insulating material. 


60 min 


ҮЙ 


Же 


The overall dimensions of rings, if any, around pins 
shall not exceed 8 mm concentric with respect to the 
pin. 


Compliance is checked by the test of 10.2.1 or 10.2.2. 


10.5 Shuttered socket-outlets shall, in addition, be so 
constructed that live parts are not accessible without a 
plug in engagement, with the gauges shown in Fig. 9 
and Fig. 10. 


B' 


RIGID STEEL WIRE 


+0.015 
10 
= +0.03 
3 0 
SECTION C-C 


All dimension in millimetres. 


NOTE — To calibrate the gauge, a push force of 20 N is applied on the steel rigid wire in the direction of its axis; the characteristics 
of the gauge internal spring shall be such that the surface A- A” is brought practically to the same level as the surface B- B’ when this 


force is applied. 


Fic. 9 GAUGE FOR CHECKING NON-ACCESSIBILITY OF LIVE PARTS, THROUGH SHUTTERS 


The gauges shall be applied to the entry holes 
corresponding to the live contacts only and shall not 
touch live parts. 


To ensure this degree of protection, socket-outlets shall 
be so constructed that live contacts are automatically 
screened when the plug is withdrawn. 


Shutters shall be so designed that a plug is inserted 
with the same movement in a socket-outlet with shutters 
as in a socket-outlet without shutters. 


The means for achieving this shall be such that they 
cannot easily be operated by anything other than a plug 
and shall not depend upon parts which are liable to be 
lost. 


An electrical indicator with a voltage between 40 V 
and 50 V included is used to show contact with the 
relevant part. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and for socket- 
outlets with a plug completely withdrawn by applying 
the above gauges as follows. 


The gauge according to Fig. 9 is applied to the entry holes 
corresponding to the live contacts with a force of 20 N. 


The gauge is applied to the shutters in the most 
unfavorable position, successively in three directions, 
to the same place for approximately 5 s in each of the 
three directions. 


During each application the gauge shall not be rotated 
and it shall be applied in such a way that the 20 N force 
is maintained. When moving the gauge from one 
direction to the next, no force is applied but the gauge 
shall not be withdrawn. 


A steel gauge, according to Fig. 10, is then applied with 
a force of 1 N and in three directions, for approximately 
5s in each direction, with independent movements, 
withdrawing the gauge after each movement. 


For socket-outlets with enclosures or bodies of 
thermoplastic material, the test is made at an ambient 
temperature of 35 + 2 °C, both the socket-outlets and 
the gauge being at this temperature. 


10.6 Earthing contacts, if any, of a socket-outlet shall 
be so designed that they cannot be deformed by the 
insertion of a plug to such an extent that safety is 
impaired. 


Compliance is checked by the following test: 


a) Socket-outlet is placed in such a position that 
the socket-contacts are in the vertical 
position. 

b) A test plug, corresponding to the type of 

socket-outlet, is inserted into the socket-outlet 

with a force of 150 N which is applied for 


1 min. 


IS 1293 : 2019 


c) After this test, the socket-outlet shall still 
comply with the requirement of 9. 


10.7 Socket-outlets with or without lid, classified 
[according to 7.2.1 (b)] shall be so constructed that, 
when mounted and wired as in normal use, live parts 
shall not be accessible with a test wire of 1mm in 
diameter (see Fig. 10) 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by applying 
with the gauge of Fig. 10, a force of IN on all accessible 
surfaces in the most unfavorable conditions without a 
plug inserted. With the lid, if any, open. 


For socket-outlets with enclosures or bodies of 
thermoplastic material, the test is made at an ambient 
temperature of 40 + 5?C, both socket-outlets and the 
gauge being at this temperature. 


During this test live parts shall not be accessible by the 
gauge. 


An electrical indicator as described in 10.1 shall be used. 


11 PROVISIONS FOR EARTHING 


11.1 Accessories with earthing contact shall be so 
constructed that, when inserting the plug, the earth 
connection is made before the current carrying contacts 
of the plug become live. 


When withdrawing the plug, the current-carrying pins 
shall separate before the earth connection is broken. 


Compliance is checked by inspection of the 
manufacturing drawings, taking into account the effect 
of tolerances, and by checking the samples against these 
drawings. 


NOTE — Conformity with the dimensional requirements ensures 
compliance with this requirement. 


11.2 Earthing terminals of rewirable accessories shall 
comply with the appropriate requirements of 12. 


They shall be of the same size as the corresponding 
terminals for the supply conductors. 


Earthing terminals of rewirable accessories with 
earthing contact shall be internal. 


Earthing terminals of fixed socket-outlets shall be fixed 
to the base or to a part reliably fixed to the base. 


Earthing contacts of fixed socket-outlets shall be fixed 
to the cover, they shall be automatically and reliably 
connected to the earthing terminal when cover is put in 
place, the contact pieces being silver-plated or having 
a protection no less resistant to corrosion and abrasion. 


This connection shall be ensured under all conditions 
which may occur in normal use, including loosening of 
cover fixing screws, careless mounting of the cover, 
etc. 


IS 1293 : 2019 


К = 0.05 


АП dimensions іп millimetres. 


NOTE — To calibrate the gauge, a push force of | N is applied оп the steel rigid wire in the direction of its axis; the characteristics of the 
gauge internal spring shall be such that the surface A- A’ is brought practically to the same level as the surface B- B’ when this force is 
applied. 


Fic. 10 GAUGE FOR CHECKING NON-ACCESSIBILITY OF LIVE PARTS, THROUGH SHUTTERS AND OF LIVE PARTS OF 
SOCKET-OUTLETS WITH INCREASED PROTECTION 


Except as mentioned above, parts of the earthing circuit 2 For the purpose of the requirements of this sub-clause, screws 
shall be in one piece or shall be reliably connected Big not considered as Pati of contact pieces; 


together by riveting, welding, or the like. 


3 When considering the reliability of the connection between 
parts of the earthing circuit, the effect of possible corrosion is 
NOTES taken into account. 


1 The requirement regarding the connection between earthing 11.3 Accessible metal parts of fixed socket-outlets with 


contacts fixed to a cover and an earthing terminal may be met by earthing contact, which may become live in the event 
the use of a solid pin and a resilient socket-contact. 


ofan insulation fault, shall be permanently and reliably 
connected to the earthing terminal. 


NOTES 


1 This requirement does not apply to the metal cover-plates 
mentioned in 10.2.1. 


2 For the purpose of this requirement, small screws and the 
like, isolated from live parts, for fixing main parts, covers or 
cover-plates, are not considered as accessible parts which may 
become live in the event of an insulation fault. 


3 This requirement means that, for fixed socket-outlet with metal 
enclosures having an external earthing terminal, this terminal 
must be interconnected with the terminal fixed to the base. 


11.4 Socket-outlets having IP code higher than IP X0 
with an enclosure of insulating material, having more 
than one cable inlet, shallbe provided with an internal 
fixed earthing terminal or adequate space for a floating 
terminal allowing the connection of an incoming and 
outgoing conductor for the continuity of the earthing 
circuit, unless the earthing terminal of the socket-outlet 
itselfis so designed that it allows the connection of an 
incoming and an outgoing earthing conductor. 


Floating terminals are not subject to the requirements 
of 12. 


Compliance with the requirement of 11.2 to 11.4 is 
checked by inspection and by the tests of 12. 


Compliance with requirements to ensure adequate space 
for floating terminals is checked by performing a test 
connection using the type of terminal specified by the 
manufacturer. 


11.5 The connection between the earthing terminal and 
accessible metal parts to be connected thereto, shall be 
of low resistance. 


Compliance is checked by the following test: 


A current derived from an a.c source having a no-load 
voltage not exceeding 12 V and equal to 1.5 times rated 
current or 25 A, whichever is the greater, is passed 
between the earthing terminal and each of the accessible 
metal parts in tum. 


The voltage drop between the earthing terminal and 
the accessible metal part is measured and the 
resistance is calculated from the current and this 
voltage drop. 


In no case shall the resistance exceed 0.05 Q. 


NOTE — Care shall be taken that the contact resistance between 
the tip of the measuring probe and the metal part under test does 
not influence the test results. 


11.6 Fixed socket-outlets [see 7.2.4 (b)], for use on 
circuits where electrical noise immunity is desired for 
connected equipment, shall have the earthings socket 
contact and its terminal electrically separated from any 
metal mounting means or other exposed conductive 
parts which may be connected to the protective earthing 
circuit of the installation. 


19 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


12 TERMINALS 


All the tests on terminals, with the exception of the test 
of 12.3.11, 12.3.12 shall be made after the test of 16. 


12.1 General 


12.1.1 Rewirable fixed socket-outlet shall be 
provided with screw-type terminal or with screwless 
terminals. 


Rewirable plugs and rewirable portable socket-outlets 
shall be provided with screw-type terminals. 


If pre-soldered flexible conductors are used, care shall 
be taken that in screw-type terminals the pre-soldered 
area shall be outside the squeezed area when connected 
as for normal use. 


The means for clamping the conductors in the terminals 
shall not serve to fix any other component, although 
they may hold the terminals in place or prevent them 
from turning. 


12.1.2 Non-rewirable accessories shall be provided with 
soldered, welded, crimped or equally effective 
permanent connections; screwed or snap-on 
connections shall not be used. 


Connections made by crimping a pre-soldered flexible 
conductor are not permitted, unless the soldered area 
is outside the crimping area. 


12.1.3 Compliance is checked by inspection and by the 
tests of 12.2 or 12.3, as applicable. 


12.2 Terminals with Screw Clamping for External 
Copper Conductors. 


12.2.1 Accessories shall be provided with terminals 
which shall allow the proper connection of copper 
conductors having nominal cross-sectional areas as 
shown in Table 4. 


The conductor space shall be at least that specified in 
Fig. 2, Fig. 3, Fig. 4 or Fig. 5. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, by measurement 
and by fitting conductors of the smallest and largest 
nominal cross-sectional areas specified 


12.2.2 Terminals with screw clamping shall allow the 
conductor to be connected without special preparation. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


NOTE — The term ‘special preparation’ covers soldering of 
the wires of the conductor, use of cable lugs, formation of 
eyelets, etc, but not the reshaping of the conductor before its 
introduction into the terminal or the twisting of a flexible 
conductor to consolidate the end. 


12.2.3 Terminals with screw clamping shall have 
adequate mechanical strength. 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Screws and nuts for clamping the conductors shall have 
an ISO metric thread or a thread comparable in pitch 
and mechanical strength. 


Screws shall not be of metal which is soft or liable to 
creep, such as zinc or aluminum. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the tests 
of 12.2.6 and 12.2.8. 


12.2.4 Terminals with screw clamping shall be resistant 
to corrosion. 


Terminals, the body of which is made of copper or a 
copper alloy as specified in 26.5 are considered as 
complying with this requirement. 


12.2.5 Terminals with screw clamping shall be so 
designed that they clamp the conductor(s) without 
undue damage to the conductor(s). 


Compliance is checked by the following test: 


The terminal is placed in the test apparatus according 
to Fig. 11 and fitted with rigid (solid or stranded) and/ 
or flexible conductor(s), according to Table 4, first with 
the smallest and then with the largest nominal cross- 
sectional area, the clamping screws or nuts being 
tightened with the torque according to Table 1. 


The length of the test conductor shall be 75 mm longer 
than the height (Н) specified in Table 6. 


The end of the conductor is passed through an 
appropriate bushing in a plate positioned at a height 
(H) below the equipment as given in Table 6. The 
bushing is positioned in a horizontal plane such that its 
centre line describes a circle of 75 mm diameter, 
concentric with the centre of the clamping unit in the 
horizontal (plane); the plate is then rotated at a rate of 
10 + 2 rev/min. 


The distance between the mouth of the clamping unit 
and the upper surface of the bushing shall be within + 
15 mm of the height in Table 6. The bushing may be 
lubricated to prevent binding, twisting, or rotation of 
the insulated conductor. 


A mass as specified in Table 6 is suspended from the 
end of the conductor. The duration of the test is 
approximately 15 min. 


During the test, the conductor shall neither slip out of 
the clamping unit nor break near the clamping unit, 
nor shall the conductor be damaged in such a way as to 
render it unfit for further use. 


The test shall be repeated with rigid solid conductors 
they exist, if the first test has been made with rigid 
stranded conductors. Where rigid stranded conductors 
do not exist, the test may be made with rigid solid 
conductors only. 


12.2.6 Terminals with screw clamping shall be so 
designed that they clamp the conductor reliably and 
between metal surfaces. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the 
following test: 


The terminals are fitted with rigid solid or stranded 
conductors for fixed socket-outlets and flexible 
conductors for plugs and portable socket-outlet of the 
smallest and largest nominal cross-sectional areas 
specified in Table 4, the terminal screws being tightened 
with a torque equal to two third of the torque shown in 
the appropriate column of Table 1. 


If the screw has hexagonal head with a slot, the torque 
applied is equal to two-thirds of the torque shown in 
col 5 of Table 1. 


Each conductor is then subjected to a pull as specified 


Table 6 Values for Flexing Under Mechanical Level Test for Copper Conductors 
(Clauses 12.2.5, 12.3.10 and 12.3.11) 


SI Nominal Cross-sectional Area of Conductor 
No. mm? 
(1) (2) 

1) 0.5 
ii) 0.75 
iil) 1.0 
iv) 1.5 
v) 2:5. 

vi) 4.0 
vii) 6.0 
уш) 10.0 


Diameter of Height H Mass 
Bushing Hole” mm for Conductor 

mm kg 
(3) (4) (5) 

6.5 260 0.3 

6.5 260 0.4 

6.5 260 0.4 

6.5 260 0.4 

9.5 280 0.7 

9.5 280 0.9 

9.5 280 1.4 

9.5 280 2.0 


D If the bushing-hole diameter is not large enough to accommodate the conductor without bindings bushing having the next larger 


hole size may be used. 


20 


BUSHING 


IS 1293 : 2019 


TERMINAL 


NOTE — Care should be taken that the bushing hole is made in a way which ensures that the force extended to the cable is pure pulling 
force and that the transmission of any torque to the connection in the clamping means is avoided. 


Fic. 11 ARRANGEMENT FOR CHECKING DAMAGE TO CONDUCTORS 


in Table 7 applied without jerks for 1 min, in the 
direction of the axis of the conductor space. 


If the clamp is provided for two or three conductors 
the appropriate pull is applied consecutively to each 
conductor. 


During the test, the conductor shall not move noticeably 
in the terminal. 


Table 7 Values for Pull Test for Screw-type Terminals 
(Clause 12.2.6) 


SI Nominal Cross-sectional Area Pull 
No. of Conductors Accepted by the N 
Terminal 
mm? 

(1) (2) (3) 

1) Above 0.75 up to inclusive 40 
ii) Above 1.5 up to 2.5 inclusive 50 
ili) Above 2.5 up to 4 inclusive 50 
iv) Above 4 up to 6 inclusive 60 
v) Above 6 up to 10 inclusive 80 


21 


12.2.7 Terminals with screw clamping shall be so 
designed or placed that neither a rigid solid conductor 
nor a wire of a stranded conductor can slip out while 
the clamping screws or nuts are tightened. 


Compliance is checked by the following test: 


The terminals are fitted with conductors having the 
largest nominal cross-sectional area specified in Table 4. 


The terminals of fixed socket-outlet are checked both 
with rigid solid conductors and with rigid stranded 
conductors. 


The terminals of plugs rand portable socket-outlet are 
checked with flexible conductors. 


Terminals intended for the looping-in of two or three 
conductors are checked, being fitted with the 
permissible number of conductors. 


Terminals are fitted with conductors having the 
composition shown in Table 8. 


Before insertion into the clamping means of the terminal, 
wires of rigid (solid or stranded) conductors are 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Table 8 Composition of Conductors 
(Clause 12.2.7) 


SI Nominal Cross-Sectional Area Number of Wires (n) and Nominal Diameter of Conductors 
No. mm? n* mm 
-ңҺ-Һ----7---------------.. 
Flexible Conductor Rigid Solid Conductor Rigid Stranded 
Conductor 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
D 0.75 24 x 0.20 =. u 
ii) 1.0 32 x 0.20 1x 1.13 7 x 0.65” 
iii) 1.5 30 x 0.25 1 x 1.38 7 x 0.80? 
iv) 2.5 50 x 0.25 1x 1.78 7 x 1.03? 
v) 4.0 56 x 0.30 1 x 2.25 7 x 0.86 
vi) 6.0 84 x 0.30 1x 2.76 7x 1.05 
vii) 10.0 = 1 x 3.57 7x 1.35 


1 ; : oe 
) Nominal diameter values are provisional. 


straightened; rigid stranded conductors may, in 
addition, be twisted to restore them approximately to 
their original shape and flexible conductors are twisted 
in one direction so that there is a uniform twist of one 
complete turn in a length of approximately 20 mm. 


The conductor is inserted into the clamping means of 
the terminals for the minimum distance prescribed, or 
where no distance is prescribed, until it just projects 
from the far side of the terminals and in the position 
most likely to allow the wire to escape. 


The clamping screw is then tightened with a torque 
equal to two third of the torque shown in the appropriate 
column of Table 1. 


For flexible conductors the test is repeated with a new 
conductor which is twisted as before, but in the opposite 
direction. 


After the test, no wire shall have escaped from the 
clamping unit thus reducing creepage distances and 
clearances to values lower than those indicated in 27. 


12.2.8 Terminals with screw clamping shall be so fixed 
or located within the accessory that when the clamping 
screws or nuts are tightened or loosened, the terminals 
shall not work loose from their fixings to accessories. 


NOTES 


1 These requirements do not imply that the terminals are 
designed so that their rotation or displacement is prevented, 
but any movement must be sufficiently limited so as to prevent 
non-compliance with this standard. 


2 The use of sealing compound or resin is considered to be 
sufficient for preventing a terminal from working loose, provided 
that, 
a) the sealing compound or resin is not subject to stress 
during normal use; and 
b) the effectiveness of the sealing compound or resin is not 
impaired by temperatures attained by the terminal under 
the most unfavorable conditions specified in this standard. 


22 


Compliance is checked by inspection, by measurement 
and by the following test: 


A solid rigid copper conductor of the largest nominal 
cross-sectional area specified in Table 3 is placed in the 
terminal. 


Where rigid solid conductors do not exist, the test may 
be made with rigid stranded conductors. 


Before insertion into the clamping means of the terminal, 
wires of rigid (solid or stranded) are straightened; rigid 
stranded conductors may, in addition, be twisted to 
restore them approximately to their original shape. 


The conductor is inserted into the clamping means of 
the terminal for the minimum distance prescribed, or 
where no distance is prescribed, until it just projects 
from the far side of the terminal and in the position 
most likely to allow the wire to escape. 


Screw and nuts are tightened and loosened five times 
by means of a suitable test screwdriver or spanner, the 
torque applied when tightened being equal to the torque 
shown in the appropriate column of Table 1 or in the 
table of the appropriate Fig 2, Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, 
whichever is the greater. 


The conductor is moved each time the screw or nut is 
loosened. 


Where a screw has a hexagonal head with a slot, only 
the test with the screw driver is made with the torque 
values given in col 5 of Table 1. 


During the test, terminals shall not work loose and there 
shall be no damage, such as, breakage of screw or damage 
to the head slots (rendering the use of the appropriate 
screwdriver impossible), threads, washers or stirrups that 
will impair the further use of the terminals. 


NOTES 


1 For mantle terminals the specific nominal diameter is that of 
the slotted stud. 


2 The shape of the blade of the test screwdriver shall suit the 
head of the screw to be tested. 


3 The screw and nuts must not be tightened in jerks. 
12.2.9 Clamping screws or nuts of earthing terminals 
with screw clamping shall be adequately locked against 
accidental loosening and it shall not be possible to loosen 
them without the aid of a tool. 


Compliance is checked by manual test. 


NOTE — In general, the design of terminals shown in Fig. 2 to 
Fig. 5 provide sufficient resiliency to comply with this 
requirement; for other designs, special provisions, such as, the 
use of an adequately resilient part which is not likely to be 
removed inadvertently, may be necessary. 


12.2.10 Earthing terminals with screw clamping shall 
be such that there is no risk of corrosion resulting from 
contact between these parts and the copper of the 
earthing conductor, or any other metal that is in contact 
with these parts. 


The body of earthing terminals shall be of brass or other 
metal no less resistant to corrosion, unless it is a part of 
metal frame or enclosure, when the screw or nut shall be 
of brass or other metal no less resistant to corrosion. 


If the body of the earthing terminals is a part of a 
frame or enclosure of aluminum alloy, precautions 
shall be taken to avoid the risk of corrosion resulting 
from contact between copper and aluminum or its 
alloys. 


Compliance is checked by manual inspection. 


NOTE — Screw or nuts shall be of plated steel withstanding the 
corrosion test is considered to be of a metal no less resistant to 
corrosion than brass. 


12.2.11 For pillar terminals, the distance between the 
clamping screw and the end of the conductor when fully 
inserted, shall be at least that specified in Fig. 3. 


NOTE — The minimum distance between the clamping screw 
and the end of the conductor applies only to pillar terminals in 
which the conductor cannot pass right through. 


For mantle terminals, the distance between the fixed 
part and the end of the conductor when fully inserted, 
shall be at least that specified in Fig. 5. 


Compliance is checked by measurement, after a solid 
conductor of the largest nominal cross-sectional area 
specified in Table 4, has been fully inserted and fully 
clamped. 


12.3 Screwless Terminals for External Copper 
Conductors 


12.3.1 Screwless terminals may be of the type suitable 
for rigid copper conductors only or of the type suitable 
for both rigid and flexible copper conductors. 


23 


IS 1293 : 2019 


For the latter type the tests are carried out with rigid 
conductors first and then repeated with flexible 
conductors. 


NOTE — This sub-clause is not applicable to socket-outlet 
provided with, 


a) 


screwless terminals requiring the fixing of special 
devices to conductors before clamping them in the 
screwless terminals, for example, flat push-on, 
connectors; 


b)  screwless terminals requiring twisting of the conductors, 


for example, those with twisted joints; and 


с) 


screwless terminals providing direct contact to the 
conductors by means of edges or points penetrating the 


insulation. 


12.3.2 Screwless terminals shall be provided with two 
clamping units, each allowing the proper connection 
of rigid or of flexible copper conductors having nominal 
cross-sectional areas as shown in Table 9. 


When two conductors have to be connected, each 
conductor shall be introduced in a separate 
independent clamping unit (not necessarily in separate 
holes). 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by fitting 
conductors of the smallest and largest nominal cross- 
sectional areas specified. 


12.3.3 Screwless terminals shall allow the conductor 
to be connected without special preparation. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


NOTE — The term ‘special preparation’ covers soldering of the 
wires of the conductor, use of terminal ends etc, but not the 
reshaping of the conductor before its introduction into the terminal 
or the twisting of a flexible conductor to consolidate the end. 


12.3.4 Parts of screwless terminals mainly intended for 
carrying current shall be of materials as specified in 26.5. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by chemical 
analysis. 
NOTE — Springs, resilient units, clamping plates and the 


like are not considered as part mainly intended for carrying 
current. 


12.3.5 Screwless terminals shall be so designed that 
they clamp the specified conductors with sufficient 
contact pressure and without undue damage to the 
conductor. 


The conductor shall be clamped between metal surfaces. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the test 
of 12.3.10. 


NOTE — Conductors are considered to be unduly damaged, if 
they show appreciable deep or sharp indentations. 


12.3.6 It shall be clear how the connection and 
disconnection of the conductors is intended to be made. 


The intended disconnection of a conductor shall require 
an operation, other than a pull on the conductor, so 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Table 9 Relationship Between Rated Current and Connectable Cross-Sectional Areas of Copper 
Conductors for Screw less Terminals 
(Clauses 12.3.2 and 12.3.10) 


81 Rated Current Conductors 
No. — — .  —%—Üp >.  N.í- v<n sn 21o->?]Àv  .Üov..- —cg.-— —. 
A Nominal Cross-Sectional Diameter of Largest Rigid Diameter of Largest Flexible 
Areas Conductors Conductors 
mm? mm mm 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) From 6 up to 16 inclusive From 1.5 up to 2.5 2.13 2.21 


inclusive 


that it can be made manually with or without the help 
of a general purpose tool. 


It shall not be possible to confuse the openings for the 
use of a tool to assist the connection or disconnection 
with the opening intended for the conductor. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the test 
of 12.3.10. 


12.3.7 Screwless terminals which are intended to be 
used for the interconnection of two or more conductors 
shall be so designed that, 


a) the clamping of one of the conductors is 
independent of the clamping of the other 
conductor(s); 

b) during the, connection or disconnection, the 
conductors can be connected or disconnected 


either at the same time or separately; 

each conductor shall be introduced in a 
separate clamping unit (not necessarily in 
separate holes); and 


с) 


d) itshall be possible to clamp securely any 
number of conductors up to the maximum as 


designed. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual 
tests with the appropriate conductors (in number and 
size). 


12.3.8 Screwless terminals of fixed socket-outlets shall 
be designed so that adequate insertion of the conductor 
is obvious and over insertion is prevented, if further 
insertion is liable to reduce the creepage distances and/ 
or clearances required in Table 5, or to influence the 
function of the socket-outlets. 


Compliance is checked by inspection only. 


12.3.9 Screwless terminals shall be properly fixed to 
the socket-outlet. 


They shall not work loose when the conductors are 
connected or disconnected during installation. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the tests 
of 12.3.10. 


24 


Covering with sealing compound without other means 
of locking is not sufficient. Self-hardening resins may, 
however, be used to fix terminals which are not subject 
to mechanical stress in normal use. 


12.3.10 Screwless terminals shall withstand the 
mechanical stresses occurring in normal use. 


Compliance is checked by the following test, which is 
carried out with uninsulated conductors on one 
screwless terminals of each sample using a new sample 
for each test. 


The test is carried out with solid copper conductor, 
first with conductors having the largest nominal_cross- 
sectional area, and then with conductors having the 
smallest nominal cross-sectional area specified in 
Table 9. 


Conductors are connected and disconnected five times, 
new conductors being used each time, except for the 
fifth time, when the conductors used for the fourth 
insertion are clamped at the same place. For each 
insertion, the conductors are either pushed as far as 
possible into the terminal or are inserted so that 
adequate connection is obvious. 


After each insertion, the conductor is subjected to pull 
of the value shown in Table 10. The pull is applied 
without jerks, for 1 min in the direction of the 
longitudinal axis of the conductor space. 


During the application of the pull, the conductor shall 
not come out of the screwless terminal. 


The test is then repeated with rigid stranded copper 
conductors having the largest and smallest nominal 
cross- sectional areas specified in 12.3.2. These 
conductors are, however, connected and disconnected 
only once. 


Screwless terminals intended for both rigid and flexible 
conductors shall also be tested with flexible conductors, 
applying five connections and disconnections. 


For fixed socket-outlets with screwless terminals each 
conductor is subjected for 15 min to a circular motion 
10 + 2 rev/min using an apparatus, an example of which 


is shown in Fig. 11. The conductor is subjected to a 
pull having a value shown in Table 6. 


During the test the conductor shall not move noticeably 
in the clamping unit. 


After these tests, neither the terminals nor the clamping 
means shall have worked loose and the conductors shall 
show no deterioration impairing their further use. 


Table 10 Value for Pull Test for Screwless-Type 
Terminals 
(Clause 12.3.10) 


SI Rated Current Pull 
No. A N 
a) (2) (3) 
i) From 6 up to 16 inclusive 30 


12.3.11 Screwless terminals shall withstand the 
electrical and thermal stresses occurring in normal use. 


Compliance is checked by the following test (a) and 
(b), which are carried out on five screwless terminals 
of socket-outlets which have not been used for any other 
test. 


Both tests have to be carried out with new copper 
conductors. 


a) The test is carried out loading the screwless 
terminals for one hour with an alternating 
current, as specified in Table 11, and 
connecting rigid solid conductors 1 m long 
having the cross-sectional area as specified in 
Table 11. 

The test is carried on each clamping unit. 
During the test, the current is not passed 
through the socket-outlet, but only through 
the terminals. 

Immediately after this period the voltage drop 
across each screwless terminal is measured 
with rated current flowing. 

In no case shall the voltage drop exceed 15mV. 


The measurement shall be made across each 
screwless terminals and as near as possible to 
the place of contact. 

If the back connection of the terminals is not 
accessible, the sample may be adequately 
prepared by the manufacturer, care shall be 
taken not to affect the behavior of the 
terminals. 

Care shall be taken that, during the period of 
the test, including the measurements, the 
conductors and the measurement means are 
not moved noticeably. 


b) Screwless terminals already subjected to the 


25 


IS 1293 : 2019 


determination of the voltage drop specified 
in the previous test (a) are tested as follows. 
During the test, a current equal to the test 
current value given in Table 11 is passed. 
The whole test arrangement, including the 
conductors, shall not be moved until the 
measurements of the voltage drop have been 
completed. 
The terminals are subjected to 192 temperature 
cycles, each cycle having a duration of 
approximately | h and being carried out as 
follows, 
1) the current is flowing for approximately 
30 min; and 
2) for a further 30 min approximately no 
current is flowing. 


The voltage drop in each screwless terminal is 
determined as prescribed for the test of (a) and is done 
at the following moments, 


1) after the first 24 temperature cycles and 
after the 192™ temperature cycle; and 

2) Additional measurements shall be carried 
out after any 3 of the following 
temperature cycles: after the 48", 72™, 
96% 120", 144% or 168% temperature 
cycles. 


In no case shall the voltage drop exceed 22.5 mV or 
two times the value measured after the 24% cycle, 
whichever is the smaller. 


After this test, an inspection by the normal or corrected 
vision without additional magnification shall show no 
changes evidently impairing further use, such as, cracks, 
deformations or the like. 


Furthermore, the mechanical strength test according 
to 12.3.10 is repeated and all samples shall withstand 
this test. 


Table 11 Test Current for the Verification of 
Electrical and Thermal Stresses in Normal Use of 
Screwless Terminals 
(Clause 12.3.11) 


SI Rated Current Test Nominal Cross- 
No. A Current Sectional Area 
A of the 
Conductor 
mm! 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
D 6 10.5 1.5 
ii) 16 22 2.5 
NOTE — For socket-outlet having a rated current lower 


than 6A. The test current is proportionally determined and 
the cross-sectional area of the conductors is chosen equal to 
1.5 mm’. 


IS 1293 : 2019 


12.3.12 Screwless terminals shall be so designed that 
the connected rigid solid conductor remains clamped, 
even when the conductor has been deflected during 
normal installation, for example, during mounting in a 
box, and the deflecting stress is transferred to the 
clamping unit. 


Compliance is checked by the following test which is 
made on three samples of socket-outlets which have 
not been used for any other test. 


The test apparatus, the principle of which is shown in 
Fig. 12 A, shall be so constructed that, 


a) aspecified conductor properly inserted into a 
terminal is allowed to be deflected in any of 
the 12 directions differing from each other by 
30? with a tolerance referred to each direction 
by +5°; and 

the starting point can be varied by 10? and 
20? from the original point. 


b) 


NOTE — A reference direction need not be specified. 


The deflection of the conductor from its straight position 
to the testing position shall be effected by means of a 
suitable device applying a specified force to the 
conductor at a certain distance from the terminal. 


The deflection device shall be so designed that, 
1) 


the force is applied .in the direction 
perpendicular to the undeflected conductor; 


2) the deflection is attained without rotation or 
displacement of the conductor within the 
clamping unit; and 

3) the force remains applied while the prescribed 


voltage drop measurement is made. 


Provisions shall be made so that the voltage drop across 
the clamping unit under test can be measured when the 
conductor is connected, as shown, for example, in 
Fig. 12 B. 


The specimen is mounted on the fixed part of the test 
apparatus in such a way that the specified conductor 
inserted into the clamping unit under test can be freely 
deflected. 


To avoid oxidation, the insulation of the wire shall be 
removed immediately before starting the test. 


NOTES 

1 If necessary, the insert conductor may be permanently bent 
around obstacles, so that these do not influence the results of ће 
test. 

2 In some cases, with the exception of the case of guidance for 
the conductors, it may be advisable to remove those parts ofthe 
sample, which do not allow the deflection of the conductor 
corresponding to the force to be applied. 


To avoid oxidation, the insulation shall be removed from 
the conductor immediately before starting the test. 


26 


A clamping unit is fitted as for normal use with a rigid 
solid copper conductor having the smallest nominal 
cross- sectional area specified in Table 12 and is 
submitted to a first test sequence; the same clamping 
unit is submitted to a second test sequence using the 
conductor having the largest nominal cross-sectional 
area, unless the first test sequence has failed. 


The force for deflecting the conductor is specified in 
Table 13, the distance of 100 mm being measured from 
the extremity, of the terminal, including the guidance, 
if any for the conductor, to the point of application of 
the force to the conductor. 


The test is made with current flowing (that is the current 
is not switched on and off during the test); a suitable 
power supply should be used and a suitable resistance 
should be inserted in the circuit so that the current 
variations are kept within + 5 percent during the test. 


Table 12 Nominal Cross-Sectional Areas of Rigid 
Copper Conductors for Deflection Test of 
Screwless Terminals 
(Clause 12.3.12) 


SI Rated Current of | Nominal Cross-Sectional Area 
No. е Socket-outlet of the Conductor 
A mm’ 
First Test Second Test 
Sequence Sequence 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Up to and including 1.0 1.5 
6 
ii) Above 6 up to 1.5 2.5 


including 16 


Table 13 Deflection Test Forces for Screwless 
Terminals 
(Clause 12.3.12) 


SI Nominal Cross-sectional Force for Deflecting 
No. Area of the Conductor the Test Conductor” 
mm? N 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 1.0 0.25 
ii) 1.5 0.5 
ш) 25 1.0 


The forces are chosen so that they stress the conductors 
close to the limit of elasticity. 


A test current equal to the rated current of the socket- 
outlet is passed through the clamping unit under test. 
A force according to Table 13 is passed to the conductor 
inserted in the clamping unit under test in the direction 
of one of the 12 directions shown in Fig. 12 A and the 
voltage drop across this clamping unit is measured. The 
force is then removed. 


The force is then applied successively on each one of 
the remaining 11 direction shown in Fig. 12 A following 
the same test procedure. 


If, for any of the 12 test directions the voltage drop is 
greater than 25 mV, the force is kept applied in this 
direction until the voltage drop is reduced to a value 
below 25 mV, but for not more than 1 min. After the 
voltage drop has reduced a value below 25 mV, the 
force is kept applied in the same direction for a further 
period of 30 s during which period the voltage drop 
shall not have increased. 


The other two samples of socket-outlets of the set are 
tested following the same test procedure, but moving 
the 12 directions of the force so that they differ by 
approximately 10? for each sample. 


If one sample has failed at one of the directions of 
application of the test force, the tests are repeated on 
another set of sample, all of which shall comply with 
these new series of tests. 


13 CONSTRUCTIONS OF FIXED SOCKET- 
OUTLETS 


13.1 Socket contact assemblies shall have sufficient 
resiliency to ensure adequate contact pressure on the 
plug pins. 

Parts of socket contact assemblies, which will be in 
contact with the portion of the pin intended to make 
electrical contact when the plug is fully inserted in the 
socket-outlet shall ensure metallic opposing contacts 
at least on two sides of each pin. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the tests 
of 9, 21 and 22. 


13.2 Socket-contact and pins of socket-outlet shall be 
resistant to corrosion and abrasion. 


Socket contacts and pin(s) of socket-outlets, which are 
made of copper or copper alloy, as specified in 26.5, 
are considered as complying with this requirement. 


Compliance is checked by inspection or by chemical 
analysis, if necessary. 


The pin(s) of socket-outlets shall be constructed in such 
a way that the mechanical strength of the pin(s) does 
not depend on the plastic material. 
NOTE — In certain designs the pin(s) of the accessories are 
hollow and filled with plastic. 
Compliance is checked by inspection and in case of 
doubt by the tests of 14.2 and 21 on a new set of 
specimens without plastic. 


13.3 Insulating linings, barriers and the like shall have 
adequate mechanical strength. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the test 
of 24. 


27 


IS 1293 : 2019 


13.4 Socket-outlet shall be so constructed as to permit, 


a) easy introduction and reliable connection of 
the conductors in the terminals; except for lead 
wires of pilot lights; 


NOTE — Screw terminals as shown in Fig. 2 to Fig. 5 
are considered suitable for reliable connection of the 
conductors. 


easy fixing of the main part to a wall or in a 
mounting box; 


b) 


c) 
d) 


correct positioning of the conductors; and 
adequate space between the underside of the 
main part and the surface on which the main 
part is mounted or between the side of the main 
part and the enclosure (cover or box) flush 
mounted so that, after installation of the 
socket-outlet, the insulation of the conductors 
Is not necessarily pressed against live parts of 
different polarity. 


NOTE — This requirement does not imply that the metal parts 
of the terminals are necessarily protected by insulating barriers 
or insulating shoulders, from contact, due to incorrect 
installation of the terminal metal part with the insulation of the 
conductor. 


For surface type socket-outlet to be mounted on a 
mounting plate a wiring channel may be needed to 
comply with this requirement. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by an 
installation test with conductors of the largest nominal 
cross- sectional area specified, for the relevant terminal 
size, in Table 4. 


In addition, for socket-outlets having screw less 
terminals, the socket-outlets shall be so constructed that 
the connecting and/or disconnecting means ofthe screw 
less terminals cannot be activated by the conductors 
during and after installation of the socket-outlet in a 
box or on a wall. 


NOTES 


1 This requirement does not imply that the connecting and/or 
disconnecting means cannot be touched by the conductors. 


2 This requirement may be met by the placement of the 
connecting and/or disconnecting means and/or the use of 
protective barriers or shoulders placed around the connecting 
and/or disconnecting means. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and in case of 
doubt by the following test. 


The test 1s carried out with a solid copper conductor 
having the smallest nominal cross-sectional area, as 
specified in 12.3.2. 


The conductor is pushed as far as possible into the 
terminal under test or is inserted so that adequate 
connection is obvious. 


A test probe according to IS 1401 test probe 1 is pushed 


IS 1293 : 2019 


DIRECTIONS OF APPLICATION 
OF THE FORCES 


5 


Key 
A = Ammeter 
mV = Millivoltmeter 
Switch 
Specimen 


Clamping unit under test 
Test conductor 
Test conductor, deflected 


O Q + оо N AY 


12A Principle of the 
test apparatus for deflection 
on screwless terminals 


Point of application of the force for deflecting the conductor 
Deflection force (perpendicular to the straight conductor) 


12 B Example of test 
arrangement to measure the 
voltagte drop during deflection 
test on screwless terminals 


FiG. 12 INFORMATION FOR DEFLECTION TEST 


against the connecting or disconnecting means with a 
force of 120 N in the direction opposite to the mounting 
direction as described in Fig. 13 A. 


During the application of the force, the conductor, 
except for lead wires of pilot lights, is subjected to a 
pull of 30N; the pull is applied in one smooth and 
continuous motion, for 1 min in the direction of the 
longitudinal axis of the conductor space. 


During the application of the pull, the conductor shall 
not come out of the screwless terminal. 


The force of 120 N has to be applied before the force 
of 30 N is applied. The force of 30 N is maintained on 
the conductor during the complete test. 


28 


Care shall be taken that the test probe does not 
touch the conductor during the application of the 
forces. 


Where the axis between the application force and the 
axis through the force necessary to operate the 
connecting/disconnecting means deviates by more than 
20°, it is allowed to exert the calculated resulting force 
directly onto the connecting/disconnecting means using 
the test probe; an example 1s shown in Fig. 13 B. 


Ifthe angle is greater than 60? no test is necessary and 
the product is deemed to comply with the requirements 
without further tests. 


Ifit is not possible to exert a force onto the connecting/ 


IS 1293 : 2019 


МОШНТҺКЗ 
DIRECTION 


| DIRECTION FOR THE 
CONDUCTOR PULL 
30 N z MIN 


DIRECTION FÜR THE FORCE APPLIED 
TG THE CONNECTING AND 
DISCONNECTING MEANS {120 М) 


MOUNTING 
DIRECTION 


- DIRECTION FOR THE 
CONDUCTOR PULL 
30 N 1 MIN 


— DIRECTION FOR THE FORCE APPLIED 
TO THE CONNECTING AND 
DISCONNEGTING MEANS (120 N) 


13 A DETERMINATION OF THE DIRECTION OF THE FORCES TO BE APPLIED 


MOUNTING 
DIRECTION 


| DIRECTION FOR THE 
S CONDUCTOR PULL 
N 1 MIN 


DIRECTION FOR THE FORCE APPLIED 
TO THE CONNECTING AND 
DISCONNECTING MEANS (120 М) 


TEST PROBE 


29 


IS 1293 : 2019 


APPLICATION 
FORCE 120 А 


RESULTING 
FORCE 


TEST PROBE 


DIRECTION FOR THE 
CONDUCTOR PULL 
30 N 1 MIN . 


13 B Test Set UP 


Fic. 13 VERIFICATION OF THE REQUIREMENTS 


disconnecting device, the product is deemed to comply 
with the requirements without further tests. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by an 
installation test with conductors of the largest nominal 
cross-sectional area specified in Table 4. 


13.5 Socket-outlet shall be so designed that full 
engagement of associated plugs is not prevented by any 
projection from their engagement face. 


Compliance is checked by determining that the gap 
between the engagement face of the socket-outlet and 
the plug does not exceed 1 mm when the plug is inserted 
into the socket-outlet as far as it will go. 


13.6 If covers are provided with bushings for the entry 
holes for the pins, it shall not be possible to remove 
them from the outside or for them to become detached 
inadvertently from the inside, when the cover is 
removed. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and, if necessary, 
by manual test. 


13.7 Covers, or cover-plates or parts of them, which 
are intended to ensure protection against electric shock, 
shall be held in place at two or more points by effective 
fixings. 


Covers, cover-plates or parts of them may be fixed by 
means of a single fixing, for example, by a screw, 
provided that they are located by another means (for 
example, by a shoulder). 


Where the fixing of covers or cover-plates of socket- 


30 


outlets serve to fix the main part, there shall be means 
to maintain the base in position, even after removal of 
the covers or cover-plates. 


Compliance is checked according to 13.7.1, 13.7.2 
or 13.7.3. 


NOTES 


1 It is recommended that the fixings of covers or cover-plates 
be captive. The use of tight fixing washers of cardboard or the 
like is deemed to be an adequate method for securing screws 
intended to be captive. 


2 Non-earthed metal parts separated from live parts in such a 
way that creepage distance and clearances have the values 
specified in Table 5, are not considered as accessible if the 
requirements of this sub-clause are met. 


13.7.1 For covers or cover-plates whose fixing are of 
the screw-type: 


By inspection only. 


13.7.2 For covers or cover-plates where fixing is not 
dependent on screws and where removal is obtained by 
applying a force in a direction approximately 
perpendicular to the mounting/supporting surface (see 
Table 14): 


a) When their removal may give access, with the 
standard test finger, to live parts by the test 
of 24.14; 

b) When their removal may give access, with the 


standard test finger, to non-earthed metal parts 
separated from live parts in such a way that 
creepage distance and clearances have the 
values specified in Table 5 by the tests 
of 24.15; and 


c) When their removal may give access, with the 
standard test finger, only to, 


1) parts of insulating material, or 
2) earthed metal parts, or 


3) metal parts separated from live parts in 
such a way that creepage distances and 
clearances have twice the values specified 
in Table 5, or 

4) live parts of safety extra-low voltage 
(SELV) circuits not greater than 25 V a.c. 
by the tests of 24.16. 


13.7.3 For covers or cover-plates whose fixing is not 
dependent on screws and where removal is obtained by 
using a tool, in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
instructions given in an instruction sheet or other 
documentation: by the same tests of 13.7.2 except that 
the covers or cover-plates or parts of them need not 
come out when applying a force not exceeding 120 N 
in directions perpendicular to the mounting/supporting 
surface. 


13.8 A cover-plate intended for a socket-outlet with 
earthing contact shall not be interchangeable with a 
cover-plate intended for a socket-outlet without 
earthing contact, if such interchange results in a change 
of the classification of the socket-outlet according 
to 7.1.3. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by an 
installation test. 


NOTE — This requirement applies to accessories of the same 
manufacturer. 


13.9 surface-type socket-outlets shall be so constructed 


IS 1293 : 2019 


that, when they are mounted and wired as for normal 
use, there are no free openings in the enclosures other 
than the entry openings for the pins of the plug or other 
openings for contacts, for example locking devices, etc. 


Drain holes, small gaps between enclosures or boxes 
and conduits, cables, or earthing contacts, if any, or 
between enclosures or boxes and grommets or 
membranes and knockouts are neglected provided they 
do not compromise the declared IP rating. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by an 
installation test with conductors of the smallest nominal 
cross- sectional area specified in Table 14. 


13.10 Screws or other means for mounting the socket- 
outlet on a surface in a box or enclosure shall be easily 
accessible from the front. These means shall not serve 
any other fixing purpose. 


13.11 Multiple socket-outlets with a common base 
shall be provided with fixed links for the 
interconnection of the contacts in parallel. The fixing 
of these links shall be independent from the connection 
of the supply wires. 


13.12 Multiple socket-outlets comprising separate bases 
shall be so designed that the correct position of each 
base is ensured. The fixing of each base shall be 
independent of the fixing of the combination to the 
mounting surface. 


Compliance with the requirements of 13.10 to 13.12 is 
checked by inspection. 


13.13 The mounting plate of surface-type socket-outlets 
shall have adequate mechanical strength. 


Table 14 Forces to be applied to Covers, Cover-Plates or Actuating Members Whose Fixing is Not 
Dependent on Screws 
(Clause 13.7.2) 


51 Accessibility with the Standard Test Tests Force to be Applied 
No. Finger after Removal of Covers, According N 
Cover-Plates or Parts of them to Sub- ~ 
clauses 
Number of Socket-outlets Number of Socket-outlets 
Complying with 24.17 and 24.18 Complying with 24.17 and 24.18 
which which 
2—— — nN „ее sn. 
Shall not Come off Shall Come off Shall not Come off Shall Come off 
a) 2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) To live parts 24.14 40 120 80 120 
ii) To non-earthed metal parts separated 24.15 10 120 20 120 
from live parts by creepage distances 
and clearances according to Table 5 
ii) To insulating parts, earthed metal 24.16 10 120 10 120 


parts, live parts of SELV ?25 V a.c. or 
metal parts separated from live parts 
by creepage distance twice those 
according to Table 5 


31 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Compliance is checked by inspection after the test of 
13.4 and by the test of 24.3. 


13.14 Socket-outlet shall withstand the lateral strain 
imposed by equipment likely to be introduced into them. 


For socket-outlets having ratings up to and including 
16 A and 250 V, compliance is checked by means ofthe 
device shown in Fig. 13. 


Compliance is checked by means of the device shown 
in Fig. 14. 


Each specimen is mounted on a vertical surface with 
the plane through the socket-contacts horizontal. The 
device is then fully engaged and weight hung on it such 
that the force exerted is 5N. 


The device is removed after 1 min and the socket- outlet 
Is turned through 90? on the mounting surface. The test 
is made four times, the socket-outlet being turned 
through 90? after each engagement. 


During the tests, the device shall not become disengaged 
from the socket-outlet. 


After the tests, the socket-outlet shall show no damage 
within the meaning of this standard; in particular, they 
shall comply with the requirements of 22. 


13.15 Socket-outlet shall not be an integral part of lamp 
holders. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


13.16 Surface-type socket-outlets having an IP code 
higher than IP20 shall be according to their IP 
classification when fitted with conduits or with sheathed 
cables as for normal use and without a plug in 
engagement. 


Surface-type socket-outlet having a degree of protection 


STEEL 


from IPX4 to IPX6 shall have provisions for opening a 
drain hole. If a socket outlet has a drain hole, it shall 
not be less than 5 mm in diameter, or 20 mm? in area 
with a width and a length of at least 3 mm. 


Ifthe position ofthe lid is such, that only one mounting 
position is possible, the drain hole shall be effective in 
that position. Alternatively the drain hole shall be 
effective in at least two positions of the socket-outlet 
when this is mounted on a vertical wall, one of these 
with the conductors entering at the top and the other 
with the conductors entering at the bottom. 


Lid springs, if any, shall be of corrosion resistant 
material, such as bronze or stainless steel. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, by measurement 
and by the test of 16.2. 


NOTES 


1 Adequate enclosure when the plug is not in position may be 
achieved by means of a lid. 


2 This requirement does not imply that the lid, if any, or the 
entry openings for the pins need be closed when the plug is not 
in position, provided that socket-outlets pass the relevant test 
for the verification of the ingress of water. 


3 A drain hole in the back of the enclosure is deemed to be 
effective only, if the design of the enclosure ensure a clearance 
or at least 5 mm from the mounting surface or provided a drainage 
channel of at least the size specified. 


13.17 Earthing pins shall have adequate mechanical 
strength. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and, for pins 
which are not solid, by the test of 14.2 which is made 
after the tests of 21. 


13.18 Earthing contacts, phase contacts and neutral 
contacts shall be locked against rotation. 


When the product is ready for the wiring it shall not be 
possible to remove the earthing contacts, phase contacts 
and neutral contact without the use of a tool. 


NOTES 


- 


1 The dimensions а and b should be chosen according to the appropriate standard sheets. 


2 Dimensions and arrangement of pins in compliance with standard sheets. 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 14 DEvICE FOR CHECKING THE RESISTANCE TO LATERAL STRAIN 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual 
test. 


13.19 Metal strips of the earthing circuit shall have no 
burrs which might damage the insulation of the supply 
conductors. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


13.20 Socket-outlet to be installed in a box shall be so 
designed that the conductor ends can be prepared after 
the box is mounted in position, but before the socket- 
outlet is fitted in the box. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


13.21 Inlet opening shall allow the introduction of the 
conduit or the sheath of the cable so as to afford 
complete mechanical protection. 


Surface-type socket-outlets shall be so constructed that 
the conduit or sheath of the cable can enter at least 
1 mm into the enclosure. 


In surface-type socket-outlet the inlet opening for 
conduit entries, or at least two of them if there are more 
than one, shall be capable of accepting conduit size of 
16, 20, 25 or 32 according to IS 14763 or a combination 
of at least two of any of these sizes. 


In surface type socket outlets, the inlet opening for cable 
entries shall preferably be capable of accepting cables 
having the dimensions specified in Table 15 or be as to 
specify by the manufacturer. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by 
measurement. 


NOTE — Inlet openings of adequate size may also be obtained 
by the use of knock-outs or of suitable insertion pieces. 


13.22 Membranes (grommets) in inlet openings shall be 
reliably fixed and shall not be displaced by the mechanical 
and thermal stresses occurring in normal use. 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 
Membranes are tested when assembled in the accessory. 


First the accessories are fitted with membranes which 
have been subjected to the treatment specified in 16.1. 


The accessories are then placed for 2h in a heating 
cabinet as described in 16.1, the temperature being 
maintained at 40 + 2°C. 


Immediately after this period, a force of 30N is applied 
for 5s to various parts of the membranes by means of 
the tip of a straight unjointed test finger (Test probe 11 
of IS 1401). 


During these tests, the membranes shall not deform to 
such an extent that live parts become accessible. 


For membranes likely to be subjected to an axial pull in 
normal use, an axial pull of 30 N is applied for 5 s. 


During this test, the membranes shall not come out. 


The test is then repeated with membranes which have 
not been subjected to any treatment. 


13.23 It is recommended that membranes in inlet 
openings be so designed and made of such material that 
the introduction of the cables into the accessory is 
permitted when the ambient temperature is low. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


The accessories are fitted with membranes which have 
not been subjected to ageing treatment, those without 
opening being suitably pierced. 


The accessories are then kept, for 2 h, in a freezer at a 
temperature of —15 + 2?C. 


After this period, the accessories are removed from the 
freezer and immediately afterwards, while the 
accessories are still cold, it shall be possible to introduce, 
without undue force, cables of the heaviest type through 
the membranes. 


Table 15 External Cable Dimension Limits for Surface Type Socket-Outlets 
(Clause 13.21) 


SI Rated Current Nominal Cross- Number of Limits of External Dimensions of 
No. A Sectional Areas of Conductors Cables 
Conductors mm 
тт? MM 
Minimum Maximum 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) 6 1 up to and including 2 13.5 
25 3 64 14.5 
1.5 up to and 2 13.5 
including 2.5 Қ 74 14.5 
ii) 16 1.5 up to and 4 18.0 
including 4 5 è 19.5 


NOTE — The limits of external dimensions of cables specified are based on IS 694 and IS 9968 (Part 1). 


IS 1293 : 2019 


After the tests in 13.22 and 13.23, the membranes shall 
show no harmful deformation, cracks or similar damage 
which would lead to non-compliance with this standard. 


NOTE — The compliance with this recommendation is required 
due to installation practices in cold conditions. 


14 CONSTRUCTION OF PLUGS AND 
PORTABLE SOCKET-OUTLET 


14.1 Non-rewirable portable accessories shall be such 
that, 


a) the flexible cable cannot be separated from 
the accessory without making it permanently 
useless; and 

b) the accessory cannot be opened by hand or by 
using a general purpose tool, for example a 
screwdriver used as such. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and manual test 
and by the test of 24.14.3. 


NOTE — An accessory is considered to be permanently useless, 
when, for re-assembling the accessory, parts or materials other 
than the original are to be used. 


14.2 Pins of portable accessories shall have adequate 
mechanical strength. 


Compliance is checked by the tests of 24 and, for pins 
which are not solid, by the following test which is made 
after the test of 21. 


A force of 100 N is exerted on the pin, which is 
supported as shown in Fig. 15, for 1 min in a direction 


D, 


WEIGHT 


perpendicular to the axis of the pin, by means of a steel 
rod having a diameter of 4.8 mm, the axis of which is 
also perpendicular to the axis of the pin. 


During the application of the force, the reduction of 
the dimension of the pin at the point where the force is 
applied shall not exceed 0.15 mm. 


After removal of the rod, the dimension ofthe pin shall 
not have changed by more than 0.06 mm in any 
direction. 


14.3 Pins and contact(s) of portable accessories shall 
be, 


a) locked against rotation; 

b) not removable without dismantling the plug; 
and 

c) adequately fixed in the body ofthe plug when 
the plug is wired and assembled as for normal 
use. 


Itshall not be possible to arrange the earthing or neutral 
pins or contacts of plugs in an incorrect position. 


The pin(s) of portable accessories shall be constructed 
in such a way that the mechanical strength ofthe pin(s) 
does not depend on the plastic material. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, by manual test 
and in case of doubt by the test of 14.2 and 21 on a 
new set of specimens without plastic. 


All exposed surfaces of plug pin(s) shall be smooth 
and free from burrs or sharp edges and other 


(24.8 mm 


Fic. 15 DEVICE FoR TESTING NON-SOLID PINS 


irregularities which could cause damage or excessive 
wear to corresponding socket contacts or shutters. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual 
test. 


NOTE — In certain designs the pin(s) of the accessories are 
hollow and filled with plastic 


14.4 Earthing contacts, phase contacts and neutral 
contacts of portable socket-outlets shall be locked 
against rotation and removable only with the aid of a 
tool, after dismantling the socket-outlet. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, by manual test 
and for single portable socket-outlets by the test of 24.2. 


14.5 Socket-contact assemblies shall have sufficient 
resiliency to ensure adequate contact pressure on plug 
pins. 


Parts of socket-contact assemblies, which will be in 
contact with the portion of the pin intended to make 
electrical contact when the plug is fully inserted in the 
socket-outlet, 


a) shall not be of insulating material except 
ceramic, or other material with no less suitable 
characteristics; and 

b) shallensure metallic contacts at least on two 


opposing sides of each pin. 


The contact pressure of the contact tube shall not 
depend on soldered connection only. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the tests 
of 9, 21 and 22. 


14.6 Pin and socket-contacts shall be resistant to 
corrosion and abrasion. 


Socket contacts and pin(s) of socket-outlets, which are 
made of copper or copper alloy, as specified in 26.5, 
are considered as complying with this requirement. 


Compliance is checked by inspection or by chemical 
analysis, if necessary. 


14.7 The enclosure of rewirable portable accessories 
shall completely enclose the terminals and the ends of 
flexible cable. 


The construction shall be such that the conductors can 
be properly connected and that, when the accessory is 
wired and assembled as for normal use, there is no risk 
that, 


a) pressing the cores together cause damage to 
the conductors insulation likely to result in a 
breakdown of the insulation; 

b) а соге, the conductor of which is connected 

to a live terminal, is necessarily pressed against 


accessible metal parts; and 


35 


IS 1293 : 2019 


a core, the conductor of which is connected 
to the earthing terminal, is necessarily pressed 
against live parts. 


с) 


14.8 Rewirable portable accessories shall be so 
designed in such a way that terminal screws or nuts 
cannot become loose and fall out of position in such a 
way that they establish an electrical connection between 
live parts and the earthing terminal or metal parts 
connected to the earthing terminal. 


Compliance with the requirements of 14.7 and 14.8 is 
checked by inspection and by manual test. 


14.9 Rewirable portable accessories with earthing 
contact shall be designed with ample space for slack of 
the earthing conductor in such a way that, if the strain 
relief is rendered inoperative, the connection of the 
earthing conductor is subjected to strain after the 
connections of the current-carrying conductors and that, 
in case of excessive stresses, the earthing conductor 
will break after the current-carrying conductors. 


Compliance is checked by the following test: 


The current carrying conductor of a flexible cable is 
connected to the accessory in such a way that the current- 
carrying conductors are led from the strain relief to the 
corresponding terminals along the shortest possible path. 
After they are correctly connected, the core of the 
earthing conductor is led to its terminal and cut off at a 
distance 8 mm longer than necessary when using the 
shortest possible path for its correct connection. 


The earthing conductor is then connected to the 
terminal. It must be then possible to house the loop, 
which is formed by the earthing conductor owing to its 
surplus length when the accessory is assembled 
correctly. 


In non-rewirable non-moulded on accessories with 
earthing contact the length of the conductors between 
the terminations and the cord anchorage shall be so 
adjusted that the current-carrying conductors will be 
stressed before the earthing conductors, if the flexible 
cable slips in its anchorage. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


14.10 Terminals of rewirable portable accessories and 
terminations of non-rewirable portable accessories shall 
be so located or shielded in such a way that the loose 
wires form a conductor in the accessory will not present 
a risk of electric shock. 


For non-rewirable moulded-on portable accessories, 
means shall be provided to prevent loose wires of a 
conductor from reducing the minimum isolation 
distance requirements between such wires and all 
accessible external surfaces of the accessory, with the 
exception of the engagement face of a plug, 


IS 1293 : 2019 


a) forrewirable accessories, the test of 14.10.1; 

b) for non-rewirable  non-moulded-on 
accessories, the test of 14.10.2; and 

c) fornon-rewirable moulded-on accessories, by 


verification and inspection according to 
14.10.3. 


14.10.1 A 6 mm length of insulation is removed from 
the end of a flexible conductor, having the minimum 
nominal cross-sectional area specified in Table 4. One 
wire ofthe flexible conductor is left free and remaining 
wires are fully inserted into and clamped in the terminal, 
as for normal use. 


The free wire is bent, without tearing the insulation 
back, in every possible direction, but without making 
sharp bends around barriers. 


The free wire ofa conductor connected to a live terminal 
shall not touch any accessible metal part or be able to 
emerge from the enclosure when the accessory has been 
assembled. 


The free wire of a conductor connected to an earthing 
terminal shall not touch a live part. 


If necessary, the test is repeated with the free wire in 
another position. 


NOTE — The prohibition against making sharp bends around 
barriers does not imply that the free wire has to be kept straight 
during the test. Sharp bends are, moreover, made if it is 
considered likely that such bends may occur during the normal 
assembly ofthe plug or portable socket-outlet, for example when 
a cover is pushed on. 


14.10.2 A length of insulation equivalent to the 
maximum designed stripping length declared by the 
manufacturer plus 2 mm is removed from the end of a 
flexible conductor having the cross-sectional area as 
fitted. One wire of the flexible conductor is left free in 
the worst position whilst the remaining wires are 
terminated in a manner as used in the construction of 
the accessory. 


The free wire is bent, without tearing the insulation 
back, in every possible direction but without making 
sharp bends around barriers. 


The free wire of a conductor connected to a live 
termination shall not touch any accessible metal part or 
reduce the creepage distance and clearance through any 
constructional gap below 1.5 mm to the external 
surface. 


The free wire of a conductor connected to an earth 
termination shall not touch any live part. 


NOTE — The prohibition against making sharp bends around 
barriers does not imply that the free wire has to be kept straight 
during the test. Sharp bends are, moreover, made if it is 
considered likely that such bends may occur during the normal 
assembly ofthe plug or portable socket-outlet, for example, when 
a cover is pushed on. 


36 


14.10.3 Non-rewirable moulded-on accessories shall 
be inspected to verify that there are means to prevent 
stray wires of the conductor and/or live parts reducing 
the minimum distance through insulation to the external 
accessible surface below 1.5 mm (with the exception 
of the engagement face of plugs). 


NOTE — The verification of ‘means’ may require the checking 
of the product construction or assembly method. 


14.11 For rewirable portable accessories, 


a) itshall be clear how the relief from strain and 
the prevention of twisting is intended to be 
effected; 

the cord anchorage, or at least part of it, shall 
be integral with or securely fixed to one ofthe 
component parts of the plug or portable 


socket-outlet; 


b) 


make-shift methods, such as, tying the flexible 
cable or tying the ends with string, shall not 
be used; 

d) cord anchorages shall be suitable for the 
different types of flexible cable which may be 
connected to it; 

е) screws, if any, which have to be operated to 
clamp the flexible cable, shall not serve to fix 


any other component; 


NOTE — This does not exclude a cover serving to retain 
the flexible cable in position in the cord anchorage 
provided the cable remains in place in the accessory when 
the cover is removed. 


cord anchorages shall be of insulating material 
or be provided with an insulating lining fixed 
to the metal parts; and 

metal parts of the cord anchorage, including 
clamping screws, shall be insulated from the 
earthing circuit. 


g) 


Compliance is checked by inspection and, is applicable, 
by manual test. 


14.12 For rewirable portable accessories and non- 
rewirable non-moulded on portable accessories it shall 
not be possible to remove covers, cover-plates or parts 
of them intended to ensure protection against electric 
shock without the use of a tool. 


Compliance is checked as follows: 


a) For covers, cover-plates or parts of them 
whose fixing is of screw-type, compliance is 
checked by inspection; and 

b) For covers, cover-plates or parts of them 


whose fixing is not dependent on screws and 
whose removal may give access to live parts, 
compliance is checked by the tests of 24.14. 


14.13 If covers of portable socket-outlets are provided 
with bushings for the entry holes for the pins, these 
bushes shall not be allowed to be removed from the 
outside or to become detached inadvertently from the 
inside, when the cover is removed. 


14.14 Screws intended to allow the access to the interior 
of the accessory shall be captive. 
NOTE — The use of tight fitting washers of cardboard or the 


like is deemed to be an adequate method for securing screws 
which must be captive. 


Compliance with the requirements of 14.13 and 14.14 
is checked by inspection. 


14.15 The engagement face of plugs shall have no 
projections other than the pins, when the plug is wired 
and assembled as for normal use. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, after fitting 
conductors of the largest nominal cross-sectional area 
specified in Table 4. 


NOTE — The earthing contacts are not considered as 
projections from the engagements face. 


14.16 Portable socket-outlet shall be so designed that 
full engagement of associated plugs is not prevented 
by any projection from their engagement face. 


Compliance is checked by the test of 13.5. 


14.17 Portable accessories of IP code higher than IP20 
shall be enclosed according to their IP classification 
when they are fitted with cables. 


Plugs having IP code higher than IP20, with the 
exception of the engagement face, shall be adequately 
enclosed when fitted with a flexible cable as for normal 
use. 


Portable socket-outlets having IP code higher than IP20, 
shall remain totally enclosed when fitted with a flexible 
cable as for normal use and even without a plug in 
engagement. 


Lid springs, if any, shall be of corrosion resistant 
material, such as, bronze or stainless steel. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the test 
of 16.2. 


NOTES 


1 Adequate enclosure when the plug is not in position may be 
achieved by means of a lid. 


2 This requirement does not imply that the lid, if any, or the 
entry openings for the pins need be close when the plug is not in 
position, provided that the accessory passes the relevant tests 
for the verification of the ingress of water. 


14.18 Portable socket-outlets having means for 
suspension from a wall or other mounting surfaces shall 
be so designed that the suspension means do not allow 
access to live parts. 


There shall be no free openings between the space 


37 


IS 1293 : 2019 


intended for the suspension means fixed to the wall, or 
other mounting surface and live parts. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the tests 
of 24.11, 24.12 and 24.13. 


14.19 Combinations of portable accessories and 
switches and circuit-breakers or other protective 
devices shall comply with the relevant individual Indian 
Standards, if a relevant combined product standard does 
not exist. 


Compliance is checked by testing the components 
according to relevant Indian Standards if any. 


14.20 Portable accessories shall not be an integral part 
of lamp holders. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


14.21 Plugs classified exclusively as plugs for 
equipment of Class II may be rewirable or non- 
rewirable type. 


If they are incorporated in a cord set, this shall be 
provided with a connector for equipment of Class II. 


If they are incorporated in a cord extension set, this 
shall be provided with a portable socket-outlet for 
equipment of Class II. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


NOTE — Cord extension sets for equipment of class II are not 
allowed. 


14.22 Components, such as, switches and fuses, 
incorporated in accessories shall comply with the 
relevant Indian Standard, if any, as far as it reasonably 
applies. 


Components incorporated in portable accessories shall 
be so rated, or so protected, that overloading of either 
the component or the plug or the socket-outlet portion 
cannot occur in normal use. 


Requirements for switches incorporated in portable 
accessories are detailed in Annex D. 


For portable socket-outlets and rewirable plugs the 
incorporated over current protective device in the 
accessory shall have a rated current equal to or less 
than the rated current of the accessory. 


Any other component(s), such as switches or control 
devices, shall have a rated current not less than, 


a) 
b) 


the rated current of the accessory; or 


the rated current of the incorporated over 
current protective device, if any. 


For components having different rated currents for 
resistive and inductive loads, the rated current to be 
referred to 1s the rated current for the resistive load. 


For non-rewirable plugs, any other incorporated 


IS 1293 : 2019 
component(s), such as switches or control devices, shall 
have arated current not less than, 


a) the test current for the combination of the 
accessory and the cable as indicated in 
Table 16, for 21; or 

b) the rated current of the incorporated over 
current protective device, if any. 


Any incorporated component(s) shall have a rated 
voltage not less than the rated voltage of the accessory. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and, if necessary, 
by testing the component according to the relevant 
Indian Standard, if any. 


NOTE — Examples of over current protective devices are: fuses, 
thermal or current cut-outs, MCBs (Miniature Circuit Breakers), 
RCBOs (Residual Current operated circuit breaker with integral 
over current protection). 


14.23 Ifa plug is an integral part of plug-in equipment, 
that equipment shall not cause overheating of the pins 
or impose undue strain on fixed socket-outlets. 


Plugs having a rating above 16 A and 250 V shall not 
be an integral part of other equipment. 


For two-pole plugs, with or without earthing contact, 
having ratings up to and including 10A and 250 V 
compliance is checked by the tests of 14.23.1 and 14.23.2. 


NOTE — Examples of equipments with plugs which are an 
integral part are razors and lamps with rechargeable batteries, 
plug-in transformers, etc. 


14.23.1 The plug of the equipment is inserted into a 
fixed socket-outlet complying with this standard, the 
socket-outlet being connected to a supply voltage equal 
to 1.1 times the highest rated voltage of the equipment. 


After 1h, the temperature-rise of the pin shall not exceed 
45° С. 


14.23.2 The equipment is then inserted into a fixed 
socket-outlet complying with this standard, the 
socket-outlet being pivoted about a horizontal axis 
through the axis of the live socket-contacts at a distance 
of 8 mm behind the engagement face of the socket- 


Table 16 Relationship Between Ratings of Accessories, Nominal Cross-Sectional Areas of Test 
Conductors and Test Currents for the Tests of Temperature-Rise and Normal Operation 
(Clauses 14.22, 19.1 and 23.3) 


SI Rating of Rewritable Rewritable Non-rewritable Portable Non- rewritable Plugs 
No. Accessory Fixed Portable Socket-Outlets 
Accessories Accessories Е р : i | 
Test Current A Test Current А Nominal Cross Test Current A Nominal Test Current A 
| | | I Sectional Area Cross | _ 
Clause Clause Clause Clause mnm Clause Clause oed Clause Clause 
19 21 19 21 19 21 2 19 21 
mm 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) 
i) 2.5А = = = Tinsel 1 1 
250 V 0.5 2.5 2.5 
0.75 4 2.5 
1 4 2.5 
П) бА 0.75 10 10 Tinsel 1 1 
250 V 16 10 14 10 1 12 10 0.5 2.5 2.5 
1.5 16 10 0.75 10 10 
1 12 10 
ii) 16A Tinsel 1 1 
250 V 22 16 20 16 1? 16 16 0.5 2.5 2.5 
1.5 16 16 0.75 10 10 
1 12 12 
19 16 16 
1:5 16 16 
NOTES 


1Tinsel cords and flexible cables having a nominal cross-sectional area of 0.5 mm? are allowed in lengths up to 2 m only. 

2 Plugs and connectors incorporated in cord sets are tested as specified in the respective relevant standard (this standard for 
plugs and the IS/IEC 60320 series for connectors), each accessory being tested independently. 

3 The test currents for accessories having other rated currents are determined by interpolation between the next lower and 
the next higher standard ratings except for 19 test currents for rewirable portable accessories, which are obtained as follows: 


a) for/,<10A, test current = 1.41; 
b) for > 10 A, test current = 1.25 1. 


D Flexible cables having a cross-sectional area of 1 mm? are allowed with a length up to 2 m only. 


outlet and parallel to this engagement face. 


The additional torque which has to be applied to the 
socket-outlet to maintain the engagement face in the 
vertical plane shall not exceed 0.25 Nm. 


14.24 Plugs shall be shaped in such a way and/or made 
of such a material that they can easily be withdrawn by 
hand from the relevant socket-outlet. 


In addition the gripping surfaces shall be so designed 
that the plug can be withdrawn without having to pull 
on the flexible cable. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and in case of 
doubt by test. 


NOTE — Examples of possible tests are given in Annex E. 


14.25 Membranes in inlet opening shall meet the 
requirements of 13.22 and 13.23. 


14.26 Rewirable portable socket-outlets which can be 
assembled and wired for normal use after their rear part 
has been fixed onto a surface shall comply both with 
the requirements for portable socket-outlets and with 
the following additional requirements for surface fixed 
socket-outlets: 


a) Provision for earthing (see 11.2, 11.3 and 11.6); 

b) Terminals and terminations (see 12.2.1); 

c) Construction of fixed socket-outlets (see 13); 

d) Resistance to ageing, protection provided by 
enclosures, and resistance to humidity 
(see 16.2.1, 16.2.2); 

e) Temperature rise (see 19); 

f) Mechanical strength (see 24); 

g) Resistance to heat (see 25); 

h) Creepage distances, clearances and distances 
through sealing compound (see 27); and 

j) Resistance of insulating material to abnormal 


heat, to fire and to tracking (see 28.1.1), glow 
wire test. 


15 INTERLOCKED SOCKET-OUTLETS 


Socket-outlet interlocked with a switch shall be so 
constructed that a plug cannot be inserted into or 
completely withdrawn from the socket-outlet while the 
socket- contacts are live, and the socket-contacts of 
the socket- outlet cannot be made live until a plug is 
almost completely in engagement. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual test. 


NOTE — Other test requirements are specified in IS 4160. 


16 RESISTANCE TO AGEING, TO HARMFUL 
INGRESS OF WATER AND TO HUMIDITY 


16.1 Resistance to Ageing 


Accessories shall be resistant to ageing. 


39 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Parts intended for decorative purpose only, such as, 
certain lids, shall be removed, if possible and these parts 
are not subjected to the test. 


Compliance is checked by the following test: 


Accessories, mounted as for normal use, are subjected 
о а test in a heating cabinet with an atmosphere having 
the composition and pressure of the ambient air and 
ventilated by natural circulation. 


Accessories having an IP code higher than IPX0 are 
tested after having been mounted and assembled as 
prescribed in 16.2. 


For accessories having a lid, the lid is closed during 
the test. 


For portable socket-outlets, the plug of the same system 
having the same rated current as the socket-outlet shall 
be inserted into the socket-outlet during the test. The 
plug can be suitably modified if necessary to allow the 
closure of the lid, if any. 


For portable socket-outlets, after having withdrawn the 
test plug from the socket-outlet the contact pressure of 
the contact assembly is checked as specified in 22.2 
with the single-pin gauge. The gauge shall not fall from 
the contact assembly within 30 s. 


The temperature in the cabinet is 70 + 2?C. 
The samples are kept in the cabinet for 7 days (168 h). 


The use of an electrically heated cabinet is 
recommended. 


Natural circulation may be provided by holes in the 
walls of the cabinet. 


After the treatment, the samples are removed from the 
cabinet and kept at room temperature and relative 
humidity between 45 percent and 55 percent for at least 
4 days (96 h). 


The samples shall show no crack visible with normal 
or corrected vision without additional magnification, 
nor shall the material have become sticky or greasy, 
this being judged as follows: 


a) With the forefinger wrapped in a dry piece of 
rough cloth the sample is pressed with a force 
of 5N. 

No traces of the cloth shall remain on the 
sample and the material of the sample shall 
not stick to the cloth. 


b) 


After the test the samples shall show no damage which 
would lead to non-compliance with this standard. 


NOTE — The force of 5N can be obtained in the following 
way: 


a) The sample is placed on one of the pans of a 
balance and the other pan is loaded with a mass 


equal to the mass of the sample plus 500 g. 


IS 1293 : 2019 


b) Equilibrium is then restored by pressing the sample 
with the fore-finger wrapped in a dry piece ofrough 
cloth. 


16.2 Protection Provided by Enclosures 


Enclosures shall provide protection against access to 
hazardous parts, harmful effects due to ingress of solid 
foreign objects and harmful effects due to ingress of water 
in accordance with the IP designation of the accessory. 


Compliance is checked by the tests of 16.2.1 and 16.2.2. 


16.2.1 Protection against Access to Hazardous Parts 
and Against Harmful Effects Due to Ingress of Solid 
Foreign Objects 


Accessories and their enclosures shall provide a degree 
of protection against access to hazardous parts and 
against harmful effects due to ingress of solid foreign 
objects. 


Fixed socket-outlets are mounted as in normal use оп а 
vertical surface. Flush-type and semi-flush type socket- 
outlets are fixed in a test wall using an appropriate box 
in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 


In case, where the manufacturer’s instruction does not 
specify another type of wall, the test wall according to 
Fig. 16 is used. 


In case where the manufacturer’s instructions specify 
another type of wall, this wall as well as the mounting 
shall be described in sufficient detail to ensure 
reproducible tests. The test wall as per Fig. 16 is made 
with bricks having smooth surface so that when the box 
is mounted in test wall, it shall fit tight against the wall 
so that water cannot enter between the box and the wall. 


NOTES 


1 If sealing material is used in order to seal the box into the 
wall, sealing compound should not influence the sealing 
properties of the specimen to be used. 


2 Figure 16 shows an example where the edge of the box is 
positioned in the reference plane, other positions are possible 
according to the instructions of the manufacturer. 


The test wall is placed in a vertical position. 


Accessories with screwed glands or membranes are 
fitted and connected with cables which shall be within 
the connecting range specified in Table 4. Glands are 
tightened with a torque equal to two-thirds of that 
applied during the test of 24.6. 


Portable socket-outlets are tested on a plain, horizontal 
surface in a position as in normal use, such that there is 
no strain on the flexible cable. They ‘аге fitted with 
such flexible cables (see Table 17) having conductors 
of the largest and smallest nominal cross-sectional area 
given in Table 4, as appropriate to their rating. 


Screws when mounting the accessory are tightened with 
a torque equal to two-third of the applicable torque 
given in Table 1. 


Parts which can be removed without the aid of a tool 
are removed. 


If an accessory has passed the test successfully, then 
this test is deemed to be passed for a combination of 
such single accessories. 


Glands are tightened with a torque equal to two-third 
of that applied during the test of 24.6. 


NOTE — Glands are not fitted with sealing compound or the 
like. 


Table 17 External Dimensions of Flexible Cables to be Accommodated by Cord Anchorage 
(Clauses 16.2.1, 17.1.1, 17.1.2 and 23.2) 


SI Rating of Accessory Number of Types of Number of Limits for External 
No. Poles” Flexible Conductors and Dimensions for Flexible 
Cable (Cable Nominal Cross Cables 
References) Sectional Area mm 
mm? A 
Minimum Maximum 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
D бА 2 IS 694 2х 0.75 2.7 x 5.4 3.2 x 6.4 
Up to and including 250 V > 2 x 0.75 3.8 x 6.0 5.27.6 
H) 6A 2 IS 694 2 x 0.75 2.7 x 5.4 3.2 x 6.4 
Up to and including 250 V 2x1 6.4 8.0 
3 3 x 0.75 6.4 8.4 
3x1 
Ш) Above 6A 3 IS 694 3x 0.75 6.4 9.8 
up to and including 16A 3х 1.5 


Ор їо апа including 250 У 


D Earthing contact, irrespective of their number, are considered as one pole. 


? Exclusively designed for two-conductor flat flexible cables. 


40 


KE UE 


400 MIN. 


ALL MORTAR JOINTS 1045 THICK 


C= 
REFERENCE e 
SURFACE  ! 


IS 1293 : 2019 


— BOX 


22 


UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED 


REFERENCE 


SECTION B-B 


SECTION A-A 
А = BRICKS 
B = MORTAR 


MORTAR 


ALL MORTAR JOINTS 10+5 THICK UNLESS 
OTHERWISE SPECIFIED, OR INACCORDANCE 
WITH THE MANUFACTURERS INSTRUCTIONS. 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 16 TEST WALL IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF 16.2.2 


16.2.1.1 Protection against access to hazardous parts 


The appropriate test specified in IS/IEC 60529 is 
performed (see 10). 


16.2.1.2 Protection against harmful effects due to 
ingress of solid foreign objects 


The appropriate test specified in IS/TEC 60529 is 
performed. 


For the test of accessories with numeral 5 as the first 
characteristic, the accessories are considered to be of 
category 2; dust shall not penetrate in a quantity to 
interfere with satisfactory operation or to impair safety. 


41 


For the test of the first characteristic numeral 6, 
enclosures of socket-outlets are considered to be of 
category 1 (see 13.6 of IS/IEC 60529); no dust shall 
penetrate. 


The test probes shall not be applied to drain holes. 


16.2.2 Protection Against Harmful Effects Due to 
Ingress of Water 


Accessories and their enclosures shall provide a degree 
of protection against harmful effects due to ingress of 
water in accordance with their IP classification. 


Compliance is checked by the appropriate tests of 
IS/IEC 60529 under the conditions specified below. 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Flush-type and semi flush-type socket-outlets are fixed 
in a vertical test wall representing the intended use of 
the accessory using an appropriate box in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s instructions. 


Where the manufacturer’s instructions specify that the 
accessory is suitable to be installed on a rough wall the 
test wall according to Fig. 16 is used. It is made with 
bricks having flat smooth surfaces. When the box is 
mounted in the test wall, it shall fit tight against the wall. 


NOTES 


1 If sealing material is used in order to seal the box into the 
wall, it should not influence the sealing properties of the 
specimen to be tested. 


2 Figure 16 shows an example where the edge of the box is 
positioned in the reference plane; other positions are possible, 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 


Surface type socket-outlets are mounted as for normal 
use in a vertical position and fitted with cables or 
conduits or both in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
instructions. Cables shall have conductors of the largest 
and smallest nominal cross-sectional area given in 
Table 4, as appropriate to their rating. 


Portable socket-outlets are tested on a plain, horizontal 
surface in a position as in normal use, such that there is 
no strain on the flexible cable. They are fitted with 
flexible cables (see Table 17) having conductors of the 
largest and smallest nominal cross-sectional area given 
in Table 4, as appropriate to their rating. 


Screws of the enclosure operated when mounting the 
accessory are tightened with a torque equal to two-thirds 
of the applicable torque given in Table 1. 


Glands are tightened with a torque equal to two-thirds 
of that applied during the test of 24.6. 


NOTE — Glands are not filled with sealing compound or the like. 


Parts which can be removed without the aid of a tool 
are removed. 


If the enclosure of a socket-outlet that has an IP code 
less than ІРХ5 is designed with drain holes, one drain 
hole is opened, as for normal use, in the lowest position. 
If the enclosure of a socket-outlet that has an IP code 
equal to or greater than ІРХ5 is designed with drain 
holes, they shall not be opened. 


Socket-outlets are tested without a plug in engagement 
and with the lid, if any, closed. 


Plugs are tested when in full engagement first with a 
fixed and then with a portable socket outlet ofthe same 
system and with the same degree of protection against 
harmful effects due to ingress of water, if defined in 
the system. 


NOTE— In some systems plugs and socket-outlets may not 
have the same degree of protection. 


Care shall be taken not to disturb, for example, to knock 
or shake, the assembly, in such a way that the test result 
will be affected. 


42 


Ifan accessory has drain holes which have been opened, 
it shall be proved by inspection that any water which 
enters does not accumulate and that it drains away 
without doing any harm to the complete assembly. 


The specimens shall withstand an electric strength test 
specified in 17.2 which shall be started within 5 min of 
completion of the test according to this sub clause. 


16.3 Resistance to Humidity 


Accessories shall be proof against humidity which may 
occur in normal use. 


Compliance is checked by the humidity treatment 
described in this sub-clause followed immediately by 
the measurement of the insulation resistance and by 
the electric strength test specified in 17. 


Inlet openings, if any, are left open; if knock outs are 
provided, one of them is opened. 


Parts, which can be removed without the aid of a tool, 
are removed and subjected to the humidity treatment 
with the main part; spring lids are open during this 
treatment. 


The humidity treatment is carried out in a humidity 
cabinet containing air with a relative humidity 
maintained between 91 percent and 95 percent. 


The temperature of the air, where samples are placed, 
is maintained within +1°C of any convenient value / 
between 15°C and 35°C. 


Before being placed in the humidity cabinet, the 
samples are bought to a temperature between f and t + 
4°C. 


The samples are kept in the cabinet for, 


a) 2 days (48 h) for accessories, having a IP code 
of IPX0; and 
b) 7 days (168 h) for accessories having a IP code 
higher than IPX0. 
NOTES 


1 In most cases the samples may be brought to the specified 
temperature, by keeping them at this temperature for at least 4 h 
before the humidity treatment. 


2 A relative humidity between 91 percent and 95 percent can 
be obtained by placing in the humidity cabinet a saturated) 


solution of sodium sulphate (Na,SO, or potassium nitrate (KNO) 
in water having a sufficiently large contact surface with the air. 


3 In order to achieve the specified conditions within the cabinet, 
it is necessary to ensure constant circulation of the air within, 
and in general, to use a cabinet which is thermally insulated. 


4 For the purpose of acceptance test, the humidity treatment is 
subjected for 24 h. 


After this treatment the samples shall show no damage 
within the meaning of this standard. 


17 INSULATION RESISTANCE AND ELECTRIC 
STRENGTH 


The insulation resistance and the electric strength of 


accessories shall be adequate. 


Compliance is checked by the following tests, which 
are made immediately after the test of 16.3, in the 
humidity cabinet or in the room in which the samples 
were brought to the prescribed temperature, after 
reassembly of those parts which can be removed without 
the aid of a tool and were removed for the test. 


17.1 The insulation resistance is measured using а d.c. 
voltage of approximately 500 V, the measurement being 
made | min after application of the voltage. 


The insulation resistance shall be not less than 5М О. 


17.1.1 For socket-outlets, the insulation resistance is 
measured consecutively, 


a) between all poles connected together and the 
body, the measurement being made with a plug 
in engagement; 

b) between each pole in turn and all others, these 
being connected to the body with a plug 
standard in engagement; 

c) between any metal enclosure and metal foil 
in contact with the inner surface of its 
insulating lining, if any; 

NOTE — This test is only made if any insulating lining 
is necessary to provide insulation. 

between any metal part of the cord anchorage 
terminal, including clamping screws and 
earthing terminal (s) or earthing contact (s), if 


any, of portable socket-outlet; and 


d) 


between any metal part of the cord anchorage 
of portable socket-outlets and a metal rod of 
the maximum diameter of the flexible cable 
inserted in its place (as specified in Table 17). 


The term ‘body’ used in (a) and (b) includes all 
accessible metal parts, metal frames supporting the base 
of flush-type socket-outlets, metal foil in contact with 
the outer surface of accessible external parts of 
insulating material, fixing screws of main parts or covers 
and cover-plates, external assembly screws, and earthing 
terminals or earthing contacts. 


NOTES 

1 Measurements (c), (d) and (e) are not made on non-rewirable 
portable socket-outlets. 

2 While the metal foil is wrapped round the outer surface or 
placed in contact with the inner surface of parts of insulating 
material, it is pressed against holes or groove without any 


appreciable force by means of a straight unjointed test finger 
test probe 11 of IS 1401. 


17.1.2 For plugs, the insulation resistance is measured 
consecutively, 


a) between all poles connected together and the 
body; 
b) between each pole in tum and all others, these 


being connected to the body; 


43 


IS 1293 : 2019 


с) between any metal part of the cord anchorage, 
including clamping screws, and the earthing 
terminal or earthing contact, if any; and 
Between any metal part of the cord anchorage 
and a metal rod of the maximum diameter of 
the flexible cable or cord inserted in its place 
(see Table 17). 


The term ‘body’ used in (a) and (b) includes all 
accessible metal parts, external assembly screws, 
earthing terminals, earthing contacts and metal foil in 
contact with the outer surface of accessible external parts 
of insulating material, other than the engagement face. 


d) 


NOTES 
1 Measurements (c) and (d) are not made on non-rewirable plugs. 


2 While the metal foil is wrapped round the outer surface or 
placed in contact with the inner surface of parts of insulating 
material, it is pressed against holes or grooves without any 
appreciable force by means of a straight unjointed test finger 
test probe 11 of IS 1401. 


17.2 A voltage of substantially sine-wave form, having 
a frequency of 50 Hz, is applied for 1 min between the 
parts indicated in 17.1. 


The test voltage shall be 2 000 V for accessories having 
a rated voltage upto and including 250V. 


Initially, not more than half the prescribed voltage is 
applied, and then it is raised rapidly to the full value. 


NOTES 


1 The high voltage transformer used for the test must be so 
designed that, when the output terminals are short-circuited after 
the output voltage has been adjusted to the appropriate test 
voltage, the output current is at least 200 (m A). 


2 The over current relay must not trip when the output current 
is less than 100 m A. 

3 Care is taken that the rms value of the test voltage applied is 
measured within +3 percent. 


4 Glow discharges without drop in voltage are neglected. 
No flashover or break down shall occur during the test. 


17.3 When applied as a routine test, the high voltage 
test may also be carried out as a flash test. The specimen 
may not be connected to the supply and an ac voltage 
one and a half times the values given in 17.2 shall be 
applied for a period of 5 s. 


No flashover or break down shall occur during the test. 


18 OPERATION OF EARTHING CONTACTS 


Earthing contacts shall provide adequate contact 
pressure and shall not deteriorate in normal use. 


Compliance is checked by the tests of 19 and 21. 
19 TEMPERATURE RISE 


Accessories shall be so constructed that they comply 
with the following temperature-rise test: 


Socket-outlets and plugs are tested according to 19.1 
except for, 


IS 1293 : 2019 


a) fixed socket outlets of a socket outlets and 

fused plug system, for which 19.2 applies; and 
b) plugs and portable socket-outlets with 
incorporated components, for which 19.3 


applies. 
Non-rewirable accessories are tested as delivered. 


Rewirable accessories are fitted with polyvinyl chloride 
insulated conductors having a normal nominal cross- 
sectional area as shown in Table 18. 


The terminals screws or nuts are tightened with a torque 
equal to two-third of that specified in 12.2.8. 


NOTE — To ensure normal cooling of the terminals, the 
conductors connected to them must have a length of at least 1 m. 


Flush-mounted accessories are mounted in flush- 
mounted boxes. The box is placed in a block of 
pinewood filled around the box with plaster, so that 
the front edge of the box does not protrude and is not 
more than 5 mm below the front surface of the pinewood 
block. 


NOTE — The test assembly should be allowed to dry for at least 
seven days when first made. 


The size of the pinewood block, which may be 
fabricated from more than one piece, shall be such that 
there is at least 25 mm of wood surrounding the plaster, 
the plaster having a thickness between 10 mm and 15 
mm around the maximum dimensions of the sides and 
rear of the box. 


NOTE — The sides of cavity in the pinewood block may have 
cylindrical shape. 


The cables connected to the socket-outlet shall enter 
through the top of the box, the point(s) of entry being 
sealed to prevent the circulation of air. The length of 
each conductor within the box shall be 80 +10 mm. 


Surface-type socket-outlets shall be mounted centrally 
on the surface of a wooden block, which shall be at 
least 20 mm thick, 500 mm wide and 500 mm high. 


Other types of socket-outlets shall be mounted 
according to the manufacturer’s instruction or, in the 
absence of such an instruction, in the position of normal 
use considered to give the most onerous conditions. 


The test assembly shall be placed in a draught-free 
environment for the test. 


NOTES 


1 In the case of non rewirable accessories care should be taken 
to minimize the influence on the structure/design/performance 
of the accessory when accessing the terminations of the accessory. 


2 Adequate measures should be taken to avoid electric shocks 

during the test. 
For accessories having three poles or more (earthing 
contacts, irrespective of their number, are considered 
as one pole) the current during the test shall be passed 
through the phase contacts, where applicable. In 
addition, separate tests shall be made passing the current 
through the neutral contact, if any, and the adjacent 
phase contact and through the earthing contact, if any, 
and the nearest phase contact. For the purpose of this 
test, earthing contacts, irrespective of their number, are 
considered as one pole. 


In case of multiple and combined socket-outlets 
the test is carried out on one socket-outlets of each 
type and current rating. With the test current as 
specified in Table 16 passed through that one 
socket-outlet. 


The temperature rise of the terminals, terminations and 
clamping units determined by means of thermocouples 
shall not exceed 45 °C. 


NOTES 


1 For the purpose of the test of 25.3, the temperature-rise of 
external parts of insulating material not necessary to retain 
current-carrying parts and parts of the earthing circuit in position, 
even though they are in contact with them, is also determined. 


2 Accessories incorporate elements such as dimmers, fuses, 
switches, energy regulators etc., the incorporated elements shall 
be tested in accordance to the ratings specified by the 
manufacturer. Any protective element such as fuses or thermal 
cut-outs is to be electrically short circuited with a link of 
negligible resistance, for the execution of the test. 


19.1 Socket-outlets are tested using a test plug with 
brass pins having the minimum specified dimensions. 


The test plug is inserted into the socket-outlet, and an 
alternating current as specified in Table 16 is passed 
for min 60; min. 


In the case of multiple socket-outlets, the test is carried 
out on one socket-outlet of each type and current rating 


Table 18 Nominal Cross-Sectional Areas of Copper Conductors for Temperature-Rise Test 
(Clause 19.1) 


Flexible Conductors for Portable 


SI Rated Current 
No. A 
(1) (2) 


i) 
iD 


iii) 


Up to and including 6 
Over 6 and up to including 16 
Over 16 


44 


Nominal Cross-Sectional Area 


2 
mm 


Rigid Conductors (Solid or 


Accessories Stranded) for Fixed Accessories 
(3) (4) 
1 1.5 
1:9 2.5 
4 6 


with the test current as specified in Table 16 passed 
through that one socket-outlet. 


For this test the temperature rise is measured on the 
terminals and terminations. 


The plug shall be tested in a draught-free environment 
at the centre of a plane wooden sheet which shall be at 
least 20 mm thick, 500 mm wide and 500 mm high. 


Plugs are tested as follows: 


Clamping units having the dimensions specified in are 
fitted on each live pin and earthing pin, if any, of the 
plug. Each clamping unit is equipped with a 
thermocouple which can be mounted either together 
with the pin or fixed permanently within the dotted area 
of Fig. 18. 


If it is not possible to use the clamping unit of Fig. 39 


See 21 Normal operation 
10 000 strokes 
\with shutter - with current 


On tasted samples 


See 19 Temperature rise test 


Gauges Figure 9 20N - Figure 10 1N 


To complete normal operational test 


See 17.2 Electric strength at 1.500V 


IS 1293 : 2019 


due to the design of the plug, the clamping unit may be 
modified in order to perform the test. 


In this case the diameter of the screw, the threaded hole 
and the total volume of the modified clamping unit shall 
be identical to Fig. 18. 


The screw is then placed approximately in the middle 
of the bare part of the pin and tightened with a torque 
of 0.8 Nm. 


An alternating current as specified in Table 16 is then 
passed for 60; min. 


Plugs having lateral earthing contacts and resilient 
earthing contacts are tested using a fixed socket-outlet 
complying with this standard and having as near to- 
average characteristics as can be selected, but with 
minimum size of the earthing pin, if any. 


On пем samples (See 5.4) 10 000 strokes 
without shutters - with current 
1 Sec 19 Temperatura rise test 

"See 17.2 Elentric strength at 1 500V 


YES 


On new samples (See 5.4) 


Gauges; Figure S2DN-Figure 104N 
YES 
On tasted samples 
See 18 Tampérature rise test 
See 17.2 Electric strength at 1.500¥ 
YES 


Continue testing 


10 000 strokes with shutters- without current 


NO 
@ 


On new samples (See 5.4y10 00 strokes 
MADE BY HAND 
with Shutters-with urterik 
Gauges: Figure 8 20N - Figura 10 1N 
See 18 Tamperstura risa test > 
See 17,2 Еіесігіс strength at 1.500 


асер 


Fic.17 TEST PROCEDURES FOR NORMAL OPERATION 


45 


IS 1293 : 2019 


AREA FOR MOUNTING 
THE THERMOCOUPLE 
PERMANENTLY 


SPACE FOR THE WELDED 
SUPPLY CABLE 


THREADED HOLE FOR 
CLAMING SCREW 


Material: brass with at least 52 percent of copper. 
Tolerance: +0.2 mm unless otherwise stated. 
NOTES 


1 The dimension(s) for the shaded area is (are) the maximum plug pin dimension(s) + 0.8 mm. 


215<ds3. 


3 The thermocouple should be placed within the shaded area but not directly under the clamping screw. 


Fic. 18 CLAMPING UNIT FOR THE TEMPERATURE RISE TEST 


The plug under test is inserted into the fixed socket- 
outlet, and an alternating current as specified in 


Table 16 is passed for 


19.2 For fixed socket-outlets of a socket-outlet and 
fused plug system, an alternating current as specified 


in Table 16 is passed for 60; min as follows: 


a) Fora single socket-outlet the plug is inserted 
into the socket-outlet and 70 percent of the 


46 


b) 


test current is passed through the plug. 

The balance of the total test current is passed 
simultaneously through a looped connection, 
connected to the socket-outlet terminals. 
The total nominal load on the supply cable is 
passed for 60;° min. 

For a multiple socket-outlet a plug is inserted 
into one socket-outlet and 70 percent of the 
test current is passed. 


A second plug is inserted into another socket-outlet and 
the balance of the total test current is passed 
simultaneously through this plug. 


The total nominal load on the supply cable is passed 
for min. 


NOTES 


1 The value of 70 percent relates to the fuse characteristics and 
is specified in the relevant national standards. 


2 In the case of fixed socket-outlets incorporating dimmers, fuses, 
switches, energy regulators, etc., these other elements are short- 
circuited for the purpose of this test. 


19.3 Portable socket-outlets and rewirable plugs with 
incorporated components are tested by the following 
two tests: 


a) Witha current which is equal to the test current 
as indicated in Table 16, for 19. For this test 
the incorporated components are short 
circuited; 

b) With a current which is equal to the rated 

current of the portable accessory or the rated 

current of the component(s), whichever is the 
lower. 


Non-rewirable plugs with incorporated components are 
tested by the following two tests: 


1) With a current which is equal to the test current 
for the combination of the plug and the cable 
as indicated in Table 16, for 19. For this test 
the incorporated components are short 
circuited; 

2) With a current which is equal to the test current 

for the combination of the plug and the cable 

as indicated in Table 16, for 21, or the rated 
current of the component(s), whichever is the 
lower. 


In addition to the verification of the temperature rise 
of the terminals, the maximum temperature rise of 
accessible metal parts shall be measured and shall not 
be higher than 30 °C and of accessible non-metallic parts 
not higher than 40 °C. 


NOTES 


1 In the case of non-rewirable accessories care should be taken 
to minimize the influence on the structure/design/performance 
of the product when accessing the terminations of the product. 


2 Examples of ‘incorporated components’ are switches and 
fuses. 


20 BREAKING CAPACITY 
Accessories shall have adequate breaking capacity. 


Compliance is checked by testing socket-outlets, and 
plugs with pins which are not solid, by means of an 
apparatus as shown in Fig. 19. 


Rewirable accessories are fitted with conductors as 
specified for the test of 19. 


47 


IS 1293 : 2019 


NOTE — In case of failure of the shutters, the tests on 
shuttered socket-outlets may be repeated with operations 
made by hand. 


Socket-outlets are tested using a test plug with brass 
pins provided, with insulating sleeves, and having the 
maximum specified dimension, with a tolerance of 


0 ; Р ; 
_0.06 mm, and spaced at the nominal distance, with a 


+0.05 
tolerance of 0 mm; however, as far as the 


extremities of the sleeves are concerned, it is sufficient 
that their dimensions are within the tolerances given in 
Annex B, if any. 


NOTES 
1 Dimensions of insulation sleeves are as per Annex B. 


2 The shapes of the extremities of the insulating sleeves are not 
considered of importance for the purpose of the test provided 
that they are according to the relevant data sheets if any. 


3 The material of the brass pins of the test plug should not be 
electro-plated and shall be as specified in IS 292 type 
CuZn39Pb2 or CuZn39Pb3 and their micro-composition shall 
be homogeneous. 


The ends of round pins are rounded. 


Plugs are tested using a fixed socket-outlet complying 
with this standard and having as near to average 
characteristics as can be selected. 


NOTE — Care is taken that the pins of the test plugs are in good 
condition before the test is started. 


For accessories with a rated voltage lower than or equal 
to 250 V and a rated current lower than or equal to 
16 A, The length of the stroke of the test apparatus shall 
be between 50 mm and 60 mm. 


NOTE — The length of the stroke for accessories with other 
ratings is under consideration. 


The plug is inserted into and withdrawn from the socket- 
outlet 50 times (100 strokes) at a rate of, 


a) 30strokes per minute for accessories having 
a rated current up to and including 16 A and 
a rated voltage up to and including 250 V; 
and 

b) 15 strokes per minute for other accessories. 


NOTE — A stroke is an insertion or a withdrawal of the plug. 


The test voltage is 1.1 times the rated voltage and the 
test currents are 1.25 times the rated current. 


The periods during which the test current is passed from 
engagement of the plug until the subsequent withdrawal 
are as follows: 


a) For accessories with rated current 
LIGA: 1.57 s 
b) For accessories with rated current 


216A: 3s 


IS 1293 : 2019 


DETAIL 'A' 


m 


y 


2727777 


Ж 


1.8 


DETAIL 'B' 
(SPRING) 


Fic.19 EXAMPLE OF APPARATUS FOR BREAKING CAPACITY AND NORMAL OPERATION TEST 


Accessories are tested using an alternating current with 
cos ® = 0.6 + 0.05. 


No current is passed through the earthing circuit, if any. 
The test is made with the connections shown in Fig. 20. 


Two-pole accessories with neutral contact (2P + N and 
2P +N + 1) are connected to two phases and the neutral 
of a three phase system. 


48 


Resistors and inductors are not connected in parallel, 
except that, 1f an air-core inductor is used, a resistor, 
taking approximately 1 percent of the current through 
the inductor is connected in parallel with it. 


Iron-core inductors may be used, provided the current 
has substantially sine-wave form. 


Accessible metal parts, metal supports and any metal 
frame supporting the base of flush-type socket-outlets 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Fic. 20 Circuit DIAGRAMS FOR BREAKING CAPACITY AND NORMAL OPERATION TESTS 


are connected through the selector switch C; for two- 
pole accessories, to one of the poles of supply for half 
the number of stroke, and to the other pole for the 
remainder, for three pole accessories, they are 
connected consecutively to each pole of the supply for 
one third of the number of strokes. 


49 


In the case of multiple and combined socket-outlets, 
the test is carried out on one socket-outlet of each type 
and current rating. 


During the test, no sustained arcing shall occur. 


After the test, the samples shall show no damage 
impairing their further use and the entry holes for the 


IS 1293 : 2019 


pins shall not show any damage which may impair the 
safety within the meaning of this standard. 


21 NORMAL OPERATION 


21.1 Accessories shall withstand the mechanical, 
electrical and thermal stresses occurring in normal use 
without undue wear or other harmful effect. 


Compliance is checked by testing socket-outlets, and 
plugs with resilient earthing socket-contacts or with pins 
which are not solid, by means of an appropriate test 
apparatus, an example of which is shown in Fig. 19. 


The test pins (during socket-outlet test) and the fixed 
socket-outlets (during the plug test for plugs with 
resilient earthing socket-outlets or with pins which are 
not solid) shall be replaced after 4 500 and 9 000 
strokes. 


The procedure specified in Fig. 17 shall be followed. 


The manufacturer shall be permitted to indicate at which 
point 1, 2 or 3 of Fig. 17 the test program shall begin. 
If the manufacturer indicates to start at point 2 or point 
3, the test shall be performed on new specimens that 
have previously been subjected to the test of 20 in the 
conditions required to the relevant starting points 2 or 3. 


Socket-outlets are tested using a test plug with brass 
pins provided, with insulating sleeves, and having the 
maximum specified dimensions, with a tolerance 


of. 


_ | mm , and spaced at the nominal distance with a 


tolerance of ° mm , however, as far as the extremities 
of the sleeves are concerned, it is sufficient that their 
dimensions are within the tolerances given in the 
relevant data sheet, if any. 


NOTES 
1 Dimensions of insulation sleeves are as per Annex B. 


2 The shapes ofthe extremities of the insulating sleeves are not 
considered of importance for the purpose of the test. 


3 The material of the brass pins should not be electro-plated 
and shall be as specified in IS 292 type CuZn39Pb2 or 
CuZn39Pb3 and their micro-compositions shall be 
homogeneous. 


The end of round pins is rounded. 


Plugs are tested using a fixed socket-outlet complying 
with this standard and having near to average 
characteristics as can be selected. 


NOTE — Care is taken that the pins of the test plugs are in 
good condition before the test is started. 


The specimens are tested with an alternating current as 
specified in Table 16, at rated voltage, in a circuit with 
cos ф = 0.8 + 0.05. 


The plug is inserted into and withdrawn from the socket- 
outlet 5 000 times (10 000 strokes) at rate of: 


a) 30 strokes per minute for accessories having 


50 


a rated current up to and including 16 Aand a 
rated voltage up to and including 250 V; and 


b) 


NOTE — A stroke is an insertion or a withdrawal of the plug. 


15 strokes per minute for other accessories. 


For accessories having a rated current lower than or 
equal to 16A, the test current is passed during each 
insertion and engagement of the plug. 


In all other cases, the test current is passed during 
alternate insertion and withdrawal, the other insertion 
and withdrawal being made without current flowing. 


The periods during which the test current is passed from 
engagement of the plug until subsequent withdrawals 
are as follows: 


a) for accessories with rated current 
€16À: 1,5, s 
b) for accessories with rated current 


$16A:3/ ^8 


No current is passed through the earthing circuit, if any. 


The test is made with the connection indicated in 20, 
the selector switch C being operated as prescribed 
in 20. 


In the case of multiple and combined socket-outlet the 
test is carried out on one socket-outlet of each type 
and current rating. 


During the test no sustained arcing shall occur. After 
the test, the samples shall not show, wear impairing 
their further use, 


a) deterioration of enclosures, insulating linings 
or barriers; 

b) damage to the entry holes for the pins that 
might impair proper working; 

c) loosening of electrical or mechanical 
connections; and 

d) seepage of sealing compound. 


For shuttered socket-outlets, a gauge according to Fig. 9 
is applied to the entry holes corresponding to the live 
contacts with a force of 20 N. 


The gauge is applied to the shutters in the most 
unfavorable position, successively in three directions 
to the same place, for approximately 5 s in each ofthe 
three directions. 


During each application, the gauge shall not be rotated 
and it shall be applied such that the force of 20 N 1s 
maintained. When moving the gauge from one direction 
to the next, no force is applied but the gauge is not 
withdrawn. 


A gauge according to Fig. 10 1s then applied with a 
force of 1 N and in three directions, for approximately 


5 s in each of the three directions, with independent 
movements, withdrawing the gauge after each 
movement. 


It shall not be possible to touch live parts with the 
gauges of Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 when they remain under 
the relevant forces. 


An electrical indicator, with a voltage between 40 V 
and 50 V, is used to show contact with the relevant 
part. 


The specimens shall then comply with the requirements 
of 19, the test current being equal to the test current 
required for the normal operation test of this 21 and 
the temperature rise, at any point, not exceeding 45°C, 
and they shall withstand an electric strength test made 
according to 17.2, the test voltage being reduced to 1 
500 V for accessories having a rated voltage upto and 
including 250 V. 


NOTE — The humidity treatment, according to 16.3, is not 
repeated before the electric strength test of this clause. 


The tests of 13.2 and 14.2 are made after the tests of 
this clause. 


22 FORCE NECESSARY TO WITHDRAW THE 
PLUG 


The construction of accessories shall allow the easy 
insertion and withdrawal of the plug, and prevent the 
plug from working out of the socket-outlet in normal 
use. 


Forthe purpose of this test, resilient earthing contacts, 
irrespective of the number, are considered as one pole, 
and non-resilient earthing contacts, irrespective of the 
number, are considered not to be a pole. 


NOTE — A solid pin used for earthing is а non-resilient earthing 
contact. 


Interlocked accessories are tested in the unlocked 
position. 


Compliance is checked, for socket-outlets-only by, 


a) 


a test to ascertain that the maximum force 
necessary to withdraw the test plug from the 


IS 1293 : 2019 


socket-outlet is no higher than the force 
specified in Table 19; and 
b) a test to ascertain that the minimum force 
necessary to withdraw a single pin gauge from 
the individual from the contact assembly is 


not lower than the force specified in Table 19. 
For plugs with resilient earthing contact assemblies, by 


1) a test to ascertain that the maximum force 
necessary to withdraw a single pin gauge from 
the individual resilient earthing contact 
assembly of the plug is not higher than the 
force specified in Table 19; and 

2) a test to ascertain that the minimum force 

necessary to withdraw a single pin gauge from 

the individual earthing contact assembly is not 

lower than the force specified in Table 19. 


22.1 Verification of the Maximum Withdrawal 
Force 


22.1.1 Test for Socket-Outlets 


The socket -outlet is fixed to the mounting plate A of 
an apparatus as shown in Fig. 21, so that the axis of the 
socket-contacts are vertical and the entry holes for the 
pins of the plug face downwards. 


The test plugs have finely ground pins of hardened steel, 
having a surface roughness 0.6 um and 0.8 um over 
their active length and spaced at the nominal distance, 
with a tolerance of + 0.05 mm. 


The diameter, for round pins, and the distance between 
contact surfaces, shall have respectively the maximum 


specified dimensions, with a tolerance of E mm. 


NOTE — The maximum specified dimension is the nominal 
plus the maximum tolerance. 


The pins are wiped free from grease, before each test, 
using a cold chemical degreaser. 


NOTE — When using the liquid specified for the test, adequate 
precautions shall be taken to prevent fire, or inhalation of 
vapour. 


The test plug with the maximum size pins is inserted 


Table 19 Maximum and Minimum Withdrawal Force for Plugs and Socket-outlets 
(Clauses 22, 22.1, 22.2, 24.10, 24.11 and 24.13) 


SI 
No. 


Ratings of the Accessory 


Number of the Poles of 
the Accessory 


Withdrawal Force 
N 


„е v. k 3<—— Ə— n". N.A 
Multi Pin Gauge Single Pin Gauge 


Maximum Minimum 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Up to and including 6A 2 40 те 
3 50 
ii) Above 6A up to and including 16A 3 54 2.0 


51 


IS 1293 : 2019 


150 


MOUNTING PLATE (A) 


SPECIMEN (B) 


TESTING PLUG (C) 


CLAMP (D) 


SUPLIMENTARY WEIGHT (G) 


PRINCIPAL WEIGHT (F) 


(E) 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


FiG. 21 APPARATUS FOR VERIFICATION OF MAXIMUM WITHDRAWAL FORCE 


into and withdrawn from the socket-outlet ten times. 
It is then again inserted, a carrier Е, for a principal 
mass F and a supplementary mass G, being attached 
to it by means of a suitable clamp D. The 
supplementary mass is such that it exerts a force equal 
to one-tenth of the maximum withdrawal force as 
specified in Table 19. 


The principal mass, together with the supplementary 
mass, the clamp, the carrier and the plug exert a force 
equal to the maximum withdrawal force as specified in 
Table 19. 


The principal mass is hung on the plug without jolting 
and the supplementary mass is if necessary, allowed 
to fall from a height of 50 mm onto the principal 
mass. 


The plug shall not remain in the socket-outlet. 


22.1.2 Test for Plugs with Resilient Earthing Contact 
Assemblies 


The test pin gauge, illustrated in Fig. 22, is applied 
to the resilient earthing contact assembly, while the 
plug is held vertically and the gauge is hanging 
downwards. 


The test pin gauge is made of hardened steel, having a 


52 


surface roughness between 0.6 um and 0.8 um over its 
active length. 


The diameter, for round pins, and the distance between 
contact surfaces shall have respectively the maximum 


specified dimensions, with a tolerance of E mm. 


The mass of the gauge shall be such that it exerts a 
force equal to that specified in Table 19. 


The pin is wiped free from grease, before the test, using 
a cold chemical degreaser. 


The test pin with the maximum dimension(s) is inserted 
into and withdrawn from the earthing contact ten times. 
It is then inserted again and shall not remain in the 
contact assembly. 


NOTES 


1 The maximum specified dimension is the nominal plus the 
maximum tolerance. 

2 When using the liquid specified for the test, adequate 
precautions should be taken to prevent inhalation of vapour. 


22.2 Verification of Minimum Withdrawal Force 


The test pin gauge, illustrated in Fig. 22, is applied to 
each individual contact with the socket-outlet or the 
plug held in such way that the gauge is hanging 
downwards. 


NOTES 


IS 1293 : 2019 


PIN 


1 The mass should be equally positioned around the centreline(s) of the pin. 


2 Dimensions according to the relevant standard sheet. 


Fic. 22 GAUGE FOR THE VERIFICATION OF MINIMUM WITHDRAWAL FORCE 


Shutters, if any, are rendered inoperative so as not to 
affect the test. 


The test pin gauge is made of hardened steel, having a 
surface roughness between 0.6 um and 0.8 um over its 
active length. 


The diameter, for round pins, and the distance between 
contact surfaces, for other types of pins, shall have 
respectively the minimum specified dimensions, with a 
tolerance of and a length sufficient to make adequate 
contact with the contact assembly. The force of the 
gauge shall be equal to that specified in Table 19. 


If the socket-outlet is intended to accept plugs having 
pins with different nominal dimensions the smallest 
appropriate one shall be used. 


In this case, the rating of the accessory in Table 19 is 
the rating ofthe plug with the smallest dimensions for 
the pins. 


NOTE — The minimum specified dimension is the nominal 
minus the maximum tolerance. 


The pin is wiped free from grease, before each test, 
using a cold chemical degreaser. 


NOTE — When using the liquid specified for the test, adequate 
precautions should be taken to prevent inhalation of vapour. 


The test pin gauge is inserted into the contact assembly. 


The test pin gauge is applied gently, and care is taken 
not to knock the assembly when checking the minimum 
withdrawal force. The gauge shall not fall from the 
contact assembly within 30 s. 


23 FLEXIBLE CABLES 
CONNECTION 


AND THEIR 


23.1 Rewirable plugs and rewirable portable socket- 
outlets shall be provided with a cord anchorage such 
that the conductors are relieved from strain, including 
twisting, when they are connected to the terminals or 


53 


terminations, and that their covering is protected from 
abrasion. 


The sheath if any, of the flexible cable shall be clamped 
within the cord anchorage. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the test of 
23.2. 


Non-rewirable plugs and non-rewirable portable socket- 
outlets shall be designed in such a way that the cable is 
maintained in position and the terminations are relieved 
from strain and twisting. 


The sheath, if any, of the flexible cable shall be 
maintained inside the accessory. 


Compliance is checked by the test of 23.2 and 23.4. 


23.2 The effectiveness of the retention of the cable by 
the cord anchorage is checked by the following test by 
means of an apparatus as shown in Fig. 23. 


Non-rewirable accessories are tested as delivered; the 
test is made on new samples. 


Rewirable accessories are first tested with a cable 
having the smallest nominal cross-sectional area, and 
then with a cable having the largest nominal cross- 
sectional area, so shown in Table 17. 


Accessories designed exclusively for use with flat 
flexible cables are tested only with the types of flat 
flexible cables specified. 


Conductors or flexible cable of rewirable accessories 
are introduced into the terminals, the terminal screws 
being tightened just sufficiently to prevent the position 
of the conductors from easily changing. 


The cord anchorage is used in the normal way, clamping 
screws, if any, being tightened with a torque equal to 
two-thirds of specified in Table 1. 


After reassembly of the specimen the component parts 


IS 1293 : 2019 


ECCENTRIC 


FiG. 23 APPARATUS FOR TESTING CoRD RETENTION 


shall fit snugly and it shall not be possible to push the 
cable into the sample to any appreciable extent. 


The specimen 15 placed in the test apparatus so that the 
axis of the flexible cable is vertical where it enters the 
sample. 


The flexible cable is then subjected 100 times to a pull of, 


a) SON, ifthe rated current is 2.5 A. 

b) 60N, if the rated current is above 2.5 A. but 
not more than 16 A and the rated voltage is up 
to and including 250 V. 

c) 80N, if the rated current is above 2.5 A, but 
not more than 16 A and the rated voltage is 
above 250 V. 

d) 100N, if the rated current greater than 16 А. 


The pulls are applied practically without jerks each time 
for 1 s. 


Care shall be taken to exert the same pull on all parts 
(core, insulation and sheath) of the flexible cable 
simultaneously. 


Immediately afterwards, the flexible cable is subjected 
for 1 min to a torque, as specified to Table 20. 


Plugs provided with flat tinsel cords are not subjected 
to the torque test. 


After the test, the flexible cable shall not have been 
displaced by more than 2 mm, for rewirable accessories, 
the end of the conductors shall not have moved 
noticeably in the terminals; for non-rewirable 


54 


accessories, there shall be no break in the electrical 
connections. 


For measurement of the longitudinal displacement, a 
mark is made on flexible cable, at a distance of 
approximately 20 mm from the end ofthe specimen or 
the flexible cable guard, before it is subjected to the 
pull. 


If, for non-rewirable accessories, there is no definite 
end to the specimen or flexible cable guard, an 
additional mark is made on the body of the specimen. 


The displacement of the mark on the flexible cable in 
relation to the specimen or flexible cable guard is 
measured while the flexible cable is subjected to the 
pull. 


In addition, for rewirable accessories having a rated 
current up to and including 16 A, it shall be checked by 
a manual test that they are suitable for fitting with the 
appropriate cable as shown in Table 21. 


23.3 Non-rewirable plugs and non-rewirable portable 
socket-outlets shall be provided with a flexible cable 
complying with IS 694 or IS 9968 (Part 1). The nominal 
cross-sectional areas of the conductors in relation to 
the rating of accessories are given in the relevant 
columns of Table 16. 


NOTE — Table 16 also specifies the test currents for the test of 
temperature-rise and normal operation. 


Flexible cables shall have the same number of 
conductors as there are poles in the plug or 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Table 20 Torque Test Values for Cord Anchorage 
(Clause 23.2) 


SI Rating of Plug or Portable Flexible 
No. Socket-Outlet (Number of Cores x Nominal Cross-Sectional Area in mm?) 
2х 0.5 2 x 0.75 3х 0.5 3. x 0.75 (2 or more) x 1 or 
greater 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Up to and including 16A 0.1 Nm 0.15 Nm 0.15 Nm 0.25 Nm 0.25 Nm 


and 250V 


Table 21 Maximum Dimensions of Flexible Cables to be Accommodated by Rewirable Accessories 
(Clause 23.2) 


SI Rating of Accessory Number of Types of Flexible Number of Maximum 
No. Poles” Cable (Cable Conductors Dimensions for 
References) and Nominal Flexible Cables 
Cross Sectional mm 
Area 
mm2 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
) 2.5А/6А 2 IS 9968 (Part 1) 2 x 0.75 8.0 
Up to and including 250V ? 
2 IS 694 2 x 0.75 5.2 x 7.6 
ii) 2.5A/6A Up to and including 250V 2 IS 9968 (Part 1) 2x1 8.8 
3 IS 9968 (Part 1) 3x1 9:2 
Hi) Above 6A up to and including 16A 3 IS 9968 (Part 1) 3х 1.5 11.0 


Ор to апа including 250У 


D Earthing contacts, irrespective of their number, аге considered as one pole. 
2 Exclusively designed for flat and circular two conductor flexible cables. 


socket-outlet, earthing contacts, if any, being considered 
as one pole, irrespective of their number. The conductor 
connected to the earthing contact shall be identified by 
the colour combination green/yellow. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, by measurement 
and by checking that the flexible cables are in 
accordance with the relevant parts of either IS 694 or 
IS 9968 (Part 1) as applicable. 


23.4 Non-rewirable plugs and non-rewirable portable 
socket- outlets shall be so designed that the flexible 
cable is protected against excessive bending where it 
enters the accessory. 


Guards provided for this purpose shall be of insulating 
material and shall be fixed in a reliable manner. 


NOTE — Helical metal springs, whether bare or covered with 
insulating material, shall not be used as flexible cable guards. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by a flexing 
test made by means of an apparatus as shown in Fig. 24. 


The test is made on new specimens. 


The specimen is fixed to the oscillating member of the 
apparatus so that, when this is at the middle of its travel, 


55 


the axis of the flexible cable, where it enters the 
specimen, is vertical and passes through the axis of 
oscillation. 


Specimens with flat cords are mounted so that the 
major axis of the section is parallel to the axis of 
oscillation. 


The accessory shall be fixed in the test apparatus in the 
following way, 


a) Plugs: by the pins; and 

b) Portable socket-outlet: at a distance of 4 mm 
to 5 mm in the direction of the flexible cable, 
from the engagement face; a test plug having 
the maximum dimensions shall be inserted in 
the portable socket-outlets during the test. 


The accessory is, by variation of the distance between 
the fixing part of the oscillating member and the axis of 
oscillation, so positioned that the flexible cables makes 
the minimum lateral movement when the oscillating 
member of the test apparatus is moved over its full travel. 


NOTES 


1 In order to have the possibility of finding easily by 
experiment the mounting position with the minimum lateral 


IS 1293 : 2019 


DEVICE FOR FIXING 
THE SAMPLE 


300 mm min. 


| 


An adjustment of the different supports for the accessories by means of a threaded spindle shall be provided according to 


the explanation in 23.4. 


FiG. 24 APPARATUS FOR FLEXING TEST 


movement of the flexible cable during the test, the flexing 
apparatus shall be built in such a way that the different 
supports for the accessories mounted on the oscillating 
member can be readily adjusted. 


2 It is recommended to have a device (for example, a slot or a 
pin) to see whether the flexible cable makes the minimum lateral 
movement. 


The flexible cable is loaded with a mass such that the 
force applied is, 


a) 20 N for accessories with flexible cables 
having a nominal cross-sectional area 
exceeding 0.75 т>; and 


b) 10 N for other accessories. 


A current equal to the rated current of the accessory or 
the following current, whichever is the lower, is passed 


56 


through the conductors, 


a) 16A for accessories with flexible cables having 
a nominal cross-sectional area exceeding 
0.75 mm?; and 

b) 6A/2.5 A for accessories with flexible cables 
having a nominal cross-sectional area less than 
0.75 mm’. 


The voltage between the conductors is equal to the rated 
voltage of the sample. 


The oscillating member is moved through an angle of 
90? (45? on either side of the vertical), the number of 
flexing being 10 000 and the rate of flexing 60/min. 


NOTE — A flexing is one movement, either backwards or 
forwards. 


Specimens with circular section flexible cables are 
turned through 90° in the oscillating member after 5 000 
flexing, specimens with flat flexible cables are only bent 
in a direction perpendicular to the plane containing the 
axes of the conductors. 


During the flexing test, there shall be, 


a) no interruption of the current; and 
b) no short-circuit between conductors. 


NOTE — A short-circuit between the conductors of the flexible 
cable is considered to occur if the current attains a value equal to 
twice the test current of the accessory. 


The voltage drop between each contact and the 
corresponding conductor, with a test current flowing 
having a value as prescribed for 21, shall not exceed 
10 mV. 


After the test, the guard, if any, shall not have separated 
from the body and the insulation of the flexible cable 
shall show no sign of abrasion or wear; broken strands 
of the conductors shall not have pierced the insulation 
so as to become accessible. 


24 MECHANICAL STRENGTH 


Accessories, surface mounting boxes, screwed glands 
and shrouds shall have adequate mechanical strength 
so as to withstand the stresses imposed during 
installation and use. 


Compliance is checked by the appropriate tests of 24.1 
to 24.13 as follows: 


a) 
b) 


Forall kinds of fixed socket-outlets (see 24.1). 
for fixed socket-outlets with a main part 
intended to be mounted directly on a surface 
(see 24.3). 

For portable single socket-outlets: 


1) 


с) 
with enclosures, covers or bodies other 
than thermoplastic or elastomeric material 
(see 24.2). 

with enclosures, covers or bodies of 


elastomeric or thermoplastic material (see 
24.2, 24.4 and 24.5). 


For portable multiple and combined socket 
outlets: 


1) 


2) 


d) 


with enclosures, covers or bodies other 
than thermoplastic or elastomeric material 
(see 24.1 and 24.9). 

with enclosures, covers and bodies of 
elastomeric or thermoplastic material (see 
24.2, 24.4 and 24.5). 


For plug 


2) 


e) 


1) with enclosures, covers or bodies other 


57 


IS 1293 : 2019 


than thermoplastic or elastomeric 
material (see 24.2 and 24.10). 

with enclosures, covers and bodies of 
elastomeric or thermoplastic material (see 
24.2, 24.4, 24.5 and 24.10). 


2) 


f) For screwed glands of accessories having an 
IP code higher than IP20 (see 24.6). 

g) Forplug pins provided with insulating sleeves 
(see 24.7). 

h) For shuttered socket-outlets (see 24.8). 

j) For surface mounting boxes (see 24.1). 

k) For portable socket-outlets having means for 
suspension on a wall (see 24.11, 24.12 and 
24.13). 

m) For shroud of portable socket-outlets (see 
24.19). 


24.1 The specimens are checked by applying blows by 
means of the pendulum hammer test apparatus as 
described in IS 9000 (Part 7/ Sec 7) (Test EHA), with 
an equivalent mass of 250 g. 


The mounting support shall have a mass of 10 + 1 kg 
and shall be mounted on a rigid frame by means of 
pivots. The frame is fixed to a solid wall. 


The design of the mounting is such that, 


a) the specimen can be so placed that the point 
of impact lies in the vertical plane through the 
axis of the pivot; 

b) the specimen can be removed horizontally and 
turned about an axis perpendicular to the 
surface of the plywood; and 

с) the plywood can be turned 60°, in both 


directions about a vertical axis. 


Surface-type socket-outlets and surface mounting boxes 
are mounted on the plywood as in normal use. 


Inlet openings which are not provided, with knock- outs, 
are left open; if they are provided with knock- outs, 
one of them is opened. 


Flush-type socket-outlets are mounted in a recess 
provided in a block of hornbeam or material having 
similar mechanical characteristics, which is fixed to a 
sheet of plywood and not in its relevant mounting box. 


If wood is used for the block, the direction of the wood 
fibers must be perpendicular to the direction of the 
impact. 


Flush-type screw fixing socket-outlets shall be fixed by 
means of screws to lugs recessed in the hornbeam block. 
Flush-type claw fixing socket-outlets shall be fixed to 
the block by means of the claws. 


Before applying the blows, fixing screws of main parts 


IS 1293 : 2019 


and covers are tightened with a torque equal to two- 
third of that specified in Table 1. 


The specimens are mounted so that the point of impact 
lies in the vertical plane through the axis of the pivot. 


The striking element is allowed to fall from a height 
which is specified in Table 22. 


The impact energy determined by the part of the 
specimen which projects most from the mounting 
surface is applied on all parts of the specimen, with the 
exception of parts A. 


The height of fall is the vertical distance between the 
position of a checking point when the pendulum is 
released, and the position of that point at the moment 
of impact. The checking point is marked on the surface 
of the striking element where the line through the point 
of intersection of the axes of the steel tube of the 
pendulum and the striking element and: perpendicular 
to the plane through both axes, meets the surface. 


The specimens are subjected to blows, which are evenly 
distributed. The blows are not applied to ‘knock-outs’. 


The following blows are applied: 
a) For parts A, five blows (see Fig. 25 A and 


Fig. 25 B): 

1) One blow to the centre; 

2) One blow on each of the two most 
unfavorable points between the centre and 
the edges after the specimen has been 
moved horizontally; and 

3) One blow on similar points, after the 


specimen has been turned 90° about its 
axis perpendicular to the plywood, 


b) For parts B (as far as applicable), C and D 
four blows: 

1) One blow is applied on one of the sides 
of the specimen where the blow can be 
applied, after the plywood sheet has been 
turned 60° about a vertical axis (see 
Fig. 25 C); and 
One blow on the opposite side of the 
specimen where blows can be applied, 
after the plywood sheet has been turned 
60° about a vertical axis, in the opposite 
direction (see Fig. 25 O). 

After the specimen has been turned 90° about 
its axis perpendicular to the plywood sheet: 


1) 


2) 


с) 


One blow is applied on one of the sides 
of the specimen where the blow can be 
applied, after the plywood sheet has been 
turned 60° about a vertical axis (see 
Fig. 25 D); and 

One blow on the opposite side of the 
specimen where blows can be applied, 
after the plywood sheet has been turned 
60° about a vertical axis in the opposite 
direction (see Fig. 25 D). 


2) 


If inlet openings are provided, the specimen is so 
mounted that the two lines of blows are as nearly as 
possible equidistant from these openings. 


Cover plates and other covers of multiple socket-outlets 
are treated as though they were the corresponding 
number of separate covers, but only one blow is applied 
to any one point. 


For socket-outlets, having an IP code higher than IPX0, 
the test is made with lids, if any, closed and in addition, 


Table 22 Height of Fall for Impact Tests 
(Clause 24.1) 


Sl Height of Fall Parts of Enclosures to be Subjected to the Impact " 
No. mm ИЫ —— N 
Accessories Having an IP Accessories Having an IP 
Code IPX0 Code Higher than IPX0 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 80 A and B - 
ii) 120 С A and B 
iii) 160 D C 
iv) 200 _ D 
DA Parts on the front surface, including the parts which are recessed. 
B Parts which do not project more than 15mm from the mounting surface (distance from the wall) after mounting as in normal use, 
with the exceptions of the above part A. 
C Parts which project more than 15mm and not more than 25mm from the mounting surface (distance from the wall) after mounting 
as in normal use, with the exceptions of the above part A. 
D Parts which project more than 25mm from the mounting surface (distance from the wall) after mounting as in normal use, with the 


exceptions of the above part A. 


58 


the appropriate number of blows is applied to these 
parts which are exposed when the lids are open. 


After the test, the samples shall show no damage within 
the meaning of this standard. In particular, live parts 
shall not become accessible. 


After the test on lens (windows for pilot lights) the lens 
may be cracked and/or dislodged, but it shall not be 


л 


HEET OF PLYWOOD 


SPECIMEN | “PIVOT 
25A 


PANNEAUEN 
CONTRE-PLAQU 


ECHANTILLON 


IS 1293 : 2019 


possible to touch live parts with, 
a) the test probe B of IS 1401 under the 
conditions stated in 10.1; 


b) the test probe B of IS 1401 under the 
conditions stated in 10.1, but with a force of 
10 N; and 


c) the steel wire of Fig. 10, applied with a force 


SHEET OF PLYWOOD 


25B 


PANNEAUEN 
CONTRE-PLAQUE 


ECHANTILLON 


y Z 
25 Ç 25D 
Application of the Blows 
Sketch Total Number of Blows Points of Application Parts to be Tested 
One of the centre 
One between O and P? 
25 (a) $ One between O and Q? А 
One between O and R? 
25 (b) 2 One between O and S” A 
One on the surface Т” 
25 (c) 2 One on the surface U” B, сатыр 
1) 
25 (d) 2 One on the surface V B, Cand D 


? The blow is applied to the most unfavourable point. 


One on the surface Z” 


Fic. 25 SKETCHES SHOWING THE APPLICATION OF THE BLOWS ACCORDING TO TABLE 22 


59 


IS 1293 : 2019 


of 1 N, for accessories with increased 
protection. 


In case of doubt, it is verified that it is possible to 
remove and to replace external parts, such as, boxes, 
enclosures, covers and cover-plates, without these parts 
or their insulating lining being broken. 


If a cover-plate backed by an inner cover, is broken, 
the test is repeated on the inner cover, which shall remain 
unbroken. 


Cracks not visible with the normal or corrected vision, 
without additional magnification, and surface cracks 
in fiber reinforced moldings and the like, are ignored. 


Cracks or holes in the outer surface of any part of the 
accessory are ignored if the accessory complies with 
this standard even if this part is omitted. If a decorative 
cover is backed by an inner cover, fracture of the 
decorative cover is neglected if the inner cover 
withstands the test after removal of the decorative cover. 


NOTE — Damage to the finish, small dents which do not reduce 
creepage distances or clearances below the values specified in 
27.1 and small chips which do not adversely affect the protection 
against electric shock or harmful ingress of water are neglected. 


24.2 The specimens are tested in a tumbling barrel as 
shown in Fig. 26. 


SAMPLE 


Rewirable accessories are fitted with the flexible cables 
specified in 23.2 having the smallest nominal cross- 
sectional area specified in Table 4 and a free length of 
approximately 100 mm measured from the outer end 
of the guard. 


Terminal screws and assembly screws are tightened 
with a torque equal to two-thirds of the specified in 
Table 1. 


Non-rewirable accessories are tested as delivered, the 
flexible cable being cut so that a free length of about 
100 mm projects from the accessory. 


The specimens are individually subjected to the test 
Ec: Rough handling shocks, primarily for equipment- 
type specimens, procedure 2 of IEC 60068-2-31 the 
number of falls being: 


a) 1 000, if the mass of the specimen without 
flexible cable does not exceed 100 g; 

b) 500, if the mass of the specimen without 
flexible cable exceed 100 g. but does 
not exceed 200 g; and 

c) 100, if the mass of the specimen without 
flexible cable exceeds 200 g. 


The barrel is turned at a rate of five revolutions per 
minute, ten falls per minute thus taking place. 


jr 
KZ FUP EE EP EP UFU Pn un ur 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


The axial length of the tumbling barrel, on the inside is 275 mm. 


Fic. 26 TUMBLING BARREL 


After the test, the specimen shall show no damage 
within the meaning of this standard. In particular: 


1) no part shall have become detached or 
loosened; 

2) the pins shall not have become so deformed 
that the plug cannot be introduced into a 
socket outlet complying with the dimension 
given in Annex B and also fails to comply with 
the requirements of 9.1 and 10.3; and 

3) thepins shall notturn when a torque of 0.4 Nm 
is applied, first in one direction for 1min and 


then in the opposite direction for 1 min. 


The shutters of socket-outlets shall be tested again 
according to 21.1, from paragraph 18 up to 
paragraph 23 (only the test of shutters). 


NOTES 


1 During the examination after the test, special attention is paid 
to the connection ofthe flexible cable. 


2 Small pieces may be broken off without causing rejection 
provided that the protection against electric shock is not 
affected. 


3 Damage to the finish and small dents which do not reduce 
the creepage distances or clearances below the values specified 
in 27.1 are neglected. 


24.3 The main parts of surface-type socket-outlets are 
first fixed to a cylinder of rigid steel sheet, having a 
radius equal to 4.5 times the distance between fixing 
holes, but in any case not less than 200 mm. The axes 
of the holes are in a plane perpendicular to the axis of 
the cylinder and parallel to the radius through the centre 
of the distance between the holes. 


The fixing screws of the base are gradually tightened, 
the maximum torque applied being 0.5 Nm for screws 
having a thread diameter up to and including 3 mm 
and 1.2 Nm for screws having a larger thread diameter. 


The main parts of socket-outlets are then fixed in a 
similar manner to a flat steel sheet. 


During and after the tests, the main parts of the socket 
outlets shall show no damage impairing their further 
use. 


24.4 The specimens are subject to an impact test by 
means of an apparatus as shown in Fig. 27. The 
apparatus on a pad of sponge rubber, 40 mm thick is 
placed together with the specimen in a freezer at a 
temperature of -15 + 2?C, for at least 16 h. 


At the end of this period, each specimen, in turn, is 
placed in the normal position of use as shown in Fig. 27, 
and the falling weight is allowed to fall from a height 
of 100 mm. The mass of the falling weight is 1 000 + 
2 g. 

After the test the specimen shall show no damage within 
the meaning of this standard. 


61 


IS 1293 : 2019 


24.5 The specimens are subjected to a compression test 
in the manner as shown in Fig. 8 the temperature of the 
pressure plate, of the base and of the samples being 
27 + 2°C and the force applied being 300 N. 


The specimens are first placed in the position (a) shown 
in Fig. 8, and the force is applied for Imin. They are 
then placed in the position (b) shown in Fig. 8 and again 
subjected to the force for 1 min. 


Fifteen minutes after removal from the test apparatus, 
the specimens shall show no damage within the meaning 
of this standard. 


24.6 Screwed glands are fitted with a cylindrical metal 
rod having a diameter, equal to the nearest whole 
number, below the internal diameter, in millimeters, of 
the packing. 


The glands are then tightened by means of a suitable 
spanner, the torque shown in Table 23 being applied to 
the spanner for | min. 


Table 23 Torque Test Values for Glands 


(Clause 24.6) 
SI Diameter of Test Rod Torque 
No. mm Nm 
Metal Glands of 
Glands Moulded 
Material 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Up to and including 14 6.25 3.75 
ii Above 14, up to and 7.5 5.0 
ii) including 20 10.0 7.5 
Above 20 


After the test, the glands and the enclosures of the 
specimens shall show no damage within the meaning 
of this standard. 


24.7 Plug pins provided with insulating sleeves are 
subjected to the following test by means of an apparatus 
as shown in Fig. 28. 


The test apparatus comprises a horizontally disposed 
beam, which is pivoted about its centre point. A short 
length of steel wire, Imm in diameter and bent into а 
U-shape, the base of the U being straight, 1s rigidly 
attached, at both ends, to one end of the beam, so that 
the straight part projects below the beam and is parallel 
to the axis of the beam pivot. 


The plug is held in a suitable clamp in such a position 
that the straight part of the steel wire rests on the plug 
pin, at right angles to it. The pin slopes downwards at 
an angle of 10? to the horizontal. 


The beam is loaded so that the wire exerts a force of 4 N 
on the pin. 


The plug is caused to move backwards and forwards in 


IS 1293 : 2019 


SAMPLE 


8.6 SLIGHTLY 
aa (22 ROUNDED EDGES 


NOS! 


SECTION A-A 
(ENLARGED) 


Fic. 27 APPARATUS FOR IMPACT TEST AT Low TEMPERATURE 


Fic. 28 APPARATUS FOR ABRASION TEST ON INSULATING SLEEVES OF PLUG PINS 


62 


a horizontal direction in the plane of the axis of the 
beam, So that the wire rubs along the pin. The length 
of pin thus abraded is approximately 9 mm, of which 
approximately 7 mm is over the insulating sleeve. The 
number of movements is 20 000 (10 000 in each 
direction) and the rate of operation is 30 movements 
per min. 


The test is made on one pin of each specimen. 


After the test, the pins shall show no damage which 
may affect safety or impair the further use of the plug, 
in particular, the insulating sleeve shall not have 
punctured or rucked up. 


24.8 Shuttered socket-outlets shall have the shutter so 
designed that it withstands the mechanical force which 
may be expected in normal use, for example, when a 
pin of a plug is inadvertently forced against the shutter 
of a socket-outlet entry hole. 


Compliance is checked by the following test, which is 
carried out both on specimens which have been 
submitted to the test according to 21, without and with 
previous treatment as in 16.1. 


One pin from a plug of the same system is applied 
for 1 min with a force of 40 N against the shutter of an 
entry hole in a direction perpendicular to the front 
surface of the socket-outlet. 


For shutters provided as the only means to prevent 
single pole insertion, the force shall be 75 N instead of 
40 N. 


Where the socket-outlet is designed to accept plugs of 
different types, the test is made with a pin from a plug 
with the largest size pin. 


The pin shall not come in contact with live parts. 


An electrical indicator with a voltage not less than 40 V 
and not more than 50 V is used to show contact with 
the relevant part. 


After the test, the specimens shall show no damage 
within the meaning of this standard. 


NOTE — Small dents on the surface, which does not adversely 
affect further use of the socket-outlet, are neglected. 


24.9 Rewirable multiple portable socket-outlets are 
fitted with the lightest type of flexible cable of the 
smallest nominal cross-sectional area specified in 
Table 4. 


The free end of the cable is fixed to a wall at a height 
of 750 mm above the floor, as shown in Fig. 29. 


The specimen is held so that the flexible cable is 
horizontal and then it is allowed to fall on to a concrete 
floor, eight times, the flexible cable being rotated 
through 45° at its fixing after each fall. 


63 


IS 1293 : 2019 


After the test, the specimens shall show no damage 
within the meaning of this standard; in particular, no 
part shall have become detached or loosened. 


Accessories IP code higher than IPX0 ones shall be 
submitted again to the relevant test as specified in 16.2. 


The shutters of socket-outlets shall be tested again 
according to 21 and 23 (only the test of shutters). 
NOTE — Small chips and dents which do not adversely affect 


the protection against electric shock or harmful ingress of 
water are neglected. 


24.10. The test is made on a new sample. 


The plug is placed on a rigid steel plate provided with 
holes suitable for the pins of the plug as shown as an 
example in Fig. 30. 


The distances between the centres of the holes (for 
example d, and d,) shall be the same as the distances 
of the circle circumscribed around the cross-sectional 
area of each pin in Annex B of the plugs. 


Each hole shall have a diameter equal to that of the 
circle circumscribed around the cross-sectional area of 
the pin plus 6 + 0.5 mm. 


The plug is to be so positioned on the steel plate that 
the centres of the circles circumscribing the pins 
coincide with the centres of the holes. 


A pull P equal to the maximum withdrawal force as 
given in Table 19 is applied, without jerks, for 1 min 
on each pin in turn, in the direction of the longitudinal 
axis of the pin. 


A pull is applied within a heating cabinet at a 
temperature of 70 + 2°C, 1 h after the plug has been 
placed in the heating cabinet. 


After the test, the plug is allowed to cool down to 
ambient temperature and then it shall be verified that 
no pin shall have been displaced in the body of the 
plug more than 1 mm. 


24.11 Barriers, between the space intended for the 
suspension means fixed to the wall and the live parts, 
likely to be subjected to mechanical strain when the 
portable socket-outlet is suspended on a wall, are tested 
as follows: 


A cylindrical steel rod, having a diameter of 3 mm and 
a hemispherical end with radius of 1.5 mm, is pushed 
perpendicular to the supporting wall surface, in the most 
unfavorable position, for 10 s against the barrier, the 
force being equal to 1.5 times the maximum plug 
withdrawal force (as specified in 22.2, Table 19). 


The rod shall not pierce the barrier. 


24.12 The portable socket-outlet mounted with an 
appropriate flexible cable is suspended on the wall as 


IS 1293 : 2019 


— — 2250 mm 


SPECIMEN 


750 mm 


Fic. 29 ARRANGEMENT FOR MECHANICAL STRENGTH TEST ON MULTIPLE PORTABLE SOCKET-OUTLETS 


STEEL PLATE 


AL LIII OAR 


| 


TRACTION 
SECTION A-A 


Key 
P Traction 


Fic. 30 EXAMPLE OF TEST ARRANGEMENT TO VERIFY THE FIXATION OF PINS IN THE Bopy OF THE PLUG 


in normal use, by means ofa cylindrical steel rod having During the test, the portable socket-outlet means for 
the same dimensions as the rod described in 24.11 and suspension on a wall shall not break or, if they break, 
a length sufficient to touch the rear of the barrier. live parts shall not become accessible to the standard 


A pull equal to the force prescribed in 23.2 for checking esting 


the flexible cable anchorage is applied, in the most 24.13 The portable socket-outlets is suspended on the 
unfavourable position, to the flexible cable for 10s. wall as in normal use, using a round head screw with 
shank diameter of 3 mm, and is subjected to a pull test 


64 


with the maximum withdrawal force specified, for the 
corresponding plug, as specified in Table 19 applied 
without jerks. 


The pull force is applied for 10 s perpendicular to the 
engagement face of the socket-outlet giving the greatest 
strain on the suspension means. 


During the test, the portable socket-outlets means for 
suspension on a wall shall not break in a way which 
allows live parts to become accessible to the test 
probe B of IS 1401. 


NOTE — The test of 24.11, 24.12 and 24.13 are carried out on 
each means for suspension, in the case of more than one means 
of suspension exist 


24.14 When testing the forces necessary to retain or 
remove covers, cover-plates, or parts of them, the 
accessories are mounted as for normal use, 


Flush-type socket-outlets are fixed in appropriate 
mounting boxes, which are installed as for normal use 
so that the rims of the boxes are flush with the walls, 
and the covers or cover-plates are fitted. 


Plugs and portable socket-outlets are fixed in a suitable 
manner so that the force can be applied to the cover, 
cover-plates or parts of them. 


If the cover or cover-plates are provided with locking 
means which can be operated without the aid of a tool, 
these means are unlocked. 


For fixed socket-outlets, compliance is then checked 
according to 24.14.1 and 24.14.2 (see 13.7.2). 


For plugs and portable socket-outlets compliance is 
checked according to 24.14.3. 


15 min. 


SHEET OF HARD 


Tem" MATERIAL 


ava aTaT a aa a a" a a a a a" CSC. CCE 47474 


Ода 


IS 1293 : 2019 


24.14.1 Verification of the Retention of Covers or 
Cover-Plates 


Forces are gradually applied in directions perpendicular 
to the mounting surfaces, in such a way that the resulting 
force acting on the centre of the covers, cover-plates, 
or parts of them is respectively, 


a) 40N, for covers, cover-plates or parts of them 
complying with the tests of 24.17 and 24.18; 
or 

b) 80N, for other covers, cover-plates or parts 
of them. 


The force is applied for 1 min. The covers or cover- 
plates shall not come off. 


The test is then repeated on new specimens, the cover 
or cover-plate is fitted on the wall after a sheet of hard 
material, | mm + 0.1 mm thick, has been fitted around 
the supporting frame as shown in Fig. 31. 


After the test the specimens shall show no damage 
within the meaning of this standard. 


NOTE — The sheet of hard material is used to simulate wall 
paper and may consist of a number of pieces. 


24.14.2 Verification of the Removal Covers or Cover- 
Plates 


A force not exceeding 120 N is gradually applied, in 
directions perpendicular to the mounting supporting 
surfaces, to covers, cover-plates, or parts of them by 
means of a hook placed in turn in each of the grooves, 
holes, spaces or the like, provided for removing them. 


The cover or cover-plates shall come off. 


COVER PLATE 


SUPPORTING FRAME 


Sd 


О Озо o 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


FiG 31. ARRANGEMENT FOR TEST ON COVERS OR CovER-PLATES 


IS 1293 : 2019 


The test is made 10 times to each separable part, the 
fixing of which is not dependent on screws, the removal 
force is applied each time to the different grooves, holes 
or the like provided for removing the separable part 
equally distributing as far as practicable the application 
points. 


The test is then repeated on new specimens, the cover 
or cover-plate is fitted on the wall after a sheet of hard 
material, 1 + 0.1 mm thick, has been fitted around the 
supporting frame, as shown in Fig. 31. 


After the test, the samples shall show no damage within 
the meaning of this standard. 


24.14.3 For plugs and portable socket-outlets, a force 
is gradually applied until 80N is achieved and 
maintained for 1 min, to covers, cover-plates or parts 
of them while the other parts of the accessory are fixed. 


The test shall be carried out in the most unfavourable 
conditions. 


During the test the covers, cover-plates or parts of them 
shall not come off. 


The test is then repeated with a force of 120 N. 


a) For rewirable plugs and rewirable portable 
socket-outlets the cover, the cover-plate or 
parts of them may come off during the test 
but the specimen shall show no damage within 
the meaning of this standard. 

b) For non-rewirable, non moulded-on 

accessories, during the test, the cover, the 

coverplate or parts of them may come off but 
the accessories shall be permanently useless 

(see 14.1). 


24.15 The test is made as described in 24.14, but 
applying, for 24.14.1, the following forces: 


a) 


10 N, for covers or cover-plates complying 
with the test of 24.17 and 24.18. 


b) 20N, for other covers or cover-plates. 


24.16 The test is made as described in 24.14, but 
applying, for 24.14.1, the force of 10 N for all covers 
or cover-plates. 


24.17 The gauge shown in Fig. 32 is pushed towards 
each side of each cover or cover-plates which is fixed 
without screws on a mounting or supporting surfaces, 
as shown in Fig. 33. The face B resting on the mounting/ 
Supporting surface, with the face 4 perpendicular to it, 
the gauge is applied at right angle to each side under 
test. 


In the case of a cover or cover-plate fixed without 
screws to another cover, or cover-plate or to a mounting 
box, having the same outline dimensions, the face B of 


66 


the gauge shall be placed at the same level as the 
junction; the outline of the cover or cover-plate shall 
not exceed the outline of the supporting surface. 


The distances between the face C of the gauge and the 
outline ofthe side under test, measured parallel to face 
B, shall not decrease (with the exception for grooves, 
holes, reverse tapers or the like, placed at a distance 
less than 7 mm from a plane including face B and 
complying with the test of 24.18) when measurements 
are repeated starting from point x in the direction of 
the arrow y (see Fig. 34). 


24.18 A gauge according to Fig. 35, applied with a force 
of 1.0 N shall not enter more than 1.0 mm from the 
upper part of any groove, whole or reverse taper or the 
like when the gauge is applied parallel to the mounting/ 
supporting surface and at right angle to the part under 
test, as shown in Fig. 36. 


NOTE — Verification as to whether the gauge according to 
Fig. 31 has entered more than 1.0 mm is made with reference to 
a surface perpendicular to face B and including the upper part of 
the outline of the grooves, holes, reverse tapers or the like. 


24.19 The shrouds of portable socket-outlets are 
subjected to a compression test at an ambient 
temperature of 25 + 5?C in an apparatus similar to that 
shown in Fig. 37. 


The apparatus comprises two steel jaws, having a 
cylindrical face of 25 mm radius, a width of 15 mm 
and a length of 50 mm. The length of 50 mm can be 
increased, depending on the size ofthe accessory to be 
tested. 


The corners are rounded with a radius of 2.5 mm. 


The specimens are clamped in such a way that the front 
face of the jaws coincides with the front face of the 
shroud. 


The force applied through the jaws is 20 + 2 N. 


After 1 min, and while the shrouds are still under 
pressure, the dimensions shall comply with the 
appropriate standard sheet. 


The test is repeated with the specimen rotated 90?. 


25 RESISTANCE TO HEAT 


Accessories and surface mounting boxes shall be 
resistant to heat. 


Parts intended only for decorative purposes, such as, 
certain lids, are not submitted to this test. 


25.1 The specimen is kept for 1 h in a heating cabinet 
at a temperature of 100 + 2?C. 


During the test, they shall not undergo any change 
impairing their further use, and sealing compound, if 
any, shall not flow to such an extent that live parts are 


IS 1293 : 2019 


FiG. 32 GAUGE (THICKNESS ABOUT 2 MM) FOR THE VERIFICATION OF 
THE OUTLINE OF COVERS OR COVER-PLATES 


exposed. 


After the test, the samples are then allowed to cool down 
to approximately room temperature. There shall be no 
access to live parts which are normally not accessible 
when the specimens are mounted as in normal use, even 
if the probe B of IS 1401 is applied with a force not 
exceeding 5 N. 


After the test, marking shall still be legible. 


Discoloration, blisters or slight displacement of the 
sealing compound is disregarded, provided that safety 
is not impaired within the meaning of this standard. 


25.2 Parts of insulating material necessary to retain 
current-carrying parts of the earthing circuit in position, 
as well as parts of the front surface zone of 
thermoplastic material of 2 mm width surrounding the 
phase and neutral pin entry holes of socket-outlets, shall 
be subjected to a ball-pressure test by means of the 
apparatus as shown in Fig. 38, except that insulating 
parts necessary to retain the earthing terminal in position 
in a box, shall be tested as specified in 25.3. 


The part under test shall be placed on a steel plate at 
least 3 mm thick and in direct contact with it. 


The surface of the part to be tested is placed in the 
horizontal position and the hemispherical tip ofthe test 
equipment pressed against this surface with a force of 
20 N. 


The test load and the supporting means shall be placed 
within the heating cabinet for sufficient time to ensure 
that they have attained the stabilized testing temperature 
before the test commences. 


67 


The test is made in a heating cabinet at a temperature 
of 125 + 2°C. 


After 1h, the ball shall be removed from the specimen, 
which is then immersed, in cold water for cooling down 
within | 0 s, to approximately room temperature. 


The diameter of the impression caused by the ball is 
measured and shall not exceed 2 mm. 


NOTE — When it is not possible to carry out the test on the 
sample under test, the test shall be carried out on a piece cut out 
of the sample and at least 2 mm thick which is cut out of a new 
set of aged specimens If this is not possible, up to and including 
four layers, each cut out of the same specimen may be used, in 
which case the total thickness of the layers shall be not less 
than 2.5 mm. 


25.3 Parts of insulating material not necessary to retain 
current-carrying parts and parts of the earthing circuit 
in position, even though they are in contact with them, 
are subjected to a ball-pressure test in accordance with 
25.2, but the test is made at a temperature of 70 + 2°C 
or 40 + 2?C plus the highest of temperature- rise 
determined for the relevant part during the test of 19, 
whichever is the higher. 


25.4 The specimens are subjected to a compression test 
by means of an apparatus as shown in Fig. 37, the test 
being made in a heating cabinet at a temperature 
of 80 2°C. 


The apparatus comprises two steel jaws, having a 
cylindrical face of 25 mm radius, a width of 15 mm 
and a length of 50 mm. The length of 50 mm can be 
increased, depending on the size ofthe accessory to be 
tested. 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Table 24 Resistance to Heat of Different Types or Parts of Accessories 
(Clauses 25.1, 25.2, 25.3 and 25.4) 


SI Specimen Test Test Test Test 
No. According According According According 
to 25.1 to 25.2 to 25.3 to 25.4 
0) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Surface-mounting boxes, separable covers, separable cover-plates x _ 
and separable frames with the exception of parts of the front 
surface zone of thermoplastic material of 2 mm width 
surrounding the phase and neutral pin entry holes 
i) Portable accessories with the exception of the partscovered by A x 
iii Portable accessories made of natural or synthetic rubber or a - 
mixture of both or PVC 
iv) Fixed socket-outlets with the exception of the parts covered by A X = 
v) Fixed socket-outlets made of natural or synthetic rubber or a - Е 
mixture of both 
x : Test applicable. 


- : Test not applicable. 


The comers are rounded with a radius of 2.5 mm. 


The specimen is clamped between the jaws in such a 
way that these press against it in the area where it is 
gripped in normal use, the centre line of the jaws 
coinciding as nearly as possible with the centre of this 
area. The force applied through the jaws is 20 N. 


After 1 h, the jaws are removed and the samples shall 
show no damage within the meaning of this standard. 


26 SCREWS, CURRENT-CARRYING PARTS 
AND CONNECTIONS 


26.1 Connections, electrical or mechanical, shall 
withstand the mechanical stresses occurring in normal 
use. 


Mechanical connection to be used during installation 
of accessories may be made using thread-forming 
screws or thread-cutting screws only when the screws 
are supplied together with the piece in which they are 
intended to be inserted. In addition, thread-cutting 
screws intended to be used during installation shall be 
captive with the relevant part of the accessory. 


Screws or nuts which transmit contact pressure shall 
be in engagement with a metal thread. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and, for screws 
and nuts transmitting contact pressure or which are 
operated when connecting up the accessory, by the 
following test. 


NOTE — The requirements for the verification of terminals 
are given in 12. 


The screw or nuts are tightened and loosened, 


a) 10 times for screws in engagement with a 


68 


thread of insulating material and for screws 
of insulating material. 


b) 5 times in all other cases. 


Screws or nuts in engagements with a thread of 
insulating material and screws of insulating material 
are completely removed and reinserted each time. 


The test is made by means of a suitable screwdriver or 
a suitable tool, applying a torque as specified in Table 1. 


During the test, no damage impairing the further use of 
the screwed connections shall occur, such as, breakage 
of screws or damage to the head slots (rendering the 
use of the appropriate screwdriver impossible), threads, 
washers or stirrups. 


NOTES 


1 Screws or nuts which are operated when connecting up 
accessories include screws for fixing covers or cover plates, 
etc, but not connecting means for screwed conduits and screws 
for fixing the main part of a fixed socket-outlet. 


2 The shape of the blade of the screwdriver used for the test 
must match the head of the screw to be tested. The screws and 
nuts must not be tightened in jerks. Damage to covers is ignored. 


3 Screwed connections are considered as partially checked by 
the test of 21 and 24. 
26.2 For screws in engagement with a thread of 
insulating material and which are operated when 
mounting the accessory during the installation, their 
correct introduction into the screw hole or nut shall be 
ensured. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual 
test. 


NOTE — The requirement with regard to correct introduction 
is met if introduction of the screw in a slanting manner is 
prevented, for example, by guiding the screw by the part to be 
fixed, by a recess in the female thread or by the use of a screw 
with the leading thread removed. 


IS 1293 : 2019 


MOUNTING 
SURFACE 


SOCKET-OUTLET 


MOUNTING 
SURFACE 


SURFACE 
SUPPORT 


SOCKET-OUTLET 


MOUNTING 
SURFACE 


SOCKET-OUTLET 


* Spacing piece having the same thickness as that of the supporting part. 


Fic. 33 EXAMPLES OF APPLICATION OF THE GAUGE OF FIG. 29 ON COVERS FIXED WITHOUT SCREWS ON A MOUNTING 
SURFACE OR SUPPORTING SURFACE 


26.3 Electrical connections shall be so designed that 
contact pressure is not transmitted through insulating 
material other than ceramic, pure mica or other material 
with characteristics no less suitable, unless there is 
sufficient resiliency in the metallic parts to compensate 
for any possible shrinkage or yielding of the insulating 
material. 


This requirement does not preclude designs with flat 
tinsel cord where the contact pressure is obtained from 


69 


insulating parts having such properties as to ensure 
reliable and permanent contact under all conditions of 
normal use, especially in view of shrinking, ageing or 
cold flow of the insulating part. 


Connections made by insulation piercing of tinsel cord 
shall be reliable. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and, for the last 
requirement, by a test, which is under consideration. 


IS 1293 : 2019 


ч 


_| 


15 4 


Y о) Y f 


Cases a) and b) do not comply. 
Cases c), d), e) and f) comply (compliance shall, however, also be checked with the requirements of 24.18, using the gauge 
shown in Fig. 35). 


Fic. 34 EXAMPLES OF APPLICATION OF THE GAUGE OF FIG. 29 IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE REQUIREMENTS 


NOTE — The suitability of the material is considered in respect Compliance is checked by inspection and manual test. 
of the stability of the dimensions. 
NOTES 


26.4 Screws and rivets, which serve as electrical as well 1 Spring washers may provide satisfactory locking. 


as mechanical connections, shall be locked against 2 For rivets, a non-circular shank or an appropriate notch may 
loosening and/or turning. be sufficient. 


70 


TEST ROD (METAL) | 


IS 1293 : 2019 


RIGHT-ANGLED 
SHARP EDGES 


%0.05 


ы ыы "m | 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 35 GAUGE FOR VERIFICATION OF GROOVES, HOLES AND REVERSE TAPERS 


SOCKET OUTLET 


OUNTING SURFACE 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 36 SKETCH SHOWING THE DIRECTION OF APPLICATION OF THE GAUGE OF Ес. 35 


3 Sealing compound which softens on heating provides 
satisfactory locking only for screw connections not subjected 
to torsion in normal use. 


26.5 Current-carrying parts, including those of 
terminals (also earthing terminals), shall be of a metal 
having, under the conditions occurring in the accessory, 
mechanical strength, electrical conductivity and 
resistance to corrosion adequate for their intended use. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and, if necessary, 
by chemical analysis. 


Examples of suitable metals, when used within the 
permissible temperature range and under normal 
conditions of chemical pollution, are: 


a) Copper 
NOTE — The requirement of copper used for current 
carrying parts are given in IS 14340. 


b) Analloy containing at least 58 percent copper 
for parts made from cold rolled sheet or at 


least 50 percent copper for other parts. 


71 


c) Stainless steel containing at least 13 percent 
chromium and not more than 0.09 percent 
carbon; 


Under moist conditions, metals showing a great 
difference of electro- mechanical potential with respect 
to each other shall not be used in contact with each 
other. 


Compliance is checked by a test, which is under 
consideration. 
NOTE — The requirement of this sub-clause does not apply to 


screws, nuts, washers, clamping plates and similar parts of 
terminals. 


26.6 Contacts which are subjected to a sliding action 
in normal use shall be of a metal resistant to corrosion. 


Compliance with the requirements of 26.5 and 26.6 is 
checked by inspection and in case of doubt, by chemical 
analysis. 


26.7 Thread-forming screws and thread cutting screws 
shall not be used for the connection of current carrying 


IS 1293 : 2019 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


FiG. 37 APPARATUS FOR COMPRESSION TEST FOR THE VERIFICATION OF RESISTANCE TO HEAT 


parts. 


Thread-forming screws and thread cutting screws may 
be used to provide earthing continuity, provided that it 
is not necessary to disturb the connection in normal 
use and at least two screws are used for each connection. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


27 CREEPAGE DISTANCES, CLEARANCES 
AND DISTANCES THROUGH SEALING 
COMPOUND 


27.1 Creepage distances, clearances, and distances 
through sealing compound shall be not less than the 
values shown in Table 5. 


Compliance is checked by measurement. 


For rewirable accessories, the measurements are made 
on the specimen fitted with conductors of the largest 
nominal cross-sectional area specified in Table 4, and 
also without conductors. 


The conductor shall be inserted into the terminal and 
connected in such a way that the core insulation touches 
the metal part of the clamping unit or, where the core 


72 


insulation is prevented by construction from touching 
the metal part, the outside of the obstruction. 


For non-rewirable accessories, the measurements are 
made on the specimen as delivered. 


Socket-outlets are checked when in engagement with 
a plug and also without a plug. 


Distances through slots or openings in external parts 
of insulating material are measured using a metal foil in 
contact with the accessible surface other than the 
engagement face of plugs. The foil is pushed into 
corners and the like by means of the test probe 11 of 
IS 1401, but is not pressed into openings. 


For surface-type socket-outlets classified IP20 
according to IS/IEC 60529 the most unfavorable 
conduit or cable is introduced for a distance of Imm 
into the socket-outlets, in accordance with 13.22. If the 
metal frame supporting the base ofa flush-type socket- 
outlet is movable, this frame is placed in the most 
unfavorable position. 


NOTES 


1 The contribution to the creepage distance of any groove less 
than 1 mrn wide is limited to its width. 


IS 1293 : 2019 


V 


SPHERICAL 
К= 2.5 тт . 


SPECIMEN 


FiG. 38 BALL PRESSURE TEST APPARATUS 


2 Any air gap less than 1 mm wide is ignored in computing the 
total clearance. 


3 The surface on which the main part of a socket-outlet for 
surface mounting is mounted includes any surface in contact 
with the main part when the socket-outlet is installed. If the 
main part is provided with a metal plate at the back, this plate 
is not regarded as the mounting surface. 


27.2 Insulating sealing compound shall not protrude 
above the edge of the cavity in which it is contained. 


27.3 Surface-type socket-outlets shall not have bare 
current-carrying strips at the back. Compliance with 
the requirements of 27.2 and 27.3 is checked by 
inspection. 


28 RESISTANCE OF INSULATING MATERIAL 
TO ABNORMAL HEAT, TO FIRE AND TO 
TRACKING 


28.1 Resistance to Abnormal Heat and to Fire 


Parts of insulating material which might be exposed to 
thermal stresses due to electric effects, and the 
deterioration of which might impair the safety of the 
accessory, shall not be unduly affected by abnormal 
heat and by fire. 


Compliance is checked by means of the tests as 
per 28.1.1 and, in addition, for plugs with pins provided 
with insulating sleeves by the test of 28.1.2. 


28.1.1 Glow-Wire Test 


The test is performed according to IS 11000 (Part 2/ 
Sec 1) under the following conditions: 


a) For parts of insulating material necessary to 
retain current-carrying parts and parts of the 
earthing circuit of fixed accessories in 
position, by the test made at 850°C, with the 
exception of parts of insulating material 
needed to retain the earth terminal in position 
in a box, which shall be tested at a temperature 
of 650 °C; 
NOTE — Side earthing contacts fixed to the base 
of the socket-outlet are not considered to be retained 
in position by a removable cover when the plug is 
not inserted. 


73 


b) For parts of insulating material, necessary to 
retain current carrying parts and parts of the 
earthing circuit of portable accessory in 
position, by the test made at a temperature of 
750°C; and 

For parts of insulating material not necessary 
to retain current-carrying parts and parts of 
the earthing circuit in position, even though 
they are in contact with them, by the test made 
at a temperature of 650?C. 


A current-carrying part or a part of the earthing circuit 
retained by mechanical means is considered to be 
retained in position. The use of grease or the like is not 
considered to be a mechanical means. 


External conductors cannot be considered as retaining 
the current-carrying parts. 


In case of doubt, to determine whether an insulating 
material is necessary to retain current carrying parts 
and parts of the earthing circuit in position, the 
accessory is examined without conductors while held 
in positions most likely to cause displacement of the 
current-carrying parts or parts of the earthing circuit 
with the insulating material in question removed. 


If the tests specified have to be made at more than one 
place on the same specimen, care must be taken to 
ensure that any deterioration caused by previous tests 
does not affect the result of the test to be made. 


Small parts, where each surface lies completely within 
a circle of 15 mm diameter, or where any part of the 
surface lies outside a 15 mm diameter circle and where 
itis not possible to fita circle of 8 mm diameter on any 
of the surfaces, are not subjected to the test of this sub 
clause (see Fig. 37 for diagrammatic representation). 
NOTE — When checking a surface, projections on the surfaces 


and holes which are not greater than 2 mm on the largest 
dimension are disregarded. 


The tests are not made on parts of ceramic material. 


NOTE — The glow-wire test is applied to ensure that an 
electrically heated test wire under defined test conditions does 
not cause ignition of insulating parts or to ensure that a part of 


IS 1293 : 2019 


insulating material, which might be ignited by the heated test 
wire under defined conditions, has a limited time to bum without 
spreading fire by flame or burning parts or droplets falling down 
from the tested part onto pinewood board covered with a tissue 


paper. 
If possible, the specimen should be a complete 
accessory. 


NOTE — If the test cannot be made on a complete accessory, a 
suitable part may be cut from it for the purpose ofthe test. 


The test is made on one specimen. 
The test is made applying the glow-wire once. 


In case of doubt, the test shall be repeated on two further 
specimens. 


The specimen shall be positioned during the test in the 
most unfavorable position of its intended use (with the 
surface tested in a vertical position). 


The tip of the glow-wire shall be applied to the specified 
surface of the specimen taking into account the 
conditions of the intended use under which a heated or 
glowing element may come into contact with the 
specimen. 


The specimen is regarded as having passed the glow- 
wire test if, 


a) there is no visible flame and no sustained 
glowing; or if 
b) flames and glowing at the specimen extinguish 


within 30 s after the removal of the glow-wire. 


There shall be no ignition of the tissue paper or 
scorching of the board. 


NOTE — If the material to be tested is not accessible due to the 
presence of moulded-on material, the moulded-on material should 
be removed to gain access. Alternatively, the manufacturer may 
provide the product as separate components and drawings to 
allow material retaining in position the current carrying parts 
to be tested. 


28.1.2 The specimen of a plug with pins provided with 
insulating sleeves is tested by means of the test apparatus 
as shown in Fig. 39. 


This test apparatus consists of an insulating plate A and 
of a metal part B between these two parts an air space 
of 3 mm shall be provided and this distance shall be 
obtained through means which do not impair the air 
circulation around the pins. 


The front surface of the insulating plate A shall be round 
and flat and have a diameter equal to twice the 
maximum permissible dimension of the engagement 
face of the plug. 


The thickness of this insulating plate shall be 5 mm. 


The metal part B shall be of brass and have, for a 
distance of at least 20 mm, the same shape as the 


74 


maximum outline of the plug. 


The rest of this metal part shall be so shaped that the 
accessory under test is heated through it by conduction, 
and that the heat transmission to the accessory under 
test by convection or radiation is reduced to a minimum. 


A thermocouple shall be inserted at a distance of 7 mm 
from the front surface of the metal part in a symmetrical 
position, as shown in Fig. 39. 


The dimensions of the holes for the pins in the metal 
part B shall be 0.1 mm larger than the maximum 
dimensions of the pins and the distances between pins 
shall be the same as those given in Annex B; the depth 
of the holes shall be sufficient. 


NOTE — The metal part B can be made of two or more 
component pieces, for hole cleaning purposes. 


The specimens are inserted in the test apparatus, placed 
in the most unfavorable horizontal position, when the 
test apparatus has reached a steady temperature, 
measured by means of the thermocouple, of 120 + 5°C 
for accessories having a rated current of 2.5 A and 
180 + 5°C for accessories having a higher current rating. 


The temperature is maintained at the relevant values 
for 3 h. 


The specimens are then taken out from the test 
apparatus and are allowed to cool down to room 
temperature, at which they are maintained for at least 
4 h. 


The insulating sleeves of the pins of the samples are 
then submitted to an impact test in accordance with 30 
but made at ambient temperature, and subject to a visual 
inspection. 
NOTE — During the visual inspection, no cracks on the 
insulating sleeves shall be visible with the normal o r 
corrected vision without additional magnification, and the 


dimensions of the insulating sleeves shall not be changed so as 
to impair the protection against accidental contact. 


28.2 Resistance to Tracking 


For accessories other than IP code higher than IPXO 
parts of insulating material retaining live parts in 
position shall be of material resistant to tracking. 


Compliance is checked according to IS 2824. Ceramics 
parts are not tested. 


A flat surface of the part to be tested, If possible at 
least 15 x 15 mm, is placed in a horizontal position. 


The material under test shall pass a tracking index of 
175 V using test solution A with the interval between 
drops 30 = 5s. 


No flashover or breakdown between electrodes shall 
occur before a total of 50 drops has fallen. 


INSULATING PART A 


HEATING 
ELEMENT 


MAXIMUM OUTLINE OF 
THE PLUGACCORDING 
TO THE RELEVANT 
STANDARD SHEET 


IS 1293 : 2019 


DIAMETER TWICE THE 
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE 
DIMENSION OF THE 
ENGAGEMENT FACE OF 
THE PLUG GIVEN 

IN THE RELEVANT 
STANDARD SHEET 


Fic. 39 APPARATUS FOR TESTING RESISTANCE TO ABNORMAL HEAT OF INSULATING SLEEVES OF PLUG PINS 


29 RESISTANCE TO RUSTING 


Ferrous parts, including covers and surface mounting 
boxes shall be adequately protected against rusting. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


All grease is removed from the parts to be tested, by 
immersion in an equivalent degreasing agent, for 
10 min. 


The parts are then immersed for 10 min ina 10 percent 
solution of ammonium chloride in water at a 
temperature of 27 + 5°C. 


Without drying, but after shaking off any drops, the 
parts are placed for 10 min in a box containing air 
saturated with moisture at a temperature of 27 + 5°C. 


75 


After the parts have been dried for 10 min in a heating 
cabinet at a temperature of 100 + 5?C, their surfaces 
shall show no signs of rust. 


NOTES 


1 Traces of rust on sharp edges and any yellowish film 
removable by rubbing are ignored. 


2 For small springs and the like, and for inaccessible parts 
exposed to abrasion, a layer of grease may provide sufficient 
protection against rusting. Such parts are subjected to the test 
if there is doubt about the effectiveness of the grease film, and 
the test is then made without previous removal of the grease. 


30 ADDITIONAL TESTS ON PINS PROVIDED 
WITH INSULATING SLEEVES 


The material of the pin-insulting sleeves shall be 
resistant to the stresses to which it may be subjected at 


IS 1293 : 2019 


the high temperature likely to occur in conditions 
approaching the bad connection conditions and at low 
temperatures in particular conditions of service. 


Compliance is checked by means of the following tests. 


30.1 Pressure Test at High Temperature 


The specimens are tested by means of the apparatus as 
shown in Fig. 40. This apparatus has a rectangular blade 
with an edge 0.7 mm wide, to be used in the case of 
round pins. 


The specimens are placed in position as shown in 
Fig. 40. 


The force applied through the blade is 2.5 N. 


The apparatus, with the specimen in position, is 
maintained for 2 hin a heating cabinet at a temperature 
of 200 + 5?C. 


The specimen is then removed from the apparatus and, 
within 10 s, cooled by immersion in cold water. 


The thickness ofthe insulation is measured immediately 
at the point of impression. 


The thickness, within the area of the impression shall 
be not less than 50 percent of the thickness measured 
before the test. 


NOTE — The values 2.5 N and 200 + 5?C are provisional. 


30.2 Static Damp Heat Test 


A set of three specimen is submitted to two damp heat 
cycles in accordance with IS 9000 (Part 5/ Sec 1 and 2). 


After this treatment and after regaining to ambient 


LOAD B 


temperature, the specimens are submitted to the 
following tests: 


a) Insulation resistance and electric strength test 
in accordance with 17; and 


b) Abrasion test, in accordance with 24.7. 


30.3 Tests at Low Temperature 


A set of three specimens is maintained at -15? + 2?C 
for 24 h. After recovering to ambient temperature, the 
specimens are submitted to the following tests: 


a) Insulation resistance and electric strength test, 
in accordance with 17; and 
b) Abrasion test, in accordance with 24.7. 


30.4 Impact Test at Low Temperature 


The specimens are subjected to an impact test by means 
of the apparatus as shown in Fig. 41. The mass of the 
falling weight is 100 + 1 g. 


The apparatus, on a sponge rubber pad, 40 mm thick, 
is placed, together with the specimens, in a freezer at a 
temperature of -15 + 2?C for at least 24 h. 


At the end of this period, each specimen, in turn, is 
placed in position, as shown in Fig. 41 and the falling 
weight is allowed to fall from a height of 100 mm. Four 
impacts are applied successively to the same specimen, 
rotating 1t through 90? between impacts. 


After the test, the specimens are allowed to attain 
approximately room temperature and are then 
examined. 


No cracks ofthe insulating sleeves shall be visible with 
the normal or corrected vision without additional 


0.7 


SPECIMEN SUPPORT 


FiG. 40 APPARATUS FOR PRESSURE TEST AT HIGH TEMPERATURE 


76 


SPECIMEN 


STEEL 


STEEL SUPPORT 


10kg +1kg 


“77 Gi 


SECTION A-A 
(ENLARGED) 


Er 
INTERMEDIATE AY, 
PIECE 100g " 


IS 1293 : 2019 


ml! 020 | 


SLIGHTLY 
ROUNDED EDGES 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 41 Impact TEST APPARATUS ON PINS PROVIDED WITH INSULATING SLEEVES 


magnification. 


NOTE — The cooling period of 24 h mentioned in the tests of 
30.3 and 30.4 includes the time necessary for cooling down the 
apparatus. 


31 TESTS 


31.1 Type Test 


The following shall be carried out as type tests on 
selected samples (see 5) of accessories drawn 
preferably at random from a regular lot of production 
for criteria of acceptance (see 5). 


Rating (see 6); 

Classification (see 7); 

Marking ( see 8); 

Checking of dimensions (see 9); 
Protection against electric shock (see 10); 
Provision for earthing (see 11); 
Terminals (see 12); 


со чох tA WN н 


Constructional requirements of fixed socket 

outlets (see 13); 

9 Construction of plugs and portable socket 
outlets (see 14); 

10 Interlocked socket-outlet (see 15); 


11 


12 


13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 


22 


23 


24 
25 


Resistance to ageing, to harmful ingress of 
water and to humidity (see 16); 


Insulation resistance and electric strength 
(see 17); 

Operation of earthing contacts (see 18); 
Temperature-rise (see 19); 

Making and breaking capacity (see 20); 
Normal operation (see 21); 

Force necessary to withdraw the plug (see 22); 
Flexible cables and their connection (see 23); 
Mechanical strength (see 24); 

Resistance to heat (see 25); 

Screws, current carrying parts and connections 
(see 26); 

Creepage distances, clearances and distance 
through sealing compound (see 27); 
Resistance of insulation material to abnormal 
heat, to fire and to tracking (see 28); 
Resistance to rusting (see 29); and 
Additional tests on pins provided with 
insulating sleeves (see 30). 


31.1.1 The specimen subjected to type tests shall pass 
the tests for providing conformity with the requirements 
of this standard. 


IS 1293 : 2019 
31.2 Acceptance Tests 


The following shall constitute acceptance test: 


a) Marking (see 8); 
b) Resistance to harmful ingress of water and to 
humidity (see 16.2 and 16.3); 


c) Insulation resistance and electric strength 
(see 17); 
d) Temperature-rise (see 19); 


e) Making and breaking capacity (see 20 ); and 
f) Mechanical strength (see 24). 


31.2.1 A recommended sampling procedure for 
acceptance test 1s specified in Annex F. 


31.3 Routine Tests 


The following shall constitute routine tests: 


a) Marking (see 8); and 
b) Electric strength (Flash test) (see 17.3). 


ANNEXA 
(Clauses 3.35 and 3.36) 
EXAMPLES OF MEMBRANES AND GROMMETS 


BOX 


ENTRY 
MEMBRENE 


ENVELOPE 


78 


PROTECTIVE GROMMET 
MEMBRENE 


IS 1293 : 2019 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 9.1) 
DIMENSIONS OF PLUGS AND SOCKET-OUTLETS 


| ENGAGEMENT 
FACE 
| INSULATION 
THICKNESS 
0.3 mm MIN. SPACE FOR 
SHUTTER 


79 


IS 1293 : 2019 


Rating 
2.5 Amm 6A mm 16A mm 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
A _ 22.2 + 0.15 28.6 + 0.15 
B 19.10 + 0.15 19.1 £ 0.15 25.4 € 0.15 
- + 0.025 + 0.025 
° 7-06 | _ 0.050 0 — 0.050 
+ 0.025 + 0.025 + 0.025 
D 9:08 _ 0.050 Шай _ 0.050 1-00 — 0.050 
+ 1.04 + 1.04 + 1.04 
E 15.9 _ 043 15.9 2043 20.6 _ 043 
= + 1.04 + 1.04 
G” , Min 7.94 7.94 9.52 
H 5.16 to 7.54 5.16 to 7.54 6.76 to 9.12 
L 7.5 9 
M 4.58 Max 6.56 Max 
NOTES 
H = distance between the base of plug and socket outlets at position of first contact of live pins. 
Dimension ‘G’ is the minimum distance between the pins (live and neutral) and the periphery of the plug. If is not 
applicable for the earth pin. 
L = Insulation length of current-carrying plug pins. 
M = Diameter of current —carrying plug pin with insulation. 


80 


Gauge for checking impossibility of single-pole insertion 
of plugs into two-pole socket-outlets 2.5A, 6A, 250 V 


Rating 
25Amm 6Amm 16A mm 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
x 19.1 19.1 25.4 
dl 4.58 4.58 6.56 
d2 5.08 5.08 7.06 
P 19.10.15 19.1 +0.15 25.4 0.15 


81 


IS 1293 : 2019 


The total mass of the gauge is 200 = 5 g. It is made of 
hard corrosion resistant metal providing sufficient 
rigidity (e.g. stainless steel). 


The test is made with the engagement face of the socket- 
outlet being horizontal. The gauge is applied under its 
own mass in any conceivable position. 


It shall not be possible to touch a socket-contact 
assembly with one gauge pin only. 


An electric indicator with a voltage not less than 40 V 
and not exceeding 50 V is applied to show contact. 


The tolerances of the gauge shall be specified in 9.1. 


IS 1293 : 2019 


ANNEX C 
(Clauses 9.1 and 9.2) 
GAUGES FOR PLUGS AND SOCKET-OUTLETS 


C-1 ‘GO’ GAUGES FOR PLUGS 


C-1.1 The gauge (see Fig. 42) is to prove correct 
spacing of plug pins. It accepts the plugs with plug pins 
at any centres that can be accepted without interference 
in socket outlets gauged by the maximum and minimum 
socket gauges. 


C-1.2 In addition, it proves the absence of axial 
projections on the face of the plug base when a plug is 


RADIUS A STRUCK 
FROM PIN CIRCLE 
CENTRE 


ЕТЕ 


pum Я 


2 x 


fully inserted into the gauge, and it also indicates 
accuracy of projection of the plug pins from the face of 
the plug if the end of each plug pin lies within the 
appropriate step on the back of the gauge when the 
plug is fully inserted. 


C-2 ‘GO’ GAUGES FOR SOCKET-OUTLETS 


C-2.1 Two gauges (see Figs. 43 and 44) are required, 
each having pins of the maximum diameter specified in 


SECTION 22 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


82 


Annex B, but one gauge having its pins so set that its 
complete insertion into socket-outlet proves that the 
socket-outlet will accept without interference, a plug 
having plug pins at the maximum centre distance and 
the other gauge having its pins so set that its complete 


IS 1293 : 2019 


insertion into a socket-outlet proves that the socket- 
outlet will accept without interference a plug having 
plug pins at the minimum centre distance. The socket- 
outlet gauges also prove the absence of axial projection 
on the face of the socket-outlets. 


Rating A u v w X y E F, G J K R 
F2 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (A (12 (13) 
6 13.83 26.33 7.24 13.79 24.31 7.6 16.92 21.67 20.50 15.75 27.18 17.02 
16 17.53 33.66 8.89 18.16 32.64 10.2 21.67 29.62 2845 20.50 32.26 21.59 
Tolerance +0.01 +0.00 +0.00 +0.00 +000 +025 +001 +001 +0.00 +0.00 - % 0.25 
-0.01 —0.001 -0.01 -0.01 -0.01 -0.25 -0.00 -0.00 -0.01 -0.01 _ — 0.25 


NOTE—The drawingsarenot intended to be mandatory regarding detailsof construction. 


Fic. 42 ‘Go’ GAUGE For PLUG 


T — 


i 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


83 


IS 1293 : 2019 


C D E - 


Rating A V 

(1) (2) 

6 26.33 

16 33.66 

Tolerance *0.01 
-0.00 


(3) 
24.31 
32.64 
*0.01 
-0.00 


(4) (5) (6) 
7.09 5.10 16.92 
8.74 7.09 21.67 
+0.00 | 40.00 +0.00 
-0.01 -0.01 -0.01 


(7) 
21.67 
29.62 
+0.00 
-0.01 


P=Y+C/2 S 

(8) (9) 
15.70 1.98 
20.69 2.36 
*0.005 *0.25 
-0.000 -0.00 


Fic. 43 Maximum ‘Go’ GAUGE FOR SOCKET-OUTLET 


SECTION Z-Z 
All dimensions in millimetres. 
Rating A V Y C D E F O = X + C/2 S T 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
6 13.83 13.79 7.09 5.10 16.92 21.67 10.44 1.98 1.57 
16 17.53 18.15 8.74 7.09 21.67 29.62 13.45 2.36 1.98 
Tolerance +0.00 +0.00 +0.00 +0.00 +0.00 +0.00 +0.00 *0.25 *0.25 
-0.01 -0.01 -0.01 -0.01 -0.01 -0.01 -0.005 -0.00 -0.00 


Fic. 44 Minimum ‘Go’ GAUGE FOR SOCKET-OUTLET 


84 


IS 1293 : 2019 


ANNEX D 
(Normative) 
(Clause 14.22) 
SWITCHES INCORPORATED IN PORTABLE SOCKET-OUTLETS 


D-1 Switches incorporated in portable socket-outlets 
shall comply with the relevant part of IS 3854 or 
IS/IEC 61058. 


Switches complying with IEC 61058-1 shall have the 
following minimum classification: 


a) Pollution degree :2 
Тһе rating of (һе switch shall not be lower than (һе b) Rated impulse withstand voltage : 2 500 V 
lowest rating of the о ог ће incorporated с) Level of resistance to fire with test : 750 °С 
overcurrent protective GevIcE according to glow wire temperature 
Switches marked with ‘OFF’ state shall be of normal d) Number of operating cycles : 10 000 
gap construction and shall disconnect all the live poles. 
ANNEX E 
(Informative) 


(Clause 14.24) 
ALTERNATIVE GRIPPING TESTS 


E-1 GRIPPING TEST E1 


Prior to testing, the reference plugs shown in Fig. 45 
shall be cleaned with a metal cleaner. 


The reference plug, the plug to be tested, and the hands 
of each person conducting the test shall be washed with 
soap and water, rinsed, and then dried. 


The test apparatus consists of a measuring device 
equipped with a means to securely attach both the 
reference plug and the plug to be tested, in a manner 
that reduces the likelihood of rotational movement 
during the pulls. An engagement face simulating the 
use of a plug in a socket-outlet of the same system, 
having an opening for the plug pins, shall be secured to 
the movable member. 


NOTE — Other methods for measuring force may be used. 
The mounting arrangements for the plug being tested 


shall be such that the face of the plug is flush with the 
faceplate. 


A typical apparatus is shown in Fig. 46. 


The plug to be tested with the flexible cable cut off 
close to the plug shall be securely attached to the test 
apparatus. 


85 


The person performing the test shall grip the plug to be 
tested, with either hand in a manner intended to apply 
the maximum pull force. 


A steady straight pull shall be applied until the plug 
pulls free from the person’s hand. 


The person applying the force shall not view the force 
indicator during the pull. 


The maximum pull force applied during the pull shall 
be recorded. 


Immediately following the pull test, the reference plug 
shall be attached to the test apparatus and a comparison 
pull made using the same hand. 


The maximum pull force shall be recorded. 


The ratio of the force for the plug under test, to that 
for the reference plug shall be calculated and recorded. 


The comparison pull procedure described above shall 
be repeated on the same plug an additional two times 
by the same person. 


The ratio for each pair of pulls (test plug/reference plug) 
shall be calculated and recorded. 


One person shall test three plugs (total nine comparison 


IS 1293 : 2019 


—— 


В mue 


All dimensions in milimetres. 


Material: for example heat-treated steel. 


Surface roughness of the gripping surface: between 0.6 im and 0.8 im. 


1 Hole for retaining pins. 


NOTE — The dimensions are to suit the test specimen and those of Fig. E-2. 


Fic. 45 REFERENCE PLUG For GRIPPING TEST 


pulls) as described above with the ratio for each pair 
of pulls being calculated and recorded for all three 
plugs. If the ratio of the pull force (plug under test/ 
reference plug) for each pair of pulls resulting from 
the tests carried out by this person is 0.8 or greater, the 
test shall be stopped and the results considered 
acceptable. 


If the ratio is lower than 0.8, two additional people 
shall test three plugs each (for a total of nine comparison 
pulls per person), as described above. 


The ratio for each pair of pulls (plug under test/ 
reference plug) shall be calculated and recorded. 


The results are considered acceptable if all of the 
following conditions are met: 


a) the ratio for each pair of pulls (test/reference 
plug) is 0.55 or greater for at least two pulls 
(of the three pulls performed) on each plug; 

b) atleast two (of the three) plugs tested by each 
person comply with item a); and 

c) at least two persons’ test results comply with 


item b). 


Ifonly one person obtains results that comply with item 
b) then at the manufacturer’s request, two persons not 


86 


previously involved in the testing may test three plugs 
each as previously described. 


The results are considered acceptable if both of the 
additional persons’ test results comply with items a) 
and b). 


No result should be lower than the maximum 
withdrawal force for the relevant socket-outlet as 
specified in Table 19. 


E-2 GRIPPING TEST E2 


This test consists of a verification of one of the following 
characteristics of the plug under test: 


a) the plug has a usable length for gripping of at 
least 55 mm in axial direction; or 

the plug has such indent(s) that a ball with a 
diameter of (12 + 0.1) mm can penetrate 
radially into the body at least 2 mm from two 
opposite directions or at least 4 mm from one 


direction; or 


b) 


с) 


the plug has special means for withdrawal (for 
example hooks, rings). 


The results are considered acceptable if at least one of 
the above conditions is fulfilled. 


оът 


Simulated engagement face 

Hole for introduction of fixing means 
Holes for pins for retention of fixing means 
Measuring device 


NOTE — The figure is for guidance only and is not govern the design of the test apparatus. 


Fic. 46 EXAMPLE OF THE TEST APPARATUS FOR PLUG GRIPPING TEST 


87 


IS 1293 : 2019 


IS 1293 : 2019 


ANNEX F 
(Clauses 31.2.1) 
SAMPLING PROCEDURE 


F-1 LOT 


F-1.1 In any consignment, all samples of the same type, 
designation, rating and manufactured under essentially 
similar conditions or procedures or production shall 
be grouped together to constitute a lot. 


F-1.2 From each lot, a certain number of samples as 
specified in Table 24 shall be selected at random and 
subject to tests specified in 31.2. 

F-2 CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 


F-2.1 In Table 24, М, is the size of first samplel. If 


the number of failures is greater than or equal to Cj, 
the lot shall be considered to be conforming to this 
standard and accepted. If the number of failure is 
greater than or equal to C, the lot shall be rejected. If 
the number of failure is between C, and С», further 
sample of N, pieces shall be taken and subjected to 
all tests. 


F-2.1.1 If the number of failures in the two samples 
combined is less than C, the lot shall be accepted 
otherwise rejected. 


Table 24 Sampling Plan 
(Clause F-2.1) 


SI Lot Size Ni N; (N;-N5) С, с, 
Хо. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
і) 51 to 100 10 20 30 0 
3 
ii) 101 to 200 13 26 39 0 5 
1 
iii) 201 to 300 20 40 60 1 5 
iv) 301 to 500 25 50 75 1 6 
v) 501 to 800 35 70 105 2 7 
vi) 800 to 1 300 50 100 150 3 10 
vii) 1 300 and above 75 150 225 12 


88 


(Continued from second cover) 


Part 1: General requirements’, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission with the following 
modifications: 

a) Accessories ratings covered are only up to and including 16 A and 250 V. 

b) Combined socket-outlet has been covered. 

с) Ambient test condition. 

d) Schedule of routine, acceptance and type tests have been included. 

e) Rated voltage covered up to and including 250 V. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of atest or analysis, shall be rounded offin accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules of rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 14 (11714). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 С.І.Т. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


