( Reaffirmed 1999 )

IS : 9854 - 1981

Indian Standard
CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION MILK DELIVERY VANS
Dairy
Chairman
SHRI V. H. SHAH

OF

Equipment

Sectional

Committee,

AFDC

35

Representing

Kaira District Cooperative Ltd, Anand

Milk Producers' Union

Members SHRI R. N. SHAH ( Alternate to

Shri V. H. Shah )
SHRI H. K. AGRAWAL Glaxo Laboratories ( India ) Limited, Bombay SHRI M. S. PURI ( Alternate ) SHRI ASOKEBASAK Dairy Development Commissioner, Maharashtra State, Bombay DR A. P. DESHMUKH( Alternate ) Department of Agriculture PC Animal Husbandry, SHRI A. K. BANERJEE Government of Bihar, Patna SHRI R. P. BANERJEE Chemical Vessels Fabricators ( P ) Ltd, Faridabad SHR~ D. P. CHOWDHURY ( Alternate ) SHRI BHANU C. SANGHANI Unicorn Industries, Secunderabad SHRI T. R. JANARDHAN ( Alternate ) SHRI I. P. BH~~IN The Haryana Dairy Development Cooperative Federation Ltd, Chandigarh SHRI T. S. CHANDRASEKARAN Milk Commissioner, Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras
BRIG B. S. DAH~YA SHRI SHAHID ALI ( Alternate ) SHRI N. DASGUPTA Stainco Enterprises Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI S. DASGUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI D. B. DESHMUKH Vulcan-Lava1 Limited, Bombay SHRI N. J. KESHAVDAS( Alternate ) SHRI S. GANESH National Committee on Science & Technology, Delhi SHRI A. S. GARG National Dairy Development Board, Anand SHR~I. D. MOUDGILL ( Alternate ) JOINT COMMISSIONER ( DAIRY Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation, New Delhi DEVELOPMENT ) SHR~S. L. TULI ( Alternate ) Directorate of Military New Delhi Farms ( Ministry

of Defence ),

New

( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1981 STANDARDS INSTITUTION under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and

This publication

INDIAN is protected

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the nublisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of couyright under the said Act.

IS : 9854- 1981
( Continued from page 1 ) Members
SHRI M. N. KHAN SHRI G. S. MANN ( Alternate) SHFCI A. R. A. KRISHNAN SHRI J. P. PAL

Representing Delhi Milk Scheme, New Delhi of Inspection
of

Directorate Genera1 Defence ), Kanpur SHRI B. K. GHOSH ( Alternate )
Milk Commissioner, Calcutta

( Ministry
West

of

Government

Bengal,

SHRI B, SEN GUPTA ( AIternate ) SHRI S. D. PANDIT Larsen & Toubro Limited, Bombay SHRI P. S. GUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI V. S. PANDYA Venus Trading Company, Anand SHRI M. S. PANDYA ( Alternate > Mehsana District Cooperative Milk Producers' Union SHRI V. M. PATEL Ltd, Mehsana SHRI M. V. CHAUDHARI( Alternate > The A. P. V. Engineering Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI RAJINDERBATRA SHRI B. A. KHURODY ( Alternate ) The Andhra Pradesh Dairy Development Corporation SHRI K. RAMAKRISHNARAO Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI M. A. NARASIMHALU( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, New SHRI T. RAMASUBRAMANIAN Delhi SHRI K. L. NANGIA ( Alternate ) National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), Karnal DR S. C. SARMA SHRI V. P. ANEJA ( Alternate ) Hindustan National Glass & Industries Limited, SHRI C. K. SOMANY Calcutta SHRI D. D. KOTHARI ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member ) SHRI T. PURNANANDAM,

Director ( Agri & Food ) Secretary
SHRI K. P. MAITRA Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI

L

2

IS : 9854 - 1981

Indian Standard
CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION MILK DELIVERY VANS
0. FOREWO RD

OF

by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 Suly 1981, after the draft finalized by the Dairy Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 The milk delivery vans are used to transport by road milk in bottles or cans from dairies or milk processing plants to milk distribution centres. The vans are designed to be mounted on truck chassis. Pasteurized milk in bottles or cans or other containers can be stored and transported at desired temperatures without spoilage. The capacity and the type of van has to be decided on the basis of number of bottles or cans to be transported, the distance to be covered, the weather condition and the road regulations. 0.3 The purchaser is also required to make arrangements for the truck chassis, get the drawings and axle loads approved by the local transport authorities, as well as arrange to build the body thereon. 0.4 The overall dimensions of the milk delivery van with accessories shall not in any way infringe the local transport authority regulations in force from time to time. 0.5 This standard covers the van body panelling as well as the structural components made from aluminium or aluminium alloy. 0.6 The structural details of the body have to be decided between the purchaser and the fabricator. 0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off inaccordance with IS : 2-1960X. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.
-1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the requirements of driver's cabin as well as insulated milk delivery van body with inner and outer panels and structuralsmfabricated from aluminium alloy.

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 3

IS : 9854 - 1981 1.1.1 This standard does not cover specifications from truck chassis, its running gear, or its accessories or any parts thereof. 2. ~GENERAL DESCRIPTION 2.1 The body of the van shall consist of the aluminium -alloy extruded section for structure with inner and outer aluminium alloy sheet panelling and insulating material. It shall also be provided with necessary fittings and accessories and supports for mounting the body on the truck chassis. 2.2 Typical general arrangements, drawings of milk delivery van mounted on chassis are shown in Fig. 1, with attendant compartment. The attendant compartment could be deleted as per individual's requirements. 3. SHAPE 3.1 The general shape of the body of the van shall be rectangular with flat sides, slightly curved roof with round corners (to allow for rain water to easily flow off) with double-loaf doors at the rear end hinged suitably to fully open outwards. At least two drainage holes of size 6 to 12 mm, about 50 mm away on the floor from the front end should be provided to drain out milk or water when the floor is washed with water. 4. DIMENSIONS 4.1 Dimensions of the milk delivery van should be in accordance with the Motor Vehical Rules. However, a maximum over-hang of 50 percent of the wheel base should be kept.
by

NOTE - It is so done so that the maximum utility of the chassis could be obtained fabricating larger body under the Rules of the Motor Vehicle Act.

5. MATERIAL 5.1 Driver's Cabin 5.1.1 The frame work of the cabin should be made of 1.6 mm thick steel sheet ( see IS : 1079-1973* ). The panels of the cabin shall preferably be of pressed sections with all connections bolted or arc-welded with gusset plates at joints. 5.1.2 The outer panelling and the interior top of the driver's cabin should be of 1.20 mm aluminium alloy sheets conforming to 19 000, 31 000 or 51 300 and in H 2 temper of IS : 737-1974t with joints at top re-riveted. The rear panels shall be blind riveted by means of beading to the frame work.
*Specification for hot rolled carbon steel sheet and strip ( rhird revision ). tspecification for wrought aluminium and aluminium alloy, sheet and strip ( for general engineering purposes ) ( second revision ).

4

IS : 9854- 1981 glass ( see IS : 2553-1971" ) for the doors and windows be provided to ensure better life of the same. The wind screen glass ( see IS : 2553-1971" ) fitted in the frame should be provided.
on either side should

5.1.3 Good quality

5.1.4 The driver and the attendant shall be provided with comfortable seats fabricated out of mild steel pipes and fitted with foam rubber seat and The driver% seat should be adback rest trimmed in rexin of good quality. justable for to and fro and up and down movement for a movement of at least 50 mm on either side. The driver's cabin floor shall be covered with rubber matting. 5.2 The structural framework of the body should be constructed using aluminium alloy extruded sections conforming to 64 430 in W P condition of IS : 733-19751_ and mouldings and finisher sections conforming to 63 400 in The joints to be either bolted or riveted W condition of IS : 733-19757. construction through cleats in extruded aluminium alloy sections or gussets of aluminimum alloy sheets. The body structure should be suitably designed so that between exterior and interior panels of sides and roof and under the floor suitable insulation can be used. 5.2.1 One rub-rail should be provided at the skirt level on each side ( outside ) of the body to its full length to protect the side panels from minor damages. 5.2.2 Precaution All mild steel bolts and nuts used should be preferably galvanized or cadmium plated to avoid galvanic corrosion when in contact Simharly, all aluminium surfaces coming in contact with with aluminium. either steel, wood or any other material, should be coated with zinc chromate Aluminium alloy rivets used should conform jointing compound or primer. to either 64 430 or 55 000 of IS : 740-1977$. alloy chequered 5.3 Floor - The floor is to be made of either aluminium plate in alloy conforming to 65 032 in W P condition of IS : 737-19749 or using extruded aluminium alloy floor plank sections in alloy conforming to 64430 in W P condition of IS : 733-1975t. The floor-in chequered plate or plank sections can be fastened to floor structure by either bolting or riveting, observing the precautions as mentioned under 5.2.2 The flooring should be made in such a way that it should have no mudguard protrusion inside and it should be possible to move the crates or cans easily from the rear end of the body to the front end. *Specification for safety glass ( second revision ). iSpecification for wrought aluminium and aluminium alloy bars, rods, and sections ( for general engineering purposes ) (second revision ). $Suecification for wrought aluminium and aluminium alloys, rivet stock for general enginkering purposes ( second revision ). @pecification for wrought aluminium and aluminium alloys, sheet and strip ( for general engineering purposes ). 5

IS : 9854 - 1981 5.4 Panelling 5.4.1 The interior and exterior of the body sides and roof shall be panelled with aluminium sheets, in alloy conforming to 19 000, 31000 or 51300 and in H2 temper of IS : 737-1974". Minimum l-20 mm thick sheets in place of these alloys may be used.

5.4.2 All panels should be water-tight top jointed and close pitch riveted to the roof sticks and the side pillars. All outside joints in the panelling should be covered with aluminium moulding strips. 5.4.3 The inside of the front-end walls and the rear doors of the body shall be covered with aluminium alloy extruded flat mouldings of 5 mm thick, 35 mm wide be used at distances of 300 mm centres from -the floor up to the roof height to act as stiffeners/buffers protecting the interior panels from crates during loading and in transit.
NOTE - On the interior side, two aluminium rails may be provided on each side alongwith the hook for tying milk cans.

5.5 Insulation - The body, sides, front and the rear portion (including rear doors ) and roof shall be insulated by means of expanded polystyrene (normal density 16 kg/m3 ) of 25 mm thickness between the panels with bonding material. Insulating material should be well protected against entry of water through the panel claddings ( joints ) from outside as well as.from inside whilst washing or during rains. 6. FITTINGS
6.1 Doors and Windows -

Two doors at the rear with hinges of such a design as to enable the doors to open to 270" shall be provided with heavy locking arrangement. The doors should remain in flush with the sides of the body wall when fully opened. Alternatively, the opening should be 1.3 m wide and the doors in two halves to be so designed as to lie flush with the rear wall. The doors and the windows should be totally dust-proof. 6.1.1 Each door should have three hinges suitable for L8 mm pins. Hasp and staple of 18 mm size in ~mildsteel execuation shall be provided for locking the doors. Suitable hook shall be provided for keeping the doors in open condition. 6.1.2 Steps in the panel with foot-rest of chequered aluminium plates should be provided on each entrance of the body of the van. 6.1.3 The doors for crew compartment should be provided with sliding windows as shown in Fig. 1 with locks, handles, etc. *Specificationfor wrought aluminium and aluminium alloys, sheet and strip ( for general engineeringpurposes ). 6

r

./`--`1
460 LENGTH OF BODY ? ---l i `l \

J
CAB 420 WHEEL OVERALL

DOOR.

750

LENGTH

OF

BODY

All dimensions

in Centimetres.

FIG. 1 MILK DELIVERY VAN

IS : 9854 - 1981 6.1.4 Rear bumper fabricated out of 150 X 75 mm mild steel channel shall be fixed at the rear of the body. 6.2 Lighting - Three roof lamps with protection mesh, one in the driver's cabin and minimum two in the rear compartment operated by a switch from the driver's cabin shall be provided. The electric wiring of the cab lightand rear lights should go over the outside surface of the ceiling and should run in conduit pipes. Parking lights both in front and rear, reversing lights, and stop lights shall be provided in addition to normal front adjustable two lights. The rear lights should be embedded in the body so that no portion protrudes outside. 6.3 A set of printed registration number plates, licence holder, driver's handoperated signal, rear view mirror, bulb horn, mud flaps, holding straps for entering into the rear body, etc, shall be provided. 7. PAINTING 7.1 If desired by the purchaser, the exterior of the cabin shall be painted in synthetic enamel paint of desired shade. The interior body should be left in bare aluminium. 7.2 All the mild steel parts of the body and the van shall be painted with anti-corrosive primer before these shall be fitted. 8. TESTS 8.1 Proper Sealing of Rear Doors, Crew Doors and Driver's Cabin Door 8.2 Road Test 9. MARKING 9.1 The van shall be marked legibly and permanently with the following particulars: a) Manufacturer's name, trade-mark or initials; b) Manufacturer's identification; c) Maximum load carrying capacity of the van; and d) Other markings, if any. In accordance with road transport authority regulations.

8

