**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13808-1 (1993) : Quality management for hospital 
services (upto 30 bedded hospitals) Guidelines : Part lOut 
patient Department (OPD) and emergency services [MHD 14: 
Hospital Planning] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13808 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 

t^sff ^ f^^ TTTTT^T sr^^ srfeTT - 'TT^^^ f^TU^ 

Indian Standard 

QUALITY MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES FOR 

OUT-PATIENT DEPARTMENT ( OPD ) AND 

EMERGENCY SERVICES — GUIDELINES 

PART 1 UP TO 30-BEDDED HOSPITALS 



UDC 362111 :616 



© BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

August 1993 Price Group 6 



Hospital and Medical Care Services Sectional Committee, MSD 8 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Hospital and Medical Care Services Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Management and Systems Division Council. 

There is a felt need for quality management and quality assurance procedures in health care 
delivery system so as to make the same more effective, economical and accountable. Once a health 
and medical care facility has been planned and equipped with proper quality of instruments and 
equipment, there is a need to manage the facility scientifically so that quality service is provided to 
patients. While basic management pnnciples and individual skills are helpful in such efforts, 
optimum results can be achieved only if certain standards and guidelines are available for the 
management and operational systems of health and medical care services. For this purpose, it 
would be necessary, as a first step, to lay down norms and standards and then to provide the 
requisite infrastructure needed for achieving the desired targets. 

The purpose of this standard is to provide guidelines for evolving well-planned and systematic 
procedures which would result in quality health care to the patients relating to OPD and emergency 
services in a 30-bedded hospital. 

Until now, quality concepts were applied in the hospital environment in fragments. The medical 
staff was concerned with the quality of its actions to control and monitor only the clinical and 
nursing aspects of care. Other services in the hospital, such as, supportive and diagnostic services, 
have their own quality assurance programmes. But what is lacking is the integrated approach. 
The infrastructure must facilitate high-quality performance from every sub-system within the 
hospital for effective and efficient patient care. Smooth functioning of the supportive and utility 
systems will facilitate high quality of technical and professional care leading to improved patient 
satisfaction. 

This standard has been prepared, keeping in view the minimum resources available with respect to 
functional, such as, space; manpower; instruments and equipment; and building requirements for 
OPD and emergency services for 30-bedded hospitals. 

This standard is mainly for 30-bedded general hospitals such as community health centres/sub- 
district hospitals/intermediate hospitals. Other standards in this series which will be published in 
due course are as follows. 

Quality management procedures for: 

Diagnostic and blood transfusion services — Guidelines 
Wards, nursing services and operation theatre — Guidelines 
Hospital support services — Guidelines 
Hospital engineering services — Guidelines 
Part I Up to 30-bedded Hospitals 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 NOVEMBER 1994 

TO 

IS 13808 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 QUALITY MANAGEMENT 

PROCEDURES FOR OUT-PATIENT DEPARTMENT 

(OPD) AND EMERGENCY SERVICES — GUIDELINES 

PART 1 UP TO 30.BEDDED HOSPITALS 

( First cover page, page 1, title ) — Substiluie the following for the existing 
title: 

EQUALITY MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITAL SERVICES 
( UP TO 30.BEDDED HOSPITALS ) — GUIDELINES 

PART 1 OUT-PATIENT DEPARTMENT (OPD) AND EMERGENCY 

SERVICES' 

( Second cover page, Foreword, para 4 ) — Insert the following after this 
para: 

*The 0>minittec responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at 
Annex E.' 

( Second cover page, Foreword ) — Add the following para at the end: 

*This series of standards for 30-bedded hospitals covers only a part of quality 
management aspect in hospital services and relates to infrastructure, skills, 
procedures and systems, etc, which is a prescription type provision, adherence to 
which is expected to result in ser\icc of desired quality. The second part, 
comprising of identification of attributes of quality and quantifying them, that is, 
performance type of standards for hospitals services would be published in due 
course.' 

( Page 1, clause 1 ) — Substitute *1S 13808 ( Part 2 ) : 1993 Quality 
management for hospital services ( up to 30-bedded hospitals ) — Guidelines: 
Part 2 Diagnastic and blood transfusion services* for iS 13909 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 
Quality management procedures for deagnostic and blood transfusion services 
— Guidelines: Part 1 Up to 30-beddcd hospitals'. 



(MSD8) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



IS 13808 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 



Indian Standard 

QUALITY MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES FOR 
OUT-PATIENT DEPARTMENT (OPD) AND 
. EMERGENCY SERVICES — GUIDELINES 



PART 1 UP TO 30-BEDDED HOSPITALS 



1 SCOPE 

This standard lays down guidelines for quality 
management procedures for OPD and emergency 
services offered in 30-bedded general hospitals. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard. 



IS No. 



Title 



12433 (Part 1) : Basic requirements for hospital 
1988 planning : Part 1 Up to 30-bcdded 

hospitals 

13909 (Part 1) : Quality management procedures for 
1993 diagnostic and blood transfusion 

services — Guidelines : Part 1 Up 
to 30-bcdded hospitals 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions 
shall apply. 

3.1 Ambulatory Care 

Medical care provided to the non-resident patients. 
The patient may walk or may be brought-in on wheel- 
chair/bed by the relatives. 

3.2 Curative Medicine 

The process of attempting to remove the disease from 
the patient. 

3.3 Diagnostic Services 

The procedure involving the use of technology by 
medical or paramedical personnel to know the nature, 
extent and the cause of disease. 

3.4 Emergency or Casualty Services 

Services provided in situation in which medical and/ 
or surgical attention is required immediately to avoid 
possible loss of life or permanent damage. 

3.5 Family Welfare 

Recognition of family as a focal point of health care 
and the right place for integrating preventive, promotive 
and curative services (comprehensive health services). 



3.6 Health Education 

It is a process that informs, motivates and helps people 
to adopt and maintain healthy practices and life styles, 
advocates environmental changes as needed to facilitate 
this goal and conducts professional training and reseanrh 
to the same end. 

3.7 Medical Audit 

The systematic and critical evaluation of the quality 
of medical care in retrospect, through analysis of 
medical records. 

NOTES 

1 Medical records include procedures used for diagnosis and 
treatment, the use of resources and the resulting outcome and 
quality of life for the patient. 

2 The purpose of medical audit is to identify opportunities 
and to implement improvement in : 

— quality of medical care 

— medical training and continuing education 

— efficient and effective use of resources 

— assessment of patient satisfaction. 

3.8 Medical Record 

A clinical, scicntiGc, administrative and leg^l document 
maintained in chronological order related to patient 
care. 

3.9 Out-Patient Department (OPD) 

OPD is an estaiilishment which is the first point of 
contact and provides primary and comprehensive health 
care for ambulatory patients who come for diagnosis, 
treatment or follow-up care. Patients may reach directly 
or be referred from dispensaries and health centres. 

3.10 Primary Health Care 

Essential health care based on practical, scientifically 
sound and socially acceptable methods and technology 
made universally accessible to individuals and families 
in the community through their full participation and 
at a cost that the community and country can afford 
to maintain at every stage of their development in the 
spirit of self-reliance mvl self-determination. 

3.11 Preventive Medicine 

The science and art of preventing disease, prolonging 
life, and promoting physical and mental health and 
efficiency. 



IS 13808 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 

3.12 Promotive Medicine 

The process of enabling people to increase control 
over, and to improve health. 

3.13 Rehabilitation 

Combined and coordinated use of medical, social, 
educational and vocational measures for training or 
retraining the individual to the highest possible level 
of functional ability and enabling the disabled and 
handicapped to achieve social integration. 

3.14 Supportive Services 

The facilities which assist in smooth functioning of 
clinical and nursing care in a hospital. 

3.15 Unit-Serial System 

The technique in which a patient is given a hospital 
number on his first admission in out-patient or in- 
patient department of the hospital. The patient retains 
that number on all subsequent admissions to any 
department of the hospital. All admissions are filed 
together in one folder and under one number. 

4 PIANNING 

4.1 Physical Facilities 

The main functions of the OPD arc diagnostic, curative, 
preventive, promotive and rehabilitative. 

Emergency department, also termed as casualty 
department, pmvidcs innnediatc lre;'lmcnl lo the ptients 
arriving in (he hospital. 

4.1.1 Location 

4.1.1.1 There should be a separate wing for OPD 
attached lo (he main hospital complex such (ha(, 

a) it is easily accessible from Ihe main entrance 
of the hospital wi(h direc( approach from (he 
main road, 

b) it is segregated from the in-patient department 
(IPD), 

c) it is preferably on the ground flcwr, and 

d) it has easy access to hospital diagnostic 
facilities. 

4.1.1.2 The emergency department should be located 
in such a way that, 

a) it has a direct, distinct access from the main 
entrance of the hospital with independent, 
direct approach from the main road, 

b) it has a distinct entry inde|X'ndent of in-palient 
and OPD main entry, 

c) there should be pioprr directions to reach the 
emergency department, and 

d) entry to the other parts of the hospital should 
be restricted. 



4.1.2 Functional and Space Requirements 

OPD is divided into three zones as given below: 

a) Entrance /one, 

b) Ambulatory zone, and 

c) Diagnostic zone. 

A typical work tlow analysis shall be as given in 
Fig. 1 of IS 12433 (Part 1) : 1988. For functional and 
space requirements of OPD as divided into these 
three zones, reference shall be made to 7 of IS 12433 
(Part 1) : 1988. 

4.2 Expected Work Ix)ad 

The expected number of out-patients depends on the 
bed strength of the hospital and various other factors, 
such as, 

a) location of the hospital; 

b) availability of other health care facility in the 
vicinity; 

c) policy and available resources; 

d) population and their needs 

— socio-economic, cultural and educational 
status; 

— prevalent disease pattern; 

e) trans}X)rt facilities; and 

geographic and tyjwgraphical fadois. 

However, a commonly used rough criterion is (hat 
every hospital Ix^d attracts 5/6 patients per day in 
the OPD and therefore, the OPD work load for a 
30-lH'dded hospital is estimated as 150-180 out-patients 
l^r day out of which 50 percent are expected to be 
follow-up patients and 50 |x*rcenl as new patients. 

4.3 Staff, Instruments and Kcjuipment Ref|uirements 

4.3.1 For manpower requirements, reference may W 
made to 8 of IS 12433 (Part I) : 1988. 

4.3.2 For instalments and equipment requirements, 
reference may be made to 9 of IS 12433 (Part 1) : 
1988. 

5 ORGANIZATION STRUCI IJRii: 

With a view to provide efficient quality management 
system there should be a well-defined organization 
structure for OPD and Emergency Services Department. 
The flow of activities under OPD and emergency 
services department have been indicated in the diagram 
given in Annex A. 

The various activities under each of these services 
will be carried out by the respective medical/|>ani medical 
personnel. The overall functioning of these services 
should be under the control of a designated medical 
office r-in-charge who would be overseeing the day- 
to-day functioning of these services in addition to his 
other duties. 



6 FUNCTIONAL MANAGEMENT 

6.1 Timings of OPD and Emergency Department 

It is recommended that OPD shall work 6 days in a 
week with facilities of morning and evening clinics. 
The timings for morning OPD may be 0800-1200 h 
and afternoon OPD shall have only clinics from 1600- 
1800 h. The timings can be changed to suit the local 
and organizational needs. In order to avoid congestion, 
separate timings are recommended for new and follow- 
up out-patients. New patients may be registered from 
0800-1000 h and the follow up patients may be registered 
from 0900-1100 h. 

Emergency department should function for all the 24 
hours. 

6.2 Functional Activities Under OPD 

The functional activities as indicated in the flow -chart 
(see Annex A) are elaborated as under. 

6.2.1 Entrance and Ambulatory Zone 

6.2.1.1 Entrance hall and waiting space 

Entrance hall serves as a waiting area for the patients 
and their attendants before getting registered. Apart 
from the entrance hall, general waiting space per 
clinic is required adjacent to each consultation clinic 
and treatment room. 

6.2.1.2 Enquiry and registration 

Patients are required to register themselves at the 
registration area according to the proforma, called 
OPD Card, which may be as recommended in 
Annex B. The details of the patients shall also be 
entered in a register by the attendant at the registration 
counter. 

6.2.1.3 Medical records 

It is desirable to maintain the medical records of all 
the out-patients, but mandatory for those patients who 
arc expected to have a prolonged outpatient treatment 
or in case of medico-legal cases. The location of the 
medical record room should be in continuation of the 
registration area. The records should be maintained 
on the basis of unit-serial system. Maintaining of 
records for the medico-legal cases is, however, 
mandatory for 3 years. 

6.2.1.4 Clinics for various medical disciplines 

These clinics include medical, surgical, obstetric and 
gynaecological, family welfare, paediatric and dental 
(optional). Speciality clinics may be provided as per 
the local needs in the afternoon OPD. The clinics 
should have a sufficient number of consultation-cum- 
examination rooms. Patients should be guided to the 
required clinics with the help of appropriate signage 
system. 

Every clinic should have a calling device to be used 
for summoning the next patient. Proper lighting and 
ventilation should be provided in the examination 
rooms. The illumination of the examination room 



IS 13808 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 

should not be less than 500 lux. There should be a 
provision of emergency light as well. 

The consulting doctor shall document the medical 
history of all the patients needing prolonged treatment. 
Guidelines for recording the medical history of the 
patients are recommended according to the proforma 
given in Annex C. First point of contact for the patient 
may be General Duty Medical Officer (GDMO) who 
may refer the patient to the required specialist. After 
examining the patient, the doctor shall legibly endorse 
the course of action on the OPD card (to be kept by 
the patient) and on the medical record profonna (to 
be preserved in the hospital) and direct the patient to 
the appropriate medical facility. In cases where 
laboratory /radiographic investigations are required, 
the doctors shall fill up the requisition slip specified 
for the purpose. In case payment is called for, the 
patient should be properly guided. Each doctor is 
expected to see at the most 40<45 patients per day 
(including follow-up and new patients). 

6.2.1.5 Pharmacy (dispensary) 

The dispensary should be located in an area conveniently 
accessible from the clinics and near the exit. The 
dispensing room shall have a minimum of two 
dispensing windows to cater to the patients in minimum 
possible time. One dispensing chemist should dispense 
with 80-120 prescriptions per day depending upon the 
number of drugs per prescription. The hospital 
administration should ensure that the pharmacist 
instructs the patients about the medication and special 
instructions, if any, such as, keeping the medicines in 
refrigerator which require cold storage, etc. 

6.2.1.6 Treatment room 

A treatment room should be provided for dressing and 
for administering injection to the patients and other 
minor surgical procedures like removal of stitches, 
drainage of an abscess, removal of a plaster, etc. 

6.2.2 Diagnostic Zone 

6.2.2.1 There is a need to enhance the scope of OPD 
so that the number of patients requiring admission can 
be minimized. Effective and efficient functioning of 
the OPD will facilitate this objective. To achieve this 
objective, it is necessary that a detailed clinical 
examination and required laboratory and imaging 
investigations should be undertaken to ensure screening 
of patients at the OPD stage and the patients requiring 
admission alone may be admitted to the hospital. 

6.2.2.2 Clinical laboratory — This provides a suppi^rt 
facility to all the clinics for laboratory investigations. 

6.2.2.3 Imaging Section — Equipped with facilities 
like X-ray, ultrasound, etc, this section also provides 
support service to all the clinics. 

6.2.2.4 The results of the investigations done at 6.2.2.2 
and 6.2.2.3 should be recorded in separate registers 
maintained in the laboratory. The results should also 
be recorded on the medical record of the patient as 
well as on the OPD card/requisition slip. 



IS 13808 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 

The laid down procedures for various activities under 
the diagnostic services should be strictly followed. 
For guidance, reference nuiy be made in IS 13909 
(Part 1) : 1993. 

6.2.3 Healtit Education 

It is a process of change in a person's knowledge, 
beliefis and behaviour to induce elements which are 
conducive to good, healthy and fulfilling life. Health 
education aims at scientific and wide dissemination 
of information concerned directly or indirectly with 
those processes and systems which have a bearing on 
the health needs and health care delivery system of 
the individual and the entire community, the ultimate 
aim being the attainment of a long life free from 
morbidity and also elimination/containment of those 
identified factors which have an adverse bearing on 
the life of the people. Health education is a process 
that informs, motivates and helps people to adopt and 
motivate healthy practice and life styles, advocates 
environmental change as needed to facilitate this goal 
and conduct professional training and research to the 
same end. 

6.2.4. Family Welfare 

Family welfare is an offshoot of the concept that 
many of the outstanding problems of the individual 
and the conununity can be best solved by aiming to 
deliver appropriate health and associated care to the 
family as a compasite unit and to aim at achieving a 
fundamental change of emphasis of utilizing family 
members for health care delivery system. 

Important components of this field include progranunes 
to educate people to adopt new methods of family 
planning and comprehensive maternal and child care 
for their better and healthy life. 

6.3 Functional Activities Under Emergency Services 

The activities under Emergency Services Department 
follow certain common patterns. The initial activity 
revolves around registration and reception of the patients. 
The serious patients may directly be passed on to the 
next stage involving proper examination, investigating 
and assessing the condition of the patient. This is 
followed by resuscitation, if required, and the next 
stage involves transfer of the patient to either the 
observation bed or to the indoors, that is, ward, OT 
or ICU or to mortuary. Associated functional activities 
in the emergency services include imparting education 
and research. 

7 PROCEDURE MANUAL 

7.1 A standard manual should be developed and 
followed with regard to each area of the OPD and 
Emergency Services Department including day-to- 
day work of the department. This may include staff 
development, maintenance of equipment and materials 
management, etc. 



7.1.1 Personnel Development 

The staff (including medical staff) of OPD and 
Emergency Services Department should be fully 
qualified, well trained and experienced in their respective 
activities. 

To keep an employee abreast of the current state of 
technology and to keep skills refreshed, there should 
be an active continuing education programme wherever 
indicative. 

7.1.2 Maintenance of Equipment and Materials 
Management 

7.1.2.1 Maintenance of equipment 

A ledger should be maintained for all equipment 
givingdetails of name of equipment, date of purchase, 
cost of equipment, source or supplier, life of equipment, 
maintenance schedule (including calibration, if 
required), breakdowns, repairs and cost of repairs, 
etc. For equipment costing more than Rs. 10,000 a 
separate history sheet should be maintained for each 
of the equipment giving all the above details and the 
inventory of additional spares should also be maintained. 
The equipment may be recommended for condemnation 
if it breaks down repeatedly incurring heavy expenditure 
and becomes beyond economical repair or becomes 
obsolete model. Efforts should be made to keep a 
good liaison with larger hospitals and other technical 
people for maintenance of equipment as and when 
required. 

7.1.2.2 Storage of materials 

Laid down procedures should be followed for storage 
and use of material (drug or non-drug) used in the 
OPD and Emergency Services Department and record 
should also be maintained indicating their consumption, 
expiry date, required level of inventory and present 
position of stock. All biological drug;^ should be kept 
under refrigeration. All bonded drugs or narcotics 
should be kept under double-locking system. 

8 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 

A suitable mechanism should be available with requisite 
infrastructural facilities for evaluating the performance 
of OPD and emergency services. For example, a fixed 
number of cases in a month at random shall have an 
audit by a medical audit committee. Every functional 
area of OPD and emeigency services should be evaluated 
by this committee to assess the efficacy of the system, 
llie feedback arising out of such evaluation should 
be recorded and made use of in improving the quality 
related activities of OPD and emergency services 
in future. Areas to be evaluated here is patient 
satisfaction. Proforma for evaluating patient 
satisfaction may be as recommended in Annex D, to 
be filled-in by the out-patients selected on random 
basis. 



IS 13808 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 



ANNEX A 

(Clause 5) 

nX)W CHART 



COMMUNITY 



RECEPTION AND 
REGISTRATKDN 



OUT PATIENT OEPH. 
(0,P.O.) 



UJ 

H 



CASUALTY 



/ 



/ 



z 



/ 



/ 



TRIA&E 



/ 




C»ii«» 



TREATMENT 
ROOM 



DIAGNOSTIC 
SERVICES 



PHARMECY 



/ 



/ 



/ 



CONSULTATION 

AND 
EXAMINATION 



/ 



/ 



\ 



\ 



/ 



/ 



yl 



IN PATIENT 
OEPTT. 



FOLLOW-UP 



MEDICAL 
RECORD 



COMMUNITY 



RESUSCITA- 
TION 



TREATMENT & 
OBSERVATION 



DIAGNOSTIC 
SERVICES 



MEDICAL 
RECORD 



REFERRED 

TO 
ANOTHER 
HOSPITAL 



IS 13808 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 



ANNEX B 
(Clause 6.2.1.2) 

OPD CARD 



Registration No. 



Date 



Name 



Age 



. Sex : M/F 



Occupation : 



Address : 



Monthly Income 



Diagnosis : . 



OPD 



Clinical Notes 



IS 13808 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 
ANNEX C 
(Clause 6.2.1.4) 
MEDICAL HISTORY RECORD 

Name : Age : Sex : Date : 

Address : OPD No. : 

Occupation : 



PROBLEM LIST 



DURATION 



1. 

2. 
3. 
4. 



History of Present Illness : 
Past History : 
Family History : 
Evaluation : 
Clinical Diagnosis : 



Date 



Investigations 



Tests 



Results 



Any other relevant finding 



Consultant's Opinion 



Treatment 



Followup : 



IS 13808 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 

ANNEX D 
(Clause 8) 

PROFORMA FOR EVALUATING PATIENT SATISFACTION IN 
OPD AND EMERGENCY SERVICES 



1. Name of the Patient : 

2. Age : 3. Sex :. 

4. Occupation : 

5. Educational Status : 

6. Monthly Income : 

7. Type of ailment suffering from and nature of illness : 

i) Medical : 

ii) Surgical : 

iii) Obstetric & Gynaecological : 

iv) Paediatric : 

v) Dental : 

vi) Inmiunization : 

vii) Investigations only : 

viii) Emergency : 

ix) Others : 



8. Do you visit this hospital every time Yes/No 

you or your family falls sick ? 



If yes, give reasons : . 



9. Are you visiting for the first time ? Yes/No 

If yes, give reasons : 

10. Could you reach the required counters/rooms Ycs/No 
without any difficulty/enquiry? 

11. Whether the Doctor/Staff were punctual? Yes/No 

12. Did you have to wait for long to see Yes/No 
the Doctor? 



If Yes, a) How long? 

b) Reasons : 

13. Whether the staff were courteous? Ycs/No 

14. Whether the staff gave complete Ycs/No 
instructions on different aspects of 

treatment/your queries? 



IS 13808 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 

15. Whether the doctors were courteous? Yes/No 

16. Whether you were attended and examined Yes/No 
by the Physician satisfactorily? 

17. Whether the attending Physician gave the Yes/No 
instructions (verbal/written) about various 

medicines that were prescribed? 

a) E)oses Yes/No 

b) Frequency Ycs/No 

c) How/when to take Yes/No 

d) Duration Ycs/No 

e) About side effects, if any, Yes/No 
& their remedies 

18. Whether all the medicines prescribed were available? Ycs/No 

19. Whether the Phannacist/Dispensing chemist Ycs/No 
explained (for each medicine separately) 

as to how and when to take? 

20. Was the treatment effective? Yes/No 

21. Whether all the investigations Ycs/No 
required were done on the same day? 

22. Did you visit this place in last 6 months? Yes/No 

If Yes, a) When did you visit last: 

b) What was the ailment: 

c) Was the treatment effective: 

i) Effective 

ii) Partially effective 

iii) Not effective 

23. Have you or your family members availed Yes/No 
emergency treatment from this hospital? 

If yes, how were you attended to? 

24. Are you satisfied with the services Ycs/No 
provided in OPD/Emergency of this hospital? 

If not, specify reasons 



IS 13808 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 

ANNEX E 

(Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Hospital and Medical Care Services Sectional Committee, MSD 8 
Chairman Representing 

Maj-Gbn m. l Sapra. Director Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Sciences, Delhi 



Members 
Dr a. K. AGARWAL 

Lt-Col R. K. Bhaskar 

Dr Narendra Bihari 
Dr S. K. Chaudhuri 

Dr R. N. Baishya (Alternate) 
Director 

liEAD OF TliE Department of 
Anaesihesiology (Alternate 1) 

Head of The Department of 
RadIODIAGNOSIS (Alternate 2) 
Dr p. N. Ghei 

Dr. S. D. Vohra (Alternate) 
Dr N. K. Grover 

Dr Y. p. Munjal (Alternate) 
Dr Shyam Joshi 
Dr S. R Karnik 
Dr G. B. Maiiapatra 
Shri G.K. Majumdar 

Shri Anil Grover (Alternate) 
iT-CoL S. K. Mathur 

Dr J. N. MOHANTY 

Dr Anil Narang 

Shri S. S. Pillai 
Dr (Mrs) Ira Ray 
Dr p. S. Rugmini 
Dr Subhasii R. Salunke 

Dr Ram S. Bharuka (Alternate) 
Dr T. Samraj 
Dr V. N. Sehgal 

Dr Saroj Sharma (Alternate) 
Dr Satvendra Singh 

Dr Sunil Sharma (Alternate) 
Prof R. P. Sinha 

Dr R. K. Sarma (Alternate) 
Dr p. Siva Reddy 

Dr (Mrs) B. K. Maini (Alternate) 
Dr a. K. Srivastava 

Dr Hem Chandra (Alternate) 
Dr M. p. Vaidya 
Lt-Col H. C. Vishwakarma 

Dr a. K. Nagpal 
Shri S. Krishnamurthy, 
Director (MSD) 



National Institute of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi 
Directorate General of Medical Services (Army), Ministry of 

Defence, New Delhi 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi 
Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narain Hospital, New Delhi 

Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and 
Research, Pondicherry 



Indian Hospital Association, New Delhi 

Indian Medical Association, New Delhi 

Institute of Public Health and Hygiene, New Delhi 

Jaslok Hospital and Research Centre, Bombay 

Ta^a Engineering & Locomotive Company Limited, Pune 

Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (India) Ltd, New Delhi 

Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Sciences, Delhi 
Directorate of Health Services, Delhi Administration, New Delhi 
Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, 

Chandigarh 
General Insurance Corporation of India, New Delhi 
National Institute of Biologicals, New E)elhi 
Medical Council of India, New Delhi 
Directorate of Health Services, Bombay 

Christian Medical College, Vellorc 

Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 

Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre, New Delhi 

Department of Hospital Administration, All India Institute of 

Medical Sciences, New Delhi 
National Academy of Medical Sciences (India), New Delhi 

Sanjay Gandhi Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, 

Lucknow 
Batra Hospital and Medical Research Centre, New Delhi 
Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services, Ministry of 

Defence, New Delhi 
Chairman, Hospital Planning Sectional Committee, MHD 18 
Director General, BIS (Ex-officio Member) 



Member Secretary 

Shrlmati Bindu Mehta 
Assistant Director (MSD). BIS 



( Continued on page 11) 



10 



IS 13808 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 

( Continued fremt page 10 ) 

Panel for Management Procedures for OPD and Emergency Services 

(MSD 8/P-l) 

Convener Representing 

Prof R. P. Sinha All India Institute of Medical Sciencies, New Delhi 

Members 

Lt-Col R. K. Bhaskar Directorate General of Medical Services (Army), Ministry of 

Defence, New Delhi 

Shri G. K. Majumdar Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (India) Ltd, New Delhi 

Lt-Col S. K. Mathur Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Sciences, Delhi 

Dr J. N. Mohantv Directorate of Health Services Delhi Administration, New Delhi 

Dr Sunil Sharma Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre, New Dt\Yi\ 



11 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the ^nr^aw o//n^Wfi 
Standards Act. 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked pr<>ducts are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Barean of Indian Standards 

BIS it a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This docs not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no 
changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of 
Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this 
Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc : No. MSD 8 ( 28 ) 

Amendments issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 



Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446. Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 



Telephone 

f331 01 31 
|331 13 75 

84 99, 37 85 61 
86 26, 37 86 62 



(37 

(37 

j53 38 43, 53 16 
)53 23 84 



40 



1235 02 16, 235 04 42 

1235 15 19, 235 23 15 

J632 92 95. 632 78 58 

1632 78 91. 632 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



