IS 12448 ( Part 6 ):lini
( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard

BASICTESTINGPROCEDURESAND MBASURINGMETHODSFOR ELECTROMECHANICALCOMPONENTS FORELECTRONICEQUIPMENT
PART 6 CLIMATIC TESTS AND SOLDERING TESTS

UDC

621'38'038 + 621'31 : 620 :. 179'2 ( 621'791'35 )

@ BlS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK .July 1991

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG
Price Group 4

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Electromechanical

Components

for Electronic

Equipment

Sectional Committee,

LTD 7

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 6 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Electromechanical Components for Electronic Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. The object of this standard ( Part 6 ) is to lay down soldering tests on electromechanical components. uniform methods of tests for climatic and

This standard ( Part 6 ) is based, without any technical change on IEC Pub. 512-6 ( 1977 ) `Electromechanical components for electronic equipment, basic testing procedures and measuring methods : Part 6 Climatic tests and soldering tests', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (TEC). In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 12448 ( Part 6 ) : I991

Indian Standard

BASICTESTINGPROCEDURESAND 1MEASURINGMETHODSFOR ELECTROMECHANICALCOMPONENTS FORELECTRONICEQUIPMENT
PART 6 CLIMATIC 1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 6 ) covers test methods for climatic tests and soldering tests of electromechanical components. TESTS AND S'OLDERING TESTS

At the end of this period and while still at high temperature, the insulation resistance shall be measured in accordance with Test 3A of IS 12448 ( Part 2/Set 3 ) : 1988 and therein shall be not less than the value specified. 3.2.2.3 The specimen shall be then allowed to recover to standard conditions as specified in Test lli ( see 31 ). 3.2.3 Damp Heat, Accelerated : First Cycle
3.2.3.1

2 REFERENCES 2.1 The Indian Standards listed in Annex A are necessary adjuncts to this standard.
SECTION 3 TEST lla 3.0 General. ONE CLIMATIC TEST

: CLIMATIC

SEQUENCE

This test shall be carried out in accordance with Test llc ( see 5 ) using the specified degree of severity. then be subjected to hours. then be exposed to as specified in Test

The object of this test is to detail a standard test method to assess the ability of a component to function in a specified manner in a specified might be encountered which environment during normal use including storage. 3.1 Preparation of the Specimen

3.2.3.2 The specimen shall this test for one cycle of 24 3.2.3.3 The specimen shall standard recovery conditions 1 Ic ( see 5 ). 3.2.4 Cold
3.2.4.1

3.1.1 Mechanical Preparation The specimen shall be equipped with normal accessories, mounted and wired according to the detail specification. When required by the detail specification, the specimen shall be operated the number of times specified prior to the test. For each test carried out, the detail specification shall specify the condition of the component, for example, operated or non-operated, mated or unmated. 3.1.2 Preconditioning Preconditioning shal1 be carried dance with the detail specification. 3.2 Test Method 3.2.1 Initial Measurements Initial measurements shall be carried accordance with the detail specification. 3.2.2 Dry Heat This test shall be carried out in accordance with Test lli ( see 11) using the appropriate degree of severity. 3.2.2.2, The specimen shall be exposed to the specified temperature for a period of 16 hours. 1
3.2.2.1

This test shall be carried out in accordance with Test 1 Ij ( see 12 ) using the specified degree of severity. to the to in

3.2.4.2 The specimen shall be exposed specified temperature for 2 hours.

3.2.4.3 The specimen shall then be exposed standard recovery conditions as specified Test llj ( see 12 ).

out in accor-

3.2.4.4 The specimen shall then be visually inspected and shall show no sign of deterioration. 3.2.5 Low Air Pressure 3.2.5.1 This test shall be carried out in accor( dance with Test 1lk ( see 13 ) using the specified degree of severity. 3.2.5.2 The duration of the test shall be 5 min unless otherwise specified. 3.2.5.3 During this test, Tests 4a and 4b of IS 12448 ( Part 2/Set 4 ) : 1988 shall be carried out where specified. 3.2.5.4 During and after this test, there shall be no sign of glow discharge, breakdown, flashover or harmful deterioration of the specimen. 3.2.6 Damp
Cycfe(s). Heat, Accelerated, Remaining

out in

IS 12448 ( Part 6 ) : 1991 3.2.6.1 This test shall be carried out in accordance with Test 1 lc ( see 5 ) using the specified degree of severity. 4 TEST llb:

COMBINED/SEQUENTIAL COLD, LOW AIR PRESSURE AND DAMP HEAT

3.2.6.2 The specimen shall be subjected test for the remaining number of cycles.

to this

Under consideration. 5 TEST tic: DAMP HEAT, STEADY STATE 5.0 General The object of this test is to detail a standard test method to assess the ability of a component to be stored and/or to function in a specified of high relative manner under conditions humidity. 5.1 Preparation
5.1.1 of the Specimen

3.2.6.3 The specimen shall then be exposed to standard recovery conditions as specified in Test llc (see5). 3.3 Final Measurements The specimen shall then be subjected to the followmg tests as described in the different parts of IS 12448 and shall meet the requirements specified therein:

a) Insulation resistance ( Test 3a 1; b) Voltage proof ( Test 4a ); 4 Contact resistance tests, as specified in the 4 e) f)

Mechanical Preparation

detail specification ( Test 2 ); Mechanical operating tests ( Test 13 ) as applicable; clamping tests, as applicable Cable ( Test 17 ); and Visual examination as applicable ( Test la ).

The specimen shall be equipped with normal accessories, mounted and wired according to the detail specification. When required by the detail specification, the specimen shall be operated the number of times specified prior to the test. For each test carried out, the detail specification shall specify the condition of the component, for example, operated or non-operated, mated or unmated. 5.1.2 Preconditioning Preconditioning shall be carried out in accordance with the requirements of the detail specification. 5.2 Test Method
5.2.1 Initial Measurements

NOTES I The first two tests shall be carried out immediately following the final recovery period. 2 `The specimen shall not be disturbed out prior to the first measurement of contact resistance after exposure. 3 When required by the detail specification, the specimen shall be operated three times and then contact continuity and tested for electrical resistance.

3.4 Details

to be Specified

When this test is required

by the detail specification, the following details shall be given: a) Method of mounting and wiring the specimen and operated condition of the component(s), if applicable; b) Preconditioning time; 4 Initial measurements and requirements; 4 Severity of each step of the climatic sequence; 4 Minimum value of the insulation resistance at high temperature; f) When the low air pressure test is applicable, the test(s) to be used and the value of the test voltage; 8) When the contact resistance test is applicable, the test to be used; h) Requirements for the final measurements; 3 Applicable operational characteristics; and

When required by the detail specification, the specified initial measurements shall be made under standard atmospheric conditions immediately after preconditioning. 5.2.2 Conditioning Damp heat, steady state, shall be applied in accordance with Test Ilc ( see 5 ) using the specified degree of severity. 5.2.2.1 Polarization voltage, When specified in the detail specification, a polarization voltage shall be applied to two of the specimens during conditioning. These specimens shall be wired, alternate terminations shall be connected together to form two groups. On specimen No. 1, the polarization voltage shall be applied across the first group of terminations and the second group connected to the housing ( shell ) and/or the mounting plate. On specimen No. 2, the polarization voltage shall be applied across the second group of 2

k) Any

deviation method.

from':,the

standard test

IS 12448 ( Part 6 ) : 1991

terminations and the first group connected to the housing ( shell ) and/or the mounting plate. In the case of rotary switches, the points of application of the polarizing voltage shall be as specified in the detail specification. 5.3 Final Measurements The specimen shall then be subjected to the following tests as described in the different parts of IS 12448 and shall meet the requirements specified by the detail specification:

to withstand rapid changes of temperature in air such as might occur during storage, transportation and use. 6.1 Preparation of the Specimen

6.1.1 Mechanical Preparation The specimen shall b= equipped with normal accessories, mounted and wired according to the detail specification. When required by the detail specification, the specimen shall be operated the number of times specified prior to the test. For each test carried out, th: detail specification shaIl specify the condition of the component, for example operated or non-operated, mated or unmated. 6.1.2 Preconditioning Preconditioning shall be carried out in accordance with the requirements of the detail specification. 6.2 Test Method
6.2.1 Initial Measurements

a) Insulation resistance ( Test 3a >; b) Voltage proof ( Test 4a );
Contact c>

4

e>

resistance tests ( Test 2 ) as applicable; Mechanical operating tests ( Test 13 ) as applicable; and Visual examination ( Test la ).

NOTl3i 1 The first two tests shall be carried out immediately, following the final recovery period. 2 When required by the detail specification, measurement a ) may be made while the specimen is sti,ll in the test chamber. 3 The specimen shall not be disturbed prior to the first nieasurement of contact resistance after exposure. 4 When required by the detail specification, the specimen shall be operated three times and then tested for electrical continuity and contact resistance.

When required by the detail specification, the specified initial measurements shall be made under standard atmospheric conditions immediately after preconditioning. 6.2.2 Conditioning This test shall be carried out in accordance IS 9OLO( Part 14/Set 1 ): 1988 with

5.4 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be specified: 4 Method of mounting and wiring the specimen; b) Operated condition of the specimen; time and number of cl Preconditioning operations, if applicable; 4 Degree of severity of Test llc ( see 5 ); 4 Value of the polarizing voltage and, in the case of rotary switches the points of application; f > Initial measurements and requirements; d Contact resistance test to be used; h) Contacts between which Tests 3 and 4 are to be carried out; during conditioning, if 3 Measurements applicable; k) Mechanical operating test(s) to be used; d Requirements for the final measurements; and Any deviation from the standard test method.

The period of exposure and the number of cycles of both high and low temperature shall be specified in the detail spzcification. 6.3 Final Measurements The specimen shall then be subjected to the following tests as described in the different parts of IS 12448 and shall meet the requirements specifikd by the detail specification: a) Voltage proof ( Test 4a ); b) Insulation resistance ( Test 3a ); c) Visual examination ( Test la ); and d) Operational characteristics. 6.4 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be given: 4 Method of mounting and wiring the specimen; time and number of b) Preconditioning operations, if applicable; c) Severity of conditioning;

n>

6 TEST lld: RAPID TEMPERATURE
6.0 General

CHANGE

OF

The object of this test is to detail a standard test method to assess the ability of a component 3

4 Initial measurements and requirements;

IS 12448( Part 6 ) : 1991

e) Operated condition of the specimen during test; f) Recovery time; g) Final measurements and requirements; and h) Any deviation from the standard test method. 7 TEST lle: MOULD GROWTH

8 TEST llf: CORROSION,

SALT MIST

7.0 General The object of this test is to detail a standard test method to assess the extent and the effect on the functioning of a compocent submitted to a mould culture. 7.1 Preparation of the Specimen according to the

8.0 General The object of this test is to detail a standard test method to assess the effects of a controlled saltladen atmosphere on the finish of the specimen. It is not intended to be followed by electrical tests. However, when required by the detail specification, this test may be followed by Test 9a: Mechanical operation ( endurance ), as described in IS 12448 ( Part S/Set 4 ): 1989 to assess the effect on the mechanical functioning of the specimen. 8.1 Preparation of the Specimen

The specimen shall be prepared and mounted according to the detail specification. When required by the detail specification, the specimen shall be operated the number of times specified prior to the test. For each test carried out, the detail specification shall specify the condition of the component, for example, operated or non-operated, mated or unmated. 8.2 Test Method This test shall be carried out in accordance JS 9000 ( Part 11 ) : 1983 Test Salt mist. 8.3 Final Examination Upon completion of the above test and after the specimen has been washed with distilled water and dried as specified, it shall be visually examined in accordance with Test la of IS 12448 ( Part 2/Set 1 ): 1988 with particular attention to the following details: a) Cracking; b) Delamination; and c) Pitting of exposed metal surfaces. 8.4 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be given: a) Method of preparation, mounting attitude of the specimen; b) Duration of the exposure; c) Requirements; and d) Any deviation from the standard method. 9 TEST llg: ATMOSPHERE In preparation. 10 TEST llb: SAND AND DUST In preparation. 4 CORROSION and with

The specimen shall be mounted detail specification.

When required by the detail specification, the specimen shall be operated the number of times specified prior to the test. For each test carried out, the detail specification shall specify the condition of the component, for example, operated or non-operated, mated or unmated .' 7.2 Initial Measurements The insulation resistance shall be measured in accordance with Test 3a of IS 12448 ( Part 2/ Set 3 ) : 1988. The required values shall be stated in the detail specification. 7.3 Test Method This test shall be carried out in accordance with IS 9000 ( Part 10 > : 1979. The duration of the test shall be stated in the detail specification. 7.4 Final Measurements The specimen shall then be subjected to the following tests as described in the different parts of IS 12448 and. shall meet the requirements ' specified by the detail specification: a) Insulation resistance ( Test 3a ), and b) Visual examination 7.5 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be given: a) b) c) d) e) Method of mounting the specimen; Operated condition; Initial measurements and requirements; Duration of the test; Requirements for final measurements; and from the standard test ( Test la ).

test

INDUSTRIAL

f) Any deviation method.

IS 12448 ( Part 6 ) : 1991 11 TEST lli: DRY HEAT 11.0 General The object of test method to to be stored manner under this test is to detail assess the ability of a and to function in specified conditions of of the Specimen a standard component a specified dry heat.
NOTES 1 The first two tests shall be carried out while the specimen is still at the specified high temperature. 2 The specimen shall not be disturbed prior to the contact resistance after first measurement of exposure. j When required by the detail specification, the specimen shall be operated three times and then tested for electrical continuity and contact resistance.

11.1 Preparation

11.1.1 Mechanical Preparation The specimen shall be equipped with normal accessories, mounted and wired according to the detail specification. When required by the detail specification, the specimen shall be operated the number of times specified prior to the test. For each test carried out, the detail specification shall specify the condition of the component, for example, operated or non-operated, mated or unmated. 11.2 Preconditioning Preconditioning shall be carried out in accordance with, the requirements of the detail specification. 11.2 Test Method 11.2.1 Initial Measurements required by the detail specification, the specified initial measurements shall be made under standard atmospheric conditions immediately after preconditioning.
When

11.4 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be given: a) Method of specimen; c) d) e) f) mounting and wiring the

b) Preconditioning,

if required;

Degree of severity; Operated condition, if applicable; Initial measurements and requirements; Contact resistance test to be used; Mechanical operating tests to be used; !?zJ and requirements h) Methods measurements; and j) Any deviation method. from the for final test

standard

12 TEST llj: COLD
12.0 General

The object of this test is to detail a standard test method to assess the ability of a component to be stored and to function in a specified manner under specified conditions of cold.
12.1 Preparation of the Specimen

11.2.2 Conditioning Dry heat shall be applied in accordance with test of IS 9000 ( Part 3/Set 1 ) : 1977 using the specified degree of severity. 11.3 Final Measurements When required by the detail specification, the specimen shall be subjected to the following tests, as described in the different parts of IS 12448 and shall meet the requirements specified by the detail specification: a) Insulation resistance ( Test 3a ); b) Voltage proof ( Test 4a ); c) Contact resistance tests ( Test 2 ) as applicable; d) Mechanical operating tests ( Test 13 ) as applicable; e) Visual examination ( Test la ) as applicable; f) Static load test ( Test 8 ) as applicable; g) Insertion retention tests in housing ( Test 15 ) as applicable; and h) Sealing and leakage tests ( Test 14 ) as applicable. 5

12.1.1 Mechanical Preparation The specimen shall be equipped with normal accessories, mounted and wired according to the detail specification. Wh en required by the detail specification, the specimen shall be operated for the number of times specified prior to the test. For each test carried out, the detail specification shall specify the condition of the component, for example,, operated or non-operated mated or unmated. 12.1.2 Preconditioning Preconditioning shall be carried dance with the requirements specification. 12.2 Test Method 12.2.1 Initial Measurements When required by the detail specification, the specified initial measurements shall be made out in accorof the detail

IS 12443 ( Part 6 ) : 1991

under standard atmospheric tely after preconditioning. 12.2.2 Conditioning Cold test shall be applied degree of severity.
32.3 Final Measurements

conditions

immedia-

13.1 Preparation

of the Specimen

in accordance

with

The specimen shall be equipped with normal accessories as specified and shall be wired and mounted according to the detail specification. The operated condition of the specimen shall be specified by the detail specification.
13.2 Test Method

IS 9000 ( Part 2/Set 1 ) : 1977 using the specified

The specimen shall be subjected to the following tests as described in the different parts of IS 12448 and shall meet the requirements specified by the detail specification: a) Insulation resistance ( Test 3a ); b) Voltage stress tests ( Test 4) as applicable; c) Contact resistance tests ( Test 2 ) as applicable; d) Mechanical operating tests ( Test 3 ) as applicable; examination e) Visual ( Test la ) as applicable; f) Sealing and leakage tests ( Test 14 ) as applicable; g) Static load tests ( Test 8 ) as applicable; and h) Insert retention applicable.
NOTES I The first two tests shall be carried out while the specimen is still at the specified low temperature. 2 The specimen shall not be disturbed prior to the of contact resistance after first measurement exposure. 3 When required by the detail specification, the specimen shall be operated three times and then tested for electrical continuity and contact resistance.

This test shall be carried out in accordance with IS 9000 ( Part 13 ) : 1981. The severity shall be prescribed in the detail specification. Facility should be provided for the application of any functional checks prescribed in the detail specification. The chamber shall be sealed. The chamber pressure shall be reduced from ambient to a value specified by the detail specification, in accordance with IS 9000 ( Part 13 ): 1981 a.nd maintained at that pressure for a minimum of 5 min. Unless otherwise specified, after this period and while the specimen is still at the prescribed low pressure, the specimen shall be subjected to a voltage proof test in accordance with Test 4a voltage proof of IS 12448 ( Part 2/Set 4 ) : 1988. The chamber pressure shall then be increased to room ambient within 1 min. 13.3 Final Measurements When specified in the detail specification the specimen shall be subjected to general examination, Test la of IS 12448 ( Part 2/Set 4 ) : 1988.
13.4 Details to be Specified

in housing ( Test 15 ) as

12.4 Details to be Specified

When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be given: mounting and wiring the a) Method of specimen; b) Preconditioning, if required; c) Degree of severity of conditioning; d) Initial measurements and requirements; e) Contact resistance test to be used; requirements for final f) Methods and measurements; and g) Any deviation from the standard test method.
13 TEST

When this test is required by the detail sp:ciEcation, the following details shall be given: a) Preparation of the specimen, including number of contacts to be wired, accessories, type and size of cable/wire bundle to be used, where applicable; b) Severity; c) Proof voltage; d) Operations to be carried out at low air pressure; e) Minimum period at low pressure if other than 5 min; f) Requirements for final measurements; and g) Any deviation from the standard test method. 14 TEST llm: DAMP SEVERITY Under consideration.
SECTION TWO -

Ilk:

LOW AIR PRESSURE HEAT MODERATE

13.0 General

The object of this test is to detail a standard test method to assess the ability of a component to operate under conditions of low air pressure, for example, high altitude.
6

SOLDERING

TESTS

Under consideration.

IS 12448 ( Part 6 ) : 1991

ANNEX A ( Clause 2.1 )
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS
Title

IS No.
9000 ( Part 31 Set 1 ) : 1977

Title

IS No.

Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part 3 Dry heat test, Secticn 1 General Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and items: `Part 10 electrical Mould growth test 12448 ( Part 2/ Sec3): 1988

9000 ( Part 10 ) : 1979

3000 ( Part 11 ) : 1983

Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic ard electrical items: Part 11 Salt mist test Basic environmenta! testing 9000 ( Part 13 ) : 1981 procedures for electronic and electrical items: Low air pressure test 9000 ( Part 141 Set 1 ) : 1988 Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part 14 Test N: Change of temperaSection 1 Test Na: ture, Rapid change of temperature ( thermal shock ) with prescribed time of transition two chamber method ( jirst revision )

continuity and electrical contact resistance test insulation test and voltage stress Section 1 General test, requirements Basic testing procedures and for methods measuring compoelectromechanical nents for electronic equip2 General Part ment: examination, electrical continuity and contact resistance tests and tests, insulation voltage stress tests, Section 3 Insulation tests Basic testing procedures and measuring methods for eleccomponents tromechanical for electronic equipment: Part 2 General examination, and continuity electrical tests, resistance contact insulation tests and voltage stress tests, Section 4 Voltage stress tests Basic testing procedures and measuring methods for electromechanical components electronic equipment: for Part 5 Impact tests ( free endurance components ) overload tests, tests and Section 4 Over load test

12448 ( Part 2/ Set 4 ) : 1988

12448 ( Part 5/ Set 4 ) : 1989

12448 ( Part 2/ Set 1 > : 1988

Basic testing procedures and measuring methods for electromechan ical components for electronic equipment: Part 2 General examination,

7

Gtandard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards Act,

