( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 2193- 1986

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR PRECAST PRESTRESSED CONCRETE STREET LIGHTING POLES

( First Revision )
Cement Chairman DR H. C. VISVESVARAYA Members Research, Designs and Standards Organization ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow STANDARDS ( B & S ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( B & S ) ( Alternate ) Larsen and Toubro Limited, Bombay SHRI K. P. BANERJEE SHRI HARISH N. MALANI ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. K. BANERJEE Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SHRI R. V. CHALAPATHI RAO SHRI S. ROY ( Alternate ) Bhakra Beas Management Board, Nangal CHIEF ENGINEER( BD ) Township SHRI J. C. BASUR ( Alternate ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi CHIPF ENGINEER( DESIGNS ) EXECUTIVEENGINEER( D )-III ( Alternate ) CHIEP ENGINEER ( RESEARCH-CUM- Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab DIRECTOR ) RESEARCHOFFICER ( CONCRETE TECHNOLOGY) ( Alternate ) A. P. Engineering Research Laboratories, DIRECTOR Hyderabad JOINT DIRECTOR ( Alternate ) Central Soil and Materials Research Station, DIRECTOR New Delhi CHIF_FRESEARCHOFFICER ( Alternate ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi DIRECTOR( C & MDD-I ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( C & MDD-I ) ( Alternate ) Structural Engineering Research Centre SHRI V. K. GHANEKAR ( CSIR ), Roorkee ( Continued on page 2 ) 0 Copyright STANDARDS 1987 INSTITUTION

and Concrete Sectional Committee,
Representing

BDC 2
and Building

National Council for Cement Materials, New Delhi

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission ofthe publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyrightunder the said Act.

1s~: 2193 - 1986
( Continued from page 1 ) Members
SHRI A. V. GCXAK SHRI S. S. MIGLANI (

Representing
Development Commissioner for Industry ( Ministry of Industry ) Cement

Alternate )
The India Cements Limited, Madras

&RI

SHRI S. GOPINATH SHRI T. TAMIZAKARAN (

SHRI S. P. SANKARNARAYANAN(

S. K. GUHA THAKURTA

Alternate

Gannon

)

Dunkerley

and Co Ltd, Bombay Ltd,

SHRI A. K. GUPTA SHRI P. J. JAGUS

Hyderabad Tndustries Limited, Hyderabad The Bygbbcafved Cement Compames

Alternate

)

DR A. K. CHATTERJEE~(Alternate > Indian Hume Pipe Co Limited, Bombay SHRI N. G. JOSHI Roads Wing, Ministry of Transport SHRI R. L. KAPOOR SHRI R. K. SAXENA ( Alternate ) The Institution of Engineers ( India), Calcutta SHRI S. K. LAHA SHRI B. T. UNWALLA ( Alternate ) Centr~o13u~~~g Research Institute ( CSIR ). DR MOHAN RAI DR S. S. REHSI ( Alternate DR A. K. MULLICK SHRI K. K. NAMBIAR SHRI S. N. PAL

)

National Council for Cement and Building Materials, New Delhi In personal capacity ( ` Ramanalaya `, II First M. N. Dastur and Calcutta

Crescent Park Road, Gandhinagar. Adyar, Madras )
Company Private Limited,

SHRI BIMAN DASGUPTA ( Alternate ) Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi SHRI H. S. PASRICHA Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi; and Central; SHRI Y. R. PHULL IWrti Research Institute ( CSIR ), New SHRI M. R. CHATTERJEE ( Alternate ) ~DR M. RAMAIAH Centrgey;d Structural ( CSIR Research Engineering 1. Madras Institute ( CSIR ), New Research Centre

ASSISTANT DIRECTOR ( Alternate ) ' _ Dalmia Cement ( Bharat ) Limited, New Delhi SHRI A. V. RAMANA DR K. C. NARANG ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, SHRI G. RAMDAS New Delhi National Buildings Organization, New Delhi DR A. V. R. RAO SHRI J. SEN GUPTA ( Alternate ) Gammon India Limited, Bombay SHRI T. N. SUBBA RAO SHRI S. A. REDDI ( Alternate ) Cement Corporation of India, New Delhi SHRI A. U. RIIHSINGHANI SHRI C. S. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army HeadSHRI H. S. SATYANARAYANA quarters, New Delhi SHRI V. R. KOTNIS ( Alternate ) Centr$eyhyd of Irrigation and Power, New SECRETARY SHRI K. R. SAXENA( Alternate

) ( Continued on page 15 )

2

SPECIFICATION FOR PRECAST PRESTRESSED CONCRETE STREET LIGHTING POLES.

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian %&I&W& Institution on 29 August 1986, after uhe'diaft finalized by the Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council, $2 This standard has been prepared with the object of providing guidance ta t&z man&tcturers and o&erd! in obtaining precast prestressed concrete street lighting poles capable of giving satisfactory service. This standard covers only poles in the manufacture of which prestressing system and mechanical compacting methods, such as, vibrafion, shocking, etc, have been. adopted. It does not cover hand compacted poles. Recommendations regarding selectioa,,. handling and erection of poles are covered in IS : 7321-1974*. 0.3 This standard was first published in a962 under the title `Specification for prestressed concrete street lighting i columns'. This modification in title is intended to make it more clear. 0.4 The present revision has been taken up with a view to incorporating the modifications found necessary in the light of experience gained during the use of this standard. This revision incorporates significant modifications in respect of materials, design, tests for poles and brackets, and earthing of poles. In addition, niodifications have been made in respect of some other provisions, such as, length, outreach, cover of concrete, tolerance on dimensions, sampling and inspection, marking, etc. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the. fiscal value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of-a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960t. The number of significant places retained in
*Code of practice for selactlon, bandliatg and. erection overhead power and telecommmfication lines. tRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

of concrete poles for

3

IS :2193 - 1986
the rounded off value should be the same as that in this standard. of the specified value

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the requirements for precast mprestressed concrete poles suitable for use in street lighting. It also covers prestressed concrete street lighting poles where untensioned longitudinal reinforcement is used to act in conjunction with tensioned steel under load. 1.2 Concrete fittings attached to or forming covered by this standard, as far as practicable. 1.3 The poles covered by this standard wiring purposes. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 2.1 Load Factor - The ratio of ultimate transverse load to the transverse load at first crack. For design, the transverse load at first crack shall be taken as not less than the value of the working load. 2.2 Maximum Working Load - The miximum working load in the transverse direction that is ever likely to occur including the wind pressure on the pole. This load is assumed to act at a point 600 mm below the connection of the bracket to the pole and will create a bending moment equal td the sum of the bending moments caused by the following loads : a) Wind pressure on the pole, bracket, luminaire and any raising or lowering contact gear; b) Overhanging weight of bracket and luminaire; and c) If raising and lowering gear is provided, the weight of such gear attached to the bracket plus 50 percent of the weight of the luminaire and the moving part of gear. 2.3 Mounting Height - The mounting height is the vertical distance from the centre of the light source to the road surface or to the horizontal plane through the nearest point of the road where the light source is not vertically above it. 2.4 Outreach - The outreach is the shortest distance between the vertical through the centre of the base of the pole and the vertical through the centre of light source. 4 part of a pole are also for overhead

are not intended

2.5Side E&y Lominaire - A luminaire in which the lead is taken through its side. 2.6 Top Entry Luminaire - A luminaire in which the lead is taken through the top. 2c7 Ultimate Failure - The conditions existing when the pole ceases to sustain a load increment owing to either crushing of cdncrete, or snapping of the prestressing tendon ,or permanent stretching of the steel ih any paft of the pole. 2.8 Ultimate Transverse Load - T& load at which failure occurs when it is ap lied to a point 600 mm below the .centre of light source and perpen dp icular to the axis of the pole along the transverse direction with the butt end of the pole planted to the required dept& as intended in the design. % OVERALL LENGTH OF POLES
3.1 The minimum length of pole shall be Arrived at after fixing the mpanting. height on the basis of the tra&c situation of the concerned street and addibg thereto the minimum planting depth as mentioned in 5.3. However, in no case, the pole length should be less than 5'2 m, considering the minimum mounting height of 4'0 m and the corresponding planting depth of 1'2 m. For longer poles, the lengths shall be in s%eps of 0'5 m. 3.2 Tolerances - The tolerances on overall length of poles shall be f 15 mm. Thetolerance on crok-sectional dimensions shall be ?i mm. The tolerance on uprightness of the pole shall be 0'5 percent.

4. MATERIALS 4.1 Cement - Cement used in the manufacturing of prestressed concrete poles shall conform to IS : 269-1976*, or IS : 455-1976t, or IS : 1489-19762, or IS : 8041-19785, or IS : 8043-197811, or IS : 8112-1976% 4.2 Aggregates - Aggregates shall comply with the requirements of IS : 383-1970**. Where specified, sample of aggregate shall be submitted to the purchaser for approval. The miximum size of aggregates shall in no case exceed 20 mm.
*Specification for ordinary and low heat Portland cement ( third revision ). tSpecification for Portland slag cement ( third revision ). $Specification for Portland-pozzolana cement ( second revkion ). $Specification for rapid hardening Portland cement (first revision ). l/Specification for hydrophobic Portland cement (first revision ). TSpecification for high strength ordinary Portland cement. **Specification for course and fine aggregates from natural sources for concrete ( second revision ).
5'

IS : 2193 - 1986 4.3 Reinforcement -Reinforcing bars and wires used for the manufacturing of prestressed concrete poles shall conform to the following: a) IS : 432 ( Part 1 )-1982 Specification for mild steel and medium tensile steel bars and hard-drawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement: Part 1 Mild steel and medium tensile steel bars ( third revision ).

b) IS : 432 ( Part 2 )-I982 Specification for mild steel and medium tensile steel bars and hard-drawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement: Part 2 Hard-drawn steel wire ( third revision ). c) IS : 1785 ( Part 1 )-1983 Specification for plain hard-drawn steel wire for prestressed concrete: Part 1 Cold drawn stress-relieved wire ( second revision ). d) IS : 17S5 ( Part 2 );I983 Specification for plain hard-drawn steel wire for prestressed concrete: Part 2 As-drawn wire ( jirst revision ).for high tensile steel bars used in e) IS : 2090-1983 Specification prestressed concrete (first revision ). f) IS : 6003-1983 Specification for indented wire for prestressed concrete (first revision ). g) IS : 6006-1983 Specification for ~uncoated stress relieved strand for prestressed concrete (Jzrst revision 1.
4.3.1 The diameter of plain wire used for pretensioning system, where prestress is developed by bond, shall not exceed 5 mm, as far as possible.

4.3.2 The surface of all reinforcement shall be free from loose scales, oil, grease, clay or other material that may have deteriorating effect on the bond between reinforcement and concrete. Slight rust may, however, be permissible. 4.4 Concrete - The concrete shall conform to the requirements laid down in IS : 1343-1980* for prestressed concrete members and IS : 456-19781 for reinforced concrete member, such as concrete fittings. 4.5 Admixtures - Admixtures may be used with the approval of the purchaser. However, use of any admixture containing chlorides in any form is prohibited. 4.5.1 The admixture shall conform to IS ~:9103-1979f.
(first revision ). concrete ( third revision ).

*Co&e of practice for prestressed concrete TCode of practice for plain and reinforced fSpeciEcation for admixtures for concrete.

6

IS

~2193- 1986

5. DESIGN 5.1The poles shall be so designed that they do not fail owing to failure
initiated by campression af concrete. 5.2 The maximum wind pressure to be assumed for computing the design transverse load at first crack shall be as specified by the State Governments, who are empowered in this behalf under the Indian Electricity Rules, 1956. In the absence of any data/Information from the State Governments, wind pressure may be determined as specified in IS : 875-1961*. The wind pressure may also be calculated considering the shape factor of po!es and brackets depending on their plan shape as per IS : 875-1964*. 5.3 Depth of Planting - The minimum depth of planting of a pole below ground level shall be in accordance with Table 1, the actual depth being determined on the basis of ground conditions.
TABLE
1

MINIMUM DEPTH OF PLANTING OF PRESTRESSED CONCRETE POLES IN THE GROUND
MINIMUM DEPTH REMARKS

MOUNTING HEIGHT, m

IN GROUND, m 190-j

(1)
4.0 to 6 0

(2)

(3)

6 5 to 7.5 8.0 to 9 0

1.50 ; 1.80 J

In increments of preferably O-5 m

5.4 Unless otherwise specified by the purchaser, the distance from the luminaire support to the centre of light source shall be taken as given in Tabl-e 2.
TABLE 2 DISTANCE FROM LUMINAIRE SUPPORT TO CENTRE OF LIGHT SOURCE
2. MOUNTING HEIGHT OF POLES, m NOMINAL DISTANCE FROM THE LUMINAIRE SUPPORT TO THE CENTRE OF LIGHT SOURCE, mm

r________h_-__---~ For Top Entry
(1) 0 ii) iii) (2) 4.0 to 5.5 6,O to 7.5 7.5 to 9.0 by the purchaser. Luminaire (3) 300 300 to 450* 450

For Side Entry Luminaire (4) 100 100 to 150* 150

*As specified

*Code of practice

for structural

safety of buildings:

Loading standards

( revised ).

7

IS:2193-1986 5.5 Outreach -

This will be in standard length as specified in Table 3.
STANDARD LENGTH OF OUTREACH
OUTREACH Not exceeding 0.5 m Var;$;5f;m 0.50 to 2.75 m in steps 1

TABLE 3

-MOUNTING HEIGHT, m 4-5 6.0 7.5 9.0

J

5.5.1 Unless otherwise specified by the purchaser, the distance between the vertical through the centre of light source of a side entry luminaire and the extremity of the concrete on the bracket arm shall be taken as 300 mm nominal. 5.6 The poles shall be designed to resist the maximum bending moment due to a load of 90 kg or the maximum working load, whichever is greater, applied at 600 mm below the centre of light source or, if so specified by the purchaser, at a point immediately below the connection of the bracket to the pole. 5.6.1 The load factor on transverse strength for prestressed concrete poles shall not be less than 2'5. This factor may be reduced to a value not less than 2'0 in the case of street lighting poles by the State Governments, who are empowered in this behalf under the Indian Electricity Rules, 1956.

5.7 Vertical Load on Bracket - The vertical load on the bracket shall be taken as equivalent to the weight of the luminaire, weight of raising and lowering gear attached to the bracket ( if used ) plus 50 percent of the weight of the luminaire and of the moving part of that gear, the load being applied at point of support of the luminaire wirh the bracket rigidly fixed to the pole in the designed manner. 5.8 Transverse Load on Bracket - The load caused by wind pressure on the luminaire and bracket is considered as acting at the point of support of the luminaire with the bracket fixed to the pole. The design of the connections of bracket to pole shall provide for torsional stresses due to wind load on the bracket and the luminaire. 6. FITTINGS 6.1 Spigot - When poles with top spigots are required, and unless otherwise specified by the purchaser, the following sizes shall be provided: : A spigot with 100 mm dia and a) For 6, 7'5 and 9 m mounting 150 mm long heights : A spigot with 80 mm dia and b) For 4'5 m mounting height 80 mm long 8

IS : 2193 - 1986 6.2 Nipples - Unless otherwise specified by the purchaser, nipples shall be provided at the end of the bracket as follows: a) For mounting heights 7'5 and 9 m: i) To Take Pendant Lumincire - Vertical 30 mm gas nipple having at least 40 mm of exposed thread; and ii) To Take Side Entry Luminaire -- 30 mm steel tubing with end horizontal and plain or threaded, as specified by the purchaser. b) For mounting heights 4'5 and 6 m: i) To Take Pendajlt Luminaire - Vertical 20 or 30 mm gas nipple having at least 25 mm of exposed thread; and Luminaire - 20 or 30 mm steel ii) To Take Side Entry tubing with end horizontal and plain or threaded, as specified by the purchaser.

6.3 Ladder Arms - If required, and unless otherwise specified, ladder arms shall be as follows: a) Single arm, of 550 mm overall projection, and b) Double arms, each of 250 mm overall projections. 6.4 Door and Door Openings - Unless otherwise specified by the purchaser, a weatherproof door with a locking device, which will resist unauthorized entry, shall be included in the pole. The door opening shall be of size agreed upon between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 6.41 The bottom of the opening shall be at least 300 mm above ground level. 6.5 All metal works shall be of non-corroding protected against corrosion. metal or of metal suitably

6.6 Bore - All poles shall have a smooth walled central duct of diameter not less than 30 mm for the purpose of taking the supply from the base to the lighting unit at top. 6.7 Service Connections - Suitabie apertures shall be provided on at least two sides of the pole below ground level for the entry of electric cables or gas service pipes. Unless otherwise specified, service slots shall be approximately 225 mm long and 75 mm wide with the top at least 300 mm below ground level. The edges of the slot shall be suitably rounded to prevent damage to the sheath or armouring of the cables. 6.8 Breathing Holes - Breathing holes shall be provided in the door and also as close-to the top of the pole as is practicable to allow circulation of air and to limit condensation. The holes shall be suitably protected against the entry of rain water. 9

IS : 2193 - 1986 7. MANUFACTURE

7.1 All reinforcement and ducts shall be accurately placed and maintained in position during manufacture. Grouping of high tensile wires may be permitted as long as the diameter of the wire is between 3 and 5 mm. 7.2 For prestressed pretensioned system, all wires shall be accurately stretched with uniform prestress in each wire. Each wire or group of wires shall be anchored positively during casting. Care shall be taken to see that the anchorages do not yield before the concrete attains the necessary strength. 7.3 For post-tensioned poles, the relative positions of wires in a cable, whether curved or straight, shall be accurately maintained by suitable means to ensure the free flow~of grout. 7.4 Cover - For pretensioned system, the cover of concrete measured from the outside of the prestressing tendon shall be at least 20 mm. Where cables and large sized bars are used, the clear cover shall be at least 30 mm. The minimum clear distance between single wires in pretensioned system shall be the greater of the following: a> One- and one-third times the largest size of aggregate used, and b) Three times the diameter of the wire. The clear distance between cables or large bars shall not be less than 40 mm or 6'5 mm in excess of the largest size aggregate used, whichever is greater. 7.5 Welding and Lapping of Steel - The high tensile steel wire or bar shall be continuous over the entire length of the tendon. Welding shall not be allowed in any case. Jointing or coupling in the case of bars and indented or crimped wires may be permitted provided the strength of .joint or coupling is not less than the strength of each individual bar or wire. 7.6 Compacting - Concrete shall be compacted by spinning, vibrating, shocking or other suitable mechanical means. Hand compaction shall not be permitted. `7.7 Curing - The concrete shall be covered with a layer of sacking, canvas, hessian or similar absorbent material and kept constantly wet up to the time when the strength of concrete is at least equal to the minimum strength of concrete at transfer of prestress in case of poles. In case of reinforced concrete brackets, the concrete shall be cured as mentioned above till the concrete attains sufficient strength. Then the poles and the brackets may be removed from the mould and watered at intervals to prevent surface cracking of the unit; the interval shall 10

IS : 2193 - 1986

depend on the atmospheric also be permitted.

humidity

and temperature.

Steam curing may

daily tests on concrete cubes shall be carried 7.8 During manufacture, out till the concrete achieves required strength at transfer. Thereafter, the tests on concrete shall be carried out as detailed in IS : 1343-1980*. The manufacturer shall apply, when required by the purchaser or his representative, results of compressive tests conducted in accordance with IS : 456-19787 on concrete cubes made from the concrete used for the poles. If the purchaser so desires, the manufacturer shall supply cubes for test purposes and such cubes shall be tested in accordance with IS : 456-19787. 7.9 Earthing - Earthing shall be provided by either of the following means: a) By having a length of galvanized iron wire of 4 mm diameter or equivalent strip or equivalent bare copper cable~embedded in concrete during manufacture and the ends of the wire or strip or cable left projecting from the pole to a length of 100 mm at 215 mm from top and 150 mm below ground level. b) By providing two holes of suitable dimensions, 215 mm from top and 150 mm below ground level to enable a galvanized iron wire of 4 mm diameter or equivalent strip or equivalent bare copper cable to be taken from the top hole to the bottom hole through the central hollow.
NOTE - The details of embedment of wire or strip or cable shall be as .agreed upon between the manufacturer and the purchaser.

7.10 Finish - The poles shall be of good finish and free from honeycombing. The surfaces of the poles in contact with the moulds shall be smooth and regular in shape. All arrises shall be clear and well-defined so as to present a neat appearance. 8. TESTS 8.1 Transverse Strength Test for Poles - The transverse strength test of poles shall be conducted in accordance with IS : 2905-1966$. A prestressed concrete pole shall be deemed not to have passed the test if cracks wider than 0'1 mm appear. at a stage prior to the application of the design transverse load at first crack and/or the observed ultimate transverse load is less than the design ultimate transverse load.
*Code of practice for prestressed concrete (first revision ). iCode of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision ). XMethods of test for concrete poles for overhead power and telecommunication lines.

11

IS : 2193 - 1986 $.2 Strength Tests for Brackets 8.2.1 The brackets shall be tested

either in its normal position at the top of the pole or fixed into a special pole head of identical dimensions, which may be a portion cut from a pole. The pole or pole head shall be rigidly fixed in a vertical position. 8.2.2 Vertical and transverse test loads calculated in accordance with 5.7 and 5.8 shall be gradually applied at the end of the bracket, the ratio between the vertical and transverse loads being kept constant. When the maximum working loads are reached, it shall be maintained for at least 2 minutes and the maximum deflection shall be measured. 8.2.3 The load shall then be reduced to zero and the residual deflection shall be measured after 10 minutes. 8.2.4 The bracket shall be considered satisfactory, if the recovery is at least 75 percent of the maximum deflection while under load. 8.2.5 The load causing failure shall not be less than `the maximum working load multiplied by the load factor considered in the design'. AND INSPECTION 9.1 ScaIe of Sampling 9.1.1 Lot - In a consignment, 500 poles ( or brackets ) or a part 9. SAMPLING thereof of the same mounting height, same dimensions and belonging to the same batch of manufacture, shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. 9-1-2 For ascertaining the conformity of the material in the lot to the requirements of this specification, samples shall be tested from each lot separately. 9.1.3 The number of poles or brackets to be selected from the lot shall depend on the size of the lot and shall be according to Table 4. TABLE 4
BRACKETS IN THE LOT

SCALE

OF

SAMPLlNG AND OF DEFECTIVES REQUIREMENTS AQiiG
Number

PERMISSIBLE
TRANSVERSE STRENGTH

NUMBER
TRANSVERSE STRENGTH

No. OF POLES OR

_.-_---_

DIMENSIONAL
Sample Size

AT FIRST CRACK (4) 2
: 5

ULTIMATE (5) Nil
Nil Nil 1

(1) 101 to 200
201 to 300 301 to 500 up to 100

(2) ::
20 30

(3)
1 : 3

NOTE - hTe poles or brackets tested provided the crack is closed after removal

up to first crack of the load.

mav

be

used,

12

IS : 2193- 1986 ~9.2 Number of Tests and Criteria for Conformity

9.2.1 All the po!es/brackets selected according to 9.1.3 shall be tested for overall length, cross-section and uprightness ( see 3.2 >. A pole/ bracket failing to satisfy one or more of these requirements shall be in the lot shall be conconsidered as defective. All the poles/brackets sidered as conforming to these requirements if the number of defective poles/brackets found in the sample is less than or equal to the corresponding acceptance number given in co1 3 of Table 4.

9.2.2 The lot having been found satisfactory according to 9.2.1 shall be further tested for transverse strength ( see 8.1 ) of the poles. For this purpose, the number of poles given in co1 4 of Table 4 shall be tested. These poles may be selected from those already tested according to 9.2.1 and found satisfactory. All these poles tested for transverse strength shall satisfy the corresponding specification requirements. If one or more poles fail, twice the number of poles originally tested shall be selected from those already selected and subjected to this test. If there is no failure among these poles, the lot shall be considered to have satisfied the requirements of this test. 9.2.3 All the brackets selected from the lot according to 9.1.3 shall be subjected to strength test for brackets ( see 8.2 >. All the brackets tested for strength test shall satisfy the requirements of this specification. If one or two brackets fail, twice the number of brackets originally tested sha!l be se!ected from the lot and subjected to this test. lf there is no failure among these brackets, the lot shall be considered to have satisfied the requirements of the specification. If more than two brackets fail, the lot shall be considered not to have satisfied the requirements of the specification. 10. MARKING 10.1 The poles shall be clearly and indelibly marked with the following particulars either during or after the manufacture, but before testing, at a position so as to be clearly read after erection in position:

a) b) cl d)

Month and year of manufacture; Name of manufacturer or his registered Serial number of poles; and

trade-mark

or both;

Position of centre of gravity of the poles with the word `C.G.`. Mark.

10.2 Each pole may also be marked with the ISI Certification

NOTE - The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian

13

JS: 2193 - 1986
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been prcduced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. IS1 marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

11. INFORMATION ORDER

TO BE SUPPLIED WlTH THE ENQUIRY OR shall be supplied with enquiry or order:

11.1 The following information

a) Mounting height; b) Type of luminaire and outreach; 4 Weight of luminaire and, if provided,

weight of raising and lowering gear; d) Spigot and nipples ( see 6.1 and 6.2 ); e) Angle which the axis cf the nipple at the tnd of the bracket makes with the vertical ( see 6.2 ); f) Ladder arms, if required ( see 6.3 ); g) Any special requirements in respect of depth of planting; h) Size of door opening ( see 6.4 ); and j) Position and size of service slots ( see 6.7 ).

14

IS : 2193 - 1986
( Continued from page 2 ) Members Representing Public Works Department, Tamil Nadu of

Government ( DESIGNS ) EXECUTIVEENGINEER( SMD ) ( DIVISION ) ( Alternate > Orissa Cement Limited, New Delhi SHRI L. SWAROOP SHRI H. BHATTACHAKYYA( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member ) SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Clv Engg >

SUPERINTENDINGENGINEER

Secretary SHRI N. C. BANDYOPADHYAY Deputy Direct or ( Civ Engg ), IS1

Concrete Poles Subcommittee,
Convener DR N. RAGHAVENDRA Members SHRI J. L. BANDYOPADHYAY Indian Posts Jabalpur

BDC 2 : 12
and Building

National Council for Cement Materials, New Delhi and Telegraph

Department,

SHRI V. V. SURYA RAO ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, SHRI S. N. BASU New Delhi SHRI T. N. OBOVEJA( Alternate ) Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala SHRI R. S. BHATIA SHRI S. K. SHARMA ( Alternate 1 ' Orissa Cement Ltd, Rajgangpur SHRI P. C. CHATTERJEE. SHRI U. N. RATH ( Alternate ) Central Electricity Authority, Rural ElectriDSRECTOR( RE ) fication Directorate, New Delhi DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( RE ) ( Afternate ) RuraIDEf;;trificatioo Corporation Ltd, New SHRI G. L. DUA SHRI P. C. JAIN

SHRI S.K. SETHI (Alternate)

Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, quarters, New Delhi

Army

Head-

SHRI SUCHA SINGH ( Alternate ) Research, Designs and Standards Organization JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow ( B & S ) CB-IL ASSISTANT DIRECTOR (E) ( B & S )-I ( Afternate ) The Indian Hume Pipe Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI N. G. JOSHI Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi SHRI R. SAMPAT KUMARAM SHRI RAMESH CHANDER ( Alternate ) Works, Fabrication The Steelpipe and SHRI A. V. TALATI Vadodara SHRI H. C. SHAH ( Alternate ) Maharashtra State Electricity Board. Bombay SHRI T. G. TEPAM SHRI R. B. JOSHI ( Alternate ) Tamilnadu Electricity Board, Madras SHRI S. THIAGARAJAN SHRI LAKSHMINARASIMHAN( Alternate )

15

