(Reaffirmed 2012)

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR DOBBY ,BARRELS
Textile Mill Accessories ( Other than Jute ) Sectional
Committee, TDC 19

csaimm
SrrruB.R.R,wuww
Mrnbm Sarr S. N. Auo~ Sxax D. F. Coax Swu Y. N. Comcma Soar P. D. S~lu G. C. G~osti I)R P. C. Gunlr S~lu B. P. KOPPI~ Sxa~ H. N. MAY Sxim R. K. R~SHIZ SHRI A. K. tim Soar G. RANAKRISHNAN
SliRr v.

Rgnomtind
Sayaji MiIb Ltd, Ahmcdabad

Shalimar Industries Private Ltd. Calcutta Mafatlal Gagalbhai & Sons, Bombay Bhaat Timber Industries ( Bombay j Private Ltd, Bombay Association of Merchants & Manufacturrn of Textile Stores & Machinrrv, India, Bombay Ahm~~~aa;tilc Industry's Research Association, The Delhi Cloth & General Mii Co Ltd, Delhi West End Works, Bombay National Machinery Manufacturers Ltd, Thana Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay ( &#mu&) Indian Textile Papa Tube Co Ltd, Virudhunagar Ewthcm India Millowners' Association, Coimbatorr The Asoka Mills Ltd, Abmeclabad Metro Wood & En&x&g Workr Private Ltd, Ahmcdabad All India Bobbin Manufactwn' Association.

N. SUB&~ho
V. SIR

&RI P. J. &WE Sunr Cam-w

SE-N v. s. SUAE

Bombay SHIID.K.~`A~O~BA~(-) Sm S. N. Sxmuu
SHn1 C. R. SRXNIVASAN Swru R. T. AYINBWM
SHRI SFIRI E. R. swBMRhm UL~AL ( Al&m&

Forest Research Institute & Co&gcs, Dchra Dun The Textile Association ( India ) Rcgd, Bombay
)

N. v.

SSIU S. R. VYM SERI s. M. CEuRAaoRTY, -(Tar)

Ahmcdabad Millownm' Association, Ahmedahad The Millowners' Association. Bombay Kcsoram Industries & Cotton Mills Ltd, Calcutta Director General, IS1 ( Ex-q&o Member)

SHlUM.L.fim As&ant Director ( Ta ), IS1

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAiG
NEW DELHI 110002

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR DOBBY BARRELS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 December 1967, after the draft finalized by the Textile Mill Accessories ( Other than Jute ) Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 0.2 This standard is based on the manufacturing country in this field. practices followed in the

0.3 This standard contains clauses 3.2.1 and 6.1.1 which call for agreement between the buyer and the seller for permitting him to use his option for selection to suit his requirements. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements of dobby barrels for use in conjunction with wooden lags conforming to IS : 3496-l 9667.
2. NOMENcLATuRE 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the nomenclature of the different components of the dobby barre1 shall be as indicated in Fig. 1.

S.MANUPACTURE
3.1 GeneraI Des&a in Fig. 1. -

The dobby barrels should be generally as illustrated

2

lS :4416.,1967 31 Material 3.2.1 Bad -The barrel should be manufactured out of well-seasoned timber of any of the species listed below as agreed to between the buyer and the seller: TRADE NAME Aini Birch Blackwood ( Rosewood ) Ghickrassy Halda IndmnorL =i=(=) Sissqo To&
blanks for barrels are given in Appendix A.
BOTANICAL

NAME

Artocargms hirsuta Lamk. Fagus sp. B&da sp. Dalbergia iat;fooiia Roxb. Chukrasia tabularis Adr. Juss. Adina cordijdia Hook. f. Q!@=f SP. Mitragyna parz$Xa Korth. Daibergia sissoo Roxb. Tectona grandis Linn. f.
short description of the timhers and recommended code of manufacture

( Roxb. )

MoTE -A

of

shaft shall be made of tempered carbon steel 3.2.2 Bad Stulft -The or case hardened mild steel rod. 3.2.3 Discs - Two cast-iron discs shall be screwed one on each end of the wooden barrel as shown in Fig. 1. 3.3 Finish - The wooden portion of the dobby barrel should be varnished and should have a smooth finish. 4. REQ4.1 Dimensions - The dimensions of dobby barrels shall conform to the requirements of Table 1 when read with Fig. 1. 4.1.1 Each' barrel in the lot shall be adjudged by means of suitable measuring scales and gauges for its conformity to the dimensions specified in Table 1.
NoTE - All the dobby barrels of the same overall length and manufactured from the same raw materials delivered to a buyer against one d-patch note shall constitute a lot.

5. MARKING 5.1 Each dobby barrel shall be marked at an appropriate manufacturer's name, initials or trade-mark. 3 place with the

1Sr4416.1967
TABLE 1 DIMENSIONS ( C&r

OF DOBBY BARRELS

4.1, and Fig. 1 )

mm

mm

Dcptb of groove A Width of groove at the top E Width of the projecting portion C ; Diameter of barrel shaft ( spindle ) d Dia&cr of barrel dl Length of the barrel L

11.1 17.0 10.4 460

12.0 17.5 11.3 40O 1140 15.0 75

, 11oo
12.5 71 12 x No.ofjacks-0*5E+2J
WhUe

E = pitch of lag, and

J-

distance from the first
and last hola to tbc corresponding end of lag ( ses Fig. 1 ).

SOT35 -

For dimensions E and J, SICIS : 3496-1966 ` Specification .for dobby lags and

Pegs

' Dobby barrels may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark.

5.1.1

NOTE --The use of the ISI Certification Mark is iov&ned by the pro&ions of tbc Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the rcquiracnts of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supcrviscd by IS1 and operated by the producer. IS1 mark&l products arc also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to'that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obta&d from the Indian Standards Institution.

6. PACKlNG 6.1 Each paper. barrel shall be wrapped in kraft paper or waterproof packing

NOTE - A' rccommcndcd method for packing the dobby barrels is illustrated in Fig. 2. This method helps in keeping the barrels free from striking against each other and against the walls of the we and thus preventing them to be chipped off.

6.1.1 The number of dobby barrels to be packed in a c&e shall be as agreed upon between the buyer and the seller. 5

IS:44l6-1967
WOOOEN PLANK

FIG. 2

METHODOPPACKING

6.2 Each case shall bear the following information: a) The number of dobby barrels in the case; and b) Manufacturer's name, initials or trade-mark, if any.

APPENDIX

A

( Note under Clause 3.2.1 )
A-l.

SHORT

DESCRIPTION

OF TIMBERS

A-l.1 Aini - with straight or interlocked grain; very coarse and quite even in texture; light in weight and with somewhat rough feel; not very durable; sap-wood white, heart-wood golden yellow turning to the colour of old gold after a few hours of exposure. A-l.2 Beech - straight grained; close and even in texture; needs careful seasoning; fairly tough and strong, easy to work; whitish or pale brown in colour. A-l.3 Birch - straight grained; fine and even in texture, may be seasoned with a little care; moderately strong, easy to work; white to light brown in colour. A-l.4 Blackwood- ( Rosewood ) - narrowly interlocked grained in long straight lines; medium coarse textured; moderately heavy to heavy; moderately strong but very hard; easy to work and machine to a smooth finish ( unless excessive interlocked fibres are present ) ; very durable and seasons without difficulty. A-l.5 Chickrassy - with irregularly interlocked uneven grain; even and medium fine textured; light to moderately heavy; fairly strong and moderately hard; works easily to a good surface; seasons easily. 6

A-l.6 Haldu - fairly straight grained but sometimes with broadIy interlocked bands of fibres; fine and even in texture; needs little care in seasoning; moderately strong; easy to saw and machine; lustrous yellow or straw coloured. A-l.7 Indian Oak - straight or often irregularly grained; medium fine to coarse and uneven in texture; moderately heavy to heavy; moderately hard to hard; lustrous when first exposed; with quite smooth to rough feel; without characteristic odour or taste. usually straight grained; but sometimes with A-l.8 Kaim (Kalam)interlocked `grains; needs careful seasoning; fairly hard and strong; easy to saw and machine; pale yellow when freshly cut; light brown on exposure. A-l .9 Sissoo - interlocked grained; medium coarse in texture; easy to season with usual precautions in stacking; slightly heavier than teak; good deal harder than teak; strong; fairly easy to work; very durable; light golden brown to dark brown in colour. A-l JO Teak - straight-grained or often very wa,vy grained when grown in dry localities; rather coarse and uneven textured; moderately heavy; moderately hard and strong; oily and extremely durable; easy to work with good machining qualities; seasons well without difficulty and is an allpurpose #timber. A-2. RECOMMENDED CODE FOB DOBBY BARRELS OF MANUFACTUBE OF BLANIU3

A-2.1 It is recommended that timber may be converted into straight grained blanks of suitable size. However, a slope of grain not exceeding 1 in 16 should be permitted in the converted blanks. The blanks should then be seasoned under proper conditions of drying to the required moisture content The moisture content of well-seasoned blanks ( see also IS : 1141-1958 *). should not be more than 12 percent nor less than 8 percent at the time of manufacture of barrels.

