. "

r

.

IS6316:1993
( Reaffirmed 1999 )

e $fW'f TRW

qmi?mT;rm -

WTC

q

fSFT 6 )

tif$tTT

0

( vi&

rg;raHk

Indiqh Standard,

SOWING-EQUIPMENTSEED-CUM-FERTILIZERDRILL-TEST CODE
( First Revision)

UDC

631*331*5 : 620.1

8 BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN.

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

*
*

NEW DELHI 110002 August 19%

Price Group 7

Sowing, Fertilizer

and Manure Application

Equipment

Sectional

Committee,

FADC 36

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Sowing, Fertilizer and Manure Application Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. Increase in the manufacture and use of seed-cum-fertilizer drills, has necessitated the application standardized tests for evaluation of their performance on a uniform and rationalized basis. This standard was first -published in 1971. On the basis of the experience fertilizer drills, it has been revised. of

gained in testing of seed-cum-

In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 6316 : 1993

Indian Standard

SOWING EQUIPMENTSEED-CUM-FERTILIZERDRILL-TEST CODE
( First Revision )
1 SCOPE This standard prescribes the method of testing for the performance of operation and soundness of construction of seed-cum-fertilizer drill. 2 REFERENCE IS 6813 : 1993 `Specification for seed-cum-fertilizer drill (f;vst revision )' is a necessary adjunct to this standard. 3 GENERAL 3.0 While carrying out the tests as recommended in 3.1 and 3.2, it is desirable that soil scientists and agronomists may also be associated in the test, if possible. The test prescribed in 3.2 (f) is for determining the soundness of construction, whereas other tests are for ascertaining the performance of the drill. 3.1 Laboratory Test The following tests shall be conducted in the laboratory: a) Metering
Test - To determine the seed and fertilizer dropping rates obtainable eat different settings and the variation among furrow openers when the machine is stationary, and 2) Seed damage determination test - To determine if any mechanical damage is done to the seed during the calibration. b) Uniformity of Seeding -- To determine whether the drill is placing the speed uniformly or not. 3.2 Field Tests The drill shall be operated in the field to test the following: FieldOperation - To determine the range of seed and fertilizer dropping rates obtainabie at different settings and the variation among openers while operating under field conditions and using the common kind of seed and fertilizer. b) Placement - To check the accuracy of placing the seed and the fertilizer 117 respect of each other. The ability to place the seed at various depths. The

performance of the covering devices and the amount of compaction of soil around the seed. C>Power Requirement - To check the draft in kgf, speed in km/hour, metric horse power and metric horse power hours per hectare.

4

Field Eficiency

and Labour

Requirement

-

To check the field efficiency which is the ratio of effective field capacity to the theoretical field capacity expressed as percent and man-hours per hectare as lbour requirement.

4 Ease of Operation and Adjustment f > Suitability and Soundness of Construction
4 SELECTION AND PREPARATION DRILL FOR TEST

OF THE

4.1 Selection The drill shall be selected at random from the production line as directed by the testing station complete with its usual accessories and in condition as generally offered for sale for commercial test report. The drill shall be new and should not be given any special treatment or preparation for test. The manufacturer may submit prototype for confidential test report. The nature of test report required by the manufacturer shall be stated. 4J.l The manufacturer shall supply operational manual, list of spare parts/parts catalogue and a specification sheet of the drill consisting of the items listed in the specimen report in Annex A, as well as any further data required to carry out the tests. These specification shall be verified by the testing station and reported in the pro forma as given in Annex A. 4.2 Preparation of the Drill for Tests, in and Preliminary Adjustment Running

1)

Calibration

a>

4.2.1 The drill shail be new and run-in by the manufacturer before test, under his responsibility in accordance with his usual instructions to users and in collaboration with the testing station. 4.2.2 The test report shall state the duration of running-m. place and

1

IS 6316 : 1993 4.2.3 The manufacturer may make adjustments during the period the drill is prepared for tests. These adjustments shall not be changed during the tests. In case it is found necessary to change the setting, alterations made shall be reported. 5 LABORATORY 5.1 Metering 5.1.1 Calibration TESTS Jack up the drill so that the ground wheels turn freely. Make a mark on the drive wheel and a corresponding mark at a convenient place on the body of the drill to help in counting the revolutions of the drive wheel. Practise turning the wheel at the speed calculated in (e) above, if turning has to be done manually for animal-drawn drill. h) Select the seed and fertilizer from following for conducting the test; Seed 1) Small size ( mustard and bajra ), and 2) Medium size paddy ), and 3) Large Fertilizers 1) 2) 3) 4) Calcium ammonium nitrate, Ammonium sulphate, Urea, and Superphosphate. fertilizer ( wheat, sorghum the

Series of tests at full, three-fourths, one half, and one-fourth capacity of the hopper shall be conducted. The step by step procedure shall be as follows:

a) Determine

the nominal width of coverage of the drill. The nominal width is equal to the multiplication of the number of furrow openers and the spacing between the openers in cm. Example: 4 furrow openers x 25 cm = 100 cm =lm

size ( pea and gram );

b)

Find the length of a strip, having the nominal width as determined in (a) above, necessary to make one hectare; Example: 10 000 rnz __~ =
lm

The physical condition of the shall be examined and reported.

IOOOOm

cl

Determine the number of revolutions the ground wheel has to make to cover the length of the strip determined in (b) above. It is recommended that this should be done by actually operating the drill in the same field and soil conditions as will be used for the field operation test (3.2). Count the number of revolutions in a given distance, say, 100 metres. A 60-cm diameter wheel will probably make about 53 revolutions in 100 metres.

d) From the value found in (c) above, select a number of revolutions of the ground wheel to cover a convenient fraction of a hectare, say, 1125. A driil having a nominal width of 1 m and ground wheel diameter of 60 cm will require about 212 revolutions to cover l/25 hectare. Calculate e> ground revolutions per minute of wheel in case of animal drawn drill and revolutions per minute of metering device in case of tractor-drawn drill. The travelling speed for animaldrawn drill should be 2.4 km/h and for tractor drawn drill the speed should be 3 and 5 km/h. A 60-cm diameter wheel makes about 21 revolutions per minute when travelling at a speed of 2-4 km/h. 2

j) Put selected seed and fertilizer in the hopper. Place a sack or container under each boot. for the k) Set the rate control adjustment seed and the fertilizer for maximum drilling. Mark this position on the control for reference. m) Engage the clutch or on-off adjustment for the hopper, and rotate drive wheel at the speed as calculated in (e) above. Turning of the wheel of animal-drawn drill may be done manually and for tractor-drawn drill metering device should be rotated at a constant speed by suitable power arrangement. n) Weigh the quantity of seed and fertilizer dropped from each opener and record on the data sheet. p) Calculate the seed and fertilizer dropped in kg/hectare and record on the data sheet. q) Repeat the process indicated in (j) to (p) at least three times. r) Set the rate control levers for the minimum and for specified rate setting and run as indicated in fj) to (p). Mark this position on the rate control for future reference. 5.1.1.1 5.1.2 Record the data according to Annex B. Mechanical Damage

For each of the tests conducted in 4.1.1, take one kg of seed from each sack land label with

IS 6316 : 1993 test number, opener and rate setting. The seeds which would be used for metering shall be tested before and after the test to ensure its invisible ( germination ) damage and the samples of the seed obtained after passing through the metering shall be tested to ensure its visible damage. Count the number of seeds with visible damage. Take the mass of the damaged seeds in one kg of the sample and calculate the percentage of damaged seeds before and after the test. 5.1.2.1 Record the data according to Annex C. 5.2 Seeding Uniformity Carry out the following uniformity in metering. 5.2.1 Sticky Belt Method Mount the drill on a stand and allow a 10 m long ( centre to centre ) belt to travel under the furrow openers or seed tubes in such a way that the speed of the belt is equal to the running speed of the drill. Arrange the drive on the driving wheel of the drill. In case the drive is taken directly to the feed shaft of seed, keep the relationship between the speed of the feed shaft and belt the same as that of the feed shaft and ground wheel. Apply a sticky layer of grease to the belt to facilitate the proper embedding of seeds without any displacement. Keep the seed/fertilizer tube as close to the belt as possible. The belt used should be painted and marked in centimetres of quickreading. Operate the drill and observe the number of seeds dropped for each metre of belt length for recommended seed rate. Repeat the test at Ieast three times. 5.2.2 Sand Bed Method If the facilities for conducting tests as given in 42.1 do not exist, then this method be used. Prepare an artificial levelled bed of 25 cm depth from fine sand and of a length of at least 5 m and the width equal to the nominal width of the drill. Allow the drill to travel over this bed with furrow openers or seed tubes lowered as near to the top surface of the bed as possible. Observe the number of seeds dropped and the average distance between two seeds for each metre of bed length. Repeat the test at least three times. For repeating the test, get the sand sieved for separating the grain from sand. 5.2.3 Record the data according 6 FIELD TESTS 6.1 Field Operation Operate the drill in a well prepared seedbed, that is, at least 15 cm deep, firm, fine structure, smooth and level; relatively free of surface trash and at good moisture content. The size of the to Annex D. test to ensure the trial plot shall not be less than 0.1 ha and 0.2 ha for the animal drawn and tractor operated drills respectively. As far as possible the shape of the plot should be a rectangular one with the sides in the ratio of 2 : 1. Follow the general procedure as for calibration ( see 5.1.1 ) except remove the ends of the seed and fertilizer tubes from the furrow openers and attach a bag to each end to collect the seeds and fertilizer whichever is the case. Also mark off in the field a distance, that when traversed, will represent a convenient part of a hectare. Use the same kind of seed and fertilizer as used in calibration test [ see 5.1.1 (h)]. Repeat at least three times for maximum, minimum and recommended feed rate settings. Use the same identical adjustment settings as in calibration test (see 5.1.1) as far as possible. Mark the positions on the rate control mechanism. 6.1.1 Record the data according 6.2 Placement 6.2.1 Operate the drill in the field under the same good seed bed conditions ( see 6.1), and with average depth setting of the furrow openers. Cover at least 100 m of row length. Carefully remove the soil without disturbing the seed and the fertilizer at several spots (a minimum of 5 ) in each row. Measure the depth of the seed below the soil surface and the vertical spacing of the fertilizer with respect to the seed. Do this by laying a plank across the row and measure downward from its lower edge to the seed and to the fertilizer. It will not be necessary to measure the horizontal spacing accurately as this is not as critical as the vertical spacing. It will be much easier to locate the seed and fertilizer if maximum rates of application are used. Also the fertilizer is more easily located if white lime is-mixed with it. 6.2.2 Repeat the procedure as given in 6.2.1 at minimum and maximum depth settings of the furrow openers. 6.2.3 Record the data according 6.3 Power Requirement 6.3.1 For Trailed Drill a) Insert a dynamometer in the hitch to measure the draft in kgf. The draft is defined as the horizontal component of the pull, parallel to the line of motion. If the line of pull through the dynamometer is not horizontal, thenmeasure the angle, the line of pull makes with the horizontal and calculate the horizontal component ( draft ). A direct reading spring type dynamometer will be satisfactory. to Annex F. to Annex E.

IS 6316 : 1993

b)

Lay off a space of 50 m in the middle of a long row and mark each end ~of this space with an easily distinguished pole. If the field is small one may have to be satisfied with a shorter row. Divide this marked space in a minimum of 5 runs. the drill as in 6.2.1. Start the drill well in advance of the first pole marker and be sure it 1s operating smoothly when it reaches this pole. As the drill travels the marked run length, record the dynamometer reading. The more the readings taken the better the results are. Calculate the average of all the readings taken within a particular run. A stop-watch or other accurate timepiece should be used to record the time for the machine to traverse the marked run length. From this value calculate the speed of travel in metre per second. Also calculate the wheel slip and theoretical field capacity. the power horsepower as follows: =

4

Detach the drill from the tractor and record the draft required only to pull the tractor ( with which the seed drill was attached in the same manner as in (c) above. Take care that the tractor is pulled at the speed as in the case of (c). the draft of the drill by deducting the draft of tractor [ as obtained in (d) ] from the draft of drill and tractor [ as obtained in (c) 1. the the procedure power in accordance as given in 6.3.1(d). with

C) Operate

e) Obtain

f-1Calculate
8) Repeat

the procedure (a) to (f) a minimum of three times to arrive average power requirement. Record the data according to Annex Requirement H.

6.3.2.1

5.4 Field Efficiency

and the Labour

4 Compute
Metric

Draft in kgf x Speed in metre ~__ per second 75

e) Repeat

(d) at average

the procedure indicated least three times to power requirement. the data according

in (a) to arrive at

6.3.1.1 Record 6.3.2

to Annex

G.

For Mounted Drill

The theoretical field capacity in hectare per hour may be taken from the power requirement tests. It is the rate of field coverage that would De obtained if the drill was operating continu2usly without interruptions ( turning at the ends, illing of hoppers, etc ). The effective field capacity is the actual average rate of coverage. tt includes the time lost in filling hoppers, turning at the end of the rows, unclogging of making adustments, etc. The labour openers, required for operating the drill 1s measured at the same time that the field capacity is deterIt is the number of the manhours used mined. to cover one hectare of effective field area. 6.4.1 Record Annex J. 6.5 Assessing Adjustments the data in accordance with

a) Lay off a space of 25 m in the middle of a long row and mark each end of this space with an easily distinguished pole. Divide this marked space in a minimum of 5 runs. b) Attach a direct reading spring type dynamometer in front of the tractor. Use another tractor to pull the tractor on which the drill is attached. c) Operate the drill as in 6.2.1. Start the drill well in advance of the first pole and be sure it is operating smoothly when it reaches this pole. As the drill travels the marked run length, record the dynamometer reading. The more the readings taken the better the results are. Calculate the average of all the readings taken within a particular run. A stop-watch or other accurate timepiece should be -used to record the time for the drill to traverse the marked run. From this value calculate the speed of travel in metres per second. Also calculate the wheel slip and theoretical field capacity. 4

the Ease ofOperation

and

The observations and adjustments with Annex K. 6.6 Suitability

regarding the ease of operation shall be recorded in accordance

and Soundness

of Construction field if at

The drill shall be operated in continuous work for at least 4 hours. It is preferred least 20 hours test is perfomed. 7 REPORTING RESULTS

7.1 For reducing the data to a usable form prepare a summary report in accordance with Annex L. The performance conformity in relation to the performance requirements specified in IS 6813 : 1993 shall also be mentioned in detail against item 5 of the summary report.

IS 6316 : 1993

ANNEX

A

( Clause 4.1.1 )
SPECIFICATION j A-l GENERAL SHEET _.

a) Name b) Type Cl Make 4 Serial No.
Model e> f> Year of manufacture

g) Different seeds which the drill is designed to sow h) Source of power 8 Recommended travelling speed of the drill k) Recommended power of tractor ( if tractor operated )
ml Location
of fertilizer outlet in relation to seed outer. A-2 FURROW OPENERS 4 Type and tilt angle with respect to vertical b) No. of openers 4 Arrangement of openers d) Range of selection of openers e) Method of changing row space and range f > Nominal width s> Lifting and lowering of openers h) Depth control j) Fertilizer pacement with respect to seeds

.

.

.

A-3 METERING MECHANISM a) Seed metering device:

1) Type 2) Size of feed shaft
3) Size ( dia ) and number of fluted rollers ( in case of plate type, the number of holes ) 4) Source of power ( ground wheel or other ) 5) Transmission ratio of shaft of seed `metering device to land wheel axle 6) Type of agitator 7) Method of feed rate control for different sizes of seeds 8) Provision for closing seed discharge b) Fertilizer distributor: 1) Type 2) Size of shaft

IS 6316 : 1993 3) Size and number of metering

device

4) Type of agitator 5) Method of feed rate control ratio of the feed shaft to land wheel axle

6) Provision for closing and opening of hopper gate 7) Transmission A-4 HOPPER a) Capacity: 1) Seed box 2) Fertilizer box

b) Type of hoppers. A-5 MARKER DETAILS a) Type b) Details of range of adjustment A-6 SEED COVERING ARRANGEMENT

A-7 TYPE OF HITCH AND ITS DETAILS A-8 GROUND DRIVE DETAILS a) No. of wheels b) Type of wheel c) Size d) Method of transmitting power to feed shafts A-9 DETAILS OF ADJUSTMENTS A-10 DETAILS OF SAFETY ARRANGEMENT FOR ROTATING PARTS LEVEL AND A-11 DIMENSIONAL DETAILS OF HANDLE, ITS HEIGHT FROM GROUND ADJUSTMENT, IF ANY ( IN CASE OF ANIMAL-DRAWN DRILLS ) A-12 OVERALL DIMENSIONS . a) Length b) Width c) Height d) Weight with seeds and fertilizers e) Ground clearance A-13 NUMBER OF GREASING POINTS A-14 DETAILS OF MATERIAL OF CONSTRUCTION Sl No.
(1) Name of Part (2) Material (3) Section or Size in mm

(4)

2. 3. 4. 5. A-15 TYPE OF TEST REQUIRED
6

Commercial/Confidential

IS 6316 : 1993

ANNEX B ( Clause 5.1.1.1 )
CALIBRATION DATA SHEET B-l DATE B-2 NOMINAL WIDTH B-3 LENGTH~OF A STRIP TO COVER ONE HECTARE AREA B-4 NUMBER OF REVOLUTIONS OF GROUND WHEEL TO COVER LENGTH OBTAINED IN (3) B-5 NUMBER OF REVOLUTSONS OF GROUND WHEEL TO COVER... . ..HECTARE B-6 REVOLUTIONS PER MINUTE OF GROUND WHEEL AT A SPEED OF......km PER HOUR B-7 REVOLUTIONS HOUR PER MINUTE OF METERING DEVICE AT A SPEED OF_....km PER

a) For seed metering device b) For fertilizer metering device B-8 CAPACITY OF HOPPER B-9 TEST FOR SEEDS a) Kind of seed b) Variety of seed c) Seed distribution: Rate
Setting

Weight of seed in kg from FurrowOpeners %.t
p_-No. 2 (4) No. 3 ____ (5) No. 4 No. 5 -__ (7) No. 6 ~ (8) NO. 7 ___ (9) Average ~ (10)

Weight of Seed from all

Furrow Openers in kg/ha .___p (II)

No. 1
P(1) (2) (3)

(6)

/F--------P---P

1

Average

I

1

NOTES 1 For different rate settings, the seed distribution shall be recorded on similar pro forma. 2 Date sheet shall be extended for additional number of furrow openers.

B-10 TEST OF FERTILIZERS a) Kind of fertilizer b) Physical condition of fertilizer c) Fertilizer distribution: 7

IS 6316 : 1993
Rate Setting Test No.

I

i

Weight

of

Fertilizer in kg from Furrow Openers

1
No. 1 ____ (3) No. 2 No. 3 No.4 i I____~ -`(4) 1 No. 5 (7)

~-

____

Weight of Fertilizer from all Furrow in _..___.~.___ Openers in I kg/ha No. 6 No. 7 1Average I I.-I (8) (9)

I_

(1)

(2) _PPPPP 1 Ppp2

t

(5)

(6)

/ / ! I

(10) __.----

(11)

i ------------

I

PI-

___-'

opt._-. /

NOTES 1 For different rate settings, the fertilizer distribution shall be recorded 2 Data sheet be extended for additional number of furrow openers.

on similar pro forma. Testing Engineer

ANNEX C ( Clause 5.1.2.1
C-l DATE C-2 KIND OF SEED C-3 VARIETY OF SEEDS C-4 DAMAGED SEED DISTRIBUTION IN OPENERS
Rate Setting Test No. Damage, Percent, in Seed Hopper (BeI fore Calibration Test )

)

MECHANICAL DAMAGE DATA SHEET

Damge, Percent in Opener ( After Calibration Test ) No. 1 No. 2 P_PFPP______ (4) ----__p (5) No. 3 No. 4 No. 5 No. 6 (9) No. 7 (10) _Average (11)

i

(1) ~-~ 1

(2)

(3)

(6)

(7)

(8) ___-

-I 3 Average NOTES 1 For different rate settings, the damaged seed distribution shall be recorded 2 Data sheet shall be extended for additional number of furrow openers.

on similar

pro fortno.

Testing

Engineer

8

IS 6316 : 1993

ANNEX D ( Clause 5.2.3 )
SEEDING D-l DATE D-2 KIND OF SEED D-3 VARIETY D-4 LENGTH OF SEED OF THE BELT/SAND BED DURING
I

UNIFORMITY

DATA SHEET

BED

D-5 WIDTH OF BELT/SAND D-6 SPEED OF THE BELT D-7 SEED DISTRIBUTION
Test No.

TEST :
Belt/Bed Length in Metres Average _ --_____

'

2 No. of 1 i seeds fallen / 3 i__Average ----I--,-

----

__-

-

-..--

--j____-_ 1 ____ i distance
Average 2 -3

--i
+___

L.._-_--__-_ ----I I I I

between two seeds

I .rT.-_
NUIC

-

-

For alnerent

..,-..

rate settings,

tne seed citstrlbutlon

.

. _

..

.

snalt ee recoraea

. .. .

1.

011

slmIlar

. ..

pro

Jorma.

Testing Engineer

ANNEX E ( Clause 6.1.1. )
FIELD OPERATION E-l DATE E-2 DESCRIPTION OF SEED BED DATA SHEET

a) Type of soil

W Soil moisture content in percent ( 0 to 15 cm depth, average )
cl Bulk density ( optional )

d) Presence of weeds and trash e) Size of clods f> Depth of seed bed
9

IS 6316 : 1993 E-3 TEST CONDITIONS E-3.1 Seed-cum-Fertilizer Drill 4 Type

b) Adjustment levels of various levers ( for adjusting c) Travel pattern E-3.2 Source of Power
E-3.2.1 E-3.2.2 Animal Power Tiller/Tractor

delivery rate of seed and fertilizer)

E-4 TEST FOR SEEDS

a) b) c) d) I---------?/
Rate Setting

Kind of seed Variety of seed Damaged seeds before test Seed distribution in openers ( optional ):
Test No. Weight of Seed in kg from Furrow Openers No. 1 No. 2 (4) No.3 Weight of Seed from all Furrow Openers in kg/ha

I --~~~__

I -

j No.4
(6)

/ No. 5 / No. 6 1 No. 7

Average

--

-(5) .~~___

l---(7)

1-:+----(8) _i

(1)

(2)

(3) ___~

1

(9)

7

--

--

I

Average NOTES 1 For different rate settings, the seed distribution shall be recorded on similar pro forma. 2 Data sheet shall be extended for additional number of furrow openers.

E-5 TEST FOR FERTILIZERS a) Kind of fertilizer b) Physical condition of fertilizer c) Fertilizer distribution:
Rate Setting Test No. No. 1 Weight of Fertilizer in kg from Furrow Open ers Weight of Fertilizer from all Furrow Openers in 7 Average (10)

No. 2

No. 3

No. 4

-No. 5 (7)

No. 6 (8) ~-

NO.

kg/ha
(11)

-,_-.--(1)

(2)
P-p__--1

_
(3)

~
(4)

(5)

----mP__
(6) (9)

10

IS 6316 : 1993
NOTES 1 For different rate settings, the fertilizer distribution number shalt be recorded of furrow openers. on similar pro forma.

2 Data sheet shall be extended

for additional

Testing Engineer

E-6 WHEEL SLIP

ANNEX F ( Clailse 6.2.3 )
PLACEMENT DATA SHEET F-l DATE F-2 LENGTH OF ROW F-3 -MEASUREMENT OF SEED AND FERTILIZER PLACEMENT:
-1

Depth Setting

Parameters

Row No. 1 Measuring Points

Row No. 2 Measuring Points

4verage

-2 -3 4

- -

~5 2 -3

(1)
Depth Depth

(2)
of seed

(3)

(4)

(5) --

(6)

I_ .(7)

_-__
(10`) ~ (13)

_.

(8)

(9) -_

-iof fertilizer

-Maximum Vertical spacing between seed and fertilizer

-( I
-1

1
--

.I_ -

I

Approx horizontal between spacing seed and fertilizer

NOTES 1 2 For minimum and averag,e depth setting, for additional the placement number data shall be recorded on similar pro ,foima.

Data sheet shall be extended

of rows.

Testing Engineer

11

IS 6316 : 1993

ANNEX

G "`I
" "

( Clause6.3.1.1 )

POWER FOR TRAILED DRILL DATA SHEET G-l DATE G-2 POWER REQUIREMENT Total 1vlarked ,Space, m Run No.

:
Time Spent to Cover the Run in Seconds Speed Revolution of Wheel toCover the Run W~heel Slip in Percent Average
kgf

Length of Run, m

in m/s

iDraft in

Metric Morse Power

`, / ____
~_ (9) (10)

Theoretical Field Capacity ha/h

(1)
-

(2)
1 -2

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

/

(8)

_ 1,;: i

-_
3 4

/

._
-

b-__

1: ._ -! _
.-

.-

I .._

r

._ -_ __

--

.-

I_ _-_
-I

-_ 1 2 -__ 3

_ -. _
-____ --.__ Average

I -

3

-_ ._

_ -.
A-_

_.
Testing Engineer

-

12

IS 6316 : 1993

ANNEX

H

( Clause 6.3.2.1 )
POWER FOR MOUNTED DRILL DATA SHEET

Testing Engineer

13

ANNEXJ ( Clause
J-i FATE 64.1 ) DATA SHEET

FIELD EFFICIENCY AND LABOUR REQUIkEMENT

J-2 EFFECTIVE FIELD CAPACTTY AND LABOUR REQUIREMXNT;
Field Size Time Spent ~ (.__--__h________ No. _-_-h__ Width Len- StartEnd- T&al m ing ing Time gth, m Time Time Spent Time Time Time Spent -for Spent for Spent Turning Supply for Adnt Heud of Ferti- justment Land lizer and Ma% ine Seed Time Spent for Recti2Zg chine Trouble Area Covered .--h_-_-7 Length, Area, in ha m Effective Field Capacity ha/h No. of Labourers Used Labour Requirement Man-hour p&r Hectare Remarks

Actual Operating Time

~___ Width, m

_-- ______~ (1) (2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

--p-m _(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14) -___

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18) ~~A .

I;

1

2

3

J-3 FUFL CONSUMPTION

( IN CASE OF TRACTOR OPERATED )

J-4 AVERAGE THEORETICAL FIELD CAPACITY ,J-5 FIELD CAPACITY

IS 6316 : 1993

ANNEX K ( CZause 6.5 )
ASSESSMENT OF EASE OF OPERATION : AND ADJUSTMENT DATA S-H%ET

K-l EASE OF OPERATION

a) The machine trails behind the prime mover satisfactorily b) It is easy to plant in straight and uniform rows c) The seed or fertilizer openers clog: i) Frequency of clogging ii) Time spent in clearing the clogging d) e) f) g) Hopper agitators working properly Fertilizer bridge over the openings Seed and/or fertilizer covering is done properly Quantity of uncovered seed ( collected at random )
:

Yes/No

Yes/No

K-2 ADJUSTMENTS

a) Seed and fertilizer i) ii) iii) iv) v) Drive Agitation Adjustment Adjustment Adjustment

regulating mechanism:

for different seeds for mixed cropping for fertilizer

b) Adjustment for width c) Adjustment for depth d) Arrangement to check the seed and fertilizer while the machine is in operation e) Seed covering adjustment Testing Engineer

ANNEX L ( Clause 7.1 )
SUMMARY L-l NAME OF MANUFACTURER L-2 MODEL NUMBER AND NAME OF DRILL L-3 PERIOD COVERED L-4 NATURE OF TEST L-5 PERFORMANCE L-6 BREAKDOWNS L-7 WEAR ON COMPONENT L-S EASE OF REPLACEMENT L-9 SUGGESTIONS OF PARTS ( IF ANY ) DURING FIELD TESTS Commercial/Confidential REPORT

FOR IMPROVEMENTS

L-10 GENERAL REMARKS

Testing Engineer 15

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer, Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

' ' `1 `I. --L ,, BIS is a statutory institution, established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of harmonious development of the activities of standardization, goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Bareaa of Indian Standards Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of *implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations, Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed _periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference; Dot : No. FADC 36~( 4086 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 600113 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone I 331 01 31 331 13 75 37 84 99, 37 85 61 37 86 26, 37 86 62
I 53 38 43,

53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

53 23 84 : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 235 02 16, 235 15 19, 632 92 95, I 632 78 91,

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. KANPUR. JAIPUR. -Printed at New Indie hinting Rem. Khurja, h&s

