IS 13195:

1991

( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard

PRELIMINARYDESIGN,OPERATIONAND MAINTENANCEOFPROTECTION WORKS DOWNSTREAMOFSPILLWAYS-GUIDELINES
U DC 627'83 1'064'2

@

BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

December

199 1

Price Group 5

Spillways Including

Energy Dissipators

Sectional Committee,

RVD 10

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Spillways Including Energy Dissipators Sectional Committee had been approved by River Valley Division Council.
protection

observed
At present

works are necessary on downstream side of spillway so as to guard against scour occurring in the immediate downstream vicinity of the spillway.

expected

or

specific methods are not avr)ilable and such works are being done based on experience. As such works have been adopted In many projects therefore an attempt has been made to formulate these guidelines based on these projects. Nine case studies* have been given ia this standard ( see Annexes A to J ) which are for general guidance and information only. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, observed or calculated, expressing. the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

Research Station, Pune.

*Greater

details

supported

by figure for any of the case study be obtained from Central Water and Power

Indiun Standard

IS 13195 : 1991

PRELIMINARYDESIGN,OPERATIONAND MAINTENANCEOFPROTECTIONWORKS DOWNSTREAMOFSPILLWAYS-GUIDELINES
1 SCOPE This standard lays down guidelines for preliminary design, operation and maintenance of protection works downstream of spillways. 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards .adjuncts to this standard:
IS No. 4th:;

a concrete apron on such a recovery for protection.

slope

also on

4.3 Concrete Blocks or Concrete Filling River Bed Downstream of Energy Dissipator

are necessary

Concrete blocks or concrete fillings are sometimes provided on the river bed downstream of energy dissipators to safeguard against excessive scour and prevent further scour. 4.4 Protective Pitchings on Natural or Artificial Banks Downstream of Spillways Protective pitchings of stone rip rap, masonry or concrete blocks are provided on natural river banks or artificially constructed embankments of diversion channels, power house tail race channels or guide banks, for protecting them against high velocity flows or waves. 4.5 Figure 1 shows different types of protection works downstream of a typical spillway project. ( also refer IS 7365 : 1985 ). 5 PRELIMINARY DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR PROTECTION ~WORKS 5.1 No definite and fast criterion can be fixed for the design of protection works such as those mentioned in 4.1 to 4.4 above. The recent design practices are based on past experience from the structures constructed and in operation. In view of this, only broad guidelines are given for general design. 5.2 Training Walls 5.2.1 The design of a training wall ( also refer IS 12720 : 1989 ) involves determination of : a) b) c) d) e) alignment, length, top level, pressure distribution, foundation level.

Title

Part 9 ) :

Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects : Part 9 Spillways and syphons
(first revision )

7365 : 1985

12720 : 1989

Criteria for hydraulic design energy of bucket type dissipators ( first revision ) Criteria for structural design of spillway training walls and divide walls

.3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS 4410 ( Part 9 ) : 1982 shall apply. 4 TYPES OF PROTECTION WORKS DOWNSTREAM OF SPILLWAYS 4.0 The following types of protection works downstream of the spillways have been covered. 4.1 Training :Spillways Walls at the Flanks of the

Training walls extended beyond the endsill of the stilling basins or buckets generally serve to guide the flow into the river channel, protect the wrap-rounds of the adjacent earth dams, river banks or power house bays and tail race channels. To this extent, the training walls are -considered to be downstream protection works.
.4,2 Protective

and

Aprons Downstream Lips or Endstills of Stilling Basins

of Bocket

Protective aprons of concrete laid on fresh rock or acceptable strata immediately downstream of bucket lips or endsill of stilling basin, protect the energy dissipator against undermining due to excessive scour during or after construction of the spillways. A suitable concrete key is normally provided, at the downstream end of the apron. Where the normal river bed level is higher than the endsill and a recovery slope is , provided, it sometimes becomes necessary to lay

5.2.1.1 The alignment and length are governed by the purpose for which the training walls is to be provided. For instance, a training wall intended to protect the earth dam wrap-round on the flank of a spillway direct or return may be alleged as to cover the portion exposed to the high velocity flow. Similarly, the alignment of a training wall for protecting the power house bay or power house tail race channel may be governed by the configuration of the bay or tail race channel alignment. In the case of spillways with ski-jump bucket, when the

PROTECTION WITH CONCRETE BLOCK FIIJJNG OR OTHER TREATMENT

RIGHT

TR. WALL

FIG. 1 DIFFERENTTYPESOF PROTECTION WORKSDOWNSTREAM OF A TYPICAL SPILLWAYPROJECT

training walls are extended beyond the bucket lip, recession or flaring away from the flow could be advantageous as their heights could be reduced because of isolation from the ski-jump arrangement also facilitates umbrella. This better aeration of the ski-jump jet. 5.2.1.2 Since the training walls are seldom designed to be submersible, their top levels have to be above the highest water level expected after allowing for the adequate free board considering the air entrainment and bulking of Bow. 5.2.1.3 The foundation levels of the training walls should be based on the scour profiles obtained from the hydraulic model studies. Whether the foundation levels should extend up to the full depths indicated by the scour

profile or some portion of it, could be decided after considering such factors as the nature of rock forming the foundation, frequency and duration of floods, initial cost of construction and future maintenance cost, etc. When model studies have not been carried out the anticipated ultimate scour can be predicted as given in IS 7365 : -1985. 5.3 Protective Aprons

5.3.1 Protective aprons of cancrete laid on fresh rock immediately downstream of the bucket lips or endsills of the stilling-basins serve two purposes, namely : a) During construction stages of the flows spillways, of large discharge intensity and lower heads pass down the 2

IS 13195 : 1991 action spillways resulting in cascading over the bucket lip or endsill. This situation causes deep scour at the toe of the lip or endsill and undermines their foundations. Concrete apron laid just downstream of the lip or endsill prevents such scour and protects the foundation, and to prevent further scouring, has been attempted in some cases. The details of such protection including size of blocks, method of dumping, filter requirement, etc, have to be decided on the merits of the individual case. 5.5 Protective Pitchings

5.5.1 Natural river banks or artificially constructed slopes of the embankments, guide in the case where the bucket lip or end banks, etc, subjected to flow velocities and waves require some form of protection to retain their sill of the stilling basin is substantially shape and prevent their erosion or dislodgement. higher than the general channel bed level, Such protection is usually in the form of pitchand the~channel bed is erodible, low initial ing, which can be either flat stone or needle rip flows may have a tendency to cascade rap, masonry lining or concrete lining. The type over the lips or endsills. As such, proof the pitching to be provided and other details vision of concrete aprons guards against would depend on several factors such as magnideep scour just at the toe. Even in long tude of velocities or wave height to be withrun, when scour has stabilized in the stood, slope of the bank, properties of the downstream region, the concrete apron material such as angle of repose, chemical comcontinues to protect the toe foundations. position, etc, and the extent of surface to be It also serves as. a signal to indicate the protected. The type of the pitching to be state of scour in the immediate downprovided may also be governed by the availabistream vicinity of a structure and allows lity of pitching material. As -for example, necessary remedial measures to be taken. concrete lining might be preferred to stone 53.2 While no definite criteria for the design masonry pitching because of non-availability of of such aprons are available at present, the large size stones, in a particular situation. The following guidelines should be followed: stone pitching can be with wire net caging also, depending on the site requirements. The design 5.3.2.1 The apron should be laid on fresh rock velocity or wave height should be determined .or acceptable strata. _ from hydraulic model studies. 5.3.2.2 It should be about 15 to 20 metres long 5.5.2 The following guidelines may be followed and be laid continuously fron one end of the while designing the protective pitching. spillway up to the other end. Its thickness is generally of the order of 0'6 to 1'5 metres. In 5.5.2.1 The bank or the surface to be protected case where model studies have done, the apron should have, as far as possible, straight aligulengths and depth can be arrived at based upon ment or smoothest possible curves as against the results emerging from the model studies, highly curved or tortous alignment. This would particularly for the parametric studies conducted ensure better performance of the pitching. .on the model from different out flow, and 5.5.2.2 The slope of the bank to be pitched combination of operations where two or more should be flatter than the angle of repose of the of energy dissipators arrangements types material forming the bank, otherwise the coexist. material retained at a steeper slope would exert .5.3.2.3 The apron should be properly anchored outward force on the pitching to disrupt it. into the base rock and should be provided with For very large heights, intermediate berms may a key at the end, which should be suitably keyed also be provided. into the base rock. 5.5.2.3 When the pitching is in the form of 5.3.2.4 When the fresh rock level or acceptable layers of hand placed or dumped dry stones, the strata varies in elevation from one end to the weight and size of individual stone should be other end ofthe spillway, the apron level could determined from the following relationships, .also vary accordingly. However, in such cases, due to Isbash. the apron be placed at least 1 to 1.5 metres ?t V' YW3 yp WC50 = below the bucket lip or endsill top, and not (0 6a~;(2d3(~~ Ywj3 higher than this limit ( also refer IS 7365 : 1985 ).

b) Even after the completion of the spillway,

5.4 Concrete Blocks or Concrete

Filling

(2)
where W&O = weight of the stone in kg, with 50 percent material containing stones of weight WSOor less V = velocity of flow, m/s
yw = specific weight of water, 1 000 kg/m3

5.4.1 When excessive scour on the downstream .of energy dissipator has already taken place and there is a risk of such scour progressing towards upstream endangering the safety of the structure, filling the rock joints and cavities in the scour hole with concrete; providing grouted anchors 3

IS 13195 : 1991
YP

C

&

= specific weight of pitching material, kglm3 = 0'86 for high turbulence level flows ( stilling basins, etc ) = 1'2 for low turbulence level flows ( river closures, etc ) = equivalent spherical diameter of stone having the same weight as W,O

4

5.5.2.4 If the embankment is subjected to waves in addition to flow velocity, the weight of the stone should also be checked from the following relationship due to Iribarren.
K * P
1 _

V = velocity of flow g = gravitational constant S = slope of the bank expressed as S ( Horizontal > : 1 Vertical Knowing the volume of the panel and thickness of the lining, the linear dimensions ( i.e. size ) of the panel could be worked out. This size may be proportioned to the overall size of the area to be pitched.

w = ( p cos a where K P
6P

sin a )a

*

--

8~

(3)

6W CH8)

H

u
6W

= constant whose value is 0'43 = constant with a value of 2'38 = density of pitching material = wave height = angle of slope of embankment = density of water

5.5.2.8 The toe of the pitching should be keyed down firmly into the bed rock. The depth of keying would depend upon the quality of bed rock and the overburden. Where bed rock is not available at all or available at very large depth, the pitching should continue into the ground, along the same slope, adequately below the expected depth of scour, which should be determined from the model studies. 5.5.2.9 For all types of pitching, adequate drainage to relieve the uplift pressure below the pitching, by way of weep holes, filters, etc, should be provided, as per the relevant Indian Standards Specifications. 5.6 In several cases, the spillways are located in saddles away from the main river channels. The flow passed down the spillway is then led to the main river through an excavated channel called the tail channel. For reason of economy, the tail channels are excavated only for their part width under the assumption that it will form its required section by erosion in due course of time. For this reason, permanent protection measures are deferred initially until the prototype behaviour of the tail channel is known during subsequent periods. While in most cases, this approach is successful, in some cases, the tail channels have behaved unexpectedly leading to unforeseen damages. 6 ASPECTS OF OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 6.1 The spillway or outlets should not be operated in contravention to the assumptions made in the design of various protection works. 6.2 The performance of the protection works should be observed during floods for the general flow conditions. Important parameters such as water levels, velocities, wave wash, erosion, etc, should be measured at all relevant locations and the records maintained. 6.3 All the maintenance procedures as applicable to the ci-vil engineering hydraulic construction works also apply to the protection works described above and should be followed. 6.4 The behaviour of the protection works normally remaining under water should be watched by special dewatering operations, atleast once after three spill years and repairs required, if any, should be executed well in time. 4

5.5.2.5 The larger of the two values of Was calculated from equations (1) and (3) should be adopted. 5.5.2.6 For high velocities, when the weight required of the individual stone is too large, wire net tied crates of several stones, of the required weight and size could be used. In such a case, the least dimension of the smallest stone used should be about two times the opening in the wire net. 5.5.2.7 When the weight required is extremely large, so that it could not be met with from stones or stone-crates, continuous lining of the surface by masonry or concrete could be resorted to. For such linings, there are two important factors to be decided, the size of the individual panel ( to be cast as a monolith ) and the thickness of the lining. The following procedure should be adopted: relationships appropriate the a) Using ( see 5.5.2.3 and 5.5.2.4 > decide the weight of the panel required~against the velocity of the flow. b) Using appropriate value of the specific weight of the pitching material TP, ( stone masonry or concrete >, calculate volume of the panel. c) Calculate the thickness of the lining using the formulae

d-:
where

V*
.2g

J

1 + s= S

(4)

d -3 thickness of the lining rw = specific weight of water
?P =

specific weight material

of the pitching

IS 13195: 1991

ANNEX A ( Foreword )
CASE STUDY ON THE BEHAVIOUR OF THE RIGHT TRAINING WALLS DOWNSTREAM OF SKI-JUMP BUCKETS, OF UKAI AND GANDHISAGAR DAM SPILLWAYS A 1 While the results of model studies can be directly applied to finalize the design of training walls on the flanks of the spillways, in respect of alignment, length, top levels, etc, decision in respect of foundation levels often pose a problem. Model studies generally indicates deep scour along the training walls and because of the impracticability of taking foundation- to such depths, the training walls are usually founded on fresh and hard rock, keying or anchoring adequately into the rock. A possibility of undermining, in due course of time, is not altogether ruled out, but a judicious operation of spillway especially not operating the spans/ sluices adjacent to the training walls often delays it. A-2 The right training wall at Gandhisagar Spillway separates the spillway and the powerhouse. The wall constructed in masonry was founded on hard and fresh rock at a uniform level of el. 339'85 m, although the deepest scour indicated by the model was at el. 326'1 m. A-3 In the case of right training wall of Ukai dam spillway, the foundation levels were based on the assumption by the project authorities:that the depth of scour in the prototype may reach, at the most, up to about 50 percent of the depth indicated by the model. While the main foundation levels were taken to the hard and fresh rock levels, continuous concrete key wall below the main foundation was taken down to 50 percent scour profile. It is striking to note that undermining occurred only in this reach, endangering the stability of the inherently weak part of the wall. The damaged portion has since been filled by a concrete pedestal. A-4 The problem of determining the foundation levels of training wall, thus appears to be of taking a calculated risk. The decision often reduces either in providing foundation against an anticipated depth of scour ( and thus high initial cost ) or keeping it to the available rock level and remedial measures as and when required in future ( thus recurring maintenance expenditure ).

ANNEX B ( Foreword )
CASE STUDY ON THE PROTECTIVE APRONS DOWNSTREAM OF THE SKI-JUMP BUCKETS OF UKAI, SALAL AND SRISAILAM DAM SPILLWAYS B-l Since the ski-jump buckets are intended to deflect the high velocity jet away from the structure and restrict the scour to the zone of impact of the jet, possibility of scour working back upwards is remote. However, for the partly completed spillways with low heads the throw of the trajectory would be relatively shorter and scour may occur very near the bucket lip. Even for the fully completed spillways, operation of a few spans or undersluices in isolation would cause the flow to be spread laterally with the impingement near the bucket lip. Such a condition caused deep scour and undermining at the bucket lip of Hirakud spillDeep scour near the bucket lip also way. occurred on the Gandhisagar spillway. In the case of Ukai dam spillway, the possibility of deeper scour near the bucket lip was visualized during the model studies and was taken care of in the prototype by provision of a 15 metre long concrete apron laid on fresh rock parallel to the bucket lip. The apron has remained intact and served its purpose. B-2 When such aprons are not laid on fresh rock or are not provided along the entire length of the spillway ( leaving some portion without concrete capping >, the damage is two folds; deep scour occurs on the unprotected portion endangering the foundation of the main structure and the apron already laid also gets dislodged due to such scour. The cases of Salal and Srisailam dam spillways serve as ideal examples. B-3 In 1982 construction stage of Salal dam spillway, the height of fall from the lowest block of the spillway up to the downstream rock level was about 17 metres. The effective head was 25 metres. During the construction season, concrete apron was proposed to be provided over the jointed dolomite rock for the entire length of the spillway. However, due to insufficient time, only part central length could be fully covered, where as at other place, the apron concrete had begun to be laid from its downstream end and left uncompleted. B-4 During the floods of 1982, the maximum intensity of discharge over the partially completed spillway was around 47 cumecs/metre. The zones where the b:d rock was covered with 5

IS 13195: 1991

concrete apron duly anchored to the bed rock, no scour took place. Scour occurred only at places, where the rock could not be covered with ~concrete apron. At certain places, the unreinforced concrete apron remained overhanging up to about 3 metres over the undercut. B-5 Srisailam dam spillway across river Krishna, was constructed during 1977-83. It is a 137 m high concrete dam, with 12 spans of 18'3 m x 16'8 m. The river bed is composed of quartzites and shales. In the immediate downstream vicinity of the spillway, there were horizontal shear zones 0'2 m to 0'9 m thick, where the quartzites are crushed and sheared. B-G During the monsoons of 1977 to 1980, the construction stage flood passed over the partially constructed spillway bays, spilling over ? bays Which were at different levels having a maximum difference of level of 23 m. The difference in level between the lip of the ski-jump bucket and downstream rock was about 44 m. B-7 Shorter throw of the water spilling over the bucket lip, as a cascading flow caused deep scour in the immediate vicinity of the bucket lip. During subsequent floods, the scour holes were concreted and leveled as protective aprons Such aprons were in some part of the spillway. however, subjected to repeated damage and

undermining. By April 1985, depth of scour below blocks 11 to 13 reached from 9 m to 22 m below the protective apron. Cavities of undermining below the apron were also present at a depth of 6 to 9 m. B-8 The protection work consisted of providing an underwater massive concrete block touching the apron and filling the eroded cavities below the apron. The water level at downstream toe varied from the top of existing apron to about 1'5 m below it. B-9 The scheme involved forming 4 cells with steel cylinder walls and filling concrete in each cell followed by concrete capping. Heavy concrete blocks ( approximate 1 metre cube ) were placed downstream of the cylinder watls to further protect the rock from the water jump damage. B-10 Since the construction of the above protection works, the spillway was completed to final levels and crest gates have also been installed. Hydraulic model studies were conducted to evolve an operation of the spillway in such a way that the throw of the trajectory fall further away from the to-e of the dam. This together with the protective measures already implemented is expected to prevent further erosion at the toe of the dam.

ANNEX C ( IioF~lW'd )
CASE STUDY ON PROTECTION DOWNSTREAM OF_MANDIRA DAM SPILLWAY WITH CONCRETE CUBES The Mandira dam spillway consists of 11 spans, 15'24 m wide X 6'1 m high separated by 2'74 m thick piers, across river Sankh in Orissa State. The spillway is designed to pass a maximum discharge of 8 495 ms/s. To lead the discharge to the main river, a tail channel of about 183 m length was excavated. Due to peculiar nature of foundation conditions (highly jointed carbonaceous phylites ) and the schedule of construction programme, the spillway profile adopted for construction was in two steps, incorporating a short slopping apron 12'2 m lower than the crest followed by a weir with uniform radius ski-jump bucket at the toe. C-2 During the year 1958 to 1962, discharge varying from 680 m3/s to 4 700 mVs passed down The tail channel development the spillway. took place with considerable scour in the bed immediately downstream of the spillway. The deepest scour level reached was el. 184'7 m at 15'2 m from the bucket. The sheet piles below the endsill of the bucket were also exposed. To protect the bucket foundation ( approximate el. 187'5 m ) and the exposed sheet piles, a concrete sloping ramp was placed adjacent to the sheet piles. In addition, concrete cubical blocks of 1% m size constructed in situ were placed along 6
C-l

the entire length of the spillway and extending to about 33 m beyond the bucket. These blocks were meant to form a flexible protection to the bed. C-3 It was observed during the subsequent floods, that the protection was not fully effective as due to action of flow, issuing from the skijump bucket, the bed material between the blocks was removed leading to uneven settlement of blocks to depths varying from 1 to 5 metres. This measure of protection had been adopted as an urgent measure without model studies. C-4 Later, the model studies were undertaken to suggest the bes_t form of protection. The recommendations made on the basis of the model studies including placing of a concrete mat, of 0'46 m thickness, enclosing the concrete cubes to a length of about 15 metres and grouting the interstices between the blocks. The surface of such mat was to slope gently away from the bucket. The blocks already placed beyond the concrete mat were allowed to remain. The question of extending the concrete mat further downstream was kept open till further prototype experience became available.

IS 13195 : 1991

ANNEX D ( Foreword )
CASE STUDY ON PROTECTION DOWNSTREAM

OF UKAI DAM

SPILLWAY

AD-1 The Ukai dam spillway,

across river Tapi, consists of 22 spans, 15'55 m X 14.71 m each, separated by 3'96 m thick piers. The crest is at el. 91'13 m, the FRL being el. 105'16 m. The energy dissipator comprises a ski-jump bucket at a uniform level of el. 51'82 m and lip level of el. 58'22 m. The 15 m wide protective apron downstream of the bucket lip has been provided at different levels to cover the rock profile. The bed rock downstream of- the bucket comprise massive basalts, porphyritic trap and amygdaloidal trap. hydraulic model studies indicated for the design flow, deep scour holes reaching el. 27 m in the trajectory impact area, about 100 m from the bucket lip. It was recommended that all the spillway gates may be operated equally and simultaneously, as far as possible.
D-2 The

needed immediate protection.
D-5 The protection provided monsoon of 1981 consisted of: i> Filling

before

the

the crevices up to 75 mm width with rich cement mortar 1 : 3 after cleaning. Grouting and compaction of cement mortar was done as deep as possible.

ii) Sealing the big hollows and cavities in the exposed rock surfaces with masonry and with rich cement mortar 1 : 3. iii) Guaniting treatment to the exposed joints in the ski-jump area. rock

iv) Extension of apron near the right side training wall to cover the scoured area. v) Covering with mass concrete 1 : 1'5 : 3 with anchor bars 25 mm to 28 mm diameter over the right side gullies I and II, which were considered to be the most vulnerable points, where the scour was seen approaching towards the spillway. vi) Concrete filling with anchor rods in other areas of deep scours. D-6 The above measures are expected to arrest further scour in the downstream area. In addition, a revised pattern of operation of crest gates was evolved whereby return flows could be minimized. This pattern involves equal and simultaneous opening of 17 central gates with gates 1 and 2 on left, 10 in the centre and 21 and 22 on the right side to be opened slighlty so as to arrest the return flow.

1973 to 1979; discharge varying from 220 m3/s to 7 533 ma/s passed down the ~spillway. The gates were however operated in a manner which was contrary to the requirement of equal and simultaneous operation of all gates, with the result that discharge much lower than the design discharge resulted in very high intensity of discharge with very low tail water levels. This condition, in addition to causing deep scour in the impact zone, also induced return flows which caused damage to the foundations of training walls and concrete aprons. area was dewatered in 1981 for inspections and repairs. It was seen that the deepest scour level had gone below the level indicated from the model studies using There were at least fully erodible bed material. five areas in the downstream region, which
D-4 The entire downstream

D-3 During

ANNEX E ( Foreword )
CASE STUDY ON PROTECTION DOWNSTREAM OF KADANA DAM SPILLWAY comprise phyllites, mica

E-l The Kadana dam spillway, across river Mahi, consists of 21 spans, 15'55 m wide X 14'03 each, separated by 3'96 m thick piers. The energy dissipator at the toe is in the form of solid roller bucket. The three central spans 9-10-11, have the roller bucket with the invert higher by 3'05 m than the adjacent spans due These spans have been to foundation problems. separated by two intermediate low height divide concrete apron of approx walls. A protective 15 m width was provided throughout the length of the spillway. The highly folded and

metamorphosed rocks schists and quartzites.

E-2 The spillway was completed in 1977 and experienced floods of magnitude varying from 4 045 m3/s to 17 730 m3/s up to 1982. The discharge of 17 730 m3/s, in 1981 was passed through 10 spans which resulted in specific discharge of 114 mZ/s as against design value of 120 mz/s. On the other hand, tail water depth of 22.6 m as against design value of 26'9 m was available, which resulted in imperfect 7

IS 13195 : 1991

energy dissipation and excessive scour. When the downstream scour pool was dewatered for inspection in 1984, a deep scour hole, of about 15 m depth, was found at a distance of about 30 m from the bucket lip, in front of span No. 19. In addition, some scour holes were observed near the end of the low divide wall and downstream of the aprons of sapan 12 to 16. The apron key in front of span 19 was

exposed by about the apron end.

1 m due to undermining

at

E-3 The small scour pits were filled with M-20 concrete with 20 percent plum including necessary anchoring with 25 mm dia bars at 1'5 m centres. The damaged portion of the apron front of span 19 was filled up similarly with concrete and the apron was extended by about 11'3 m.

ANNEX F ( Foreword )
CASE
F-l The STUDY ON PROTECTION DOWNSTREAM OF DHAROI DAM SPILLWAY

Dharoi dam spillway, across river Sabarmati, consists of 12 spans, 14'9 m wide X 10'67 m each, separated by 3'66 m thick The spillway is designed to pass a g%num outflow of 15 439 ms/s, at FRL el. 189'59 m. The spillway crest is at el. 178'96 m. The energy dissipation arrangements at the toe consists of solid roller bucket at invert el. 149'05 m for the three left spans and at el. 147'52 m for the remaining nine spans. The average ground level el. 158'5 m downstream of the spillway being substantially higher than the bucket level, a 15 m wide excavated ( unprotected ) plateform at el. 150'0 m was provided just downstream of the bucket lip and was jointed to the ground level by a recovery slope 3 : 1. F-2 The spillway was completed in 1976 and the radial gates were installed in 1978. Various floods with discharges varying from 990 ma/s to 1 470 m*/s passed down the spillway between 1976 and 1980. The gates were operated for the first time in 1980. For the low outflows, 6 central gates were opened for 0'3 m For higher discharges, all the gates opening. were opened to full height ( 9 m ), one by one Such a operation resulted for testing purposes. in unsatisfactory flow conditions leading to flow -concentration at some place and return flows at the other. F-3 The downstream portion was dewatered for the first time in 1982 for inspection. It was

observed that the bueket surface was eroded to depths varying from 2 mm to 260 mm. There was erosion near the bucket lip of spans 1-2 and all along the left training wall. The launching apron at the end of the left training wall had been washed out, endangering the safety of the earth dam behind it. Higher rock out crops along the right flank of the spillway also appeared to cause unsatisfactory flow conditions.
F-4 The

following
:

protective

measures

were

provided

i) The eroded bucket surfaces was repaired with epoxy coat and epoxy mortar 1 : 7. ii) Seventy four drainage holes provided in the bucket were air cleaned. iii) Higher rock out crop on the left flank, at levels varying from el. 155 m to el. 164 m was dressed down to a uniform level of el. 155 m. iv) The portion downstream of the bucket lip of spans 1-2 and along the left training wall was provided with a 10 m wide concrete apron ( 1 : 1'5 : 3 ) founded on hard rock at el. 150'0m. v) The left training wall was extended 27 m to cover the earth dam toe. by

ANNEX G
( Foreword )

CASE STIJDY ON PROTECTION OF THE LEFT BANK DOWNSTREAM MAHI BAJAJ SAGAR DAM SPILLWAY Mahi Bajaj Sagar Dam Spillway, across river Mahi in Rajasthan consists of 16 spans, 15 m x 12'5 m each separated by 3'5 m, each separated by 3'5 m and 5'5 m thick piers. The crest level is at el. 268'5 m, with FRL el. 8
G-1 The

OF

280'75 m and MWL el. 281'50 m. A ski-jump bucket with a radius of 15 m and 40" lip angle has been provided at the toe with its invert at el. 227'0 m. The design maximum discharge is 24 000 m"/s.

IS 13195 : 1991 G-2 The river bank on the right side is formed of exposed rock. However, on the left side, a road leading to the earth dam has been provided at el. 247'5 m and therefore, an artificial embankment has been constructed to slopes varying from 1'75 : 1 to 2 : 1. This embankment has been connected to the low level submersible bridge located about 350 m downstream of the axis. G-3 Hydraulic model studies for different discharges indicated that the left hank would be subjected to velocities of the order of 7 m/s. The deepest scour level reached el. 220 m over an initial length of about 80 m protection to the left bank. G-4 Various alternative methods of protective pitching were considered. Provision of conwas adopted in view of high crete lining velocity as well as non-availability of large size stones at the dam site. The size of the individual concrete panel was worked out as 3'5 m X 3'5 m X 1 m thick, laid on suitable filter and provided with weep holes for drainage. The toe of the pitching was taken at el. 225'0 m, except for the initial 80 metre length where the scour levels indicated from the model studies were as deep as el. 220'0 m. In this reach, a 4.5 m wide concrete apron was provided at el. 225'0 m with its cut-off taken down to el. 220'0 m.

ANNEX H ( Foreword )
CASE STUDY ON PROTOTYPE BEHAVIOUR OF TAIL CHANNEL DOWNSTREAM OF ANER DAM SPILLWAY H-l The Aner dam spillway consists of 10 spans, 12'0 m X 6'5 m each separated by 2'75 m thick piers, on a saddle, across river Aner in Maharastra. The Spillway crest is at el. 209'8 m with the FRL at el. 216'4 m and HFL at el. 218'4 m. The energy dissipation arrangement consists of 44 metre long hydraulic jump type stilling basin at el. 199'0 m. The spillway has been designed for maximum outflow of 4 318 mp/s. H-2 The spillway has been constructed in saddle away from the main river, The flow passing down the s illway is led to the main 0 metre long excavated tail river through a 1 2 6p channel. The width of the tail channel of 144'75 metre at the end of the stilling basin is gradually reduced to 60 metres at its confluence with the main river. The bed level of the tail channel drops from el. 204 m to el. 182 m. The design bed slopes are 1 in 75 and 1 in 30. It was assumed in the design that with the above configurations of the tail channel the maximum tail water level at the stilling basin exit would be el. 209'90 m. Accordingly, both the guide walls of the spillway were kept at el. 210'5 m. The design also provided for the construction of flood embankments in continuation of the guide walls, to avoid flooding on the low lying areas on both the sides of the tail channel and particularly the left bank canal. actual construction, the flood H-3 During embankments were, however, not constructed. Also the required levels and gradients of the tail channel by excavating the rock out crops were not provided under the assumption that there would be natural erosion of the tail channel bed and banks during floods. The bed levels were approximately higher by 2 metres than the design bed levels. This was done mainly to save cost of excavation ( believed to he Rs 45 lakhs or so ) which hopefully was to be done by the nature itself. H-4 During the floods of 1981, a maximum discharge of 3 777 ma/s ( about 87% of design discharge ) passed down the spillway. The expected erosion of the tail channel did not take place and as a result, the tail water levels actually obtained were found to be higher by about 2 metres. The higher tail water levels coupled with the non-existence of flood embankments and inadequate heights of the guide walls led to flooding on both the sides of the tail channel and breach of the left bank main canal. H-5 The following remedial fmeasures taken up by the project authorities : were

9 Construction

of the left side flood embankment, leaving adequate free board over the expected tail water levels. The material required for the construction of this embankment is quarried from the excavation of the tail channel as far as possible,

ii) Raising of the left side guide wall by 1'5 m, and iii) Rate of erosion to be watched carefully every season.

9

is 13195 : 199;'

.

-

,dNNEX J
CASE STUDY ON PRihOTYPE BEHAVIOh OF' TAIt CHANNEL DOWhSTREAM OF WATiAK DAM SPILLWAY.'

,

J-l The Watrak dam spillway consists of 96 spans, :12'5 m ,X 8'25 each, separated by 2'75 m thick piers, on asaddle, across river Watrak in Gujarat. The Spillway crest is at el. ,I28'0 m with the FRL at el. 136'25 m and HFL at el. 139'69 m. The energy dissipation ,arrangement consists of 64 metre long hydraulic jump type stilling basin : at el. 1.15'85 m. The spillway has been designed for a maximum outflow of 5 667 ma/s. J-2 The spillway has been constructed in saddle on the right of the river, due to poor foundation conditions in the main river. The flow from, the spiNway is led to the main river through 1 260 metre long excavated tail channel. The width of the tail channel of 88'7 metre at the end of the stilling basin is reduced to 45 metres at' its confluence with the main river. The bed level : of the channel drops from el. I20;8 m!at the beginning to el. 108;3 m at the confluence. The tail channel runs along the rock formation containing alternate bands of quartzite aud phylite. ,,!!" . y J-3 The spillway and the .tail ch.annel were subjected to flow, first time. during the monsoon on' 1983, for a maximum. discharge of about 368. m8/s,- as against design, discharge of 5 667 ma/s.. IHeavy erosion took place in the tail Ghannell from .ch. ,370 downstream, with the depth of erosion reaching about 7 metres in the

vicinity of ch. 570. Since such large scale erosion had .occurred even sfor [as small a discharge as 6% of the design discharge, it was decided to provide protection to the.bed of the tail channel so as to prevent the erosion travelling upwards the spillway. Accordingly L metre thick apron of M-20 concrete with two keys, one at the upstream and one at the downstream was designed to be provided between ch. 416 and ch. 449. The profile of the apron was fixed according to the scour profile. J-4 This work could be started only in July 1984. When part of the work was in progress, another flood of about 7.36 ma passed down I the spillway in August 1984. / During this flood, further erosion of tail channel had taken place and the erosion apeared .to move upstream. Due to this, it became infeasiable to construct the protective apron at its .originally:planaed location ( ch. 416 to ch. 449 ): The revised location was decided to be between ch, 370 and ch. 402, according to' the scour profile existing there. The upstream key at el. 100.m and the downstream key would be at el. 100 m. j c ,to the above protective J-5 In addition apron, a key below t,he end sill of the stilling basin, going down up to el. 97'.0 m has also been provided to guard against any scour occurring in the immediate downstream vicinity of the spillway.

10

I

Standard Mark
I

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Stnndards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the proStandard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for confurmity to ducer. that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may bc obtained from the Bureau of Irdian Standards.

