INATA Ah IS 14464 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


calle tah чт — етте 
затоа À Reece ort БТ ater 
Raar cat тот 


(Teel FRAT ) 


Textile Dyestuffs — Determination of 
Solution Stability of Reactive Dyes in 
Presence of Electrolytes 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 59.040; 71.040.50 


© BIS 2023 


т HA э 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


er ey AH чач, 9 FRITS THK MT, 4$ Reed - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2023 Price Group 5 


Textile Speciality Chemicals and Dyestuffs Sectional Committee, TXD 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Textile Speciality Chemicals and Dyestuffs Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textiles Division 
Council. 


Reactive dyes are commonly used for dyeing and printing of cellulosic materials by textile industry in the presence 
of electrolytes in batch wise and continuous dyeing process, Solution stability of reactive dyes in the presence of 
electrolytes is an important characteristic to ensure proper dyeing. 


This standard was first published in 1997. The present revision has been made in the light of experience gained 
since last revision and to incorporate the following major changes: 

a) Grade and purity of chemicals used have been specified; 

b) Sampling clause has been modified; and 


c) References to Indian Standard have been updated. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 
In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 


calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (second revision)’. 


IS 14464 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


TEXTILE DYESTUFFS — DETERMINATION OF SOLUTION 
STABILITY OF REACTIVE DYES IN PRESENCE OF 
ELECTROLYTES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes a method for the 
determination of the solution stability of reactive 
dyes for use in batch wise and continuous dyeing 
process in the presence of electrolytes. 


2 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 


2.1 It is the user’s responsibility to use safe and 
proper techniques in handling materials and 
equipment. Manufacturers must be consulted for 
specific details such as safety data sheets and other 
recommendations. 


2.2 Good laboratory practices have to be followed. 
Working with vacuum and chemicals (including 
dyes) requires safety measures such as wearing 
safety glasses, goggles or face shields, gloves, 
aprons and dust control. 


3 PRINCIPLE 


Several solutions of known concentration, including 
the solution stability limit, of the dye to be tested are 
prepared at a specified temperature in accordance 
with the dye manufacturer’s recommendation. The 
dye solution is adjusted to the desired test 
temperature. A specified amount of the desired 
electrolyte solution is added and the resultant 
solution either filtered immediately or stored for a 
specified time at a specified temperature and 
subsequently filtered under suction. 


The solubility and/or solution stability limits of the 
dye solution to the addition of electrolyte are 
determined by visual assessment of the filter 
residues and the measured flow-through time of the 
filtrate. 


4 APPARATUS AND REAGENTS 

4.1 Wide-mouthed Erlenmeyer flask, capacity 500 ml. 
4.2 Thermostatically controlled heating bath, with 
magnetic stirring bar 40 mm long by 6 mm diameter, 


speed of stirrer 500 rev/min to 600 rev/min. 


4.3 Water bath, with temperature regulator (heating/ 


cooling) for adjusting the storage temperature. 


4.4 Thermostatic device with circulation pump to 
adjust temperature of Nutsch filter (Buchner funnel). 


4.5 Heatable double-walled Nutsch filter (Buchner 
funnel) of stainless steel or porcelain of inner 
diameter 70 mm, capacity at least 200 ml, having 
more than 100 holes with a total surface area of holes 
(evenly distributed) of not less than 200 mm. 


4.6 Vacuum Apparatus 
4.6.1 Suction bottle, capacity 1 litre to 2 litres. 


4.6.2 Piston or membrane pump of sufficiently high 
suction capacity to create a full vacuum of at least 
50 kPa under pressure. 


4.6.3 Apparatus to adjust and maintain a given 
vacuum. preferably coupled with a manometer. 


4.6.4 Stop-watch, to measure flow-through time. 


4.6.5 Circular filter paper, 70 mm + 2 mm diameter 
(Whatman No. 2). 


4.6.6 Electrolyte solution (stock solution) prepared 
using distilled water or fully demineralized water 
according to the concentrations given in Table 1 or 
such that the required quantity of desired electrolyte 
is contained in 50 ml of solution. 


NOTES 


1 The reproducibility of the test method depends on the 
quality of the electrolyte. For this reason chemically pure 
substances should be used. 


2 Although the electrolytes used are mostly simple salts 
tests of the stability of their solutions which need to be 
carried out rapidly, often prove not very meaningful 
Electrolyte solutions should therefore be discarded at the 
latest one week after their preparation. 


5 TEST PARAMETERS 


The parameters chosen for the test, including 
dissolving, storage and filtration temperature. 
electrolyte chosen and its concentration, will depend 
on the type of dyestuff being tested. Examples of 
combinations of test parameters are given in Table 1. 


IS 14464 : 2023 


Table 1 Examples of Combinations of Test Parameters 
(Clauses 4.6.6, 5 and 7) 


SI No. 


Dyeing 
Process 


Dissolving 
Temperature 
of Dye 


°C 


Filtration/ 
Storage 
Temperature 


°С 


Storage 
Time, 


Electrolyte Added and 
Concentration of Stock 
Solution 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(6) 


Batchwise 


90 


60 


50 


80 


90 


40 


25 


50 


25 


40 


60 


90 


Sodium chloride, 50 g/l 


Sodium chloride, 60 g/l 
Sodium carbonate (Na2CO3. 
10 H20), 5g/1 


Sodium chloride. 60 g/l 


Sodium chloride, 50 g/l 
Sodium carbonate, 5 g/l 
Sodium hydroxide, 2 ml/l 
prepared from solution 
containing approximately 
435 g/l 


Sodium chloride, 50 g/l 
Sodium carbonate, 5 g/l 
Sodium hydroxide, 2 ml/l 
prepared from solution 
containing approximately 
435 g/l 


ii) 


Continuous 


90 


90 


90 


90 


25 


25 


25 


25 


30 


120 


60 


30 


Sodium hydroxide, 50 g/l 
Sodium hydroxide, 30 g/l 
prepared from solution 
containing approximately 
435 g/l 


Sodium carbonate (Na2C03. 
10 H20). 40 g/l 


Sodium silicate, 95 g/l 
prepared from solution 
containing between 34 
percent and 40 percent 
sodium silicate 

Sodium hydroxide, 38 g/l 
prepared from solution 
containing approximately 
435 g/l 


Urea, 100 g/l 
Sodium carbonate (Na2CO3. 
10 H20), 30 g/l 


6 PREPARATION OF SOLUTIONS 


6.1 The concentrations at which the test dye 
solutions are prepared shall be chosen considering 
the expected solution stability limit of the dye in the 
presence of electrolyte: 


SINo. Expected Limit to Stepwise Increase 


Fall Between in Dye 
Approaching Limit Concentration 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 1 g/l to 10 g/l 1 g/l 
ii) 10 g/l to 30 g/l 5 g/l 
iii) 30 g/l to 100 g/l 10 g/l 


The maximum dye concentrations used for the test 
shall be: 


a) 30 g/l for batch wise dyeing processes; and 


b) 100 g/l for continuous dyeing processes. 


6.2 Place a known amount of dye to be tested in 
wide-mouthed Erlenmeyer flask and add 150 ml of 
distilled or fully demineralized water at about 60 °C. 
(but not above the dissolving temperature). Swirl the 
flask by hand until the dye is fully wetted out (pre- 
dissolving). Place the solution into the heating bath 
set at desired dissolving temperature and stir for ten 
minutes at 500 rev/min to 600 rev/min in order to 
stimulate dyebath compositions used In commercial 
practice, additions of other components to the test 
solutions are permissible (see dyestuffs 
manufacturer’s recommendations). However, these 
additions, including their influence on volume of 
test solution shall be noted in the test report. On the 
other hand changes in volume attributable to 
changes in temperature should not be taken into 
account. 


Urea as dissolving agent may be added in 
accordance with the recommendations of dye 
manufacturers. According to general experience, 
amount of water should be reduced by | ml per gram 
of urea added, so as not to change the total volume 
of solution. 


6.3 Adjust the dye solution to the desired 
temperature for filtration or storage using the 
thermostatically controlled water bath. Add 50 ml of 
the electrolyte solution (stock solution) previously 
adjusted to the test temperature and homogenize the 
resulting solution. 


7 STORAGE 


Allow the final test solution to stand at constant 
temperature for the specified storage time (see Table 1). 


IS 14464 : 2023 


8 FILTERING THE SOLUTIONS 


8.1 Pre-heat the Nutsch filter to the test temperature 
by pumping through the heating medium from the 
thermostatic device, and maintain at this 
temperature throughout the entire titration 
operation. 


8.2 Immediately before filtering, wet out two filter 
papers in the Nutsch filter in a double layer with at 
least 50 ml water at the test temperature. 


8.3 Adjust the vacuum to between 3 kPa to 4 kPa 
(equivalent to 300 mm to 400 mm water column 
pressure) before filtration so that 200 ml water at the 
test temperature passes through the filters in a flow- 
through time of 5 seconds to 8 seconds. 


8.4 Before filtering, homogenize the test solution by 
swirling it-in the flask (visual check). Filter the 
entire test solution (do not decant) at the desired 
temperature. Measure the flow-through time with a 
stopwatch. 


8.5 If the solution does not filter within 2 min at a 
stabilized vacuum, filter it for an additional 2 min 
under full vacuum. 


8.6 After the solution has passed through, continue 
to extract the filters uniformly under full vacuum for 
1 min. 


8.7 Allow the filters to dry completely at room 
temperature before evaluation. 


9 EVALUATION 


9.1 Compare visually the dried filter paper after 
filtration of the various test solutions of known 
concentration, The solubility limit-or solution 
stability, limit in the presence of electrolyte is taken 
as that concentration at which filter residues are seen 
Residues that are difficult to see may possibly be 
detected by gently rubbing the filter surface with a 
fingertip. 


9.2 Flow-through time may be used as a further 
evaluation criterion. A sudden sharp increase in the 
flow-through time when moving up the range of 
solution concentrations indicates that the solubility 
limit has been exceeded or that the solution is no 
longer stable. 


10 REPORT 


10.1 The test report shall include the following. 
a) Full identification of the dyestuff under 
test; 


b) Full identification and amount of added 
electrolyte(s); 


IS 14464 : 2023 


c) Type of filter paper used and its 
manufacturer; 


d) Solution stability in the presence of 
electrolyte expressed in grams per litre, 
including the dissolving апа storage 
temperatures; 


e) Flow-through time, where applicable; 


f) Any special observations during the test or 
evaluation procedure; and 


g) Any deviation, by agreement or otherwise, 
from the procedure specified (for example, 
total volume of solution other than 200 ml. 
addition of urea or other components, etc). 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
FACTORS AFFECTING RESULTS 


The test method has been successfully used in 
monitoring the quality of dyes for some time. 
However, since there are many test variants that 
depend on production and application methods used, 
the electrolyte stability data given in the literature-is 
not easy to evaluate. Also, with electrolyte stability 
different test conditions may lead to different 
results. 


In addition to the factors already known to influence 
solubility testing without electrolyte, such as filter 
quality, dissolving temperature, storage temperature 
and storage time, here the influence of electrolyte 
must be taken into account. This includes such 
factors as electrolyte purity and ageing of electrolyte 
stock solution. In order to increase comparability 
and reproducibility, the test should be carried out 
with chemically pure substances, which are 
normally not used in works practice. Depending on 
the type and amount of impurity, the values found in 
evaluation with salts of technical quality may be 
widely scattered. 


Ageing of the stock solution will of course affect 
laboratory tests only, since in actual practice such 


solutions are hardly used, certainly not the solutions 
that have been stored for any length of time. 
However, in the laboratory the highly concentrated 
solutions that are mostly used may, with prolonged 
storage crystallize out or become chemically 
changed. 


For the sake of simplifying the work, fresh solutions 
as a гие are not used for each test; however, the age 
of the solutions is limited, for the reasons given 
above in cases of dispute, fresh solutions should 
always be prepared. It should be borne in mind that 
the occurrence of unexpected interaction between 
the dye and the electrolyte is possible, and this may 
lead to equivocal results. Thus, for example, with a 
particular high concentration of electrolyte and a 
low mass of dye precipitation may occur that does 
not take place with high masses of dye. 


Although many process variants are possible in 
dyeing with reactive dyes and production dyeing 
conditions are often not comparable with laboratory 
conditions this test provides useful indications about 
the sensitivity of individual reactive dyes to the 
presence of electrolytes. 


IS 14464 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Textile Speciality Chemicals and Dyestuffs Sectional Committee, TXD 07 


Organization 


Department for Jute and Fibre Technology Institute of 
Jute Technology University of Calcutta, Kolkata 


Ahmedabad Textile Industry’s Research Association, 
Ahmedabad 


Ama Herbals Laboratories Pvt Ltd, Lucknow 


Archroma India Pvt Limited, Mumbai 


Atul Limited (Colors Business), Valsad 


Bio Dyes India Pvt Ltd, Goa 

Central Coir Research Institute, Alappuzha 

Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, 
Mumbai 


Department for Jute and Fibre Technology Institute of 


Jute Technology University of Calcutta, Kolkata 


Global Organic Textile Standard, (GOTS), Thane 


Indian Jute Industries Research Association, Kolkata 


Northern India Textile Research Association, Ghaziabad 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


SGS India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Shree Pushkar Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd, Mumbai 


Textiles Committee, Mumbai 


The Arvind Mills Limited, Ahmedabad 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 
PROF A. K. SAMANTA (Chairperson) 
SHRIMATI DEEPALI PLAWAT 
SHRIMATI FAHIMUNNISA KHATIB (Alternate) 
SHRI Y. A. SHAH 


SHRI RAJESH RAMAMURTHY 
SHRIMATI PRACHI NARVEKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJARAM JAMDADE 
SHRI ARINDAM CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


DR Bosco HENRIQUES 


DR SHANMUGASUNDARAM О. L. 
DR S. RADHAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR SUJATA SAXENA 
DR A. S. М. RAJA (Alternate) 


DR D. DAS 
SHRI RAHUL BHAJEKAR 
MISS PRACHI GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR S. K. CHAKRABARTI 
SHRI SANDIP BASU (Alternate) 


DR M. S. PARMAR 
DR NIDHI SISODIA (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV GUPTA 
SHRI SANJAY CHARAK (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTHIKEYAN K. 
SHRI GAURAV SARASWAT (Alternate) 


DR N. N. MAHAPATRA 


SHRI KARTIKEYA DHANDA 
SHRIMATI SHILPI CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJARSHI GHOSH 
SHRI UMASANKAR MAHAPATRA (Alternate) 


DR PADMA S. VANKAR 
SHRI M. P. SATHIANARAYANAN (Alternate) 


IS 14464 : 2023 


Organization 


The South India 


Coimbatore 


Textile Research Association, 


The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research Association, 
Mumbai 


U P Textile Technology Institute, Kanpur 


Wool Research Association, Thane 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


DR PRAKASH VASUDEVAN 
SHRIS. SIVAKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI (DR) MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 
DR ARUN KUMAR PATRA 
DR SHUBHANKAR MAITY (Alternate) 
SHRIMATI (DR) MRINAL CHOUDHARI 
SHRI J. K. GUPTA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 


HEAD (TEXTILES) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI HIMANSHU SHUKLA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(TEXTILES), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 07 (21069). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern :C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot Мо. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


