( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard VIBRATION AND SHOCK - EXPERIMEhJTAL DETERMINATION OF MECHANICAL MOBILITY
PART 1 BASIC DEFINITIONS

AND TRANSDUCERS

ICS 17.160

0 BIS 1999

BUREAU
MANAK BHAVAN,

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

October

1999

Price Group

9

Mechanical

Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee, LM 04

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 7626-1:1986 `Vibration and shock - Experimental determination of mechanical mobility -- Part 1 : Basic definitions and transducers' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee and approval of the Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The text of IS0 Standard has been approvedas suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. In the adopted standard certain conventions are not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is especially drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a full point (.) as the decimal marker. In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their placeare listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: In terna tional Standard IS0 2041 Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence Identical

IS 11717:1999 Vocabulary

on vibration and shock (first revision)

The concerned technical com.mittee has reviewed the provisions of the following International Standards referred in this adopted standard and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: International IS0 4865 IS0 5347 IEC Publication 263 Standard Vibration and shock Vibration and shockTitle Methods for analysis and presentation of data

Methods of calibration of vibration and shock pickups and polar diagrams

Scale and sizes for plotting frequency characteristics

IS 14736 ( Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1986

Indian Standard VIBRATION AND SHOCK - EXPERIMENTAL DETERMINATION OF MECHANICAL MOBILITY
PART 1 BASIC DEFINITIONS AND TRANSDUCERS

0

Introduction to IS0 7626 on mobility

For most practical applications, it is not necessary to know entire 6N x 6N matrix. Often it is sufficient to measure

the the

0.1 General introduction measurement
Dynamic function characteristics of frequency

driving-point mobility and a few transfer mobilities by exciting with a force at a single point in a single direction and measuring the translational response ture. In other applications, motions at key pojnts on the struconly rotational mobilities may be of

of structures from mobility

can be determined

as a

interest. In order to simplify the use of the various parts of IS0 7626 in

measurements

or measurethe various mobility measurement tasks encountered in practice, IS0 7626 will be published as a set of five separate parts. IS0 7626/l (this part of IS0 7626) covers basic definitions and

ments of the related frequency-response functions, known as accelerance and dynamic compliance. Each of these frequencyresponse functions point on a structure The magnitude dependent. is the phasor of the motion response at a due to a unit force (or moment) excitation. are frequency-

and the phase of these functions

transducers. The information given in this part of IS0 7626 is common to most mobility measurement tasks. compliance differ from mobility only IS0 7626/2 translational covers mobility excitation with measurements using an attached exciter. single-point

Accelerance

and dynamic

in that the motion response is expressed in terms of acceleration or displacement, respectively, instead of in terms of velocity. In order to simplify the various parts of IS0 7626, only the term "mobility" will be used. It is understood that all test procedures and requirements described are also applicable to the determination of accelerance and dynamic compliance.

IS0 7626/3 covers rotational excitation is primarily predictions. intended

mobility measurements using single-point with an attached exciter. This information for rotor system rotational resonance

Typical a)

applications predicting

for mobility the dynamic

measurements response

are for to known

IS0 7626/4 covers measurements of the entire mobility matrix using attached exciters. This includes the translational, rotational and combination terms required for the 6 x 6 matrix for each location on the structure. measurements is not attached using impact excitato the structure.

of structures

or assumed b)

input

excitation; the modal properties of a structure ratios); of interconnected (natural

determining

frequencies, c) predicting

mode shapes and damping the dynamic interaction

IS0 7626/5 covers mobility tion with an exciter which

structures; d) checking mathematical the validity and improving models and structures; the accuracy of

e) determining dynamic properties (i.e. modulus of elasticity) of materials in pure forms.

the complex or composite

Mechanical mobility is defined as the frequency-response function formed by the ratio of the phasor of the translational or rotational response velocity to the phasor of the applied force or moment excitation. If the response is measured with an accelerometer, conversion to velocity is required to obtain the mobility. Alternatively, the ratio of acceleration to force, know as accelerance, may be used to characterize a structure. In other cases, dynamic compliance, the ratio of displacement to force, may be used.
NOTE - Historically, frequency-response functions of structures have often been expressed in terms of the reciprocal of one of the aboveThe arithmetic reciprocal of named dynamic characteristics. mechanical mobility has often been called mechanical impedance. It should be noted, however, that this is misleading because the arithmetic reciprocal of mobility does not, in general, represent any of the elements of the impedance matrix of a structure. This point is elaborated upon in annex A.

For some applications, a complete description of the dynamic characteristics may be required using measurements of translational forces and motions along three mutually perpendicular axes as well as measurements of moments and rotational motions about these three axes. This set of measurements results in a 6 x 6 mobility matrix for each location of interest. For N locations on a structure, the system thus has an overall mobility matrix of size 6N x 6N.

1

1s 14736 (Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1966

Mobility test data cannot be used directly as part of an impedance model of the structure. In order to achieve compatibility of the data and the model, the impedance matrix of the model shall be converted to mobility or vice-versa (see clause A.3 for limitations).

3

Symbols and units
Symbol a ailFj E Quantity
Acceleration Accelerance Transducer output Frequency Force Stiffness Mass Sensitivity Velocity Displacement Dynamic compliance Mobility Free impedance Blocked impedance

St unit
m/s2 m/(N.s2) V HZ N N/m kg V/units of input variable m/s m m/N m/fNs) N.s/m N.s/m

0.2

Introduction

to this part of IS0 7626

f
F
k m s

Before carrying out mobility measurements, it is necessary to evaluate the characteristics of the force and response transducers to be used in order to ensure that accurate amplitude and phase information can be obtained over the entire frequency range of interest. This part of IS0 7626 is primarily a guide for the selection, calibration and evaluation of the transducersand instruments for their suitability in making mobility measurements.

V X

x,/F,
Yij z

1

Scope and field of application

=ij

This part of IS0 7626 provides basic definitions with comments and identifies the calibration tests, environmental tests and physical measurements necessary to determine the suitability of impedance heads, force transducers and response transducers for use in measuring mechanical mobility. This part of IS0 7626 is limited to information which is basic to various types of driving point and transfer mobility, accelerance and dynamic compliance measurements. Blocked impedance (see 4.3) measurements are not dealt with.
NOTE - Procedures for carrying out mobility measurements in various circumstances will be dealt with in IS0 7626/2, IS0 7626/3, IS0 7626/4 and IS0 7626/5.

4

Definitions

For the general terms and their definitions used in this part of IS0 7636, see IS0 2041. Several of the more important definitions used in the measurement and presentation of mechanical mobility data are listed below to emphasize their use in this part of IS0 7636. 4.1 frequency-response function: The frequency dependent ratio of the motion-response phasor to the phasor of the excitation force. NOTES

2

References
Vocabulary Methods for analysis and

IS0 2041, Vibration and shock IS0 4865, Vibration and shock presentation of data. 1) IS0 5347, Vibration and shock vibration and shock pickups. 1)

1 Frequency-response functions are properties of linear dynamic systems which do not depend on the type of excitation function. Excitation can be harmonic, random or transient functions of time. The test results obtained with one type of excitation can thus be used for predicting the response of the system to any other type of excitation. Phasors and their equivalents for random and transient excitation are discussed in annex B. 2 Linearity of the system is a condition which, in practice, will be met only approximately, depending on the type of system and on the magnitude of the input. Care has to be taken to avoid non-linear effects, particularly when applying impulse excitation. Structures which are known to be non-linear (e.g. certain riveted structures) should not be tested with impulse excitation and great care is required when using random excitation for testing such structures.

Methods of calibration of

IEC Publication 263, Scales and sizes for plomhg frequency characteristics and polar diagrams.

1)

At present at the stage of draft.

2

IS 14736 (Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1986

3

Motion may be expressed in terms of either velocity, acceleration the are corresponding accelerance frequency-response and dynamic mobility,

or

2

The

primary

usefulness

of

blocked

impedance

is

in

the

displacement; designations respectively.

function compliance,

mathematical or comparing

modelling

of a structure

using lumped mass, stiffness When combining mobility

and damping elements or finite element techniques. such mathematical

models with experimental

data, it is necessary to convert the analytical blocked impedance matrix into a mobility matrix, or vice versa, as discussed in annex A.

4.2

mobility,

Y,,: The frequency-response

function

formed

by the ratio of the velocity-response phasor at point i to the excitation force phasor at point j, with all other measurement points on the structure allowed to respond freely without any constraints other than those constraints which represent application. the A normal support of the structure in its intended typical graph is given in figure 1. NOTES 1 The velocity response can be either translational or rotational, and the excitation force can be either a rectilinear force or a moment.
2 If the velocity response measured is a translational one and if the excitation force applied is a rectilinear one, rhe mobility term should be expressed in metres per newton second in the SI system.

4.4

free impedance: The ratio force phasor to the resulting velocity

of the applied excitation phasor, with all other con-

nection forces). element NOTES

points of the system free (i.e. having zero restraining Free impedance is the arithmetic reciprocal of a single of the mobility matrix, as defined in 4.2.

1 Historically, no distinction has often been made between blocked impedance and free impedance. Caution should, therefore, be exercised in interpreting 2 While published data. determined free impedances could be

experimentally

assembled into a matrix, this matrix would be quite different from the blocked impedance matrix resulting from mathematical modelling of the structure and, therefore, would not conform to the requirements discussed in annex A for using mechanical impedance in an overall theoretical analysis of the system.

4.3

blocked impedance, Z,,: The frequency-responsefunction formed by the ratio of the phasor of the blocking or drivingpoint force response at point i to the phasor of the applied excitation velocity at point j, with all other measurement points on the structure "blocked" (i.e. constrained to have tero velocity). All forces and moments required to constrain fully all points of interest on the structure shall be measured in order to obtain a valid blocked impedance matrix. Blocked impedance measurements (see 1131) are, therefore, seldom made and are not dealt with in the various parts of IS0 7626. NOTES
1 Any changes il the number of measurement points or their location will change the blocked impedances at all measurement points.

4.5 Other to mobility

frequency-response

functions

related

There are several other structural response ratios sometimes used instead of mechanical mobility. summarized in table 1.

which These

are are

Careful note should be taken of the comments on each type of ratio. Typical magnitude graphs for accelerance and for dynamic compliance, corresponding to the mobility graph shown in figure 1, are shown in figures 2 and 3, respectively.

Table

1 -

Equivalent

definitions

to be used for various kinds of measured related to mechanical mobility
Motion expressed as acceleration Accelerance aIF, m/(N& = kg~'

frequency

response

functions

Motion expressed as velocity Term Mobility Y,, = vJF, m/(N.s) conditions

Motion expressed as displacement Dynamic compliance x,lF; m/N

Symbol
Unit Boundary See figure Comment Term Symbol Unit Boundary Comment Term Symbol Unit Boundary Comment conditions conditions --______..___

Fk = 0 ; k t j
1

Fk = 0 ; k s
2

j ,
mass

FL = 0;k
3

#,;

Boundarv conditions are easy to achieve experimentally Blocked impedance Z,, = F/v, IN.s)/m vk = 0 ; k f j Blocked effective

Dynamic stiffness

F,fa,
(N.s2)im ak = 0;k = kg *j

F,lX,
N/m _Y* = 0

;

k -f .i

Boundary conditions are very difficult or impossible to achieve experimentally Free impedance Effective mass (free effective mass)) Free dynamic stiffness F I-8 I \N/m I Fk = 0;k *.j

F,/v, = -;-

F,la,
fN.sJ)im I = kg #j Fk = 0; k s,,

(Ns)im"
Fk = 0;k

Boundary conditions are easy to achieve, but results shall be used with great caution in system modelling

IS 14736 (Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1966

NOTES 1 Dynamic compliance is called "receptance" by several authors.

5.2.1

The motion transducer should be of lightweight kading

(or nonof the

contacting) design so as to minimize structural structure under test.

2 Accelerance has, regrettably, been called "inertance" in some publications. This term is not a standard term and should be avoided because it is in conflict with the common definition of "acoustic inertance" and also contrary to the implication carried by the term "inertance".

5.2.2 The attachment of the transducer to the structure under test should be stiff in the direction of the primary measurement axis of the transducer.

4.5 frequency range of interest: Span, in hertz, from the lowest frequency to the highest frequency at which mobility data are to be obtained in a given test series.

5.2.3

The attachment

should have a sufficiently

small contact by the

area to prevent stiffening or damping transducer or its mounting fixture.

of the structure

5.2.4 When applying impulse excitation, zero piezoelectric accelerometers due to the ,pyro-electric

drift of effect is

5 Basic requirements motion-measurement 5.1 General

for force- and transducers

likely to occur and this will limit the accuracy of the measurement at low frequencies. Other types of motion transducers (e.g. piezoresistive, electrodynami,car some shear type piezoelectronic accelerometers) can provide the solution to this problem.

The basic characteristics are important follows: a) Transducers

of all measurement adequate

transducers which data are as

in acquiring

mobility

5.3 Requirements transducers

for force-measurement

shall have sufficient

sensitivity

and low Some of the characteristics outlined in 5.1 are more important than others in the selection of a force-measurement transducer to be used for mechanical mobility measurements. Since compromises in design have to be made, the items outlined in 5.3.1 to 5.3.3 shall be considered as being of prime importance.

noise in order to obtain a signal-to-noise ratio of the measurement chain which is adequate to cover the dynamic range of the mobility of the structure. Since lightly damped structures require a larger dynamic range than structures with considerable damping, transducer noise is of particular concern when testing lightly damped structures. b) If the frequency-response is not compensated function of the measurement by suitable signal process-

5.3.1

The

effective

end

mass

(mass

between

the

force-

transducer

sensing element of the transducer

and the structure)

should be

ing, the natural frequency of the response transducer shall be far enough below or above the frequency range of interest that no unacceptable c) Transducer phase shift will occur.

small enough to minimize extraneous

inertial signals related to

such mass. (See 8.4 for further details.)

sensivity shall be stable with time and have

5.3.2

The

stiffness

of the

force

transducer

and

its com-

negligible d.c. drift. d) Transducers shall be insensitive to extraneous ensuch as temperature, humidity, vironmental effects, magnetic fields, electrical fields, acoustical fields, strain and cross-axis inputs. e) Transducer mass and rotational inertia shall be small so as to avoid dynamic loading of the structure under test, or at least small enough so that a correction the loading. can be made for

ponents should be selected so that no resonances involving this stiffness occur within the frequency range of interest. As a compromise, the effect of such resonances on the signal from the force-sensing element should be compensated for by suitable signal processing.

5.3.3 The static preload shall be adequate for the range of excitation forces required by the test application. Transducers with built-in preload are available to minimize this problem.

Low susceptibility of the measurement system to the effects of electrical ground loops and other extraneous signals is also important.

5.4 Requirements for impedance heads and attachments to the structure under test
A device which combines an accelerometer and a force

5.2 Requirements transducers
Although

for motion-measurement

transducer in one assembly for the purpose measurement is traditionally called an "impedance the

of mobility head". The

motion-measurement

transducers

require

characteristics outlined in 5.1, certain of these characteristics are more important than others. Motion transducers used in mechanical mobility measurements are most commonly accelerometers; however, displacement or velocity transducers are sometimes use,d. The major characteristics to be considered in transducer selection are outlined in 5.2.1 to 5.2.4.

design is a compromise based on the characteristics outlined in 5.2 and 5.3. However, certain characteristics of prime importance, given in 5.4.1 to 5.4.4, should be borne in mind.

5.4.1 The total compliance between the structure and the internal accelerometer should be small, because a large compliance will cause errors in acceleration measurements.

4

IS IS0

14736 7626-l

(Part 1 ) : 1999
: 1986

NOTE -

The total compliance is the sum of the attachment comof the impedance head. The atof as includes the localized "die effect" compliance The total compliance can be measured

used for mobility measurements, damping design. However, angle between

and the accelerometer and accelerometer

pliance and the internal compliance tachment compliance the structure described in annex C. under test

it is good practice

is of a low to display the phase outputs on a

the force transducer

phase meter and record any deviations from the proper phase angle between the force transducer and accelerometer out the operational calibration. outputs while carrying

5.4.2 The effective end mass (mass between the forcesensing element of the transducer and the structure) should be small in relation to the free effective mass of the structure under test.

6.2

Basic and supplementary calibrations

transducer

5.4.3

The moment

of inertia of the impedance

head, relative

The basic and supplementary calibrations (see table 2) are intended for determining the suitability of the transducers for mobility measurements. Piezoelectric transducers are very frequently used. If other types of transducers such transducers. are used, the pro-

to an axis in the plane of attachment, should be small enough to minimize structural loading due to rotational motion about that axis. NOTE Further guidelines for avoiding loading of the structure under of impedance heads will be given in IS0 762612.

cedures may have to be modified to determine the suitability of

test by the attachment

Transducers calibrations

exhibiting should not

changes be used

in basic or supplementary if the changes are unacclauses in this part of

5.4.4 In the design of an impedance head, care is required to avoid cross-sensitivity of the acceleration transducer to the applied force.

ceptable, as indicated in the appropriate IS0 7626. Table 2 Summary of transducer

calibrations

and tests

6

Calibration

Calibration or test

Accelerometer

T

Force transducer Basic 7.2.2 7.3 8.2 8.3 8.4 Supplementary

Basic Sensitivity measurement Electrical impedance calibrations; transducer calibrations. Dimensions Mass Effective end mass
7.3 ,7.2.1

Calibrations fall into three categories: a) operational calibration of the combined

and analysis system; b) c) basic transducer supplementary

1
r nentarl 8.2 8.3 8.6 8.7.1 8.8.1 8.9.1 rnd 8.9. 8.9.4 8.9.5

!Supple.

6.1

Operational

calibrations Transducer compliance Polarity Frequency response Linearity 8.5 8.6

Operational calibrations of the combined measurement and analysis system shall be carried out at the beginning and end of each measurement series (and at intermediate times, as required). Detailed procedures will be covered in the relevant parts of IS0 7626 pertaining to the various types of mobility measurements, as outlined in clause 0. Combined system calibrations are easier to perform, more accurate and in wider use than the basic calibrations discussed in clause 7. These system calibrations are achieved by driving, in free space, a known free mass while the acceleration and force channel gains are set at the values that will be used in later measurements. The ratio output shall follow the appropriate mass line on the resulting mobility graph. If any difficulties are experienced in combined system calibrations, basic calibrations should be carried out. The accuracy of the frequency scale of the response graph or other data output should always be checked during the operational calibration.
NOTES 1 An example of the resulting mobility graph, showing the effect of the impedance head attachment compliance, is shown in annex C. 2 It is usually unnecessary to perform a phase-shift calibration provided that the accelerometers, force transducers and amplifiers are selected to have nearly flat response throughout the frequency range

8.7.2 8.8.2 8.9.1 3nd 8.9.2

Temperature sensitivity Transverse sensitivity Strain sensitivity

L

Transducers conditioners

intended for use with specific amplifiers or signal should have the calibration performed under the

conditions of intended use. For example, piezoelectric force transducers, impedance heads and accelerometers are intended for use with either charge amplifiers or high impedance voltage amplifiers and should be calibrated with the intended amplifier. For these transducers, the capacitance of the cables used between transducer and amplifier is important and the transducers should be calibrated together with the intended cable. Other types of transducers should be calibrated with

5

IS 14736 (Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1966

their intended

signal conditioning devices in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for electrical excitation, special terminating impedance, etc.

When calibrating force transducers and impedance heads, special care should be taken to use mounting conditions similar to those specified by the manufacturer. Flatness of the mounting plate and proper torquing of the attaching screws is important. A thin film of oil or grease or wax between the transducer and the mounting surface may increase transducer coupling and rigidity for use at high frequencies. If special fixtures are used, every effort should be made to carry out force transducer calibrations using a mechanical arrangement closely resembling that to be used during the mobility measurement.

NOTE - Since the output signal of the charge or voltage amplifii associated with the accelerometer is always a voltage, the resultant acceleration channel sensitivii should always be expressed in volts per metre per second squared IV/lm/9)1. In general, the acceleration channel sensitivity is determined from the knowledge of the separate sensitivities of the accelerometer and the amplifier; in cases where precise mobility measurements are required, the accelerometer and the amplifier to be used with.the accelerometer should be calibrated together in order to obtain the acceleration channel sensitivity directly. Force-transducer sensitivity

7.2.2

Force transducers and the force section of impedance heads shall be calibrated using a mass-loading technique. The sensitivity calibration shall be carried out by mounting the force transducer on a suitable shaker using the rated preloading torque recommended by the manufacturer. The force transducer shall be vibrated at a controlled acceleration amplitude, ae, with only a reference accelerometer attachedto its opposite face. The force transducer amplifier voltage output, E,,, and the applied acceleration, us, shall be measured. A loading mass, m, shall then be attached to the opposite face of the force transducer without changing the amplifier gain settings. The voltage output, EM, shall be measured with the shaker input adjusted so that the applied acceleration, a, has exactly the same amplitude as before (that is u = a&. The sensitivity of the force channel, Sf, is then given by the following equation :

7
7.1

Basic piezoelectric General

transducer

calibrations

All basic calibrations and tests listed in table 2 shall be carried out by the manufacturer on each transducer and the results shall be recorded in the documentation supplied with the transducer. All basic calibrations should be repeated periodically by the user (or by a commercial calibration laboratory, if the user does not have adequate calibration facilities). The recommended time interval for repeating basic calibrations and tests is 1 year. In addition, calibrations such as sensitivity should be repeated more frequently, particularly if the transducer is subjected to conditions which may change its sensitivity.

Sf =

EM - Eo (m + ml + m2 + m& - (ml + m2 + m.$uo * "

(1)

where m is the loading mass; is the mass of the reference accelerometer; is the effective mass of the bolt; is the effective end mass of the force transducer.

7.2 7.2.1

Sensitivity
Accelerometer sensitivity

ml m2 m3

Sensitivity of accelerometers and the accelerometer portion of impedance heads shall be determined by using the comparison method. Calibration shall be carried out by mounting the accelerometer on a suitable shaker equipped with a reference accelerometer previously calibrated by or referenced to an absolute calibration. The calibration amplitude should be within the range encountered in actual mobility measurements, generally between 1,0 and 100 m/s*. The sensitivity calibration should be carried out at a single fre quency, generally 80 Hz. NOTE - A differentfrequencymay be used, if 80 Hz is outside the
operating frequency range of the transducer or if another frequency is more suitable for the particular transducer design or experimental application of the transducer.

All the masses are expressed in kilograms and the acceleration shall be expressed in metres per second squared. As (ml + m2 + m3)uo = (ml + m2 + mjlu, because a0 .= 0, equation (1) becomes Sf = -

EM-Eo
mu

NOTE - For force transducers which have not been preassembled, extremecareshouldbe taken to ensure that the mounted preload does
not change from application to application, since sensitivity and calibration depend on transducer preload. Equation (2) gives the sensitivity of the force channel (i.e. the transducer/amplifier combination) in volts per newton. The sensitivity of the force transducer alone can be deduced from equation (2) and the sensitivity of the amplifier used.

For accelerometers designed to be used with a charge amplifier, accelerometer sensitivity shall be expressed in picocoulombs per metre per second squared IpC!(m/s3. For accelerometers designed to be used with a voltage amplifier and for accelerometers with a built-in charge amplifier or impedance transformer, accelerometer sensitivity shall be expressed in volts per metre per second squared IV/(m/r9)1.

For force transducers designed to be used with a charge amplifier, force-transducer sensitivity shall be expressed in picocoulombs per newton. For force transducers designed to be used with a voltage amplifier, force-transducer sensitivity shall be expressed in volts per newton.

IS 14736 (Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1986

NOTE the force transducer

In cases where precise mobility measurements transducer and the amplifier together should be calibrated

are required, the force

7.3.2

insulation resistance
all the terminals of the shall be measured and

to be used with

in order to obtain the total

The direct current resistances between transducer and its mounting surface supplied as data by the manufacturer.

force channel sensitivity directly.

The method

described

is adequate

only at frequencies

below

. approximately one-fifth of the resonance frequency due to the
effective mass of the system and the stiffness, transducer. following This resonance can be estimated equation

k, of the force
by means of the

If the transducer is not of an isolated type, the manufacturer shall indicate the type of mounting needed to achieve isolation when using the transducer (see 5.1).

:
k
ml + m2 + rn3) I frequency of the
112

f" = -?_ -___ 2n L (m +

(31

where f, is the resonance transducer, in hertz.

8
mass-loaded

Supplementary
General

calibrations

8.1
7.2.3 Impedance-head sensitivity

The supplementary The sensitivity of an impedance head can be obtained from the individual calibrations of the accelerometer and the force transducer performed using the methods given in 7.2.1 and 7.2.2, respectively. Field calibration of an impedance head usually consists of driving two or three differently sized free masses. This ensures that the impedance known mobilities over a wide range. head can measure

calibrations

and tests listed in table 2 shall on samples of the Furthermore, some of

be carried out by the manufacturer transducers for each tvpe manufactured.

the supplementary calibrations and tests should be carried out by the user to determine the condition of a transducer which exhibits peculiar operating characteristics mance. or changes in perfor-

7.3
7.3.1

Electrical
Transducer

impedance
resistance and capacitance the terminals of the manufacturer with a 50 V.

8.2

Dimensions

Pertinent dimensions, including height, width, length, diameter and dimensions of any mounting holes or studs, shall be given. The dimensions shall be provided in the form of an outline cable sizes and cable drawing. Descriptions of connectors, types shall also be provided.

The direct transducer

current resistance between shall be measured by the

megohmmeter,

using an applied voltage not exceeding

The capacitance shall be measured with an impedance bridge, using an excitation voltage within the operating frequency range of the transducer. If the capacitance changes with frequency, the measurement shall be carried out at a minimum of two frequencies, including the frequency at which the reference sensitivity shall be determined. For transducers the capacitance of which does not change significantly with frequency, the measurement shall usually be carried out at loo0 Hz. Since the capacitance of some piezoelectric materials changes with temperature and voltage, the capacitance measurement shall be performed at room temperature (20 to 30 `W and at an excitation voltage recommended by the transducer manufacturer. Variations due to temperature can be minimized by avoiding handling immediately before or during the capacitance measurements.
NOTE For some transducers containing internal electronic com-

8.3

Mass
is the total mass of the transducer, ex-

The mass specified

cluding mounting studs and cables which do not form an integral part of the transducer.

8.4 Effective end mass of force impedance heads

transducers

and

The effective end mass of force transducers and impedance heads is the mass between the force-sensing elements and the specimen end of the transducer. This effective end mass should be included in the manufacturer's specifications. However, the user should be aware that the effective end mass is increased by the addition of the hardware used to attach the transducer to the structure under test and/or to preload the transducer. Thus, the total effective end mass is the sum of the manufacturer's effective end mass and the mass of the attaching hardware.

ponents, the above impedance measurement operation may produce inaccurate results or possibly cause damage. In these cases, insertion methods should be used. Resistance and capacitance measurements should be repeated

at suitable time intervals (see 7.1). Since these measurements are generally not very accurate, only significant variations, compared to previous calibrations, shall be taken into account. For instance, if resistance and/or capacitance has changed by more than 5 %, the transducer should be further evaluated by performing all basic and supplementary calibrations or it should be repaired, as required.

8.5

Compliance

of impedance

heads

The compliance of an impedance head is the compliance of that part of the assembly between the point of attachment to the structure and the internal accelerometer (see IlOl).

7

IS 14736 ( Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1986

In addition

to the compliance

of the impedance

head as pro-

The

reference

voltage,

E,, is the output

of the transducer generally 80 Hz.

vided by the manufacturer, the compliance of the attachment hardware shall also be considered when carrying out mobility measurements. A procedure for experimentally pliance is given in annex C. determining the total com-

amplifier obtained at the reference frequency,

It is important that the mass load on the force transducer does not cause a resonance involving the loading mass and the transducer compliance. This can be checked using equation (3). The frequency-response deviation shall be less than + 5 % of the response at the reference frequency range of interest. over the frequency

.

8.6

Polarity

NOTE - As in the sensitivity calibration of the force transducer,

better

nufacPolarity of the transducer, usually laid down by the turer, shall be by a comparison methdd to determine whether a positive or negative output voltage change is produced when the mechanical input is applied in a direction from the mounting surface towards the opposite end of the transducer sensitivity of the transducer. to the mounting and along This defini-

accuracy is obtained by not adjusting the torque of the forcetransducer mounting bolt at any time during the frequency-response calibration, if force transducers without built-in preload are used.

8.8

Linearity

the axis of maximum

tion of polarity is applicable to most transducers which have the sensitivity axis perpendicular surface.

Linearity calibrations shall be carried out by harmonic excitation using the comparison method.

8.7
8.7.1

Frequency

response
frequency response

8.8.1
The

Accelerometer
amplitude-linearity

linearity
deviations shall be determined by

Accelerometer

The frequency-response calibration shall be performed by the comparison method at an acceleration amplitude chosen to provide a signal-to-noise ratio exceeding ten (S/N > 20 dB) and over the frequency range corresponding to the range of use of the accelerometer. Harmonic or wide-band excitation, applied with a suitable vibration exciter, may be used to measure the frequency responses. be random or transient. Wide-band excitation may

measuring the ratio of the reference and test accelerometer outputs. This ratio shall be measured by the manufacturer at a minimum of three acceleration levels in the upper decade of the design range of the accelerometer. It may be useful for the user to check the linearity in his own range of use. The deviations at each acceleration shall be determined by computing the difference from the average ratio at all accelerations. This difference shall be expressed as a percentage of the average ratio. If the deviations at all accelerations are within + 2 %, the accelerometer is suitable for mobility measurements.

Harmonic excitation may be applied at discrete frequencies or by a continuous sweep. In the first case, there shall be enough discrete frequencies, for instance ten frequencies per decade, to ensure that, the transducer is free from local or internal resonances within the frequency range of interest. If the calibration is carried out at a limited number of discrete frequencies, addition of a frequency sweep is useful to ensure the same objective. When a continuous sweep is used, the frequency should be swept slowly, while the amplitude of the excitation acceleration is maintained constant over the full frequency range by means of a feedback control system using a reference accelerometer. The frequency r' ;ponse shall be flat within ? 5 % in the frequency range of Interest. Care shall be taken so that transverse motion of the vibration exciter, combined with the cross-axis sensitivity of the transducer, does not cause measurement errors of the order of the specified + 5 %. 8.7.2 Force-transducer frequency response

8.8.2

Force-transducer

linearity

The linearity calibration shall be carried out by vibrating the mass-loaded force transducer, generally at 80 Hz, at various acceleration levels and measuring the voltage output of the forcetransducer amplifier, E,, at each of the applied accelerations, a,. The linearity deviations, expressed as a percentage, determined from the following equation : Amplitude-linearity deviation = (5) shall be

where E, is the force-transducer amplifier discrete acceleration amplitude, V; voltage output at a

Frequency-response calibration shall be performed under the same conditions described for the accelerometer frequency response. However, the force transducer shall be mass-loaded and vibrated at a constant amplitude of acceleration at each specified frequency. The voltage output of the forcetransducer amplifier, L r, shall be measured at each of the frequencies The frequency-response deviations, expressed as a percentage, shall be determined from the following equation :

a, is the discrete acceleration amplitude as determined by a standard accelerometer, in metres per second squared;

(Ex14,vg is the average of the ratio of force-transducer amplifier output amplitude to the acceleratioh amplitude for all acceleration levels, expressed in volt seconds squared per
metre, and is equal to
N

(4)

c
i-

(E,la,),ln

1

8

IS 14736 ( Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1966

A different frequency may be used if 80 Hz is outside the operating frequency range of the transducer or if another frequency is more suitabe for the particular transducer design or application. The applied force shall be computed as follows. At one of the applied accelerations, the applied force shall be computed by dividing the amplifier output, E,, by the force-transducer channel sensitivity, previously determined in 7.2.2. The force applied at even/ other calibration point shall be determined by multiplying the force just computed by the ratio of new applied acceleration to the acceleration A force transducer, used to compute the force above. in an impedance

the sensing

axis.

For measurement

of transverse-sensitivity

ratios of much less than 1 %, the excitation requirements are more strict. Extreme care and skill are required to obtain valid values for such transverse sensitivities. The transducer shall be mounted and rotated about its sensing axis through 350�, in increments of 45O or less, to determine the maximum transverse response. If the transverse-sensitivity ratio exceeds 5 % of the axial sensitivity or changes significantly from an earlier calibration, evaluated by performing should be repaired, the transducer supplementary should be further calibrations or it

as required.

or the force transducer

8.9.5

Strain effects

head, is not suitable for mobility measurements if the linearity deviations exceed 2 %, within the rated range of operating forces.

The effect of strain on the sensitivitv of a transducer can be measured by use of a simple cantilever beam, clamped to a rigid support. A suitable beam design would have a first natural frequency of approximately mounted on the cantilever 5 Hz. The transducer shall be beam at a suitable location. The

8.9 Supplementary calibrations necessitated environmental and secondary effects

by

strain shall be measured by strain gauges bonded to the beam near the transducer mounting. Details of the procedure for determining the sensitivity of force transducers be found in 1121. the effect of strain on heads can

Certain calibrations are necessitated by the fact that secondary and/or environmental conditions can cause transducer outputs which are not direct analogues of the transduced Ruantities. The supplementary calibrations described reflect the need to quantify such effects. in 8.9.1 to 8.9.5

and impedance

8.9.1

Change

in transducer

sensitivity

with

9

Presentation

of data
of mobility test data can be greatly enhanced

temperature It is usually desirable to select transducers not which have

The interpretation

temperature-sensitivin/ throughout

deviations

exceeding

? 1,O %

by the use of a suitable graphic display. A variety of display formats is available to suit various applications. '

the temperature

range of intended use.

9.1
8.9.2 Noise induced variations in signal transducers by temperature

Logarithmic

plotting

Variation in temperature generates low-frequency noise in piezoelectric transducers and in any built-in transducer amplifiers that may be used. As the frequency range of use of piezoelectric transducers is generally much higher, the noise and the measured signal are not correlated so that there are no consequences on the results of the mobility measurements. However, during low-frequency measurement, rapid variations in temperature may cause sufficient noise to saturate the transducer electronics, thus inducing wrong measurements.

At frequencies well below the lowest resonance or antiresonance frequency of a structure, the magnitude of any of the three structural frequency-response functions follows an almost straight line on a plot of log magnitude versus log frequency. At frequencies well below the lowest resonance, the curve tends to be asymptotic to lines of constant compliance. Well below the lowest anti-resonance, the curve tends to be asymptotic to lines of constant mass. For mobility plots, compliance lines slope upwards at one magnitude decade per frequency decade and mass lines slope downwards at one magnitude decade per frequency decade, as shown in figure 1.

8.9.3

Force-transducer

preload mouhting

effects

on sensitivity

If accelerance or dynamic compliance data are plotted, the slopes of the mass and compliance lines change accordingly, as shown in figures 2 and 3. When plotting the results of mobility measurements with a logarithmic frequency scale, the magnitude and frequency scales should conform to the recommendations given in IEC Publication 263. A recommended format for plotting mobility data, including lines for mass and dynamic compliance, is shown in figure 4. NOTES

The effect of different

torques on the sensitivity of

force transducers which have not been pre-assembled may be determined by repeating the sensitiuity calibration when the force transducer is remounted using different torques.

8.9.4

Accelerometer

transverse

sensitivity

Transverse-sensitivity calibrations shall be performed at a single frequency below 500 Hz. The transducer shall be mounted on a vibration exciter perpendicular to the transducer-sensing axis. Harmonic excitation shall be applied at a frequency where it is known that the shaker motion in a plane perpendicular to the sensing axis is at least 100 times the motion in the direction of

1

In the system of SI units, lines for constant dynamic compliance,

lines for constant mobility and lines for constant mass, In increments of one decade of magnitude, always Intersect at frequencies of 1/2x, 10!2rr, 100/2x, etc. The frequency of 159 Hz (equivalent to 1000/2aj is a convenient one for reference purposes, as shown in the examples in the lower part of figure 4.

9

IS 14736 (Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1986

2 In accordance with IEC Publication 263, the ratio of the length of the scale for a decade of magnitude to the length of the scale for a decade of frequency should be as 2/5. The format in figure 4 for plotting mobility data follows the 2/5 rule. 3 Appropriate exponents to use as the power of 10 for mobility, mass and dynamic compliance should be determined from the test results to suit the data to be plotted and then noted on the plot.

diagram has the advantage that the data may be enhanced by circle-fitting procedures. This may be important for extracting modal damping coefficients from the test data.
NOTES 1 In figure 6, the actual measured data points are connected by straight lines. These lines are not part of the measured data. They are shown as an aid to distinguishing between data points belonging to one mode of the structure and those belonging to a second mode. 2 The fact that the straight lines connecting the measured data points in figure 6 do not approach a circle through the data points shows that not enough data points were measured near the resonance frequency to determine directly the true resonance frequency, peak response and damping of the modes. In order to identify these parameters properly, either more data points should be measured or a suitable circle-fitting procedure shall be applied to the measured data points.

9.2

Alternative plotting methods

Instead of plotting the magnitude and phase of the mobility test results, it is sometimes advantageous to plot the real and imaginary components as functions of frequency, as illustrated in figure 5. It may also be desirable to plot the test results in polar coordinates, as illustrated in figure 6 (Nyquist plot). The polar

10

IS 14736 (Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1986

180 135

-135 -180

lo-* -

1o-3

-

-2

2
T

E >: E 3

s" 1O-4 -

,
1

Frequency,

Hz

Figure

1 -

Typical

graph

of plotted

mobility

test results

11

IS 14736 (Part 1 ) : 1999 Iso 7626-l : 1986

s?m f

I

P

-45
-90 -135 -780 70*
I ,
1

I

IO'
-

Mass Wg

IO0
II IO kg

II

10-l
Frequency, Hz

Figure 2 -

Accelerance

graph corresponding

to the mobility graph plotted in figure 1

12

IS 14736 ( Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1986

180 13590I b 45# & 0 P m I -45-' m f -9o-' -135-' -180

a

.

I

7r\ v

.

b .

)

.

I

Frequency,

Hz

Figure 3 -

Dynamic compliance

graph corresponding

to the mobility graph plotted in figure 1

13

IS 14736 ( Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1986

-

-+
I

Ln hl Lrl CJ ul N

IA

N

a
7 7 -

,
:

5:

zrne
$Ob
rC

Saalfiap

'al6Ue aSk?qd

(S.N)/lU

' +

'hl!qOw

14

IS 14736 (Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1966

IO 03 0,6 ;
N

0,4

5
E 5
i

02
0

; -0,2 c ; -0,4 -0,6 -0,8 -I,0
-

200

04
z i T E N 2 E ? 0,4 02 0

I
200
Frequency, Hz

1 -0,2 % a -0,4 -0,6 -0,8 -1,0 2000
of mobility corresponding to figure 1

Figure

5 -

Graph

of the real and imaginary

components

15

IS 14736 (Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1966

I,0,0,8 0,6 2 T 0,4

d 0,2 E E 0 is E -0,z z .f -0`4 -0,6 -0,8 -I,0 --I-1,0
Real component, 10-Z m/(Nd

Figure 6 -

Polar diagram of the mobility results for the two lowest frequency

modes in figure 1

16

IS 14736 (Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1986

Annex Relationship between mechanical

A mobility and modal analysis

impedance

(This annex does not form an integral part of the standard.)

A.1

General

The dynamic response of a mechanical system basically depends on two parameters, i.e. the exciting forces and the dynamic characteristics of the system. If the level of the exciting forces is within the range in which the system behaves essentially linearly, the system characteristics can be described in the frequency domain either by a mobility matrix [Yl or by an impedance resulting in the following two equivalent relations between exciting forces and response velocities: matrix [Zl,

{v(w)} = [ Y]{Fkd} {F(w)} = [z]{vku)}
where IS the column vector of the external dynamic !LiEi'poiAs; (v (CO)). NOTE "point". is the column vector of the corresponding response velocities at all points of interest. is often used with the same meaning as forces expressed as functions of frequency, acting on the system at

The term "point"

designates a location and the associated direction. The term "coordinate"

The matrix notation of equations (6) and (7) is convenient because, in general, more than a single point on the structure has to be considered. If N is the number of points at which motion response is to be considered, plus any additional points at which external forces act (either exciting forces or reaction forces), the column vectors in equations (6) and (7) are of order N and the matrices are of order N x N. From equations (6) and (7), it follows that (8) expressed by equations matrix, (81, means that the elements Z,; of the impedance matrix are not

IZI = [VI-'
It should be noted that the matrix inversion, arithmetic reciprocals of the elements

Y,, of the mobility

and vice versa.

A.2

Boundary
testing,

conditions
a dynamic exciting force is supplied to the structure at one point at a time. Thus,

In mobility

F;,=O;k+j
where .j k is the point of excitation; denotes all other ooints of interest. for experimental determinations of mechanical mobility. Given these boundary at point i and of the force at j yields the ij element of the mobility matrix:

(9)

Equation (9) defines tions, measurement Y,, = (v,lF\),k

the boundary conditions of the velocity response

condi-

= O:k ;t ,
expression of the definition boundary condition of mobility given in 4.2. can easily be achieved in experimental procedures.

(10)

This is the mathematical It should be qoted

that the above

17

IS 14736 (Partl):lQQQ IS0 7626-1:1986

In contrast,

the elements

of the impedance

matrix Z [equation

(711 are

Zii = Fi/vi
with the boundary conditions

.

tlla)

vk=O;k#j
Equations (1 la) and (11 b) are the mathematical to determine The difference the structure the elements of the impedance conditions expressions of the definition of blocked impedance procedures. matrix [equation (711 by experimental means.

. .

(116,

given in 4.3. The boundary condiThus, it is generally not possible

tions of equation (11 bj are very difficult or impossible to achieve in practical experimental

in the boundary

of equations

(9) and (lib)

is very important

for the proper use of mobility and impedance

data. It should be noted that this difference

becomes irrelevant,

however,

in the special case in which a single point (and direction) on

(the driving point) is the only point of interest.

This special case is not uncommon in practice. This accounts for the often-used definition of impedance as being the ratio of the exciting force to the velocity response, without specifying the boundary conditions. In this special case, thejmpedance matrix and the mobility matrix only have a single term, and, therefore, special impedance structure. is a free impedance impedance is the arithmetic reciprocal of mobility. of the general N It should be noted that this matrix of the as defined in 4.4. Thus, it is not an element x N impedance

A.3

Comparing

impedance

and mobility

data

Experimental investigations of the dynamic characteristics of structures result in mobility type data. In mathematical modelling, however, it is generally easier to use mass and stiffness matrices. In the frequency domain, these result in blocked impedance data. When comparing mobility and blocked impedance data, it is necessary to convert one into the form of the other. In doing this, special care shall be exercised because blocked mechanical impedance is not an invariant characteristic of a structure, but it is dependent upon the number of degrees of freedom considered (see fll). The elements of an impedance matrix can, therefore, be compared with those of an inverted mobility matrix, only if all degrees of freedom of both matrices (points and directions) are identical. If the mathematical model (and its impedance matrix) has more degrees of freedom than the experimental mobility matrix, as will often be the case in practice, it is necessary to convert impedance to mobility to allow comparison with the corresponding elements of an experimentally-determined mobility matrix, rather than vice versa. This is so because mobility is free of artificial constraints, but impedance is not.

A.4

Modal

analysis
analysis with mathematical modelling. It is particularly convenient for

Modal analysis is a very useful tool for linking experimental predicting the dynamic interaction of interconnected

sub-stuctures.

When using experimental mobility data, modal analysis uses statistical methods to extract the modal parameters, including natural frequencies, damping and modal mass for stiffness), within the frequency range of interest. A number of different methods are available for identifying these parameters accurately and taking into account the effect of modes outside the frequency range of interest. When using mathematical models, the modal parameters can be extracted from the computed mass, stiffness and damping matrices of the sub-structures by eigen-value/eigen-vector computation or other matrix reduction procedures. These procedures are often more efficient that the direct inversion of the entire impedance matrix.

18

IS 14736 (Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-i : 1986

Annex Mobility

B function

as a frequency-response

(This annex does not form part of the standard.)

6.1
When x(t) where A w I @

Harmonic
a time function

excitation
can be expressed as

= A cos (wr + @I

.

(12)

is the amplitude

of the harmonic

waveform;

is the circular frequency, is the time, in seconds; is an initial phase angle, can be represented + 0)

in radians per second;

in radians, on a complex plane as

the function y(t) where j=J-? x(f)

= Aejrwl

.

113)

is the projection

of Y(r) on the real axis.

F(t) can be thought of as a rotating vector centred at the origin of the complex plane. This rotating vector is commonly called a "phasor"1). If the ratio of two phasors is formed at a given frequency, the result is a complex number, and is not a function of time. If a set of these complex numbers ple, if the two phasors are is formed for all frequencies of interest, the result is called a frequency-response function. For exam-

H(w)

=

2 = B(w)ePtw)
x2

(14)

where B(w) B(w) = A,(w)lA&J) = Q,(w) @*(WI

Both B(w) and 6(w) are functions of the frequency w. The frequency-response function, H(w), can be expressed in polar form by the amplitude and phase [B(w) and B(w) above) or in rectangular form as real and imaginary components: H(w) where R(w) I(w) = B(w) = B(w) cos O(w) sin B(w) as a frequency-response mobility-like quantities. function given by the ratio of the velocity and force phasors. Similar arguments = R(W) + jl(w) (15)

Mobility can be considered can be made for the other

1) Some authors define the phasor as Aei@. Both definitions are consistent with the use of the term "phasor" part of IS0 7626 is only concerned with the ratio of phasors.

in this part of IS0 7626 because this

19

IS 14736 (Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1986

B.2

Random

excitation
with a stationary Gaussian distribution, a fundamental equation that relates the output and input of a linear

In random vibration bilateral system is

where G&O) H(o) G.&w) is the cross-spectral density between the input and output of the system;

is the frequency-response is the auto-spectral

function

of the system;

density

of the input. is a real function of frequency; hence, H(w) is a complex function of frequency. function given by the ratio of the cross-spectral density between the velocity and

Cl2 is a complex function Mobility can be considered

of frequency and GZ as a frequency-response

force excitation to the auto-spectral density of the force excitation, the input. In actual practice, only estimates of the cross- and autospectra are available. Hence, mobilities can only be estimated using a random excitation. The estimation errors can be made less than other measurement errors and do not necessarily limit the accuracy of the measurements.

B.3

Transient
vibrations,

excitation
the input and response of a linear system can be related through the expression

In transient

X,(01
where X,(w)

= Hku)X$d

.

(17)

is the Fourier

transform

of the output, of the input, function

xl(t) ~g(t);

;

X+J)
H(w)

is the Fourier transform is the frequency-response in equation

of the system. functions of frequency. The inverse Fourier transform of H(w) is the unit impulse

All of the quantities

(17) are complex

response function, h ft), of the system; be considered as a frequency-response response and of the input Force.

that is, if a unit impulse is applied to the input, the system output is given by h it). Mobility can function given by the ratio of the Fourier transforms of the time histories of the velocity

In actual practice, the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) is used as an approximation of the continuous Fourier transform. Careful selection of sample rate and sample size can reduce the errors of this approximation to levels less than other measurement errors. The use of the DFT does not, therefore, necessarily limit the accuracy of the measurements.

20

IS 14736 (Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1986

Annex Determination of impedance-head

C compliance and damping

attachment

(This annex does not form an integral part of the standard.)

Overall calibration and determination

of the sensitivity of a mobility measurement

set-up, including the attachment

hardware

between also pro-

the vibration exciter and the structure under test, may be accomplished using the following test procedure. vides data on the attachment compliance and the structural damping of the impedance head (see [IO]). The test shall be carried out by mounting a large rigid block on a sufficiently compliant

This procedure

support so that the natural frequency

of the

block on the compliant support is 2 Hz or less. A cylindrical block of sufficient mass should be used to place the anti-resonance frequency well within the frequency range of interest. The magnitude, in kilograms, of the appropriate mass, m; may be estimated from m = 1/[(2r@C] where f is a convenient frequency, in hertz, in the upper part of the frequency range over which mechanical mobility measurements are

. . (18)

to be carried out: C is an estimate of the compliance, in metres per newton, force transducer and the structure under test. of the impedance head and the attachment hardware between the

In order to design the compliant port compliance, C,:

support for the calibration

block, rearrangement

of equation (18) yields the minimum required sup-

C, = 1/[ (2nfJ*m]
where

.

fs
m

is the natural frequency,

`in hertz, for the mass of the supported of the block selected for the test.

block (2 Hz or lower);

is the mass, in kilograms,

The impedance

head (or the force transducer)

should be mounted

colinear with the centre of gravity of the calibration

block. The

transducer manufacturer's specifications for mounting bolt torque should be closely adhered to. The mounting hardware should be as closely as possible identical to that to be used when testing the structure. The vibration exciter should be attached to the impedance head (or to the force transducer) in the manner to be used in the mobility test. The vibration exciter should be supplied with the same type of excitation waveform which is to be used during the mobility test. The range of frequencies to be used for the test with the calibration block should extend beyond the frequency range of interest at the high end. The mathematical model for this calibration test set-up is given in 141. The output signals from the force transducer and the motion-response mobility test and should be plotted as either a mobility or accelerance transducers should be processed in the same way as for the curve on suitable graph paper.

The curve will appear in the typical form as shown in figure 7 for mobility data. The results shown in figure 7 were obtained with a calibration block having a mass of 55 kg and represent a rather typical attachment compliance of the impedance head of about 8 x lo-10 m/N. In the frequency range from 30 to 1 100 Hz, the measured mobility curve closely approaches that of the mass of the block used for the calibration, plus the mass of the impedance head below the force transducer, combined with the mass of the attachment hardware. If the mass indicated by the low-frequency portion of the results of the mobility test does not equal the total calibration system mass, the mobility measuring system has failings which should be corrected. calibration or electronic instrument problems are likely causes. The anti-resonance (response dip) in the measured Inadequate sensitivity, incorrect

mobility curve at 2 400 Hz indicates that, at that frequency,

the mobility of the

caiibration block has the same magnitude as that due to the attachment compliance of the impedance head. Since the two mobilities have essentially opposite phase, the total mobility magnitude tends towards zero at the anti-resonance frequency. It remains finite because of damping at the interface between the impedance head and the calibration block. This also accounts for the 0' phase angle at the anti-resonance.

21

IS

14736

IS0

7626-l

(Partl):1999 : 1986

At frequencies above the 2 400 Hz anti-resonance, the measured mobility curve approaches asymptotically the series combination of the compliance of the mounting hardware and that of the impedance head itself. It may be difficult to check the total compliance if the attachment has considerable damping. If the anti-resonance dip is not very sharp, the mobility curve will not approach the effective compliance asymptote at high frequencies.
NOTE - The irregularity at 4 600 Hz in the measured mobility curve shown in figure 7 is the result of a transverse rocking mode of the impedance head about its attachment point.

If the overall calibration and sensitivity test is extended to sufficiently high frequencies, the mobility curve becomes controlled by the effective damping of the impedance head and its mounting hardware. The magnitude of the effective damping can seldom be computed. Thus, the test described in this annex is the only practical way to determine how much damping is present in the coupling of the force transducer to the structure to be tested.

I 9

0

F

s-180 l-360 1O-3

1O-4

7 2 ;10-, % E 1O-6

1O-7 30
Frequency, Hz

1000

IO 000

Figure 7 -

Example of test results showing the effect of impedance-head

attachment

compliance

f2!% averages)

22

IS 14736 ( Part 1 ) : 1999 IS0 7626-l : 1986

Bibliography

Ill

O'HARA,

G.J.

Mechanical Measurement

Impedance

and Mobility

Concepts,

J. &oust

SOC. Am.

41, 1887: PP. 1180-1184.

I21

EWINS, D.J.

and Application June 1976.

of Mechanical

Impedance

Data, Parts 1, 2 and 3, J. SOC. Environ. Eng. Vol. 14.3,

15.1 and 15.2, Dec. 1975 -

[31

SAINSBURY, M.G.

and EWINS, D.J. Vibration Transactions Impedance,

Analysis of a Damped

Machinery

Foundation

Structure

Using the Dynamic Stiff-

ness Coupling Technique

ASME,

J. Eng. lnd. 88, Aug. and Vibration

1974: pp. 1000-1005. (2nd ed.), ed. HARRIS, C.M. and CREDE, C.E.,

[41

HIXSON, E.J. McGraw-Hill,

Mechanical New York,

in Shock

Handbook

1976: chap. 10. and Transmission-Matrix of Modal Testing, Concepts, J. Acousf.
SOC. Am.

[51 161 171

RUBIN,

S. Mechanical

Immittance-

41, 1967: pp. 1171-1179.

EWINS, D.J. Whys and Wherefores

J. Sot.

Environ. Eng. 18-3, 1979: pp. 3-19. Techniques Results for the Mid-Range

EWINS, D.J. and GRIFFIN, J. A State-of-the-Art Assessment of Mobility Measurement Structures (30-3000 Hz), J. Sound and Vibration 78(2), 1981 : pp. 197222. EWINS, D.J. 1981 State-of-the-Art Assessment of Mobility Measurements, A Summary

[81

of European

Results, Shock Vib. Bull. 51,

: Part 1, pp. 15-35.
State-of-the-Art Assessment of Mobility Measurement Techniques, J. Sot. Environ. Eng. 20(l), March 1981:

[91

EWINS, D.J. pp. 3-13.

[lOI

BROWNJOHN, J.M.W., STEELE, G.H., CAWLEY, P. and ADAMS, R.D. pedance Heads, J. Sound and Vibration 73, 1980: pp. 461468. KLAASSEN, K.B. Piezoelectric Accelerometers Press, Delft, Netherlands, 1978: chap. III. in Modern

Errors in Mechanical

impedance

Data Obtained

with Im-

1111

Electronic Measuring

Systems,

ed. REGTIEN, P.P.L.,

Delft University

1121 BOUCHE, R.K. Calibration of Shock and Vibration Measuring
formation Center, U.S. Department of Defense, 1979.

Transducers,

Monograph

SVM-11,

The Shock and Vibration

In-

[131 CANSDALE, R., GAUKROGER, D.R. and SKINGLE, C.W.
Technical Report TR 71LW, Royal Aircraft

A Technique for Measuring Impedances of a Spinning Establishment, Farnborough, United Kingdom, May 1971.

Model

Rotor,

23

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be' addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. LM 04 (0247).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued

Since

Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters :

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 Telephones : 32301 31,3233375,3239402 Regional Offices :
Central Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110 002 l/14 C. 1~ T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi CALCUTTA 700 054 SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone
323 76 17 323 38 41 337 84 99,337 337 86 26,337 85 61 91 20

Eastern

Northern

60 38 43 1 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 15 1 235 15 19,23523 832 92 95,832 1 832 78 91,832 78 58 78 92

Southern

C. 1.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113

Western

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400 093

Branches

AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. printed at : F&hat
Offset Press,

New Delhi-2

