IS 15800:2007

WKM

J-l/'l*

Indian Standard QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS -- GUIDELINES FOR SERVICE QUALITY BY PUBLIC SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS

ICS 03.120.10

@ BIS 2007

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

December

2007

Price Group

14

Quality Management

Sectional Committee,

MSD 2

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Quality Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division Council. After the publication of the standard IS 15700:2005 `Quality management systems -- Requirements for service many public service organizations have come forward to adopt the quality by public service organizations', requirements of the standard. A strong need is being felt for a guidance standard which provides guidelines to different public service organizations for their understanding and to facilitate the implementation of the requirements of IS 15700. This standard through its guidelines on various requirements of IS 15700 and examples intend to fulfil the need of public service organizations. The guidance in this standard is not intended to be an interpretation of the requirements in IS 15700. At various places in the standard, certain examples have been provided to explain the concepts/application of the guidance. It should be noted that these are only illustrative and not exhaustive. For further benefit to the user, the basic content of the IS 15700 requirements are included in boxed text preceding the corresponding clause in this Indian Standard. For some of the requirements of IS 15700, no guidance has been given, in such cases, it is presumed that the requirements are self-explanatory and do not need further guidance. This standard is applicable to and can be implemented by all such organizations which are either directly providing service to society at large or to those organizations which through their policies, directives, regulations etc indirectly affect the services to be/being provided by these service providers for example, Public transport services, Public water supply services, Power distribution services, Insurance companies, Public health care services, Postal services, Education services, all regulatory bodies, etc. The public service organizations may not necessarily be in the Government sector only. The use and implementation of this standard by public service organizations, and common man through increased satisfaction levels and the organizations and effectiveness. Annexes A to S are for information only. are expected to benefit the public through their increased efficiency

IS 15800:2007

Indian Standard QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS -- GUIDELINES FOR SERVICE QUALITY BY PUBLIC SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS
OINTRODUCTION 0.1 General All organizations, large or small, including public service organizations, have an established way or system of working. A quality management system is the way an organization directs and controls its activities associated with the establishment of its policy and objectives for quality and then achieving its objectives. Whh a view to facilitate public service organizations on developing and implementing a quality management system and also to demonstrate implementation through third party certification, an Indian Standard, IS 15700 has been published. The implementation of this standard is expected to benefit the public and common man through increased satisfaction levels and the organizations by increasing efficiency and effectiveness of their systems. 0.2 Relationship with IS 15700

This standard has been developed as a consistent pair of quality management system standards which have been designed to complement IS 15700. Although the two Indian Standards have different scopes, they have similar structures in order to assist their application as a consistent pair. This standard is recommended as a guide for organizations whose top management wishes to move beyond the requirements of IS 15700, in pursuit of continual improvement of performance. However, it is not intended for certification purposes. The guidance in this standard is not intended to be an interpretation of the requirements in IS 15700. At various places in the standard, certain examples have been provided to explain the concepts/application of the guidance. It should be noted that these are only illustrative and not exhaustive. For further benefit to the user, the basic content of the IS 15700 requirements are included in boxed text preceding the corresponding clause in this Indian Standard. For some of the requirements of IS 15700, no guidance has been given, in such cases, it is presumed that the requirements are self explanatory and do not need further guidance. 0.3 Relationship with 1S/1S0 9001:2000

1S/1S0 9001:2000 `Quality management systems -- Requirements' specifies requirements for a quality management system that can be used for internal application by organizations, or for certification, or for contractual purposes. It focuses on the effectiveness of the quality management system in meeting customer requirements. IS 15700 specifies requirements for a quality management system where a public service organization needs to demonstrate its ability to consistently provide effective and efficient service that meets customer requirements. All requirements of IS/ISO 9001 are generic and are intended to be applicable to all organizations. Whereas IS 15700 standard has been specifically designed for the public service organizations and in its formulation considerable assistance has been drawn from 1S/1S0 9001. Organizations which have already adopted a quality management system meeting the requirements of ISASO 9001 can modify their existing quality management system by implementing few additional requirements of IS 15700 for example, Requirements of Citizens' Charter, Complaints Handling, etc. The details of similarities and differences between IS 15700 and IS/ISO 9001 are given in Annex A.

1

IS 15800:2007 0.4 Process Approach For an organization to function effectively, it has to identify and manage numerous linked activities. An activity using resources, and managed in order to enable the transformation of inputs into outputs, can be considered as a process. Often the output from one process directly forms the input to the next. The application of a system of processes within an organization, together with the identification of these processes and their management, can be referred to, as the `process approach'. and interactions

An advantage of the process approach is the on-going control that it provides over the linkage between the individual processes within the system of processes, as well as over their combination and interaction. In addition, it highlights the value addition at every stage. When used within a quality management a) b) c) d) understanding system, such an approach emphasizes the importance of:

and meeting requirements, in terms of added value, and effectiveness, and based on objective measurement.

need to consider processes continual improvement

obtaining results of process performance of processes

In plain words process approach would mean recognizing that a series of processes are needed to provide a service, identifying the various processes that are needed to provide a service, ensuring that all inputs needed to provide the service are of desired quality, ensuring that the process steps/activities themselves contribute to the quality of service and a mechanism for monitoring the process, analysing the results and improving the process exists. The figures in Annex B illustrate the concept of process approach. 0.5 Quality Management Principles

To lead and operate an organization successfully, it is necessary to direct and control it in a systematic and transparent manner. Success can result from implementing and maintaining a management system that is designed to continually improve performance while addressing the needs of all interested parties. Managing an organization encompasses quality management amongst other management disciplines. Eight quality management principles as given in Annex C should be used by top management organization towards improved performance. 1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies requirements a) b) c) for a quality management system where a public service organization; in order to lead the

needs to demonstrate its ability to consistently provide effective and efficient service that meets customer and applicable legal, statutory and regulatory requirements; aims to enhance customer aims to continually satisfaction; and improve its service and service delivery process.

1.2 The requirements for complaints handling process covered in this standard do not apply for employment related disputes and/or disputes referred for resolution outside an organization. 1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard provides guidelines for understanding and implementing the requirements of IS 15700 by public service organizations. It provides elaboration on Quality Management Systems requirements as given in IS 15700 for helping the public service organizations in establishing a quality management system for the service delivery processes that are necessary to provide all services needed by its customers and achieving the desired objectives of service delivery in an effective and efficient manner, consistently. While the examples given in this standard are meant to clarify the concept regarding the correct use of Quality Management System requirements and help an organization in implementing the same, these should not be considered as essential elements to be fulfilled by the organization. These guidelines do not, however, add, change or modify the requirements of IS 15700.

IS 15800:2007 2 REFERENCE The following standard contains provision, which through reference in this text constitutes provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard is encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: IS No. IWISO 9000:2005 2 REFERENCES The following standards contain provisions, which through reference in this text constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: IS No. 1S/1S0 9000:2005 IS/ISO 9001:2000 IS/ISO 10002:2004 IS/ISO/TR 10013:2001 IS/ISO 14001:2004 IS 15610:2006 Title Quality management systems -- Fundamentals and vocabulary (third revision) Quality management systems -- Requirements (second revision) Quality management -- Customer satisfaction -- Guidelines for complaints handling in organizations (first revision) Guidelines for quality management system documentation (jZrst revision) Environmental management systems -- Requirements with guidance for use (jirst revision) Guidelines for measurement of customer satisfaction Title systems -- Fundamentals

Quality management

and vocabulary

(third revision)

3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this standard, the following terms and definitions, shall apply. in addition to that given in IS/ISO 9000

3.1 Citizens' Charter -- Citizens' charter is a document declaring the intentions and the commitment of an organization for providing effective and efficient service, taking into account customer's expectations and minimum acceptable levels of service, thereby providing assurance that the organization complies with the service quality standards. 3.2 Complaint (Grievance) services and/or process, 3.3 Complainant 3.4 Complaints 3.5 Customer -- Expression of dissatisfaction made to an organization related to its products, where a response or resolution is explicitly or implicitly expected. , or its representative, making a complaint. handling.

-- Person, organization, Handling Objective

-- Something

sought, or aimed for, related to complaints

-- Organization

or person that receives a product and/or service. and purchaser.

Example: Consumer, 3.5 Customer

client, citizen, end-user, beneficiary

The term `customer' means an ordinary citizen or even a foreign national with business, professional or personal interests in public jurisdiction, which may vary in context from that used in private sector, Further, the customer may be direct users or recipients of public services but may or may not directly be paying for the use of public services, such as, use of roads, pavemenis, street lights, public parking and law and order services, etc. The absence of these services would amount to service deficiency and thereby lead to customer dissatisfaction. The customers are generally not homogeneous ancl it is important to understand the patterns and diversity inherent therein so that each customer could be provided with the service suited to his individual requirements. There are also customers with varying interests and demands, for which special provisions are at times made by the public service organizations, for example, varying rateshaxation systems based on different electricity loads and uses (domestic or industrial), water consumption for domestic or industrial use, income groups, type and size of business, age groups m also group discounts (for example, railways, [ravel agencies, etc). This will also help in avoiding the pitfall of basing improvement strategies by the needs and expectations of one vocal or visible group alone. 3

IS 15800:2007 Those who deliver public services mayhave to balance the distinct interests and needs of different groups or categories of customers, within the broader framework of public interest. It maybe kept in mind that the satisfaction of the customers' needs is also directly related to the confidence inspired by the Government/public institutions with regards to their service delivery. Internal customers (for example, employees, -- Customer's etc) are excluded from the scope of this standard. perception of the degree to which the customer's requirements

3.6 Customer Satisfaction have been fulfilled. NOTES

1 Customer complaints are a common indicator of low customer satisfaction but their absence does not necessarily imply high customer satisfaction. 2 Even when customerrequirementshave been agreed with the customerand fulfilled,this does not necessarilyensure high customer satisfaction. 3.7 Feedback -- Opinions, comments, suggestions and expressions of satisfaction/dissatisfaction. I

3.8 Non-conformity

-- Non-fulfillment

of a requirement.

3.8 Non-conformity This term is used to describe any instance of failure to meet a specified requirement. This maybe a non-fulfillment of a customer's requirement, a problem with a product or a service, a deficiency in the service quality management system. 3.9 Public Service Organization -- An organization whose activities influence public interest. Example: Government ministries and departments, which provides service(s) to public at large ardor

Regulatory bodies, Public utility service providers, etc.

NOTE-- Whereverthe term `organization'has been used in this standard,it means `publicservice organization'. 3.9 Public Service Organization

I

This standard is applicable to and can be implemented by all such organizations which are either directly providing service to society at large or to those organizations which through their policies, directives, regulations, etc, indirectly affect the services to be/being provided by these service providers, for example, Public transport services, Public water supply services, Power distribution services, Insurance companies, Public health care services, Postal services, Education services, all regulatory bodies, etc. The public service organizations may not necessarily be in the Government sector only. Public service involves balancing the needs of the individual or the group of customers within the broader framework of the public interest. The needs and expectations from the public service may vary amongst different stakeholder groups. In case where there are different branches/units of the same organization, which are dependent on the head office for policy decisions, then the `Head office' being the controlling office will be referred as the `organization at the Apex level' and branch/units as `organization at the Unit level'. 3.10 Quality -- Degree to which a set of inherent characteristics fulfils requirements.

NOTES 1 The `requirements'include product and/or service requirements. 2 `Inherent',as opposed to `assigned',means existing in something,especially as a permanentcharacteristic. 3.11 Service -- The results generated, by activities at the interface between the organization and by organization's internal activities, to meet customer requirements. 3.12 Service Delivery -- The organization's provide the service. and the customer

activities, including those at the customer interface, necessary to I

4

IS 15800:2007 3.11 Service Service is the result of at least one activity necessarily performed at the interface between the organization and the customer and can be tangible and intangible. Whereas service delive~ is the actual process of providing service. The example of a service provision a) b) c) d) an activity performed clearing of cheques); can involve: tangible product (for example, repairing of an automobile, intangible product (for example, tiling of income tax return); transmission, training, coaching, etc); and

on a customer-supplied

an activity performed on a customer-supplied delivery of an intangible

product (for example, knowledge

an activity directed towards creation of appropriate ambiance for the service provided to the customer (for example, maintenance of hygienic and clean environment, etc especially in case of hospitality industry like hotels, restaurants; also hospitals, offices, etc). Some of their special attributes are:

Services are distinct from products. a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) Non-material in nature;

Function of different variables; Difficult to standardize; Non-uniform Dependent Produced in output; on setting, deliverer and receiver; and consumed simultaneously; after delivery. on their treatment: to testing before delivery; and in service output have a bearing on their quality and, therefore,

Not amenable

Not amenable to rectification

The following variations a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) j)

What is being Handled: People or their possessions Service Result: Tangible or non-tangible Type of Customen Relationship Individual, collective Open or contracted demand needed etc required with customer ambience, etc) on the quality of service Continuous/When populational, with Customec

Service Supply: Continuous/On Service Usage by Customer Service Spread Locational,

Degree and type of personal interaction Impact of tangibles (Equipment,

infrastructure,

3.12 Service Delivery The example of a service delivery can involve: a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) issuance of a Passport; issuance of Driving License, test certificate, issuance of Electricity delivery of parcel, letters, etc; payment made against cheque, demand draft, etc; serving of food and beverages administering deliverance treatment (in case of Hotels and Restaurants, and etc); to the patient including medicines; etc; Bills, Telephone Bills, etc;

of lecture for training, teaching, etc. Objectives -- Something sought, or aimed for, related to service quality. and direction of an organization as regards service

3.13 Service Quality

3.14 Service Quality Policy -- The overall intentions quality, as formally expressed by top management. 3.15 Stakeholder an organization. (Interested Party)

-- Person or group having an interest in the performance

or success of

Example: Customers,

owners, people in an organization,

suppliers, bankers, unions, partners or society.

NOTE-- A group can comprise an organization,a part thereof, or more than one organization. 5

IS 15800:2007 3.15 Stakeholder The stakeholder (Interested Party) may also include Government and Regulatory Bodies. at the highest

for an organization

3.16 Top Management level. 4 DOCUMENTATION 4.1 General The organization a) b) c) d)

-- Person or group of people, who directs and controls an organization

REQUIREMENTS

shall document

the following:

Service quality manual; Citizens' charter; Any other document needed by the organization service and service delivery processes; and Records required by this standard (see 4.4). REQUIREMENTS for effective planning, operation and control of its

4 DOCUMENTATION 4.1 General

An organization develops and maintains documentation to ensure effective operations of its functions. The purposes and benefits of having documentation in an organization may include the following: a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) j) k) n) p) Describing Projecting Enhancing Describing the quality management consistency in operations; between different functions; their role within the organization; system of the organization; of operation;

a clear, efficient framework inter-relationships understand

Making employees Communicating Providing

how things are to be done; and a basis for order for operations; and restraining of existing employees; to quality to employees; and management; and of operations. commitment improvement;

Providing objective evidence that the work has been done as per procedures; uniformity Providing basis of training for new employees Communicating Providing management's understanding between employees

m) Enhancing

a basis for continual

Providing a basis for auditing and evaluating the effectiveness

The extent of the quality management system documentation could differ from one organization to another due to the complexity of processes and their interactions; size of the organization and the competence of personnel. An organization should review and utilize the existing documents and references which could significantly reduce the documentation development work. This review of existing document would also help in identifying those areas wherein the inadequacies should be addressed and corrected. An organization should document the processes to the extent necessary to ensure their effective operation and control. The amount of documentation needed by an organization should be based on analysis of the processes. It should not be the documentation that drives the processes. The service quality management a) b) c) d) e) Service quality manual; Citizens' charter; Documented procedures (required by IS 15700 or otherwise); for effective planning, operation and control; Other documents Work instructions; needed by the organization system documentation should usually include the following:

6

IS 15800:2007 f) g) h) Forms; External documents, guidelines; and Records. for example, applicable legal documents, circulars, policies, OMS, Manuals,

The typical structure of documentation (see Annex D) should include service quality manual and citizens' charter as the apex documents. These documents briefly describe how the requirements of IS 15700 are met with. The citizens' charter should include declaration by the organization about its intention and commitment for providing effective and efficient services. This document should also include a statement-providing assurance by the organization for its compliance to the service quality standard. The next level of documentation with: a) b) c) d) e) What is to be done? How is it to be done? Who will do it? When is it to be done? Where is it to be done? is procedure. The procedure normally includes the sequence of activities along

The organization should define the other documents, which are required for the management of its services keeping in view, that they are required for providing effective and efficient services to the customers and they are user-friendly, as well. These documents would include office manuals, Act, Rules, regulations, policies, books of instructions, guidelines, etc. In addition to these documents, a public service organization, like, a department under Ministry (Government of India) may like to document procedures/guidelines/work instructions for: a) b) c) d) e) Security of official information Issue of draft text; File numbering Processing systems; notes for the cabinet/cabinet committee/group of ministers; and Preparing/submitting and documents;

reports of commissions/committees.

Work instructions are detailed description of how to perform and record task, like, providing description for handling complaints. Work instructions may be, for example, in the form of detailed written descriptions, flow charts, notes, instruction manuals, checklists and also may include acceptance criteria. Work instructions should generally be used to describe critical activities. The difference between the procedure and work instruction is that the procedure generally covers various operations and functions whereas the work instructions are specific to a particular task. Forms are documents used to record data required by the quality management system. A form becomes a record when data are entered. The data recorded in the forms demonstrates compliance to the requirements of the quality management system. The difference between a `document' and a `record' is that the records are not generally under revision control as records are not subject to change. IS 15700 standard requires maintenance Clause of IS 15700 a) b) C) d) e) 5.7.1 6.2.1 8.2.1.2 8.3 8.5.1 of minimum 5 records (see 4.1), which are Record Required Management reviews Training records Evidence of conformity under monitoring and measurement Internal audit results and follow-up actions Results of corrective and preventive action (department under Ministry) may have many other

In addition to the above records, a public service organization records, for example, a) b) c) Register for parliamentary Progress report of recording assurance,

Register on disposal of comments

received from member of Parliament,

and review of files, 7

IS 15800:2007 d) e) f,) g) Filemovement Call book, Precedent book, and Details of pending court/CAT cases. Manual register,

4.2 Service Quality The organization a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h)

shall establish and maintain a service quality manual which includes system,

scope of service quality management service quality policy, service quality objectives, complaints responsibility documented handling objectives,

and authority of personnel procedures

at relevant levels within the scope of this standard,

required by this standard,

other documents, needed by the organization for effective planning, operation and control of its service and service delivery processes, or reference to them, and description of service processes including service delivery processes those needed to directly support them (see 7.2). Manual at the customer interface and

4.2 Service Quality

1S 15700 requires that a service quality manual is established and maintained which includes details of Quality Management System requirements, and description of service and service delivery processes. The service quality manual is one of the top level documents for the Quality Management System. The service quality manual describes the way the requirements of IS 15700 have been interpreted and implemented for each public service organization. A quality manual is unique to each public service organization. These guidelines allow flexibility in defining the structure, format, content and method of presentation for documenting the service quality manual by the public service organization. A service quality manual should contain the elements as described below but not necessarily a) in the same order:

Title and Scope -- The title and scope of quality manual should define the organization and its activities to which the manual applies. The manual should make reference to the IS 15700 on which the quality management system is based. Table of Contents -- It should list the number and the title of each section and number of pages. Review, Approval, and Revision -- The service quality manual should indicate the evidence of review, approval, revision status and date of service quality manual. Change Control -- Where possible, manual for in the attachments. the nature of change should be identified in the service quality

b) c) d) e)

Service Quality Policies and Objectives -- The quality manual should include a statement of service quality policies and objectives. The objectives at operational levels and functions may be specified in other part of the service quality manual that is, under details of 5.4 of IS 15700. Complaints Handling Objectives -- They should be derived from service quality policy and the procedure for complaints handling. and authority should be indicated through job descriptions procedures required by IS 15700 are:

f)

!!3) Responsibility and Authority -- Responsibility relevant to the scope of IS 15700. h) Documented Procedures -- The documented Procedure Required

Clause of IS 15700 1) 2) 3) 4.3 4.4 7.3

Control of documents Control of records Complaints handling

1 ne above procedures to their corresponding

should be included in service quality manual generally as Annexure with reference sections. 8

IS 15800:2007 j) The other documents needed by the organization for effective management of its service and service delivery process should either be included in the manual or a reference to such documents should be provided in the manual. These documents would be other than those required by IS 15700, for example, Office manual, organization charts, rules, regulations, act, book of instructions, guidelines, etc. Very small organization may find it appropriate to include all the details of other documents needed for management and service delivery processes within a single manual. However, large organization may need to refer these documents in the Service Quality Manual. Description of service and service delivery process through flow chart/table/descriptive paragraphs or their combination should be included in the manual. The service delivery processes at the customer interface and the related processes required to support the service delivery should be included in the manual. sheet on which the structure of service quality manual maybe developed is given in Annex E. manual may bean electronic document provided everyone who needs to use the manual has otherwise it could be loose-leaf binder so that it may be changed whenever revisions are requirements of IS 15700 and for service quality manual maybe covered separately dedicating for each requirement. Every page should be identified and numbered to ensure that the and up-to-date.

k)

The typical content The service quality access to computer; issued. The various one section/chapter manual is complete

In order to limit the size of the documentation, reference to existing documents in the organization should be incorporated in the service quality manual. When the references are indicated, the revision status should be avoided in order to preclude frequent changing of documents where reference has been made to make it in line with change in revision status of referenced documents. 4.3 Control of Documents required by this standard shall be:

4.3.1 All the documents a) b) c)

approved for adequacy prior to issue; reviewed periodically, updated as necessary and re-approved. The changes made shall be identified; and legible and identifiable shall related to the scope of this standard which also identities their indicating their current revision status.

4.3.2 The organization a) b) c) d) e)

maintain a master list of all documents current revision status; maintain distribution

list of all such documents; documents are available at points of use; are suitably identified to prevent their if retained for any purpose,

ensure that the current versions of applicable ensure that obsolete documents, unintended use; and ensure that the documents procedure

of external origin are identified and their distribution

controlled.

4.3.3 A documented 4.3 Control

shall be established

to define the controls needed for the above.

of Documents

4.3.1 The document control ensures that the document which is in use is the right document that is, it is the applicable document, the latest issue relating to the work being done. Most documents related to provision of service and service delivery to customers, as issued by public service organizations are public documents which increases the need for their reliable control. The process of control of documents a) should include the following:

Review and approval -- The documents should be reviewed and approved before they are issued or changed. The documents should be reviewed to ensure clarity, accuracy, adequacy and proper structure. There needs to be a mechanism for indicating that the documents have been reviewed, that is, putting signatures on the contents page after review. In case of electronic system, this could be in the form of release of documents through network. Evidence of approval of documents should be retained. Updation and re-appmval -- A system should also be established to review the documentation periodically and update it as necessary. This may result out of internal/external audits, reviews and suggestions from 9

b)

IS 15800:2007 concerned personnel. The documents should be re-approved normally by the original document approving authority. c) after the changes have been incorporated,

Incorporation of changes -- The same review and approval process used in developing the original documents should apply when processing changes. The changes should be identified either within the documents or through tables indicating summary of changes. Information regarding revision of publications, regulations, application forms, challans, guidelines, instructions for provision of services should be controlled and traceable to relevant changes made. Legibility and identification -- All documents should be legible and identifiable through document number or any other suitable means. The current revision status of the document should be indicated.

d)

4.3.2 A master list of all documents covered under the scope of Quality Management Systems should be maintained either as an electronic document or as hard copy. The master list should clearly indicate the current revision status of the documents. An example of the format of a typical master list is given at Annex F. Revised documents sections/designations should be replaced by the latest revision. The documents issued to various departments/ should be mentioned in the distribution list to keep a track.

Obsolete documents which are no longer valid for implementation or for reference should be suitably identified by mentioning `obsolete' or `superseded' on the document itself. Under certain circumstances, the appropriate document to be used may not be the latest revision of the document and in such cases, the obsolete documents are retained. All documents which have originated from any other source/department outside the organization should also be controlled through their proper identification and controlled distribution such as applicable legal documents, policies, circulars, OMS, manuals, guidelines, etc. The controlled distribution should include the record of personnel/departments to whom the documents have been issued. The updating of documents of external origin should be done from time-to-time as soon as any changes are affected for example by subscription to updates, newsletters, visiting websites. 4.3.3 A documented procedure defining the above control mechanism should be established. The structure and format of the documented procedure (hard copy or electronic media) should be decided by the organization. The procedure could be in the form of text, flow charts, tables, their combination or any other suitable method. An example of a documented procedure for control of documents is given in Annex G. For further guidance on documentation, 10013 should be referred. 4.4 Control of Records including manual, procedures, records, etc, the standard IS/ISOiTR

Records (including files) shall be established and maintained to provide evidence of conformity to requirements and for the effective operation of the management system for service quality. The records shall remain legible, readily identifiable and easily retrievable. The method of identification, storage, protection, disposition of each record, their retention time and responsibility for each of these activities shall be established in a documented procedure. 4.4 Control of Records

Records are considered as objective evidence of the results of a process and must also be covered in document control mechanism. The importance of this activity is to demonstrate that the processes are in control and data can also serve as useful reference tool for continual improvement. The organizations are free to develop other records that may be needed to demonstrate conformity of their service delivery processes, services and QMS. There are various other quality records which may be generated by an organization may provide information: a) b) c) d) e) f) on the degree of achievement on the level of customer benchmarking, for analysis to identify quality trends, for corrective action and its effectiveness, 10 of the quality objectives, and dissatisfaction with the service, of the service, and could be useful as they

satisfaction

about the results of the quality system for review and improvement

IS 15800:2007 g) h) inappropriate ontheskills sub-contractors andtraining andsupplier's performance, and

of personnel.

A documented procedure has to be established for proper identification, storage, protection and retrieval of such records. A typical flow chart highlighting the various steps involved in this process is given in Annex H. However, not all records generated in the organization need to be controlled. Responsibility for maintenance and control of records shall be clearly defined in documented procedure. An example of a documented procedure for control of records is given at Annex J. It should be ensured that these quality records are verified as valid. There should be appropriate provision for storage for safe keeping of files/records (including closed files) is so that these are well protected from loss, deterioration and damage from moisture, fire, etc. These records should be legible, readily identifiable and easily retrievable. Records should never be altered otherwise it will render them invalid as a true record of what had happened. However, if it is unavoidable, the same may be permitted with authorization. The method of identification, storage, protection, disposition of each record, its retention time and responsibility for each of these activities should be established in a documented procedure. The records should be retained for minimum retention period, as stipulated, which maybe reviewed from time-to-time. Retention times and methods of disposal for such records should be set down in the procedure keeping in mind their usage; relevant legal, statutory or regulatory requirements; and possible product liability claims. The weeding out of the old and outdated records should be done with the approval of the competent authority. It is always helpful to document the file numbering system being used in the organization for various types of records and also to maintain a list of files being generated in the course of activities in various departments. In the case of large organizations, these lists could be maintained separately by each departmentlunit, as the case maybe. A typical format for maintaining 5 MANAGEMENT 5 MANAGEMENT the records/files matrix is given in Annex K.

RESPONSIBILITY RESPONSIBILITY

The top management, as per 1S/1S0 9000, is defined as `Person or group of people who directs and controls an organization at the highest level'. The commitment and the active involvement of the top management are essential for developing and maintaining an effective and efficient service quality management system. For this purpose, the top management should consider actions such as; a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) j) k) I 5.1 Management Top management a) b) c) d) Commitment shall: establishing a vision, policies and strategic objectives consistent direction and values regarding with the purpose of the organization; quality of service and the quality

set a personal example in order to develop trust within its people; communicating organizational management system; establishing participating continual in improvement

improvement

as an objective for processes to increase awareness, the involvement

of the organization; and involvement of people; strategic plans; of people in the

projects, solutions and services; motivation

promoting policies and objectives organization; creating an environment understanding

that encourages

and development and

provision of the structure and resources that are necessary to support the organization's current and future customer needs and expectations; and managing change. planning for the future of the organization

establish the service quality policy and citizens' charter, ensure that service quality objectives conduct management ensure the availability reviews, and of resources. and complaints handling objectives are established,

IS 15800:2007 5.1 Management Commitment maintaining and

IS 15700 requires the deep involvement of top management for establishing, implementing, continually improving a service quality management system through the following actions: a)

Establish a service quality policy, namely, the intentions and directions of the top management for the quality of services being provided by the organization. This policy should be established in consultation with the concerned levels and functions within the organization and should be consistent with the other policies of the organization. Establish a working group with representatives from stakeholders, such as, senior management, middle management, staff associations, unions, customers, suppliers and other for preparationh-evision of citizens' charter. Ensure that measurable service quality objectives and complaints handling objectives for the organization are established. For this purpose, a small committee of heads of the various sections maybe assigned the job. These are normally the quantified targets for quality of service(s), which an organization would aim to provide to its customers. It has to be ensured that these are measurable and achievable and show improving trends. Timely conduct management review meetings at defined interval with agenda as per 5.7.2 and members may include heads of various sections. Further, whatever decisions are taken, including the provision of resources, they are implemented before the conduct of next review meeting. Focus requirements are determined and are met with the aim of

b)

c)

d)

5.2 Customer

Top management shall ensure that the customer enhancing customer satisfaction. 5.2 Customer Focus

organizations depend upon their customers and therefore the success of the organization depends on understanding the current and future needs of present and potential customers and then meeting these requirements. Top management should create an environment throughout the organization which focuses on identification of its customers, their needs, regular contact with them, ensuring that their requirements are met and corrective actions are taken on their feedback for enhancing customer satisfaction. Figure 1 illustrates that the customer is the focal point of the three key aspects of a Service Quality Management System. It also illustrates that customer satisfaction can only be assured when there is harmony of interaction between the management responsibility, the personnel and material resources and the service quality management system structure.

FIG. 1 KEY ASPECTSOF A SERVICEQUALITYMANAGEMENT SYSTEM 12

IS 15800:2007

5.3 Service Quality

Policy and Citizens'

Charter

5.3.1 Top management a) b) c) d) e) f) are documented, are appropriate

shall ensure that service quality policy and citizens' charter

to the purpose of the organization, including customers and other stakeholders, improve the effectiveness of the and understood within the organization, and continually

are made available to all personnel are communicated

include a commitment to comply with requirements quality management system, and are reviewed for continuing suitability.

5.3.2 The service quality poIicy shall provide a framework objectives and complaints handling objectives. 5.3 Service Quality Policy and Citizens' Charter

for establishing

and reviewing

service quality

5.3.1 Service quality policy reflects the intentions of the top management for the service quality to all, particularly to the employees of the organization, so that they have unity of direction for the quality. Top management should use the service quality policy as a means of leading the organization toward continual improvement of its performance leading to enhanced customer satisfaction. It should be consistent with organization's overall policies and strategy. In establishing a) b) c) d) e) the service quality policy, top management should consider the;

expected or desired degree of customer development needs and expectations potential contributions

satisfaction,

of people in the organization, of other interested parties, of suppliers, and needed for the organization to be successful.

level and type of future improvement

Service quality policy should be brief, organization specific and should reflect vision and mission of the organization and should also reflect a commitment for quality, customer satisfaction and continual improvement. It has to be documented and approved by the top management. What Service Quality Policy should Include?

Service quality policy may include; a) b) c) d) e) f) g) provision of efficient and timely service to its customers, provision of enhanced continual improvement continual improvement commitment management customer satisfaction, in quality, in productivity, of employees, and continually improve the effectiveness of the quality

regular training and development

to comply with requirements system, and

fostering mutually beneficial

supplier relationship.

5.3.2 The service quality policy should, a) b) provide a framework or long-term. for establishing and reviewing service quality objectives, which can be short-term

be reviewed from time-to-time, preferably in the management review meeting to ensure its continued suitability and relevance to organization's activities keeping in view the changing customer expectations, market situations and business environment. be made available to and understood by its employees to make them aware of the service objectives of the organization and the need for adhering to the service quality policy to achieve the stated objectives. This could also be done through display at various locations in the organization including intranet, internal newsletters etc and also covered in training programmes/other meetings. 13

c)

IS 15800:2007 Some examples of Quality Policies are given in Annex L. The guidance about the details and contents to be included in the citizens' charter have been given in 7.1. 5.4 Objectives Service quality objectives and complaints handling objective shall be consistent with the service quality policy and shall be established at relevant functions and levels within the organization. All the objectives shall be measurable and documented. 5.5 When establishing a) b) c) the above policy and objectives, the following factors shall be taken into accounfi and other stakeholders; and and organizational requirements.

Input of customers Financial,

Any relevant legal, statutory and regulatory requirements; operational

5.4 Objectives Objectives are the goals to be aimed for. Quality objectives are derived from the service quality policy. Having documented the organization's objectives, these are then translated into the quality objectives for various functions (departments) and levels (hierarchy in the organization) of the organization. Further, the objectives have to be measurable and documented. Measurable objectives mean quantified parameters against which measurement comparison is made. 5.5 While setting the objectives, care should be taken that these are neither too ambitious, which are difficult to achieve even with the best efforts of all employees (as it may cause remotivation) nor should these be too low, which are very easy to achieve. It is therefore suggested that the functional objectives maybe set by `he departments themselves, which are then reviewed by the top management based on the achievements of the last year, the resources available to the department and the overall objectives of the organization. Further, these objectives should be realistic taking into consideration the financial and operational constraints. The quality objectives should not be only restricted the customers. They should also be for employees, and other stakeholders. suppliers

Though, the time norms `for various activities are quality objectives, in addition, there are number of other characteristics, like, completeness, correctness, confidentiality, security and courtesy, which should form part of quality objectives. Some examples of service quality objectives are given in Annex M. 5.6 Responsibility, Authority and Communication

5.6.1 Top management shall ensure that the responsibilities and authorities are established at relevant functions and levels, related to the scope of this standard, and communicated within the organization. 5.6 Responsibility, Authority and Communication Top

5.6.1 Responsibility defines the area in which the persons are able to act and for which they are accountable. management needs to ensure that everyone knows; a) b) c) what he is required to do (responsibility), what he is allowed to do (authority), that he understands and and authority relate to each other. how these responsibility

There is need to document the responsibilities as well as authorities of those personnel whose activities influence service quality in service quality manual. This should include ensuring effective customer/supplier relationships at all interfaces within and outside the organization. The responsibility and authority defined should be consistent with the means and methods available for achieving service quality. Further, the authorities should be commensurate with the responsibilities. The description of responsibilities and authorities should be clear so that there is no scope for any ambiguity, particularly in areas of interaction. An organization chart may also be included in the manual. The descriptions should not be elaborate or complex. It is recommended that in the service quality manual, responsibilities and authorities up to the level of middle management maybe included, and for the remaining staff, the same be described in the other documents of the departments. It is important

14

M 15800:2007 that the descriptions clearly reflect the real life situations, allow for flexibility, and are indicated by designations only, andnotby individual names. For the unit level, the responsibilities and authorities may be included in its own documentation. Responsibilities and authorities should be communicated and understood by all concerned. In a small branch/office, there maybe a need to interchange responsibilities as the employees may have to do each other's job. In such cases, these changes in responsibilities should be documented. The responsibilities and authorities should be communicated manuals, etc. i 5.6.2 Working Group for Citizens' Charter adopting various means like circulars, guidelines,

Top management shall constitute a working group for formulation of the citizens' charter. The nodal officer (see 5.6.3) at the apex level shall act as a member secretary of the working group. The working group shall include representatives from top management, middle management, staff association/unions, customers and other stakeholders. The selection of team members shall be done in a transparent manner, the details of which are accessible to public. 5.6.2.1 The responsibilities a) b) c) d) e) identifying identifying preparing of the working group shall include of the organization; with stakeholders; authority; and suitability.

all stakeholders

all key services provided by the organization; a draft citizens' charter in consultation the citizens' charter after its approval by appropriate as necessmy, based on the feedback and continuing

formally issuing/releasing reviewing and updating,

5.6.2 Working Group for Citizens' Charter For preparation of citizens' charter or revising an existing one, the top management should constitute a working group comprising representatives from all stakeholders of the organization, that is, person or group having an interest in the performance or success of the organization. The stakeholders include the management, important customers or their associations, NGOS, consumer organizations, suppliers (products or services), staff unions, officers associations, etc. An officer from senior management should normally be appointed as the chairman of the working group and appropriately senior officer (see 5.6.3) as membersecretary. This not withstanding, the organization would be at liberty to appoint other personnel as chairman and nodal officer. The selection of team members should be done in a transparent manner, the details of which should be made accessible to public, for example, through internet, newsletter, other print or visual media or any other means. 5.6.2.1 This working group has to identify all stakeholders of the organization.

The key services being provided by the organization should be identified based on the mandate given to the organization andlor any other responsibilities assigned to the organization. Identification of key services should always include the services being provided to customers and society which have a bearing on the credibility and the image of the organization. When this working group prepares a draft citizens' charter (contents in line with 7.1 of IS 15700), it should be placed for wide circulation for public comments. Based on the comments received the citizens' charter should be finalized by the working group and approved by the top management/appropriate authority. The review of citizens' charter by the working group should be done at least annually or earlier in case changes in services are contemplated. The review should be breed on the feedback received and continuing suitability of the provisions of citizens' charter. The feedback may include the results of audits, extent of compliance to objectives, suggestion schemes, customers feedback, output of management review meetings, existing legal, regulatory and statutory requirements, etc. This revised citizens' charter should preferably be re-approved from the same authority that approved it initially.

15

IS 15800:2007

5.6.3 Nodcl 0j6cer 5.6.3.1 Nodal oflcer at apex level Top management shall appoint a member of its management as a nodal officer at apex level who, irrespective of other responsibilities, shall have responsibilities and authority, which include: a) b) c) d) e) ensuring that processes needed for the service, service delivery, citizens' charter and complaints handling are established, implemented and maintained; acting as member-secretary of the working group (see 5.6.2) for formulation of the citizens' charter; which have a acting as public grievance officer and reporting to top management significant impact on the organization; of any complaints

regularly reporting to the top management on the performance of the service quality, citizens' charter and complaints handling with recommendations for improvement; and devising mechanism for obtaining feedback and internal quality audit (see 8.3).

NOTES 1 The responsibilityof the nodal officer at apex level may also include liaison with the certifying body. 2 While nodal officer at apex level shall be responsiblefor the above, he may take the help of other officer in the organization,if required,on account of administrativeexigenciesor in public interest. 5.6.3 Nodal O@cer 5.6.3.1 Nodal oficer at apex level

The top management should appoint an appropriately senior level officer as nodal officer at apex level who would also be responsible (accountable) for establishing, implementing and maintaining all the processes within the organization that are required for service and service delivery, citizens' charter and complaints handling. The nodal officer appointed should have the required authority (power cr right given to a person to take actions and make decisions) to ensure proper establishing, implementation and maintaining of above mentioned processes. Typical activities involved wherein the nodal officer has the responsibility and authority are given below: a) As member secretary for the working group, he/she will oversee the formulation and upkeep of the citizens' charter. and periodic review

b) He/She will also act as public grievance officer (PGO). c) He/She liaise with the various departments and the top management by regularly reporting on the performance of the service quality, citizens' charter and complaints handling with recommendations for improvement and about any complaints which might have a significant impact on the organization. He/She should devise suitable mechanism for obtaining feedback for continual improvement organizing internal quality audit for identifying the gap areas for strengthening the QMS. and

d) e)

He/She will also be responsible for maintaining liaison with the external certification body. During the discharge of his various duties, the nodal officer can take assistance from other officer in the organization, if needed.

5.6.3.2 Nodal offwer at unit level Where an organization is providing services through its different units, the top management shall ensure the appointment of a nodal officer at unit level, who, irrespective of other responsibilities, shall a) b) c) ensure that processes needed for the service, service delivery, citizens' charter and complaints handling are implemented and maintained; act as public grievance officer; and report regularly to the nodal oftlcer at the apex level, on the performance of the service quality, citizens' charter and complaints handling with recommendations for improvement.

5.6.3.2 Nodal oficer at unit level In case of large organizations where an organization is providing services through its different branches/units,

16

IS 15800:2007 the top management should appoint a nodal officer at each unit level also who will be responsible for the implementation and maintenance of all the above referred processes within the branch/unit and will also act as PGO for that branch/unit. Apart from this, he/she should regularly tlirough normal reporting channels, provide inputs to the nodal officer at the apex level on the performance of the service quality, feedback on citizens' charter and complaints handling process including receipt of any complaint which might have a significant impact on the organization or branch/ unit, with recommendations for improvement. Frequency of reporting by the nodal officer at unit level depends upon the size, structure, nature of activities and kind of input required by the organization. The reporting mechanism should be dovetailed with the existing reporting systems and channels. 5.6.4 Internal Communication Top management shall ensure that appropriate communication processes are. established within the organization so that effective communication takes place for the various processes related to service, citizens' charter and complaints handling. 5.6.4 Internal Communication Good and effective communication is essential for the proper implementation of Quality Management System and also for obtaining feedback on its effectiveness. A proper internal system of communication needs to be established at all levels so that required information reaches the right person at the right time. Information should be clear and appropriate to the person receiving it and especially for personnel at customer interface who should be fully equipped with relevant information and resources necessary to deliver services for the total customer satisfaction. The organization's top management should ensure that there are communication processes different organization levels, as well as horizontally, through different areas and departments, information related to the effectiveness of the Quality h4anagement System. vertically, at the in order to share

Top management should ensure establishment of processes for determining the different types of information that needs to be communicated, the persons who will be receiving the communication and then decide the means or methods of communication that will be used within the organization. Any communication process should be able to: a) b) c) send and receive information ensure no information quickly between sender and receiver.

is lost or distorted during the process of sending and receiving.

build trust between sender and receiver. within the organization can include information relating to opportunity customer satisfaction index/results of surveys, shortfall in performance that could be adopted are: for improvement processes, etc. in

The communication business processes,

Some of the methods of communication a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) Formal and informal meetings, Circulars, Notice boards, E-mail, Suggestion Newsletters, Monthly production Intranet, etc. Review scheme,

plans/schedules,

and

5.7 Management

5.7.1 Top management shall review the organization's management systems for service quality, citizens' charter and complaints handling at planned intervals to ensure their continuing suitability, adequacy, efllciency and effectiveness. This review shall include assessing opportunities for improvement and the need for changes, including the service quality policy and objectives. Records of management reviews shall be maintained (see 4.4).

17

IS 15800:2007 5.7 Management Review

5.7.1 In order to meet the customer's needs and ensure implementation of the service quality systems, citizens' charter and complaint handling system including various related processes, a structured top management review should be carried out at regular intervals which should include the following aspects: a) b) c) d) Review of the implementation of the quality objectives citizens' charter is the key input for this review. The shortfall from the planned achievements as laid down in the service quality policy and to be identified. along with schedule

to the actual achievements

Institution of corrective and preventive actions for the shortfall/gap of implementation and responsibility.

in achievement

The systems for service quality should be reviewed with respect to being adequate for the current needs and their effectiveness in delivering service quality to the customer. The steps required to increase the efficiency of such processes also to be examined. Review should be conducted at regular intervals with a structured agenda and followed by records and action plan. Initially, the reviews could be more frequent, say quarterly, and may be less frequent after the system stabilizes. However, many organizations have two management reviews in a year and ensure that all the inputs as in 5.7.2 are covered in one year. The review should be chaired by the chief executive of the public service organization all heads of the functional departments. to complete management on review process. and attended by

e)

f)

!3) The nodal officer should coordinate 5.7.2 The input to management a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) j)

review shall include information

follow-up actions from previous reviews, results of audit, customer feedback including changing customer results of customer satisfaction surveys, requirements, are achieved, actions, and

feedback from other stakeholders, extent to which objectives review of processes recommendations status of preventive/corrective

performance, for improvement.

5.7.2 The organization needs to focus on the expectations of the customer and continuously strive to improve the service quality systems. The Management Reviews should aim on the above and be based on the following data/ information collected and analyzed from various processes. a) b) Follow-up actions from previous reviews -- The action taken report of the previous reviews to be included as an agenda point and corrective actions for any slippages to be instituted. Results of audit -- The trends of the non-compliances observed in internal and external audits conducted and corrective actions on major areas of weakness including potential areas for non-conformances arrived at. Customer feedback including results of customer satisfaction surveys -- The customer focus should be the prime objective of the public service organization and feedbacks in form of customer complaints, customer satisfaction surveys, suggestions from the customers should all be captured and actions instituted for meeting the expectations of the customers. Changing customer requirements -- In a fast changing business scenario, the customer requirements and expectations undergo changes very fast. The perceptions and expectations of the customers need to be gathered by the organization/marketing groups and the required changes in the quality system for service delivery need to be incorporated. This should also include new services being provided by the organization in addition to the existing services. Feedbackfrom other stakeholders -- The other stakeholders like employees, Government, unions, etc who have stakes in the services being provided by the organization should also be considered as important source for feedback leading to continual improvement of the service quality being provided. 18

c)

d)

e)

IS 15800:2007 f) Extent row/~idz objectives areachieved-The acllievementofservice quality objectives isthe keyinput for the management review. The objectives need to be very closely monitored for achievement and actions instituted for any shortfall. The service quality objectives also need to be reviewed for their continued relevance to the processes and upgraded on a regular basis to meet the customer's expectations. Status of preventive/corrective Review of processes Recommendations actions. performance. for improvement.

g) h) j)

The various processes involved in the service quality delivery to be monitored on the key process parameters for the achievement of targets. Such reviews should result in a positive recommendation for further enhancing the quality of the services being provided. The review should not only focus on the corrections but also on long-term corrective actions for sustained performance of the various processes. The inputs from (a) to (j) identified for the management reviews are the mandatory inputs identified in the standard. However, any other areas which are felt necessary to attain high quality levels of the service delivery may also be taken up in the review process. 5.7.3 Review output shall include any decisions and actions related to a) b) c) d) improvement improvement in service quality standards; in customer satisfaction;

improvement in the management systems for service quality, citizens' charter and complaints handling; and resource needs.

5.7.3 The output of management reviews should focus on improvement in service quality standards and customer satisfaction by way of constantly upgrading the service quality objectives and citizens' charter and be prepared with clear cut action plan, assigned responsibility and time frame for completion. In case any augmentation of additional resources is required to implement the actions of the management review, suitable provisions for the same should also be made. The nodal officer needs to follow up the various actions of the management reviews to ensure that the same are completed as envisaged. 6 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT for effective implementation of management handling. The resources shall include human

6.1 The organization shall determine and provide resources systems for service quality, citizens' charter and complaints resources, infrastructure and work environment. 6 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT

6.1 Resource management is the efficient and effective deployment of organization's resources when and where they are needed. Such resources may include infrastructure, information systems, training, technology, financial, human, work environment and other resources specific to the services and service delivery processes. The identification of the needs regarding proper resource management should involve inputs from the employees, customers and other stakeholdcrs. This can be done through mechanism like feedbacks, meetings, suggestions, etc. Resource allocations should consider both the current and future needs of an organization. While allocating resources an organization should take into account the benefits as well as the cost involved in providing resources for its various service and service delivery processes. 6.2 The organization a) b) c) d) shall ensure that the personnel are:

selected on the basis of capability

to salisfy defined job specifications, and the objectives to be achieved which have a

trained to ensure that they understand the tasks to be performed including how they contribute to the achievement of objectives, aware of their responsibilities including promptly significant impact on the organization, and aware of procedures to be followed and information 19 reporting

on complaints/feedback

to be given to the customers.

IS 15800:2007

6.2.1 The training records shall be maintained 6.2 a)

(see 4.4)

Capable personnel are vital source for any organization. The organization should select the right human resource to ensure that the organization functions smoothly and is able to fulfil the needs of the customer. The organization should determine the level of knowledge, qualification, experience to carry out the job successfully. This should be the part of the job description. and skills needed

Capability of the personnel are their demonstrated ability to apply knowledge and skills. A person becomes capable through a combination of education, training, skills and experience to accomplish the designated job. Persons assigned to carry out the various activities need to be capable to carry out that activity especially in a small organization where many persons have multiple responsibilities. After determining the qualification, experience and skills of the persons, the same should be matched with the job specification to identify gaps between them. The organization should take necessary action, like, providing training to upgrade the capability of the person to meet the job specification. b) Training in an organization should always be an on-going activity. Training should be planned taking into considerations the requirements of the job and the requirements of the organization. The employees should be trained to understand the importance of achieving the objectives and targets and how these are to be met with. Training to the employees may be on the job, or through external means. Training can also be job specific or general in nature. General training could include training on service quality management system requirements (organization's vision, mission, policies and objectives), good housekeeping, quality improvement, team building, leadership and managerial skills, behaviourial skills, communication skills, problem solving, creativity and innovation, etc. should ensure that the personnel working for and on behalf of the organization are aware of their role and responsibilities within the service quality management systems, and the importance of promptly reporting on complaints/feedback. The personnel should also be made aware of the consequences of the departure from the applicable service quality requirements and the associated impact on the credibility and image of the organization. The organization should also ensure that the personnel especially at the customer interface are familiar with the procedures to be followed and have the requisite information to be provided to the customers. This could be ensured through on the job training or through counseling, meetings, etc. training plan, training provided and
An organization

c)

d)

6.2.1 The training records which should include training need identification, the effectiveness of the training imparted, should be maintained. 6.2.2 The organization a) b) c) d) e) shall ensure that the personnel, as specified; in a courteous manner; enquiry/complaint; and skills.

who are in direct contact with the customers

are available and accessible, respond promptly

are sensitized to treat customers to customer's

provide accurate, updated and complete information; possess good interpersonal and good communication

6.2.2 Visibility and access are the two major consideration for service quality. The operations of the organization should be visible to the customers. The customers also expect easy access to services of the organization, for example, the telephone response should be such that the customer does not have to wait for a longer time. The organization should ensure that the right person is available to customer for his/her requirements on the first or second try. The persons coming in contact with customer should be thoroughly trained in dealing with people that is, in interpersonal and communication skills. The courteous behaviour and responsiveness (quick response) should be major parameters on which the employees should be trained. 6.3 Infrastructure and Work Environment and work environment necessary

The orgamzatlon shall determine, provide and maintain the infrastructure F for achieving service quality and complaints handling.
20

IS 15800:2007 6.3 Infrastructure and Work Environment

Infrastructure is defined as a system of facilities, equipment and services needed for the operation of an organization. Infrastructure includes the basic facilities, equipment, installations, offices, working areas, telecommunication, computer networks, office furniture, software, transportation system, utilities like power, water, etc. The organization should identify the type of infrastructure required as needed for achieving service quality and complaints handling objectives. The organization should also review the existing infrastructure and provide for the additional requirements as identified from time-to-time. It is also necessary to maintain the infrastructure in operational condhion to ensure it gives the desired output and is able to deliver services that meet customer requirements. This usually includes preventive and corrective maintenance schedules and a replacement policy for old and out dated infrastructure. Work environment is the set of conditions under which work is performed. Work environment involves the human and physical factors under which people operate. Physical factors include space, facilities, safety rules and guidance, working conditions like temperature, humidity, noise, lighting, cleanliness, sanitation, hygiene, ergonomic, pollution hazards, etc. The ergonomic factors related to the facilities and equipments used by the personnel of the public service organizations or the customer/citizens includes area, distribution and functionality of the spaces, adequacy of the furniture and work equipment, access for physically challenged, signaling and visual support, etc. Other reIevant work environment factors could be psychological -- social factors such as positive work environment within the public service organization that is, the trust, team work and motivation among the employees. Identified factors should be controlled and necessary actions should be taken to improve them.

The service organization should implement feedback mechanisms that allow information, proposals and suggestions from personnel and customers/citizens to contribute improving the work environment. 7 CITIZENS' 7.1 Citizens' CHARTER, Charter SERVICE PROVISION AND COMPLAINTS HANDLING

7.1.1 The citizens' charter shall contain a) b) c) vision and mission statement of the organization, list of key service(s) being offered by the organization, and available to the customer for measurable service standards for the service(s) provided and remedies non-compliance to the standards.

7.1.2 The citizens' charter shall a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) represent a systematic be non-discriminatory; describe or refer to complaints be periodically handling process; include the name, address, telephone number and other contact details of the public grievance officer; reviewed for updation and continual improvement; of the organization from its customers, wherever required; and on the date of issue of the citizens' charter and who all were consulted during its highlight expectations provide information preparation CHARTER, Charter effort of the organization to focus on its commitment towards its customers;

be simple and easy understandable

and also printed in local languages,

as required;

7 CITIZENS' 7.1 Citizens'

SERVICE

PROVISION

AND COMPLAINTS

HANDLING

The basic objective of the citizens' charter is to empower the citizen in relation to public service delivery. Under current Indian conditions, purpose of citizens' charter can be stated as: a) Specifying what citizens can expect and how to act if the specifications/standards are not met,

21

IS 15800:2007 b) c) d) e) f) Enhancing tmnsparency ofrules/procedures/schemes, as faraspossible accountability fortheservice they desire, offered and rendered to

Specify ingchoices

available tothecitizens and organizational

Showing how the services offered are a good value for money, Clarifying individual public, and Indicating conditions systems for services

that public needs to fulfil in order to avail of the services offered. of their citizens' charters:

The following key issues need to be addressed for effective implementation a) b)

The need for citizens and staff to be consulted at crucial stages of charter formulation; Orientation of staff about the salient features and goals/objectives of the charter; vision and mission statement of the department; and skills such as team building, problem solving, handling of grievances and communication skills and earmarking of specific budgets for awareness generation and orientation of staffl The need for wider publicity of the charter through print media, posters, banners, brochures, local newspapers, etc and also through electronic media; and The need for creation of database on consumer grievances effective and replication of best practices in this field. and for redressal leaflets, handbills,

c) d)

to make the charter more

A Road Map showing the action steps that maybe a) b) c) d) Formation

taken to formulate a citizens charter are given below: of nodal officers; (especially at the business interface level) and their

of working group and appointment of all stakeholders with clients/stakeholders/staff associations; of draft charter for comments/suggestions;

Identification Consultation representative Preparation 1) 2)

and major services to be provided by organization;

Circulation Modification

and

of charter to include suggestions.

e) f) g) h) j)

Consideration

of the charter by working group; authority; and of charter and putting up on website;

Approval by the appropriate Formal issue/release Appointment

Sending copies to citizens groups and all stakeholders;

of a nodal officer to ensure effective implementation.

Citizens' charter is a tool to improve service delivery and to reduce dissatisfaction of the citizen/consumer/ customer with the quality of service offered by a public organization. The following guidelines should therefore be useful: a) b) c) d) To be useful, the charter must be simple, and easy to understand; h4erely announcing through interaction the charter will not change the way we function. It is important and training for generating a responsive climate; to create conditions

Indicate clearly, that while these are not justifiable, the commitments enshrined nature of a promise to be fulfilled with oneself and with the user; and Separate charters can be framed for distinct services.

in the charter are in the

7.LI Citizens' Charter -- General Structure Guidelines The following should be included in a charter: a) b) c) d) e) f) Vision and mission statements; A brief statement regarding the services offered; Passenger amenities Details of clients and the services provided to each client group; Public interface of the service concerned to be addressed (for example, Reservation, by railways, Mail delivery, Premium services by post, etc); Commitment to standards (Time frame, Quality of service, etc); The staff at the service interface: 22

IS 15800:2007 1) 2) 3) 4) g) h) What to expect from them? Where are they located? Keeping citizens informed: What information do they need? If things go wrong (remedial measures): What could go wrong?; Whom to contact?; What to expect to set it right? deliver better services? Expectations and how to access it? from the clients; and

How citizens can help the organization

Details of grievance redressal mechanism

7.1.2 What Makes a Good Charter? The elements of a good charter can be said to be: a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) j) Focus on customer requirements, Simple language, Service standards, Effective remedies, Training, Delegation, Feedback mechanism, Close monitoring, Periodic review. and

An example of a model format for citizens' charter is given at Annex N and action guide for citizens' charter is given at Annex P. 7.2 Service Provision rhe organization a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) j) shall take into account expectations of the customer

ensure that services being provided by the organization and regulatory requirements;

ensure that the service delivery processes are in line with the objectives defined by the organization; assure the quality of the products and/or services purchased and/or outsourced, quality; ensure availability of procedures/work instructions, information, wherever implementation so that service delivery processes are carried out as specified; ensure availability and use of suitable equipment, monitoring and measuring which affects its service necessary, devices; and their

ensure calibration or verification of measuring equipment at specified intervals, or prior to use, wherever necessary; identify the verification status of the service or service delivery process at relevant stages; identify, verify, protect and safeguard the customer property, whenever provided by the customer for its use in service; and ensure implementation charter. of monitoring and measurement including time norms as specified in the citizens'

7.2 Service Provision a) It should be recognized that public services need to balance the interests of the immediate customers of the organizations and the citizen or society at large, which may be significantly different. Specific interests may also vary between different customer groups. Many organizations have to discharge several statutory/regulatory functions which may constitute a substantive part of their overall activities, for example all actions related to investigations, raids and detention by police, market enforcement functions by controller of weights and measures etc. Others maybe primarily delivering pure services with some statutory powers, for example, electric power distribution companies whose primary responsibility is to supply uninterrupted power, attendance of complaints but they are empowered to conduct search and seizure for misuse which is a statutory function. 23

IS 15800:2007 As a first step, the statutory/regulatory functions of the organization should be segregated from the other service functions. It is implicit when addressing statutory/regulatory functions that the interest of the society is paramount and compliance of regulatory requirements should therefore be strictly adhered to. However, even while discharging these functions, norms for service dimensions such as fairness, timeliness, courtesy, transparency, confidentiality, security must be established, demonstrated and monitored. Informing the affected person or group of persons of their rights with respect to the regulations is a proactive and positive strategy that would assist in improving the degree of assurance associated with the service. Where interactions with a wide spectrum of customer groups lead to perceptions of redundancy of existing regulations, or any conflict of interest, the organization may, where it lies within its scope, initiate action in consultation with all stakeholders for the amendment to regulations through a widely consultative process. Every public service organization should determine through interactions with its customers (users of services) their expectation of excellence for each dimension of service being consumed by them. The significant dimensions that may be addressed are: 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) tangibles, reliability, security); assurance, associated with the service that bear on the quality of service being delivered; service dependably and accurately (including

that is, ability to perform the promised

which includes credibility of service provider, knowledge that is, willingness with the customers; to help, accessibility and

and competence personnel

of personnel; of

responsiveness, communicating

of relevant

and methods

empathy, which is the human element associated with the service delivery and includes the need of being heard and attended to with dignity and understanding.

b)

It is necessary that the service quality objectives (together with the service quality standards) are communicated to all levels within the organization and especially to those who are responsible for planning the processes and for their monitoring. Where overall organizational objectives have been established, it is also necessary to establish appropriate functional level objectives that would individually and interactively contribute to the attainment of organizational objectives. This could imply targets and goals for individual units as well as personnel in key positions. The application of process approach and systems approach to management is of paramount importance in the services sector. This is because unlike products, services have special attributes that necessitate a very high degree of control over the internal processes that lead and converge upon the interface processes (for special attributes of services see 3.11). It is therefore necessary that each public interface process should not only be adequately supported by the back-end processes but the sequencing and timing of each input should also be synchronized to meet the flow of service delivery to the consumer. The planning for the processes may also include the variations in service output (see 3.11). Having defined the service quality objectives, the planning for service realization processes can be done by; 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7) 8) 9) a process map showing sequence and interaction identification of relevant process owners. for each process. of processes.

process inputs and their origins, process outputs and their destination. resource requirements objectives of the process. monitors and controls applied. performance indicators and applied measurements. and results. targets for quality for deliverables. record of activities undertaken

c)

In order to deliver the requisite services, organizations have to purchase both tangible products as well as services. Examples of products could include stationary, softSvare, equipment etc, while services could be purchased in the form of security, cleaning, maintenance services. Wherever the quality of service is likely to affect the quality of service deliverable, it is necessary to exercise control on processes related to selection of supplier and purchasing which may include verification of purchased product or services. Monitoring systems for the quality of purchased products could include vendor rating.

24

IS 15800:2007 It should be realized that purchase or outsourcing of service that integrates with or supplements the services of the organization has to be treated separately from the normal controls exercised on the quality of products or services purchased as inputs to internal processes. The outsourccd services are rendered on behalf of the organization and the liability for any action arising out of deficient service would rest with the organization. This becomes critical when legal requirements are also to be complied with as may be applicable to public service organizations. In such cases, a Service Level Agreement (SLA) must be entered into with the outsourced service supplier establishing the exact nature of service and the service standards required, together with performance guarantees and liability clauses. The SLAS should be constantly reviewed. The empanelment of tax return preparers by income tax department is an example of such outsourced service. d) Availability of information flow is vital in a service delivery organization as the quality of service is largely dependent on the knowledge, competence of the person at the interface and the information available to him to deal with the individual customer or situation. Knowledge is classified into `Implicit knowledge' which incorporates the culture or core values of the organizations and the personal skills of the individual; and `Explicit knowledge' which emanates from established manuals, procedures, work instructions and information systems. While implicit knowledge is a subject of human resource development, the explicit knowledge is part of the systems approach to management which can be controlled through organizational routines. In a public service organization, knowledge of legal requirements, customer's rights, operational procedures including financial, procedures and code of conduct and complaint/appeals mechanism assumes greater importance and is a subject of training. Simultaneously where public handling or public information systems are concerned, the dealing person should be provided with a constant flow of relevant information, both procedural as well as data (such as for enquiry services) which need to be provided as part of the service or is essential for correct rendering of service. The service quality manual, procedures, work instructions should be prepared to provide the vital information needed by the service provider at the point of service delivery as well as for persons associated with the enabling processes. It should be ensured that these documents are available to the concerned person at the required location, at the time required by him and in the form understood by him. Where computer network facilitate information flow, easy access to information should be available both to the service provider and where interactive media is used, to the customer. As a policy, the organization may also decide to place the manuals and procedural documentation for the general knowledge of the public which helps in generating goodwill, credibility, accountability as well as in minimizing public contact. e) & f) The requirement for equipment should be considered to the extent it has a bearing on the quality of service being rendered at the interface (for example, computers, networks, weighing scales in a post office). Such equipment need to be subjected to a laid down preventive maintenance and verification schedule, which may include, as relevant, calibration of measuring equipment at defined intervals. Information security, where public information is being stored and handled should be considered an area of high importance and adequate safeguards (for example, firewalls, anti-virus software, back-ups) must be installed. There are several tangibles associated with the service that should be verified before releasing into the service flow and whose status should be known both to the authority releasing the tangible and the one receiving it to prevent unintended supply. Such tangibles may include information, forms, publications, utilities (such as drinking water), and equipment (such as gas cylinders). Several public services involve the retention of vital customer property with the service provider as a part of the overall service deliverable. Examples include, money deposits, vault services, transportation of personal effects (letters, parcels, baggage), original documents pledged for mortgage, personal records and information, etc. The organization should devise procedures and provide resources to safeguard the customer property for the entire duration it would remain in its custody against all anticipated hazards (for example theft, fire, environmental decay, virus attack). Individuals should be made responsible as far as possible for the custody and the protection of the customer property. Procedures should include returning the customer property, where applicable, as soon as requirements for its retention are over. Service standards should be monitored through internal resources as well as through customer perception surveys. However the internal monitors should be integrated into the workflow as far as possible to nvoid their becoming a resource constraint. Time monitors can be set through supervisory controls or internal customer feedback or through computer software where relevant. Monitoring for performance 25

g)

h)

j)

IS 15800:2007 accuracy of service and associated tangibles can also be done through supervisors and internal customers as well as bytheperson at the interface where deficiencies areobserved directly byhimor pointed out by the customer. Monitors for tangibles can be set up through inspection schedules with defined responsibilities. Most of the other service attributes such as courtesy, willingness to help, responsiveness, accessibility, fairness, security, confidentiality, knowledge and competence of employees can be monitored through customer feedback systems or surveys. These have to be instituted as proactive activities and ensured that they reflect customer expectations and perceptions reliably. Measurements should be conducted for the identified performance indicators and not necessarily for all monitors in place. The exact information sources, the type of data, persons responsible for its capturing and processing, the method of data analysis, its periodicity, the manner in which the analyzed data shall be used and the channels of its communication should be laid down for each measurement. Where customer feedback is taken on a continuous basis, consideration should be given to the design of the format, ease of interpretation, method of drawing attention of the intended customers, prevention of influencing responses by the employees, protecting anonymity if requested, reliable communication channel of feedback to internal resource persons. All measurements being measured. should be validated for their robustness and for accurate representation of the attribute

For customer surveys, the organization may identify the key service attributes relevant to its specific nature of activities and type of clientele for each of the above service dimensions. The demographic spread of the survey, the sample sizes, the periodicity, the method of data collection, the attributes being measured, the measurement scale should also be specified. The determination should be quantitative preferably measured on a 5 or 7 point scale and taken over a significantly large sample representative of all groups of customers. The average results for each service attribute should then be compared with actual perceptions from different categories of customers of the service being rendered by the organization based on their experiences. These gaps in service quality should be taken as reference for setting service standards and objectives for improvement. 7.3 Complaints Handling

The organization shall establish a documented procedure for complaint handling process. Various steps in the complaints handling process shall include the following: a) b) Identification redress; of complaint prone areas in a systematic manner and determine the time norms for their

Providing information concerning complaints handling process in clear language and formats accessible to all. Such information shall include: 1) 2) 3) where and how the complaints minimum information can be made, and will be closed;

to be provided by complainant,

time limits within which the complaint

c)

Widely publicizing the information about complaints handling process through print, web and other media. The name, address, telephone number and other contact details of the public grievance officer of the organization shall also be displayed prominently at the reception and other convenient places in the organization; Unique identification of the complaint and recording necessary information including relevant details of complaint, remedy requested, due date of redress, relevant data related to the complaint and immediate action to be taken (if any); Scrutiny of the complaint and its categorization and severity; as critical, major or minor depending upon its seriousness

d)

e) f)

Acknowledgement of each complaint promptly giving the complaint number along with an indication of the redress time and the name, designation and telephone number of the employee to be contacted for all future correspondence; Investigation of relevant circumstances and information relating to the complaint. The level of investigation shall be commensurate with the seriousness and severity of the complaint. If the complaint

g)

26

IS 15800:2007

cannot be immediately resolved, it shall be dealt in a manner which would lead to its effective redress as soon as possible and the complainant shall be intimated; h) Communication of the decision to the complainant regarding his complaint immediately after the decision is taken and getting his feedback. In case the decision is not in line with the remedy requested by the complainant, the justification for the decision taken along with alternative internal and external recourse available for appeal shall also be intimated and the complaint shall then be closed; and Nominating respond. `Ombudsman' who could be approached if normal service delivery mechanism does not

j)

7.3 Complaints

Handling

The terms complaint and grievance have been used synonymously in IS 15700 (as well as in guideline document) and the implementing organization may use the term applicable to them. Complaints are an expression of dksatisfaction, whether they are oral or in writing, about the service or actions of an agency or its staff as well as the complaint handling process itself affecting an individual or group. It can also concern a failure by an organization to comply with its service standards in its citizen charter or other pledges made by the organization regarding services it provides to the public. Various efforts are undertaken on a continual basis to ensure quality services; but in reality there is always the possibility of service failures arising out of service standards not met or when pledges made in the citizen charters are not fulfilled. When there is a service failure or deficiency in any aspect of service delivery, a good complaint redressal system will readily provide essential feedback on the quality of services provided to rectify any gaps in service delivery. In doing so, there is also the need to assure the citizens that their complaints are taken seriously and that the complaints are resolved in a responsive and timely manner to the satisfaction of the users. Hence to ensure customer satisfaction, the organization should institutionalize a good service recovery system through effectively handling of complaints. For example, online web-enabled system for lodging of complaints/grievances, like the Public Grievances Redress and Monitoring System (PGRMS) developed by National Informatics Centre (NIC) in association with Department of Administrative Reform and Public Grievances (DARPG), would ensure online availability of complaint redressal system to the citizen and also help in creating database for analysis of complaints. The purpose of the complaints a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) handling mechanism can be broadly defined as follows:

Citizens have a right to complain Organizations

and seek redress for a decision that is unfair or wrong;

can identify areas that need improvement;

It is a valuable tool for collecting information about specific complaints and their trends and for providing feedback to the organization; Effective complaints management can promote customer satisfaction; a situation that can be resource-intensive They save money and time by resolving problems internally, close to the source; They can prevent complaints from escalating and multiplying, and lead to adverse publicity; They are fundamental to good administrative It is a part of good governance. with any

practice for the public service; and

Public complaints may include complaints made by members of the public on their dissatisfaction service delivery process including administrative action such as: a) b) c) d) e) f) g) unjusthot in accordance with the existing laws and regulations,

causing excessive delays in service delivery, abuse of power, mal administration, ineffective service delivery, lack of transparency and discrimination in the delivery of the services, and service devoid of any courtesy and humzn touch.

At times, someone may make a comment that highlights a part of the service that could be improved, and may not be termed as a complaint. Thus, a feedback can be a complaint but could also take the form of a compliment or suggestion. 27

IS 15800:2007 Complaints serve as valuable sources of information that organizations use to assess their performance and improve programmed service delivery. It is a well-known and established fact that only a few dissatisfied clients bother to complain. Thus, for every disgruntled client, there are many more who do not complain although they may be in a similar predicament. It is also generally acknowledged that many of these complaints could have been resolved quickly and efficiently at the `point of service' where front line staff is interacting with the users. To ensure that this takes place, staff should be delegated the required authority and motivated to settle complaints at their level. The Head of Department should take the decision regarding the category of complaints that can be handled at the `point of service'. Quite often, the complaints are received orally or face-to-face at customer interface. For 10 simple steps to deal with such complaints, refer to Annex Q. It may be desirable to have routine or less complex complaints heard and dealt with where they originate, while complaints on more complex decisions may require review by a senior manager or committee from that of the original decision maker. The trust and confidence of the public on the public complaints system depends on the management of complaints in a systematic way and that they are resolved fairly, efficiently and within a reasonable time frame. For establishing and documenting a procedure on complaints handling, guidance may be drawn from 1S/1S0 10002. While scrutinizing the complaint, it should be categorized as critical, major or minor as defined below: a) Critical: On the basis of objective scrutiny, if it is observed that the complaint leads to doubts about the credibility and image of the organization and the declarations made by the organization in the citizen charter or otherwise, are of no value then the complaint should be categorized as critical. Majon The absence of, or failure to implementor maintain one or more requirements of a key service or service delivery process, or a situation that leads to doubts about the quality of the service being provided by the organization. Minor: Not having adequately maintained one or more requirements of service or service delivery process or a situation that leads to doubts regarding the assurance of quality of services being provided by the organization.

b)

c)

One major confidence building measure for customers is the publicity on how well the organization has managed the complaints. In service delivery, it is hard to undo the damage done. It can best be compensated by a damage control exercise which in most of the cases of service delivery is not possible. This publicity for the management of complaints can be a powerful tool of public accountability. By publicizing the complaints and the results thereon through a public report, the organization can inform the public about the effectiveness of its complaint management system. The organization a) b) c) d) needs to publish information on complaints received periodically and it should include:

Numbers and types/categories

of complaints, to improve services, and

Average redressal time for complaints, Action taken as a result of complaints Complaints resolved and pending. MONITORING, MEASUREMENT AND IMPROVEMENT

8 IMPLEMENTATION, 8.1 Implementation The organization a) b) c) d) e) shall

establish single-window set up information status, etc;

system at points of public contact to facilitate disposal of applications; centres and help-lines for information on procedures, application

and facilitation

widely publicize the citizens' charter through organization's stakeholders; prominently display the citizens' charter in the organization;

web site, media and sending copies to all and relating to citizens' charter in

publish annually the data relating to performance viz-a-viz commitment the annual report or by some other suitable means.

28

IS 15800:2007 8.1 Implementation The public service organization should set up a single window system/counter(s) at points of public contact to facilitate disposal of applications. The personnel positioned at these points should have the latest information, be familiar with the overall working of the organization and be able to address the service related issues for their final disposal. These points may also act as informationlfacilitation centres and the required information, formats, pamphlets describing the features of the service and expectations of the citizens should be available at these points. The dealing personnel should be aware of documents/information required, methodology for filling up the application forms comprehensively. Based on the time estimates for the work to be done they should provide information to public about the tentative dates for processing and final disposal of application. For this sufficient number of counters, information kiosks, computer terminals should be provided and they should remain functional through out the working hours. Specific deliverables against the requirements of citizens charter are monitored and the data relating to the performance is easily made available in the hard copies and soft copy at a reasonable and affordable price/cost. The annual report with respect to commitments made and service delivered is published and available through the website, newspapers, other periodicalslpublications. Any querry/complaints from the citizen, should be handled by one nodal officer and his/her name and contact details should be described in the acknowledgementlweb based query system. In order to ensure fail-safe and mistake proof system of delivery standby arrangements should be built into the system. For the transparency of the transaction, close circuit cameras and other similar technologies should be deployed and the status of compliance/grievances should be publicly displayed/available on website of the organization. 8.2 Monitoring and Measurement shall monitor and measure:

8.2.1 The organization a)

the characteristics of the service and service delivery processes to verify that the service quality objectives and service standards have been met. This shall also be carried out at all stages and locations where the organization has an interface with the customer; the performance, namely, commitment made in the citizens' charter and complaints handling procedure on a regular basis and report to top management with recommendations for improvement; and the working of the complaints handling machinery through random checks. shall be regularly examined by the

b) c)

8.2.1.1 In addition, the editor's/grievance column of the local newspapers organization for picking up cases, as appropriate. 8.2.1.2 Records of the evidence of conformity 8.2.2 Customer Satisfaction shall be maintained

(see 4.4).

The organization shall establish and implement a system for measuring customer satisfaction designed methodology. This information shall be used for continual improvement. 8.2 Monitoring and Measurement

through suitably

For ensuring efficiency of the services of the Public Service Organization (PSO), the performance measurement criteria need to be defined and regularly monitored in terms of objectives, targets, time frames for processing, currency/accuracy of information, standardization of work practices, referencing to manuals, etc. Methodology for identification of the work done by a particular public servant also needs to be defined. The PSO should develop a system of internal monitoring of the delivery of the service to the required service standards at each and every stage, work station, location, office and counter. For doing this, the organization may choose to employ service monitors who will interact with the public to find out the degree of their satisfaction and the grievance, if any. The service quality standard shall be prominently displayed and employees shall be motivated to continually meet these standards. Wherever feasible timers and other technological devices shall be installed to measure and publicly announce the performance versus standards, The service monitors should submit the results of the monitoring 29 to the top management on regular basis. This

IS 15800:2007 could be twice a day, twice a week or such frequency depending transaction and the criticality of the service transaction. Through surprise checks/supervision should be checked. The organization service delivery system. upon the type of service, volume of service

the efficacy of complaint handling and grievance may consider using dummy citizens for checking

redressal mechanism the efficacy of entire

Provision should be made for proactive actions based on the newspaper reports. Also provisions for suo-moto cognizance of any adverse condition/situation/fault/defect in the entire system of service delivery to the citizens should be made and monitored for effectiveness. For evidence of conformity to the laid down service quality standards in the form of time records, copies/list of the documents/information handed over and pending to be handed over should be kept including the name and contact details of the citizen/members of the public seeking the information and nodal officer responsible for providing the information/delivering the requisite service. For guidance on measurement 8.3 Internal Quality Audit of customer satisfaction, IS 15610 should be referred.

The organization shall conduct internal audits at planned intervals to determine whether the management system for service quality conforms to the requirements of this standard and to the documents established by the organization. An audit plan shall be documented indicating the scope, frequency of audit, auditor(s), auditee and audit date(s)/time. Selection of auditors and conduct of audits shall ensure objectivity and impartiality of the audit process. Auditors shall not audit their own work. The auditee shall ensure that actions are taken without undue delay to eliminate detected non-conformities and their causes. Follow-up activities shall include the verification of the actions taken and reporting of verification results. Records of the audits shall be maintained (see 4.4). 8.3 Internal Quality Audit Internal audit is a process through which management can get information as to how the quality management system is functioning and can also continually improve the quality management system. Internal audits should be conducted periodically. There maybe variations in the frequency of audits of different departments. For example, the frequency of internal audits maybe more for such departments, which have direct links with customers, or to whom higher number of customer complaints have been attributed or where previous audit results show larger non-conformities. Notwithstanding this, each department should be audited at a fixed interval, at least once in a year. To ensure independence and efficacy of internal audits, it is necessary that trained internal auditors are deputed for auditing in such a manner that they are not assigned to audit those activities for which they, or to whom they report, are directly responsible. The essential requirement is that nobody audits his own work. Anyone trained in 1S/1S0 9001 or IS/ISO 14001 or any other management systems lead auditor course with exposure to IS 15700 would be suitable to conduct internal audits. Alternatively, anyone with training/exposure to IS 15700 with normally 2-day course in internal auditing would be suitable. The person responsible for managing audit function should develop annual audit programme and for each audit cycle an audit schedule covering basis of audit (criteria), scope (activities to be audited), audit dates and duration, audit team leader and member etc should be prepared in advance and communicated to the audit team leader and the departments to be audited. Following steps should be followed for implementation a) of internal audit process:

Train and appoint a senior person for managing the audit function, that is, development of audit programme, audit schedule, training of auditors, reviewing checklists for the audit, reviewing audit tindings, reviewing corrective action taken, organizing follow up activities etc. Develop a documented procedure for internal audit covering all the audit steps and defining responsibilities at all stages of the audit along with forms and formats to be used for planning, conducting and reporting audit results. 30

b)

IS 15800:2007 c) Select suitable persons in the organization to undergo training on auditing tools and techniques. It is preferable to nominate the persons to training courses accredited by Quality Council of India or and similar other bodies. An experienced internal auditor or an external experienced auditor should conduct one or two rounds of internal audits along with trained auditors working as trainee auditors. This would facilitate the development of a competent audit team. Periodic audits should be conducted by the cross functional teams and reports submitted to the incharge of the audit function for initiating corrective action process and follow up activities. Following records for each audit cycle should be maintained 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) Audit programme, Audit schedules, Checklists Corrections Verification along with notes of the auditors, notes, departments, and and corrective action response from the concerned of internal audit are given below: for its success. For this purpose top Audit reports with non conformity as per procedure:

d)

e) f)

reports of the corrective action taken.

Some useful hints for achieving objectives a) Involvement management 1) 2)

of top management in the audit process is necessary should ensure that;

a senior person is assigned to manage the audit function. team of internal auditors should be selected in such a manner that they can effectively audit persons at different levels in the organization, for example, a junior person may not effectively interview a senior manager because of level differences. auditors should be spared from the routine work for planning (preparation of checklists, conducting (going round all the allocated departments) and reporting the audit findings. etc),

3) 4)

conveying to all concerned that a `non-compliance' found during audit will not result into any type of sanction (adverse action) against the person being audited and that the audit should be regarded as a service provided to people to help them identify deficiencies in their own controls that they may have missed by being too close to the action. for improvement in

b) c)

One of the permanent objectives for each auditor should be to find out opportunities addition to highlighting non-compliances.

Ideally, auditors should not audit their own work but in small organizations it may not be possible to have total independence. In such cases, external auditors could be hired for conducting impartial internal audits. system is being

The purpose of audit is to gather information/evidence to satisfy oneself that the documented complied with and therefore audit reports should record findings which show compliance.

After completion of the audit, which is conducted by obtaining evidences (through examination of records, observation of activities, questioning/interviewing people etc), the auditors compare the same with audit criteria (policies, objectives, procedures, requirements from customer, 1S/1S0 9001 requirements, etc) and prepare their audit findings in terms of `conformities' and `non-conformities'. These non-conformities should be firstly discussed by the auditee, then prepared and conveyed to the auditee during audit itself. The auditee should take following two actions within agreed time frame on each of non-conformity reported: a) b) , The non-conformity is corrected that is, action is taken to eliminate the non-conformity, and of similar

The cause of non-conformity is investigated and removed in such a manner that possibility non-conformity happening in future is eliminated that is, taking `corrective action'.

I 8.4 Analysis of Data
The organization shall analyze the data collected during monitoring and measurement (see 8.2.1) and customer satisfaction (see 8.2.2) to determine current level of performance and opportunities for continual improvement, particularly where nonconformities are recurring. 31

IS 15800:2007 8.4 Analysis of Data

The public service organization should determine and collect data for assessing the performance and to identify areas for improvement. Data should be made available from measurement of the service processes and through customer assessment (including customer feedback and complaints) for analysis. Wherever possible, the data should be obtained service organization. Typical example include: a) b) c) d) e) f) Review of service requirement, Service performance Satisfaction Complaints, Monitoring Results of audits, and and measurement outcomes. data, from customers/citizens, survey/feedback for information systems that already exist within the public

Recording and analyzing the types of complaints, as well as the outcome of these complaints can provide valuable information to an organization on how to improve efficiency, provide higher quality service and foster improved relationships with the public. The organization a) b) c) d) e) 0 g) h) j) should develop a system for analyzing the complaints which should include:

identification identification

of the service delivery gap and the source of the mismatch; of the problem; both systemic elements and personal factors; of recurrence and put in place preventive measures; solution to the problem;

causes, including

estimate of the likelihood proposal of an immediate benefit-cost sensitization

strategies to prevent or limit recurrence; analysis of any system change; for any necessary system changes; and of staff involved in these service areas. recommendations

Analysis of these data should be purposeful, disciplined and based on planned observations. The identification of systematic errors, their cause and prevention should be the aim of data analysis. The root cause of error should be logically pursued as errors arise from flaws in the service operation related to complex operations, inadequate procedures, human error, working conditions, training, environment, instructions, resources, etc. Wherever possible, the public service organization should analyse the information and data gathered using numerical, graphical or through flow chart methods. Some typical examples of data analysis techniques include: a) b) c) d) e) Histograms, Cause and effect diagram, Why-Why Conceptual analysis, diagrams of processes including process flow diagrams, and

Pareto diagrams.

Some examples of data and root cause analysis/problem solving techniques are given in Annex R. After the analysis of data has been performed, it should be used to support the preventive and corrective actions and records should be maintained to ensure continuity of the measurement and data collection system. The conclusions from customer satisfaction analysis and performance assessment can help to control processes. Customer satisfaction measurements call for abilities to define an organization's performance through customers' eyes. An index of customer satisfaction will be a weighted average considering the essential attributes like, responsiveness, timeliness, correctness, etc, chosen for the study. For the purpose of measurement of customer satisfaction (customer satisfaction index) and methods of evaluation, IS 15610 may be referred. An example of the bar chart of customer satisfaction index viz-a-viz various attributes of service as determined based on the feedback from customers is given at Annex S.

32

IS 15800:2007

8.5 Improvement 8.5.1 Corrective and Preventive Actions The organization shall take action to eliminate the cause(s) of non-conformities and potential cause(s) in order to prevent recurrence and occurrence respectively. These shall be appropriate to the effects of the non-conformities encountered and potential problems. Records of action taken and improvements effected shall be maintained (see 4.4). 8.5 Improvement 8.5.1 Corrective and Preventive Actions Identification and reporting of non-conforming services (problems/mistakes) is the duty and responsibility of each individual in the service organization. Every effort should be made to identify potential service non-conformities before customers are affected. Responsibilities and authorities should be defined. Normally there would be two stages of corrective action: a) b) An immediate An evaluation positive action to satisfy the requirement of the root cause of the non-conformity. Examples include: of the customer; and

Corrective action should be applied to reduce, eliminate the causes of non-conformities. a) b) c) d) e) f,) g) Non-conforming Objectives/targets Poor performance Unsatisfactory Mistakes/errors services, not met, programmed and plans, rates, and/or other interested parties, in the monitoring and measurement of activities.

Deviation from the Government Complaints/customer/citizen identified

results of audits, and

A proactive approach to manage the activities of the organization is to find the causes of potential programmed that can lead to customer dissatisfaction and take preventative actions to avoid them from occurring. Examples of, where preventive a) b) c) d) feedback delivery; action may be applied include: from employees level/index indicating a more efficient process for service and service

and suggestions

review of customer processes

satisfaction

indicating areas of dissatisfaction;

review of targets/objectives

and their trend; and

giving early warning of out of control activities through mistakes/errors. and preventive actions may include the following improvement and better connectivity; areas:

Some of the corrective 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7) 8) 9)

Provide better infrmtructure Software standardization; Legal and policy restructuring;

Citizen services, deliver in the area closest to the people; Customer surveys; Customized application development; Better technology framework;

Better financial framework; Better social framework; of all processes; and co-existence; machinery with more IT personnel; the government

1o) Automation 11) Collaboration 12) Strengthen

13) Deliver the right thing at the right time; 33

N 15800:2007 14) E-Governance; 15) Anywhere, 16) [ntegration 18) Openness anytime access of services; of databases; rather than moving in all directions; ofentire approach; to bring transparency; to the outcome; activities which involve public contacts; services; of government

17) Paper should move inonedirection 19) Define constraints; 20) Adopt a holistic approach 21) Make service providers 22) Significant 24) Convenience restructuring

more responsible

23) Overall facilities to public; to public through integrated of grievances; of reports under RTI Act; processes; 25) Online issuance of permits and licenses; 26) Online resolution 27) Online submission 28) Restructuring 29) Technology

of government evaluation;

30) Staff involvement 32) Implementation 34) Fragmented 36) Transparency 37) Customized 38) Delivering 40) Transpoti

in all policies; while preparing action plans; of action plans in earnest;

31) Citizen centric approach 33) Impart training to users;

efforts should be avoided; and awareness should be brought about at all levels; should be supreme; solutions for various activities; documents through e-mails;

35) Change management

39) Wide use of digital signatures; time tables and monitoring; through smart cards; 41) Toll tax, road tax and other payments

42) Smart card for every type of activity of government; 43) Public transport system to be fully computerized; 44) Faster clearance of shipping assignments; and website updating should be the priority areas; networks; and for citizens; 45) Annual report, RTI information 46) Awareness campaigns 48) Improved vigilance. The actions should be appropriate to the magnitude improvements made should be maintained. and effect of the problem. Records of actions taken and

47) Secured and reliable telecommunication

34

IS 15800:2007

ANNEX A (Clause 0.3)
RELATIONSHIP WITH IS/ISO 9001:2000 (Informative)

A-1 In the formulation of IS 15700 considerable assistance has been drawn from IS/LSO 9001. The following documentation and management responsibility requirements of IS 15700 are similar to the Quality Management System general (documentation requirements) and management responsibility requirements of IS/ISO 9001: a) b) c) d) e) f-) Service quality manual and other document needed by the organization and control of service and service delivery process; Control of documents; Control of records; Management commitment; Customer focus; Service quality policy; authority review. and communication; and for effective planning, operation

&') Objectives; h) Responsibility, j) Management

Similarly, the requirements for Resource Management including infrastructure and work environment, monitoring and measurement, internal quality audit, analysis of data and improvement (including corrective and preventive actions) in IS 15700 have been prescribed in a manner that they are applicable to the public service organizations for their service and service delivery processes. As such, the organizations which have already adopted the requirements of 1S/1S0 9001 can easily adapt their quality management system with the service specific requirements given in IS 15700. In IS 15700, the requirements for citizens' charter and complaints handling have been covered based on the Government of India guidelines on these subjects. The requirements for citizens' charter are not specified in 1S/ 1S0 9001. The requirements for complaints handling in IS 15700 have been based on 1S/1S0 10002:2004 and are more elaborate than those prescribed in IS/ISO 9001. Also, there is no provision for nominating of `Ombudsman' in 1S/1S0 9001 whereas IS 15700 covers this requirement under 7.3. With modifications of the requirements as given above, the already existing Quality Management the requirements of 1S/1S0 9001, can easily be changed to meet the requirements of IS 15700. System as per

35

IS 15800:2007

ANNEX B (Clause 0.4)
PROCESS APPROACH (Informative)

Input Requirements Specified (includes resources) ---4 Interrelated or interacting activities and control methcds l--

o
output

EFFECTIVENESS OF PROCESS= Abilily to ach,eve desired resuits

Requlremenk Satisfied (Res.it of a process)

\

I

Monitoring and Measuring )

L
EXAMPLE OF GENERIC PROCESS

EFFICIENCY OF PROCESS= \ Results achieved w. resources used )

Outputs from other processes

Outpk from other cvwesses Outpuk from D

Inputs to A

Inputsto B outputs fromA

Inpuk to D OutWk from B

EXAMPLE OF A GENERIC PROCESS SEQUENCE

Input Computer * b ~

output

TYPINGWORDSON
PAPER

F[le on the hard disk Hard copy of words on paper b

EXAMPLE OF PROCESS OF TYPING WORDS ON PAPER

36

IS 15800:2007

ANNEX C (Clause 0.5)
EIGHT QUALITY MANAGEMENT (Informative) C-1 Eight quality management a) b) principles are given below: PRINCIPLES

Customer Focus -- Organizations depend on their customers and therefore should understand current and future customer needs, should meet customer requirements and strive to exceed customer expectations. Leadership -- Leaders establish unity of purpose and direction of the organization. They should create and maintain the internal environment in which people can become fully involved in achieving the organization's objectives. Involvement of People -- People at all levels are the essence of an organization enables their abilities to be used for the organization's benefit. and their full involvement

c) d) e) f) g) h)

Process Approach -- A desired result is achieved more efficiently when activities and related resources are managed as a process. System Approach to Management -- Identifying, understanding and managing interrelated processes as a system contributes to the organization's effectiveness and efficiency in achieving its objectives. Continual Improvement -- Continual improvement be a permanent objective of the organization. Factual Approach information. to Decision-Making of the organization's overall performance should

-- Effective decisions

are based on the analysis of data and

Mutually Beneficial Supplier Relationships -- An organization and its suppliers are interdependent .and a mutually beneficial relationship enhances the ability of both to create value.

ANNEX D (Clause 4.1)
TYPICAL SERVICE QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM DOCUMENTATION (Informative) STRUCTURE

SERVICE QUALITY MANUAL & CITIZENS'

DOCUMENTS NEEDED FOR PLANNING, OPERATION AND CONTROL OF

37

IS 15800:2007 NOTES 1 Describe the service quality managementsystem in accordancewith requirementsof 1S 15700 and measurable service standards and commitmentsto the customers. 2 Documentslike office manuals, regulations,policies and procedures, 3Consists ofdetailed work documents,for example, written descriptions,insuuction manuals, checklists, acceptancecriteria, etc. 4 Forms may be applicableto all levels of documentationstructure.

ANNEX E (Cku.cie 4.2)
CONTENTS SHEETS OF SERVICE QUALITY MANUAL (Informative)

I SERVICE I Section 0.3: Contents ISSUE NO. 01

QUALITY

MANUAL

\ DOC NO.: SQMS-M-01

I

I
PAGE REV NO. DATE APPROVED BY: PAGE: 10F 2

CONTENTS

I

SECTION

I
I GENERAL I ORGANIZATION I DISTRIBUTION I AMENDMENT CONTENTS INTRODUCTION PURPOSE LIST SHEET

CONTENT

I
I I I I

PAGES IN SECTION

I

SERIAL PAGE NO,

I 0.1
I 0.2 / 0.3 0.4 1 1.1 I 1.2 2 3 4 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 5 5.1

PROFILE

I I I I

(SERVICE

QUALITY MANUAL) MANUAL)

(SERVICE

QUALITY

\ SCOPE (SERVICE I ADMINISTRATION

QUALITY MANUAL) OF THE MANUAL POLICY AND OBJECTIVES

I I
I I

I I
I

I SERVICE QUALITY DOCUMENTATION GENERAL SERVICE QUALITY CONTROL CONTROL

I I
I

MANUAL

OF DOCUMENTS OF RECORDS RESPONSIBILITY COMMITMENT

MANAGEMENT MANAGEMENT I CUSTOMER

I
I
AND CITIZENS'

FOCUS QUALITY POLICY

5.3

SERVICE CHARTER

I

38

IS 15800:2007 SERVICE Section 0.3: Contents ISSUE NO. 01 PAGE REV NO. DATE APPROVED CONTENTS SECTION 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 6 6.1 6.2 6.3 7 7.1 7.2 7.3 8 8.1 8.2 8.3 8.4 8.5 ANNEX I ANNEX II ANNEX III INFRASTRUCTURE ENVIRONMENT AND WORK PROVISION RESPONSIBILITY, COMMUNICATION MANAGEMENT RESOURCE AUTHORITY REVIEW AND OBJECTIVES CONTENT I PAGES IN SECTION SERIAL PAGE NO. BY: PAGE: 2 OF 2 QUALITY MANUAL DOC NO.: SQMS-M-01

I

I

I

I
I

I

I

MANAGEMENT

CITIZENS' CHARTER, SERVICE AND COMPLAINTS HANDLING CITIZENS' SERVICE CHARTER PROVISION HANDLING

COMPLAINTS

IMPLEMENTATION, MONITORING, MEASUREMENT AND IMPROVEMENT IMPLEMENTATION MONITORING INTERNAL ANALYSIS AND MEASUREMENT AUDIT

QUALITY OF DATA

IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES REQUIRED BY IS 15700 BY THE I I

OTHER DOCUMENTS ORGANIZATION DESCRIPTION

IDENTIFIED

OF SERVICE PROCESS

I

I

I

39

IS 15800:2007

ANNEX F (Clause 4.3.2)
MASTER LIST (Informative) Document No, Issue/ Revision No. Revision Date Approved by No. of Copies Users Department Person Change No. Summary of Change

Title

40

IS 15800:2007

ANNEX G (Clause 4.3.3)
PROCEDURE FOR CONTROL (Informative) OF DOCUMENTS

Procedure Approved by: Effective Date: 1. Purpose: To ensure that documents and identification of revision status. 2. Scope: All documents 3. Overall Responsibility: 4. Procedure: ;1No. 1.1 Documentation ActiviQ/Description

for Control of Documents

DOC Issue Page: Page

NO.: SQMS-P4-01 No. 01 1 of 4 Rev. No. 00

are controlled with regard to their approval, review, changes made, legibility

required by IS 15700 and documents Nodal Officer/Document

of external origin.

Control Officer.

Responsibility

Reference Documents IS 15700 and list of documents identified by individual departments/ sections

Service Quality Manual, Citizens' Charter and records as required by IS 15700 have been documented. The other documents as needed and identified for effective planning, operation and control have been documented by concerned personnel. Legibility of the documents have been ensured. 1.2 Approval for adequacy The following documents adequacy by appropriate below: Charter -- Chief Executive ii) Office manuals, guidelines, procedures of the department Heads instructions manual, criteria, format for Heads/Department checklists, 4.3 Document policies and -- Function shall be got approved for authority, as mentioned

Chief Executive Officer/ Nodal Officer at apex levellActivity/ Department Heads

Nodal Officer level/Document Officer

at apex Control

i) Service Quality Manual and Citizens'

iii) Written descriptions, acceptance numbering

records -- Function Heads The following shall be followed: Nodal officer level/Document `fficer at apex Control

Service Quality Manual -- SQMS -- M-01 SQMS indicates Service Quality Management System, M indicates Manual and 01 indicates issue number of manual Citizens' Charter -- SQMS -- C -- 01 SQMS indicates Service Quality Management System, C indicates Charter and 01 indicates issue number of Citizens' charter Procedures complaints for control of documents, handling records and

SQMS --P4 --01, SQMS -- P4 -- 02 and SQMS -- P7 -- 01 41

IS 15800:2007 Procedure Approved by: Effective Date: for Control of Documents DOC " Issue Page: Page NO.: SQMS-P4-01 No. 01 2 of 4 Rev. No. 00 Reference Documents

YlNo.

Activity/Description SQMS indicates Service Quality Management System, P indicates procedure, 4 & 7 indicates clause number of IS 15700 and 01 & 02 indicate serial number of procedure Other documents identified, for example, guidelines, procedures, work instructions, manuals, forms (records) as applicable to various departments. The document numbering will be as given below: XXXX -- Y -- 00; where for represents abbreviation Xxxx department/section/Service Quality Management System, for example, RECP indicates reception; EST'T indicates Establishment department, VIGL indicates Vigilance department, SQMS indicates Service Quality Management System etc Y represents `P' for procedure of the department or `M' for manual of the department or `G for guidelines of the department or `F' for format of recordslregister being maintained or `W' for work instructions for a specific job of the department, etc 00 represents serial number of the procedure, manual, guidelines, format (records, register), work instruction being implemented in the department.

Responsibility

4.4

Master Copies Master copies of all approved documents shall be maintained along with the original approval of appropriate authority. Nodal Officer leveVDocument officer at apex control Master file copy

4.5 4.5.1

Master List Master list of all documents indicating their current revision status, shall be compiled and maintained. The master list shall be circulated to all controlled document copy holders. As soon as the amendments are effected to the documents, revised master lists shall be circulated to all controlled document copy holders. Nodal Officer at apex level/document controlled officer Nodal Officer at apex level/document controlled officer Master list

4.5.2

Master list

42

IS 15800:2007 Procedure for Control of Documents DOC Issue Page: Page -- NO.: SQMS-P4-01 No. 01 3 of 4 Rev. No. 00 Reference Documents

t Approved by: i Effective Date:

I

I

51No. 4,6 4.6.1

Activity/Description Distribution Distribution of documents shall be undertaken to ensure that the current versions of applicable documents are available at points of use. Photocopies of the master copy are distributed and all pages of the documents shall be stamped with `controlled copy' stamp. A distribution list shall be maintained indicating the designation/function to which documents are distributed. Review, updation and re-approval The documents shall be reviewed at least once six months and, if required, they should updated. A request for change in any document may also received from anybody and should be reviewed. required, the documents may be updated. in be be If

Responsibility

Nodal Officer at apex levelldocument controlled officer Nodal Officer at apex levelldocument controlled officer Nodal Officer at apex levelldocument controlled officer Activity/Department Head Master copy

4.6.2

4.6.3

Master list (contains distribution list)

4.7 4.7.1

4.7.2

Activity/Department

Head

4.7.3

The revised documents shall be re-approved preferably by the appropriate authority who had earlier approved the documents, The changes made in the documents shall be identified and revision number of the whole document or version number of the page(s), depending upon the number of changes, shall be incriminated by one. ""Ppropfiate authority

4.7.4

[On change of the document in full, its Issue No. shall be incremented by one. On page-wise change, Page Revision No. of the specific page shall be incremented by one. When the number of changes becomes high (for example 20 number in case of a Quality Manual, 5 in case of other documents), they shall be considered for change in revision number of the whole document] The master copy (ies) of the document shall be replaced and master list/distribution list shall be updated. The revised document shall be distributed to the concerted controlled copy holders. Obsolete documents One coFy of the obsolete documents may be maintained duly marked `OBSOLETE on all pages, in Obsolete Document File for future reference. On receipt of a changed document, in full or in part, pages or the document of the previous revision/version would become obsolete and shall be destroyed.

Nodal Officer level/Document Officer

at apex Control

Master list and the document

4.7.5

Nodal Officer level/Document Officer

at apex Control

Master file

copy

4,7.6 4.8 4.8.1

Nodal Officer at apex level/ Document Control Officer

Master list (contains distribution list)

Nodal officer level/Document Officer Controlled

at apex Control

Obsolete Documents File

4.8.2

COpy holder

43

IS 15800:2007 Procedure Approved by: Effective Date: for Control of Documents DOC Issue Page: Page NO.: SQMS-P4-01 No. 01 4 of 4 Rev. No. 00 Reference Documents Head Register documents External origin of of

Y No. 4.9 4.9.1 4.9.2 Documents

Activity/Description of external origin

Responsibili~

Documents of external origin that is, circulars, instruction, manuals, procedures and policies, etc as received by each department from other organizations, for example, from administrative authority/department./ministry shall be identified with reference number, date of issue, title, issue number/version number as applicable. This shall be undertaken by individual departments. Such documents shall be stamped with `controlled copy' stamp and shall be distributed to the concerned designation. The distribution list of documents of external by each maintained origin shall be departmenthection mentioning the identification of such documents as mentioned above and the designation/functions/requirements/sections to which these documents are issued.

Department/Section

Department/Section

Head

Register of documents of External origin (contains distribution list)

4.10

Maintenance

of documents All controlled holders copy

All controlled documents shall be properly and suitably maintained so that they remain available at points of use, and also remain legible.

44

IS 15800:2007

ANNEX H (Clause 4.4)
FLOW CHART -- CONTROL (Informative) OF RECORDS

Generation of records as a result of activities of the department
Concerned Department

Maintain files as per list of files with retention period

� files

List of

~aff
1 +

Indexing & filing/storage

of records

Maintain old and current records

I
Admn. staff

Preserve for specified retention period

I

I I

I

No

identify records to be disposed of, with the due approval of the competent authority

\ Disposal of records, as approved

I

45

1S 15800:2007

ANNEX J (Clause 4.4)
PROCEDURE FOR CONTROL (Informative) OF RECORDS

Procedure Approved by: Effective Date:

for Control of Records

DOC: SQMS-P4-02 - Issue No. 01 Page: 1 of 2 Page Rev. No. 00 disposition of records, their retention

1. Purpose: To ensure that the method of identification, storage, protection, time and responsibility for each of these activities are established.

2. Scope: All records required by IS 15700 and those required for providing evidence of conformity

to requirements

and for the effective operation 3. Overall Responsibility:
4. Procedure:

of the management

system for service quality. Control Officer

Nodal officer at apex level/Document

S1 No. 4.1 Identification

Activi~ of records

Description

Responsibility

Reference Documents

Records including files required to be maintained at various levels, within the organization, for providing evidence of conformity to requirements and for the effective operation of the management system for service quality shall be identified. 4,2 4.2.1 Approval and document numbering and files of format of records

Activity I-Iead/Department Head/Section Head

List of records in each department

The documented procedure for control of documents for approval for adequacy. of format of records and their document numbering shall be followed. The files maintained in the departmentlsection shall be identified with document number as given below: XXXX/YYY/OOOO/VOL-Z XXXX represents abbreviation for departmentisection where file is maintained, for example, RECP indicates reception; ESTD indicates Establishment department, HRDV indicates Human Resource Development, VIGL indicates Vigilance department, etc YYY represents abbreviation for subject or reference to other department for example, GEN indicates General; LVE indicates Leave, etc 0000 indicates year VOL-Z indicates volume of file for example, VOL-1

Activity Head/Department Head/Section Head Activity Head/Department Head/Section Head

4.2.2

Procedure for of control documents (SQMS-P4-01)

4.3 4.3.1

Record Matrix and Master List of Records A record matrix shall be maintained departmentisection indicating the following: Name of Record Document No. of record Controlling Document Opened On (file/register), Type of record Vol. No. (file/register), at each Activity Head/Department Head/Section Head Record Matrix SQMS-F-00

46

IS 15800:2007

Procedure \ Approved by: I Effective Date:

for Control of Documents

DOC: SQMS-P4-02 " Issue No. 01 I Page: 2 of 2 I Pa~e Rev. No. 00

I
I

sl No. Location

Activity Description Closed On (file/register), Responsibility for filing, indexing and storage as decided by concerned Activity/Department Head Minimum retention time

Responsibility

Reference Documents

4.3.2

The master list of documents including records as mentioned in the documented procedure for control of documents shall be maintained. Master copy of record matrix shall also be maintained. Legibility, Records Storage, Protection and Retrievability of

Nodal Officer at apex level~ocument Control Officer

Procedure ~ontro, documents (SQMS-P4-01)

for of

4.4 4.4.1

Records shall be filled in such a manner that they are legible and shall be maintained through proper filing, storage and upkeep ensuring their protection and legibility. Adequate resources for storage and protection like almirahs, cabinets, racks shall be provided. The protection of records from rodents, insects, etc, shall be provided. Records shall be placed in cabinets, racks, almirahs, etc with proper indexing and labelling to ensure easy retrieveability. Disposition of Record Records for which the retention period is over shall be identified and segregated. Such records should Be disposed of suitably through shredding, destroying by other means or shifting them to record room.

~ 4.2

4.5

47

ANNEX K (Clause 4.4)
RECORD MATRIX FORMAT (Informative) Record Matrix Format Approved by: Effective Date: DOC: SQMS-F-OO Issue No. 01 Page: 1 of 1 Page Rev. No. 00

48

IS 15800:2007

ANNEX L (Clause 5.3.2)
EXAMPLES OF QUALITY POLICY (Informative)

L-1 BANK (BRANCH) The Bank will provide personalized Banking Services with special attention to small savings and consumer financing so as to meet customers' total requirements. The branch will continually improve the processes involved in delivery of products and services for `TOTAL CUSTOMER SATISFACTION' by implementing Quality Management system requirements as per IS/ISO 9001:2000. L-2 BANK (HEAD OFFICE) The Head Office is firmly committed to:

Render efficient and prompt services to the top management at Head Office by providing quality information for their decision making and achievement of Bank's vision mission by coordinating the activities of various HO Divisions. Establish and maintain quality management system and work consistently with the aim of its continual improvement through active involvement of staff members in a conducive work environment. L-3 TRAINING a) CENTRE OF INSURANCE COMPANY

We aspire to institutionalize management training in order to release hidden entrepreneurial ability of our managers and optimization of intellectual assets of the organization in a changing competitive environment to enhance value addition of our services to the fullest satisfaction of our stakeholders, in general, and policy holders, in particular. We are committed to promote MDC as an institution of excellence through scientifically structured and specialized training programmed in response to emerging demand and declared vision, mission and goals of the organization. We would constantly strive to develop knowledge, skills, commitment and attitude of Trainees in keeping with the corporate strategy and long term plan, in such a manner that the organization maintains a sustainable growth to fulfill its business and social goals. We commit ourselves individually and jointly to achieve the declared knowledge and capability constantly for total quality improvement. RAIL MUSEUM) goals by improving our own

b)

c)

d)

L-4 RAILWAYS (NATIONAL

Everyone at the National Rail Museum associated with the Fairy Queen services are committed to provide quality services to the travellerers to provide an experience of steam travel with Fairy Queen locomotive and rekindle memories of a bygone era by achieving excellence in operation and maintenance of locomotive and coaches. The importance of quality service has been adequately stressed in the minds of all those who are associated with this service and they in turn are committed to render quality serv;ce in terms of Fairy Queen's quality management system and improvement on continual basis. For achieving this policy, objectives of relevant functions change in requirements for continuing suitability. L-5 TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY have been set up and are reviewed regularly with

OF INDIA

TRA~'s mission is to create and nurture conditions for growth of telecommunications in a manner and at a pace which wiil enable India to play a Ieading role in emerging global information society. We shall focus on: a) b) c) d) Providing Promoting Promoting a fair and transparent policy environment, among service providers, at affordable prices,

level playing field and fair competition efficiency in telecom operators, 49

Access to world class quality telecommunications

IS 15800:2007 e) f) g) Adoption ofemergingt Trmsparency indecision echnologies, andeffective interconnection anopportunity between service providers, toall concerned. and making byaffording

Ensuring technical compatibility

L-6 VIGILANCE

DEPARTMENT

We, at the vigilance division, NHPC are committed to instill a transparent system of vigil and to enhance customer satisfaction through internal training and supervision and ensuring continual improvements in the effectiveness of Quality Management System. L-7 REGIONAL PASSPORT OFFICE

Regional Passport Office -- Hyderabad aim to achieve total customer satisfaction by timely issue of passports and nurturing the culture of providing prompt and courteous service with a passion for excellence through full involvement of its personnel at all levels. We shall strive to attain a reputation for best performance by continual improvement of all our processes. L-8 TRAINING GROUP, CFFS EDUCATION SERVICES

The quality policy of the training group is: a) b) c) d) To disseminate the information/knowledge in the field of Fire Science/Engineering/S faculty with practical afety. to the

To conduct all programmed by qualified and experienced satisfaction of the participants/sponsors. To make continual improvement

demonstrations

To review and update the courses based on feedback from sponsors and participants. based upon the participants feedback.

ANNEX M (Clause 5.5)
EXAMPLES OF QUALITY OBJECTIVES (Informative)

1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7) 8) 9) 10) 11) 12) 13) 14) 15) 16) 17) 18)

Time norms set for various services will be met. Complete Complete and accurate information confidentiality will be provided to customers with customers will be ensured. skills and complete knowledge at one go. in all transactions will be ensured.

Safety and security in all our transactions All forms for use of customers

will be available.

Employees at the customer interface will have the required communication of rules. A minimum 50 percent of customer satisfaction Customer complaints All documents Maintenance will be reduced by 50 percent during this year. will be reduced by 10 percent. document

index will be achieved during this year.

The backlog of pending complaints

will be reviewed and any obsolete/redundant of minimum

will be deleted.

All purchase orders for purchase of various items will be complete The inventory cost will be reduced by 10 percent during first year. Each employee will be provided training for 2 days in this year.

and unambiguous.

inventory of various items will be ensured.

All workers will be trained and motivated this year to maintain safe, clean and healthy work environment at their work place. Suggestions Compliance scheme from employees to preventive maintenance will be introduced. schedules of all computers will be ensured this year.

The number of non-conformities

in the internal audit will be reduced by 5 percent. 50

IS 15800:2007

ANNEX N (Clause 7.1 .2)
A MODEL FORMAT FOR CITIZENS' (Informative) 1) 2) The Aim/purpose CHARTER

of this charter is to work for better quality in public service

a) Our Vision is . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. b) Our Mission is . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ....

3)

(Enumeration a) b)

of services delivered by the department) C) d)

We deliver the following

services:

4)

Our aim is to achieve the following Nature of ServiceService a) b) c)

service delivery/quality

parameters

Delivery Standard

Remarks

5)

Availability a) b) c)

of prescribed

forms Whom to contact

Title of the Form Fee to be paid

Forms are also available on the worldwide downloaded at . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6) We have created a website for registering facility. A centralized customer care center/grievance you can lodge your complaint. All complaints will be acknowledged taken will be communicated within Consultation
q q q

web at www . . . . . . . . ... (where

applicable)

and can be

complaints

at www . . . . . . . . . You are welcome

to use this where

7) 8) 9)

redressal center has also been established

at

by us within days.

days and final reply on the action

with our users/stakeholders from our users. polls. representatives and if you wish to to be available

We welcome suggestions We conduct

meetings with usersluser We hold periodical at be associated with this please contact

q

Please also enter your details at our website WWW . . . . . ... indicating your willingness for consultation, survey on the points enlisted in the Charter. on the following :

1o)

We seek your co-operation

Citizen's Charter is a joint effort between us and you to improve the quality of service provided by us and we request you to help us in the following way (give details relevant to the departments concerned) a) b) 11) Guide Book/Hand Book/Consumer He]pline Please contact

We have published a Handbook Officer for more details. Our Helpline number is Our customer information

for the guidance of our customers.

center is located at

Phone No,

51

IS 15800:2007 12) Information i) Availability of Information: listed below: 1. a) b) c) ii) iii) 13) Courteous For information Complaint outside Office hours, please contact redressal systems Information to Information on the following subjects can be obtained from our officers 4. Located at 5. Telephone/Fax/e-mail related

2. Name of the officer 3. Designation

and helpful service will be extended by all the staff. to make with respect to the delivery of the above standards you are welcome with the following officers Located at Telephone/Fax/e-mail

If you have any complaints to register your complaints Name a) b) c) 14) Other information
a) b)

Designation

15)

We are committed to revise and improve the services being offered under the Charter constantly. Please direct your suggestionslfeedback to Sh/Smt

ANNEX P (Clause 7.1.2)
CITIZENS' CHARTER: AN ACTION GUIDE (Informative)

1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7) 8) 9) 10) 11) 12)

Display of the Charter at the entrance of all offices. Display of information board at all offices of the Department. by those at the service delivery counters. at the offices. Wearing of name badges by all staff and particularly The Charter size to be standardized matter in font size 11. Local language translations All employees

Specific time slots to be allotted to receive and settle consumer grievances

to a booklet of half of A/4 size. Titles to appear in font size 14 and

of the Charter to be made available to the public.

dealing with the public to have a copy of the Charter readily available.

Stakeholder Meetings to be held at least once in two months and minutes of the meeting to be made and acted upon. Presentation of Annual Performance Report to the user groups by the Senior Management. service delivery standards periodically levels of the users. (say once in a year). Charter to be revised with enhanced Exit polls to be conducted

to measure service satisfaction

Charter awareness drive to be taken up by mentioning the existence of the Charter on the output-stationery printed for the users of the service/services. 52

IS 15800:2007 13) 14) 15) 16) 17) 18) Citizen' sChmter Adviso~Committees to be formed with st&eholders ineachoffice/unitidivision. review. Such to be

MIS on service delivery parameters mentioned information to be shared with user groups. Complaint Boxes documented. and Suggestion

in the Citizen's Charters and a periodical

Boxes to be kept at all offices. Complaints

Complaints/Suggestions

Charter to be put on the website of the department. departmenticall centers. Call centers to be used for receiving complaints

to be received through websites of the information to the citizens.

and for providing

A comprehensive list of neighborhood groups, consumer associations, mahila mandals, citizens' groups, ward welfare associations, etc, to be maintained in all ofllces for periodical interaction and consultations with the public. Through press notification individuals interested in participating in such meetings to be listed. Identification Identification of training needs: c) Senior Management. of a Nodal Ot%cer for Citizen's Charter work in the department. a) Cutting Edge Staff, b) Middle Management

19) 20) 21) 22) 23)

Availability of officers to the public during a fixed time slot. Provision for "login" and "logout" date and time to be made in the computer system for forms/documents/ applications received by the department for processing/issue of certificates/licenses. Citizens' Feedback forms to be kept at the service delivery counters. Feedback for corrective action. Feedback through Call Centers/Website/e-mail/Telephone received to be analyzed to be encouraged.

ANNEX Q (Clause 7.3)
TEN SIMPLE STEPS TO DEAL WITH COMPLAINTS (Informative) Step 1 Listen and record details without questioning the arguments The complainant may be verbally aggressive but it is the duty of the person who is attending to the complainant to listen attentively; the person may wish to put questions linked to the flow of ideas but should not interrupt unnecessarily. The person attending to the complainant should note all the information provided, even those the person may wish to explain later and should not argue or deny anything. The key is LISTENING with interest. A complainant maybe exaggerating or making accusations at the officers. The person attending to the complainant should not try to reply or defend the service until all the arguments of the complainant are exhausted. A complainant may even be abusive, loud and have a threatening tone; politely asks him/her to calm down. Explain that such a behaviour will not be conducive in finding a solution to the issue. The same could be explained in a better tone and the objective is to note the step-by-step problem source. Do not start an argument or fight back. While the person attending to the complainant are expected to be patient and polite, in letting a complainant express his frustration, he/she should also be firm and may wish to withdraw if the situation persists and/or the customer becomes too threatening. He/she may also direct the complainant's discussion in such a way that the conversation sticks to the main points. The person attending to the complainant should avoid provocative language and should not use words such as "you are lying; you are in a fighting mode".

Step 2 Do not be de fencive

53

IS 15800:2007 ;tep 3 Respond with Lpositive attitude In acknowledging the complainant's concerns, the person attending to the complainant should be careful not to accept liability for the problem. Avoid apologizing for n mistake until the person is sure that the mistake is on the delivery side and an apology is warranted. Statements to be used maybe solution to your problem should reflect I'm glad you're raising this with me so that we could find a way out I'm sure we can find a satisfactory ;tep 4 Express mderstanding and lympathy(Win over he user's confidence) The actions and the words of the person attending to the complainant that he/she understands the complainant's feelings. Statements to be used maybe I know you have travelled a long distance to take this matter with me. The problem must have caused frustration to you. I understand how you are upset and angry in such a situation. I shall try to solve the problem immediately, with If you give me all the information, some advice from my superiors.

Such an attitude must have calmed the complainant, [The person attending to the complainant Start by summarizing may wish to offer some tea/drinks] so far. Hopefully, by now the complainant is willing to coopera~ in hying to find a solution, Step 5 Put questions .Oensure that the real xoblem is understood the information received from the complainant does not agree. is needed. Note the facts again, if the complainant Reconfirm Summarize ~tep 6 Find out what :he complainant wants ~enuinely

Ask questions if more specific information the complainant's

that all the information is correct. view as to what the real problem is.

Ask the complainant what helshe wants the person attending to the complainant to door what helshe expect will happen to the complaint. Some complainants want to vent their anger/frustrations on someone in the department, therefore it is better to express appreciation for raising the complaint. If not, try to find out what the complainant wants specifically. At this stage, the person attending to the complainant must have understood what the complainant wants. The complainant should be briefed about the details of the complaint as understood by the person attending to the complainant. Summarize what the expectations from the service are.

$tep 7 Explain what :an be done in the ight of the provisions ]f the law.

The complaint

may not be clearly genuine but could be attended to. attended to. to the complainant, the

If it can be done, it should be immediately

If it is outside the purview of duties of the person attending other options should be proposed.

Prior to proposing the options, other colleagues should be consulted and decision on the possible information/service to be provided and their timeframe/dates should be provided. The sooner the information is provided or resolution of the complaint is made, the better it is. step 8 YOU may wish o discuss the options md agree on the ~ction or dates The person atten~ing to the complainant should present all the alternatives to the complainant, highlighting the advantages and disadvantages if any, of each alternative. The complainant should be informed about the provision of appeals and the details about the availability of an `Ombudsman'. If none of these are acceptable to the complainant, the matter should be referred to someone of higher authority in the process. Now both parties must agree on a course of action as to how the complaint should be resolved and the process and timetable for its resolution If the case is referred to at level two, the possible dates maybe If the case has to go to level three, give indications Such an approach inspires the complainant's confidence given. as to possible alternatives. in the process.

54

IS 15800:2007 Step 9 Take immediate action on the accepted solution Step 10 Follow up to ensure customer satisfaction Immediate action to implement the agreed solution should be taken. To inspire their confidence, the complainant should be kept informed at important stages. In these circumstances, comrdainant. the plan of action should be revised in consultation the complainant with the should be

Once the solution or an alternative has been found, contacted to inform him/her about the solution.

The complainant may be invited when he/she is in town to discuss the solution and evaluate whether he/she is satisfied. Thank the complainant for his/her continued support to the service, The appreciation for the complainant's initiative should be expressed. It should also be expressed to the complainant that the complainant's initiative has allowect the organization to correct the anomaly in his/her and the other related cases. The senior officer in charge of the complaint should keep track of issues and file the reports to ensure that full and complete records of the complaints are kept. It should be checked whether the concerned person has reviewed all the complaint records. An analysis should be taken about the recurrence of complaints, their distribution -- geographical or age-wise, and about their causes. Such analysis should be undertaken on a sample basis and accordingly policies should be changed to suit the new situations and needs of specific groups. The training, other staff requirements and other resources should be provided.

55

IS 15800:2007

ANNEX R (Clause 8.4)
WHY-WHY DIAGRAM (Informative) Excessive

time s~ent on correspondence

ImEl
To mistakes

many
WHY?

Too many correspondence

levels

of

reviewing/checking

WHY?

Fear

of the top boss WHY?

Typists
Steno

need more training

Need better equipment software
WHY,

Text not

clear or ,00 complex
(end)

I

Present

equipment/ software faulty (end)

56

IS 15800:2007 CAUSE AND EFFECT DIAGRAM (ISHIKAWA DIAGRAM) Analysis of the Data Entry Problem

CAUSES COMPUTER MEASU~MENT

EFFECT

`;'30"?3 Data Entry Error Rate Clerk X ~ Training~ Motivation ~ Procedures ~

Clerk Y + Clerk Z +

/

OPERATOR

PREPARATION

57

IS 15800:2007

ANNEX S (Clause 8.4) BAR CHART (Customer Satisfaction Index)

100

Responsiveness

Timelines

Courteous

Communi-

Correctness

Profession-

cation

alism

Technical "Confidentiality competency

General

u Jan-Apr

u May-Aug

u Sep-Dec

58

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed of comments. Standards are also reviewed such review indicates that no changes are up for revision. Users of Indian Standards or edition by referring to the latest issue of of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods

from Doc : No. MSD 2 (327).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 23378626,23379120 { 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 28327891,28327892 {

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131, 23233375,23239402 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Eastern

Northern

Southern

: C. I.'f. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at Sunshine Graphics

