Indian Standard 


acs feu dem ails Ulead sed ch 


qei üfufeefla & dr fuferer — 
farea 
( RAT JRT ) 


Welded and Seamless Steel 
Dissolved Acetylene Gas 
Cylinders — Specification 
( Third Revision ) 


ICS 23.020.30 


© BIS 2018 


Rds AM emu 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM TS, 9 TQUE SL Art, ae fereit-110002 
Vesela” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2018 Price Group 8 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


The standard was first published in 1974 when the manufacture of acetylene cylinders had not commenced in 
India. This standard was subsequently revised in 1982 and 1993, when the manufacture of acetylene cylinders had 
commenced in India. ISO 3807 “Dissolved Acetylene Cylinders — Basic requirement has been revised, This 
revision was to align with ISO 3807 : 2013 and included seamless cylinders also. 


This revision is being undertaken to incorporate the following: 


a) Modification in the definition of dissolved acetylene cylinder. 
b) Inclusion of crushing strength for the porous mass. 
c) Inclusion bonfire of test. 


d) Modification of method of measurement of the gap between porous mass and the shell. 


e) To refer the test methods specified in IS 3196 (Part 3) : 2012 Welded Low Carbon steel gas cylinder 
exceeding 5 liter water capacity for low pressure liquefiable gases : Part 3 Methods test (fifth revision). 


The bonfire test was adopted from Australian Standard No. B. 189-1962. Welded capsule type steel cylinders for 
acetylene published by Standards Association of Australia. 


Manufacture and filling of dissolved acetylene gas when contained in cylinders is regulated by the Gas Cylinder 
Rules, 2016 ofthe Government of India .This specification has been prepared in consultation and agreement with 
the concerned statutory authorities. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex F. 


For the purpose of deciding whether particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
*Rules for rounding off numerical values' (revised). The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


The relevant SI units and the corresponding conversion factors are given below for guidance. 


Pressure 1 Pa (Pascal) = 1 N/m? 
1 kgf/mm? = 9.806 65 MPa 


IS 7312 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


WELDED AND SEAMLESS STEEL DISSOLVED 
ACETYLENE GAS CYLINDERS — SPECIFICATION 


( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This specification covers the requirements for portable 
welded or seamless dissolved acetylene gas cylinders 
made of steel and having nominal water capacity within 
the range 0.5 liters and up to and including 130 litres. 
This standard lays down the requirements for the 
materials, design, manufacture, construction, tests and 
marking of these cylinders. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions to this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards listed in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 7241 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Dissolved Acetylene Cylinder — A cylinder 
having a valve and with or without safety devices filled 
with porous mass a solvent for the storage of dissolved 
acetylene and at least sufficient quantity of Acetylene 
to saturate acetone (see IS 170) as solvent at 
atmospheric pressure and at a temperature of 15?C. 


3.2 Cylinder Shell — An empty cylinder, manufactured 
and suitable for receiving and containing a porous mass 
and to be fitted as part of an acetylene cylinder. 


3.3 Fusible Plug — Non reclosing pressure relief 
device designed to function by the yielding or melting 
of a plug of fusible material at a predetermined 
temperature. 


3.4 Manufacturer of Acetylene Cylinder — 
Company responsible for filling the cylinder shell with 
porous mass (porous material) and which generally 
prepares it for the first charge of acetylene. 


3.5 Maximum Acetylene Content — Specified 
maximum weight of acetylene including saturation gas 
in an acetylene cylinder. 


3.6 Porous Mass (Porous Material) — Single or 
multi-component material introduced or formed in the 
cylinder shell in order to fill it and that, due to its 
porosity, allows the absorption ofthe solvent/acetylene 
gas solution. 


NOTES 
1 The porous mass may be monolithic or non monolithic 


2 Monolithic porous mass, consisting ofa solid product typically 
obtained by reacting materials or by bonding materials together 
with a binder. 


3 Non-monolithic porous mass, consisting typically of granular, 
fibrous or similar materials without addition of a binder. 


3.7 Porosity — Ratio oftotal volume (water capacity) 
of the cylinder shell minus the volume of the solid 
material of the porous mass to the water capacity of 
the cylinder shell. 


3.8 Saturation Gas — Acetylene dissolved in the 
solvent in the cylinder at atmospheric pressure 
(1.013 bar) and at a temperature of 15?C. 


3.9 Solvent — Liquid that is absorbed by the porous 
mass and 1s capable of dissolving and releasing 
acetylene. 


3.10 Specified Solvent Content — Weight of solvent 
(see 3.9) that the acetylene cylinder shall contain that 
is established during prototype testing. 


3.11 Tare Weight — Means the weight of the cylinder 
shell together with any fittings, permanently attached 
and includes the weight of valve any safety device, 
porous mass, requisite quantity of solvent (see 3.10) 
for dissolving acetylene, and the weight of acetylene 
gas saturating the solvent at atmospheric pressure and 
temperature of 15?C; 


3.12 Water Capacity — Actual capacity ofthe cylinder 
shell as defined in 3.2 measured by filling the cylinder 
shell with water. 


3.13 Working Pressure — Settled pressure at a 
uniform reference temperature of 15?C in a cylinder 
containing the specified solvent content and the 
maximum acetylene content. 


NOTE — For determination of the working pressure see 
Annex D. 


3.14 Test Pressure — The internal pressure required 


IS 7312 : 2018 


for the hydrostatic stretch test of the cylinder shell 
before filling the porous mass. It is equal to 5 880 KPa 
(60 kgf/cm?) for cylinders without fusible plug and 
5 194 KPa (53 kgf/cm?) for cylinders with fusible plug 
when acetone is the solvent. 


4 MATERIAL 


4.1 The steel used in the manufacture of cylinders shall 
conform to IS 6240. For seamless cylinders 6.3 may 
be referred. 


4.1.1 Suitable low carbon steel other than those given 
in 4.1 may be used with the prior permission of the 
statutory authority. In such a case the minimum 
specified value of yield strength of the steel 
specification shall be used for the purpose of calculating 
the wall thickness of the cylinder. Such a steel shall be 
certified by the steel maker to be other than of rimming 
quality suitable for pressing or drawing with acceptable 
non-ageing properties and shall be fully killed. 


4.1.2 The cylinder manufacturer shall obtain and 
provide certificate of cast (heat) analysis of the steels 
supplied for the construction of gas cylinders and 
establish means to identify the cylinders with the casts 
of steel from which they are made. 


4.2 The bung/valve pad shall be hot forged from rolled 
steel either conforming to class 1A or 2 of IS 1875 or 
IS 2062 or IS 7283 or IS 9550. 


4.3 The material used for footring shall conform to 
Grade HR1 of IS 1079 or any other steel equivalent or 
superior qualities. 


5 GENERAL 


A fully dimensioned sectional drawing of the cylinder, 
together with design-calculations and scheme of 
manufacture, shall be submitted by the manufacturer 
to the inspecting authority for final approval by statutory 
authority. 


6 DESIGN 


6.1 A cylinder shall be of welded construction having 
a cold drawn or hot drawn cylindrical portion with 
hemispherical, ellipsoidal or semispherical ends welded 
to it or two halves of halves of cold or hot drawn and 
circumferentially welded together, or any other 
construction approved by the statutory authority. 


6.2 The calculation of the thickness of pressure parts 
of the gas cylinder is related to the minimum value of 
yield strength ofthe material specified in 4.1 and 4.1.1 
and the test pressure. 


6.2.1 The agreed finished thickness shall not be lower 
than that calculated from the following formulae: 


a) For cylindrical portion, greater of the 
following two: 


_ PD, 
200x0.8 J R, +P, 
" FD, 
200x0.8 J R, — P, 
OR 


2) t-0.136 x JD, 


b) For torispherical part or end ( see Fig. 1A): 


1) 


P,D KZ 


o 


x 
200x0.8J R, +P, 5 


c) Forsemi-ellipsoidal part or end (see Fig 1 B): 


PD, K (0.65+0.1K) 
= x 
f= 200x0.8 J R, +P, 4 
where 

t = Calculated minimum wall thickness of 
cylindrical shell in mm excluding any 
additional thickness to resist influences other 
than those of internal pressure and of 
external forces due to normal handling 
(see 8.4); 

P, = Hydrostatic test pressure above atmospheric 
in kgf/cm?; 

D, = inner diameter in mm; 

D, = Outer diameter in mm; 


J = Weld joint factor; 
1.0 if each weld is to be fully radiographed; 


= 0.9 for cylinders with circumferential seam 
or seam only ( not radiographed); 


= 0.9 for cylinders with seams other than 
circumferential which are spot radiographed 
in accordance with 13.2. 


R, = Yield strength (minimum value specified 
in 4.1 and 4.1.1) in kgf/mm? ; 


H = Depth of dishing, in mm; 
K = The ratio D/H, 
R = Dishing radius, in mm ( R < D,); 


r = Knuckle radius, in mm ( r 2 0.1 D, ); and 


MO 


6.2.1.1 For hemispherical ends or parts, the minimum 
calculated thickness need not exceed that of the 
cylindrical portion of the cylinder. 


a) TORISPHERICAL END 


IS 7312 : 2018 


STRAIGHT FLANGE 
(PARALLEL PORTION) 


Do 


b) SEMI-ELLIPSOIDAL END 


STRAIGHT FLANGE 
(PARALLEL PORTION) 


Fic. | TORI-SPHERICAL AND SEMI-ELLIPSOIDAL END 


6.2.1.2 When concave bottoms are applied (see Fig. 2) 
the design shall be, such that the following minimum 
values are guaranteed by the cylinder manufacturer: 


ti = 20, t, = 2t, h = 0.1 D, and r = 0.075 D, 


6.2.2 The thickness of the shell shall not be less than 
2.5 mm for cylinders up to and including 10 litres water 
capacity and not less than 3.5 mm for cylinders above 
10 litre water capacity. The actual thickness of the end 
or dished part shall not be less than the thickness of the 
cylindrical portion. 


6.3 The cylinders of seamless construction shall 
conform to IS 7285 (Part 1) or Part 2 regarding material, 
design, manufacture, heat treatment, fitting and testing. 
The serial number punched on the seamless shell by its 
manufacturer shall continue as the serial number of the 
dissolved acetylene gas cylinder. No fusible plug or 
safety device shall be fitted on the body of seamless 
cylinder. 


6.4 Before the design is finally approved, the statutory 
authority may require one or more prototype cylinders 


to be subjected to various tests as specified in this 
specification or such other tests, as authority deems 
fit. 


7 WELDING 


7.1 The cylinder shall be welded by any suitable fusion 
welding method and shall conform, as for welding 
procedure and welder’s performance qualifications, to 
the requirements of IS 2825 or IS 817. 


7.2 Before welding, the plates to be joined shall be free 
from scale, grease, oil and dirt. Before the cylinders 
are closed, longitudinal welds, wherever used, shall be 
visually examined from both sides to ensure that the 
welds are satisfactory. 


7.3 Welds shall have an even finish and shall merge 
into the parent material without undercutting or abrupt 
irregularity. 


7.4 Welding consumables used shall be such that the 
desired properties of the weld are obtained and the 
physical values of the welded metal are not lower than 
the specified values of the parent metal. 


IS 7312 : 2018 


7 
/ 
Z 
^ 
7 
/ 
/ 
¢ 
Qu 


Fic. 2 CONCAVE BOTTOM 


7.5 The chemical composition of the weld metal shall 
be compatible with that of the parent metal. 


7.6 Where the cylinder shells with joggle welds are 
used, it shall be verified that the welds do not damage 
the porous mass in accordance with Annex E. 


8 MANUFACTURE 


8.1 The number of longitudinal seams in the welded 
cylinder shall not exceed one and the number of 
circumferential seams shall not exceed two. 


8.2 When the welded cylinder contains a longitudinal 
seam, the edges of the plate forming the longitudinal 
joint of the shell shall be rolled or formed by pressure, 
not by blows, to the required curvature. 


8.3 The end or dished part shall be of hemispherical, 
semi-ellipsoidal or torispherical shape. These shall be 
either forgings, suitably thickened at the neck, or pressed 
ends with provision for welding to it a bung/valve pad 
to take the valve. The end shall have a cylindrical skirt 
or parallel portion of minimum length 20 mm or three 
times the shell thickness, whichever is greater. 


8.4 Agreed Finished Thickness 


The agreed finished thickness shall not be less than the 
minimum calculated wall thickness obtained by the 
application of formulae given in 6.2.1 at any point and 
at any transverse section of the cylindrical portion. 
Additional thickness may also have to be provided to 
cover corrosion allowance and stresses due to 
horizontal acceleration and retardation during 
transportation. The amount of this allowance shall be 
as agreed to between the manufacturer and the 
purchaser. 


8.5 Examination of Cylinders Before Closing in 
Operation 


Cylinders shall be examined for wall thickness, 
before the closing in operation, circularity of the 
cylindrical shell and the skirt portion of ends, 
external and internal surface defects, the profile 
regularity of the ends, offset at the joints and 
straightness. The manufacturer shall assure himself 
that the wall thickness is not less than the agreed 
finished thickness at any point. 


8.5.1 Circularity 


The out of roundness of the cylindrical shell shall be 
limited to such a value that the difference between the 
maximum and the minimum outside diameter in the 
same cross section is not more than one percent of the 
mean of these diameters. 


8.5.2 Surface Defects 


The internal and external surfaces ofthe cylinder shall 
be free from defects which will adversely affect the 
safe working of the cylinder. 


8.5.3 Profile Regularity 


The contour of the dished end shall not deviate from 
the approved dimensions by more than 1.25 percent of 
the nominal diameter in respect of radial dimensions 
and by more than one percent in respect of axial 
dimensions. Such deviations shall not be abrupt changes 
and shall be outside the specified shape. 


8.5.4 Offset at the Joint 


The misalignment measure at the surface of the plates 
shall not exceed 10 percent of the nominal plate thickness. 
Where the thickness of the ends exceeds the shell 
thickness by more than 25 percent, the abutting edges 
shall be reduced by a smooth taper extending for a 
distance of four times the offset between the abutting 
edges. 


8.5.4.1 Before any welding 1s commenced, it shall be 
ascertained that the chamfered edges are in alignment 
and that the defects in alignment, the surface of the 
plates are less than: 


a) For plates of thickness 5 mm or less—t/6 for 
a longitudinal seam and t/4 for circumferential 
seam, subject to a maximum of 1 mm; 


b) For plates over 5 mm in thickness — It shall be 
ascertained that the prepared edges are in 
alignment to meet the requirements of the 
welding process and that the defects in alignment 
and the surface of the plates are not more than : 
1) 10 percent of the nominal plate thickness 
with a maximum of 3 mm for longitudinal 
joint, However, for plates up to and 
including 10 mm thick a misalignment of 
] mm is permitted. 

2) 10 percent of the maximum nominal plate 
thickness plus | mm with a maximum of 
4 mm for circumferential joints. 


NOTE — Welds made with backing strips require better 
alignment than specified above. 


8.5.5 Straightness 


Unless otherwise shown on the drawing, the maximum 


IS 7312 : 2018 


deviation of the shell from a straight line shall not 
exceed 0.3 percent of the cylindrical length. 


9 VALVES AND VALVES PAD 


9.1 The valve connection shall consist of a welded or 
brazed pad/bung, and shall be threaded to suit the type 
of valve specified in IS 3224. If welding 1s adopted, 
two runs of welding shall be employed for bungs which 
have a backing pad (either on the outside or one on the 
outside and one on the inside). In the case of bungs 
without backing pad, one run of welding shall be given 
on the inside and one on the outside. In the case of 
bungs without backing pad but having a chamfer on 
the bung providing compound weld joint (butt and 
fillet) between bung and top dished end, the same may 
be welded only on the outside with two runs of weld. 


9.2 Valve Protection 


The valve shall be protected by a stout metal cap 
perforated for ventilation and of thickness not less than 
3.5 mm, screwed on to the neck, or in any other manner 
approved by the statutory authority. 


9.3 Valves 


The valves for the cylinders shall conform to IS 3224. 
The cylinders of seamless construction according to 6.3 
shall be fitted with valves having safety device. 
However, cylinders for marine application shall not 
have any safety device. 


10 FITTINGS OTHER THAN VALVES 
10.1 Footring 


The footring, where fitted as a separate fixture to the 
bottom end of the cylinder, shall be at least 20 mm 
away from the circumferential weld. The thickness of 
the sheet from which the footring 1s made shall not be 
less than the calculated wall thickness of the cylinder 
body. The footring may be intermittently welded. In 
case, the bottom edge is curled, the curling shall be 
inwards to facilitate safe handling. It shall be provided 
with holes for ventilation, and if curled drainage holes 
to be provided to avoid corrosion. The maximum 
permissible deviation from the vertical shall not exceed 
1 percent. Footrings shall be sufficiently strong and 
made of steel compatible with that of the cylinder 
prescribed in IS 1079, or of other steel having 
equivalent properties. The bottom of the footring shall 
not be less than 8 mm below the outside bottom of the 
cylinder shell for cylinders up to 34 liters nominal water 
capacity. For cylinders of more than 34 liters nominal 
water capacity and up to 50 liters nominal water 
capacity, this value shall be minimum 15 mm and for 
cylinders exceeding 50 liters nominal water capacity, 
this value shall be minimum 25 mm. 


IS 7312 : 2018 


10.2 Safety Devices 


10.2.1 Fusible plug provided for welded cylinders shall 
conform to IS 13497 or equivalent as approved by 
statutory authority. 


10.2.2 Safety devices shall be positioned on the bung 
valve pad of the welded cylinders on both sides of the 
valve shank opening. 


11 HEAT TREATMENT 


All cylinders shall be efficiently normalized, or stress 
relieved in accordance with the steel maker's 
recommendation after manufacture and completion of 
all welding (including that of attachments) and before 
hydrostatic test 1s applied, by any suitable method at a 
temperature in excess of 600°C. Liquid quenching is 
not permissible. A complete record of the heat treatment 
cycle shall be maintained. 


12 INSPECTION 


12.1 General 


12.1.1 The inspecting authority shall have free access, 
at all reasonable time to that part of the manufacturer's 
works engaged in the order. They shall also be at liberty 
to inspect the fabrication at any stage and to reject any 
cylinder, or part of a cylinder, that does not comply 
with the requirements of this standard. 


12.1.2 The Manufacturer shall supply the man power 
and equipment for such inspection and tests as are 
required and for any additional checks which may be 
agreed between the inspecting authority and the 
manufacturer. 


12.1.3 The visual inspection of cylinders shall be 
carried out and the limits of defects shall be as given in 
IS 9639. 


12.2 Inspection of Components 


12.2.1 All pressings, halves and cylindrical shells shall 
be examined for surface defects before any seams is 
welded. If there are defects which, in the opinion of 
the inspecting authority, would be detrimental to the 
sound construction of the container, the pressing or shell 
shall be rejected. 


12.2.2 At the discretion of the inspecting authority, 
2 percent or more of the pressings, halves and the 
cylindrical shells shall be selected at random to 
represent all batches of material used for the 
manufacture of the cylinders, and these batches shall 
be examined for minimum thickness before any seam 
is welded. 


12.2.3 Should any pressing, half or shell be less than the 
minimum specified thickness, the whole output from the 


relevant batch of material shall be examined for minimum 
thickness, and any pressing or shell which is less than 
the specified minimum thickness shall be rejected. 


12.2.3.1 For the purpose of this clause 'batch of 
materials’ is defined to mean pressings or cylindrical 
shells manufactured in a continuous production run. 


13 RADIOGRAPHIC EXAMINATION 


13.1 Radiographic examination with X-ray when 
required, shall conform to the techniques and 
acceptability criteria set forth in the relevant Indian 
Standards. For general guidance, reference may be 
made to IS 1182 and 8.7 of IS 2825. The radiographic 
technique used shall be sufficiently sensitive to reveal 
a defect having a thickness equal to 2 percent of the 
combined thickness of the weld and the backing 
material. 


13.2 Spot Radiography (see definition under 6.2.1) 


13.2.1 One out of every 50 consecutive cylinders from 
continuous production shall be taken at random for spot 
radiography. 


13.2.2 In addition, after a change in the type or size of 
cylinder or the welding procedure (including machine 
settings), or after a break in the production exceeding 
four hours, the first cylinder welded shall be taken for 
spot radiography. 


13.3 The film density shall be up to 3 and in no case 
shall not be less than 1.7. 


13.4 See 10 of IS 3196 (Part 3) for testing details of 
radiography. 


14 CHECKING OF WATER CAPACITY 


The water capacity of the cylinders shall be checked. 
This shall be done by weighing or by volumetric 
method. Water capacity of the cylinder shall have a 
tolerance of E percent on the declared value. 


15 HYDROSTATIC TESTS 
15.1 Hydrostatic Stretch Test 


Each heat treated cylinder shall be subjected to a 
hydrostatic stretch test. No pressure greater than 80 
percent of the test pressure shall have been applied to 
the cylinder before the test. 


15.1.1 Hydrostatic stretch test shall be carried out 
accordingly to IS 3196 (Part 3) using ‘non jacket’ 
method. 


15.1.2 Permanent volumetric expansion suffered by the 
cylinder due to application of test pressure shall not 
exceed 7.5 percent of the total volumetric expansion at 
the pressure. 


15.2 Hydrostatic Test 


Cylinder which passes the test given in 15.1 shall be 
subjected to hydrostatic test. During the hydrostatic test, 
the pressure shall be increased gradually till 95 percent 
of the test pressure is reached. After this pressure is 
reached, the external surfaces of the cylinder are dried 
and the pressure shall be retained for a period of not 
less than 30 s. Any reduction in pressure noticed during 
this retention period or any leakage or visible bulge or 
deformation shall be treated as a case of failure in the 
test. 


15.2.1 The values of hydrostatic test pressure shall be 
in accordance with 3.15. 


15.2.2 Hydrostatic test shall be carried out according 
to IS 3196 (Part 3). 


15.2.3 The tests specified in 15.1 and 15.2 may be 
carried out at the same time. 


16 PNEUMATIC LEAKAGE TEST 


16.1 Subsequent to hydrostatic tests, each cylinder, 
after it has been dried, shall be tested for leakage by 
subjecting to air pressure of not less than 3 920 kPa 
(40 kgf/cm?) for a period of one minute while immersed 
in water and shall show no leakage. 


16.1.1 Alternatively any other method approved by the 
statutory authority may be used. 


16.1.2 Pneumatic leakage test shall be carried out 
according to IS 3196 (Part 3). 


17 BURST TEST 


17.1 One cylinder selected at random from a batch of 
403 hydrostatic test passed cylinders shall be subjected 
to a hydrostatic pressure till it bursts. 


17.2 Bursting test shall be carried out according to 
IS 3196 (Part 3). 


17.3 The nominal hoop stress value ofthe cylinder shall 
be not less than 0.95 of the minimum specified tensile 
strength of the material of the cylinder. The cylinder 
shall burst without fragmentation. During burst test in 
case leakage starts from any welding before fracture 
or before achieving required hoop stress the specimen 
shall be discarded and fresh test specimen shall be 
taken. Fracture shall not occur in the weld in the 
direction of the circumferential or longitudinal seam. 
The fracture shall also not occur in the direction parallel 
to circumferential weld within 10 mm from the edge of 
the circumferential weld. 


18 ACCEPTANCE TESTS 


18.1 For every batch of 202 or less heat treated and 
finished cylinders, one test cylinder shall be selected 


IS 7312 : 2018 


at random, and the various acceptance tests shall be 
carried out on test specimens taken from this cylinder. 


18.1.1 Number of test specimens and method of testing 
shall be in accordance with IS 3196 (Part 3). 


18.1.2 The percentage elongation and yield strength, 
wherever applicable, and tensile strength thus 
determined shall not be less than the respective 
requirements for the material specified in 4. 


18.1.3 The bend test specimen having cracks or any 
other open defects, which exceed 3 mm, measured in 
any direction on the convex surface of the specimen, 
shall be treated as a failure. 


18.1.4 The weld shall show a good penetration and 
absence of lack of fusion. 


18.1.5 The thickness shall not be less than the 
calculated thickness. 


19 TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
ACETYLENE POROUS FILLING MASS AND 
SOLVENT 


19.1 Acetylene 


19.1.1 The quantity of the acetylene stored in the 
cylinder (excluding the acetylene required to saturate 
the solvent at atmospheric pressure and a temperature 
of 15°C) shall not exceed the amount authorized for 
the cylinder and permanently marked on the cylinder. 


19.1.2 When the cylinder has been charged with 
acetylene and the pressure has reached equilibrium the 
maximum gauge pressure in the cylinder with acetone 
as the solvent shall not exceed 1 568 kPa (16 kgf/cm?) 
at 15°C. This shall be confirmed using the formula 
given in Annex D. 


19.2 Porous Material 


19.2.1 Every cylinder shall be filled with a porous 
material filling approved by the statutory authority. The 
porous material shall be compatible with the cylinder 
shell, the solvent and acetylene and shall not form 
dangerous or harmful products with these. For common 
porous materials consisting of inert materials (for 
example calcium silicate hydrate), this is generally the 
case. 


19.2.2 Cylinders with porous mass shall be subjected 
to vibration test as given in 20.4 to ensure no air pockets 
of appreciable size in porous mass . 


19.2.3 The porous filling material shall be of such 
structure that it will not disintegrate or sag when wet 
with solvent or when subjected to normal service. The 
porous filling material shall be uniform in quality and 
free of voids, except that a well drilled into the firing 


IS 7312 : 2018 


material beneath the valve is permissible provided that 
the well be filled with a material of such type that the 
functions of the filling material are not impaired. 
Overall shrinkage ofthe filling material is permissible 
provided that the total clearance between the cylinder 
shell and filling material does not exceed 0.5 percent 
of the respective diameter or length but in no case of 
exceed 3.2mm measured diametrically and 
longitudinally and that such clearances do not impair 
the functions of the filling material. 


19.2.4 The porosity of the porous filling shall be in 
the range of 75 to 92 percent with a tolerance of + 2 
percent on nominal declared value as determined by 
the method prescribed in Annex B. 


19.2.5 The crushing strength of the porous filling shall 
be 2 156 kN/m? (22 kgf/cm’) minimum as determined 
by the method prescribed in Annex C. If sample fails 
in requirement of crushing strength of the porous mass 
and if the inspecting authority considers that the failure 
was due to an error in carrying out the test, a fresh test 
shall be done on a test piece taken from the same 
cylinder. The defective test shall be ignored, but 
otherwise, the following procedure shall be adopted. 
The test shall be repeated on the same cylinder and in 
addition, one cylinder shall be drawn at random from 
the same control unit and tested. If any of the samples 
fails, the particular control unit shall be rejected and 
cylinders of that particular control unit shall be rendered 
unserviceable for holding the gas. From the rest of 
the batch, one cylinder from each control unit shall be 
selected at random and cylinders shall pass or fail, 
control unit wise depending upon the results of crushing 
strength as laid down in this clause. Cylinders of 
rejected control unit shall be rendered unserviceable 
for holding the gas and shall be destroyed. 


19.2.6 For safety reasons, the porous material shall be 
able to prevent the propagation of an acetylene 
decomposition within the cylinder and shall be of such 
quality that it enables the acetylene cylinder to meet 
the requirements of 20.3 and 20.5. 


19.2.7 Acetylene cylinders equipped with fusible plugs 
shall pass the fire test described in 20.6 in addition. 


19.2.8 Where cylinder shells with joggle welds are 
used, it shall be verified that the welds do not damage 
the porous material in accordance with Annex E. 


19.3 Solvent and Acetylene Content 


19.3.1 The solvent shall be compatible with the 
cylinder shell. The commonly used solvents are acetone 
and DMF. Only approved solvent approved by the 
statutory authority shall be used. Acetone, if used, shall 
comply with the requirements of IS 170.The specified 
solvent and the maximum acetylene content including 


the gas in solution shall be such that the cylinder meets 
the requirements of type tests specified in 20. 


19.3.2 In addition to the requirement specified in the 
section 19.3.1, the maximum amount of acetone filled 
in a cylinder shall be proportioned to the porosity of 
the porous mass and the volumetric capacity of the 
cylinder in the following scale: 


Porosity Maximum Acetone Content in 
Percent Percent of Water Capacity of 
Cylinder, by Volume 
For Cylinders For Cylinders 
having having 
Nominal Water Nominal Water 
Capacity not Capacity 
Exceeding 9 Exceeding 9 
Litres Litres 
Over 75 up to and 34.8 36.2 
Including 80 
Over 80 up to and 37.1 38.6 
Including 83 
Over 83 up to and 38.5 40.0 
Including 87 
Over 87 up to and 38.5 40.0 
Including 90 
Over 90 up to and 41.8 43.4 
Including 92 


20 PROCEDURE FOR TYPE APPROVAL OF 
DISSOLVED ACETYLENE CYLINDERS 


20.1 Approval Requirements 


20.1.1 A request for approval for acetylene cylinders 
may cover a range of different cylinder sizes provided 
that: 


a) The cylinders contain the same porous mass 
and same solvent. 

b) The maximum acetylene content per litre 
water capacity of the cylinder shell is the same 

c) The specified solvent content per litre water 
capacity of the cylinder shell is the same. 

d) The construction of the cylinder shells shall 
be similar i.e. welded (with circumferential 
joggle welds or cylinders with butt welds only) 
or Seamless cylinders 

e) the nominal outside diameter of the cylinders 
falls within the range of either: 

1) x270 mm, or 
2) »270mm 
20.1.2 Selection of Test Cylinders 


a) Forcylinders with a nominal water capacity 
above 50 litre and up to 130 litre, the 


inspecting authority shall select cylinders for 
test with a capacity considered to be 
representative ofthe size under consideration. 

b) Forcylinders with a nominal water capacity 
between 10 litre and 50 litre, tests shall be on 
the smallest and the largest cylinders of every 
range proposed by the manufacturer meeting 
requirement 20.1.1. 

c) For cylinders with a nominal water capacity 
below 10 litre, no test need be carried out on 
cylinders having maximum acetylene content 
of not more than 90 percent of the equivalent 
proportional content used in approved 
cylinders of water capacity more than 10 litre. 
However, in such case the maximum acetylene 
content per volume (water capacity) shall not 
exceed 0.180 kg/litre. For cylinders having 
a higher acetylene content, tests shall be 
carried out on cylinders with a nominal water 
capacity representative size under 
consideration. 


20.1.3 Information to be Supplied 


Each request for approval shall include the following 
information: 


a) ASchedule ofthe different constructions and 
sizes of acetylene cylinders which form the 
subject of the request for approval and which 
includes, for each size of cylinder, the 
following information 


1) Nominal water capacity, in litre. 

2) Solvent to be used. 

3) Mass of solvent, in kilogram. 

4) Maximum acetylene content, in kilogram. 

5) Test pressure of the cylinder shell, in 
kgf/cm? 

b) A description of the porous mass as it exists 
in the cylinder which gives sufficient 
information concerning raw materials, 
specifications and procedure for testing, 
production process, quality control, testing 
and inspection procedures. 

c) A report on the porosity determinations carried 
out by, the manufacturer on test cylinder, 
according to the method given in Annex B and 
declaration of the maximum and minimum 
limits of porosity within which the porous 
mass will be manufactured. 


20.1.4 Declaration of the Manufacturer 


The request for approval shall be accompanied by a 
declaration from the manufacturer stating that in the 
event of approval is granted, the production of the 
porous mass will be in accordance with the information 


IS 7312 : 2018 


given in the request for approval in 20.1.3. 


20.2 Submission of Cylinders for Test 


20.2.1 The manufacturer shall submit an adequate 
number of cylinders including spare cylinders to the 
inspection authority which shall with stand successfully 
the appropriate type tests 20.3 and 20.4 and 20.6 prior 
to approval being granted to the request made by the 
manufacturer. 


20.2.2 The cylinders shall be selected from the sizes 
specified in 20.1.2. These cylinders shall be complete 
with all accessories including porous mass, solvent and 
saturation gas, unless otherwise specified by inspecting 
authority. 


20.2.3 The inspecting authority has the right to witness 
the filling of the porous mass and to select and the 
number of the cylinders which are to be tested. 


20.2.4 Cylinders of each size selected for test by the 
inspecting authority shall be tested as follows: 


a) Two cylinders shall be subjected to the 
porosity test in accordance with Annex B. 


b) Two cylinders shall be subjected to the 
crushing strength as per Annex C. 


c) Three cylinders shall be subjected to the 
elevated temperature test in accordance with 
section 20.3. 


d) Four additional cylinders shall be subjected 
to the vibration test as specified in 20.4 out of 
which one shall be sectioned longitudinally 
for examination while the remaining three 
cylinders shall be further subjected to drop 
treatment followed by back fire test specified 
as in 20.5. 


e) Ifthe cylinder shell has joggle welds, three 
cylinders of the largest and three cylinders of 
the smallest water capacity shall be subjected 
to the test of the integrity of the porous 
material in the area of joggle welds in 
accordance with Annex E. 

f) For cylinders equipped with fusible plugs, 
three cylinders shall be subjected the bone fire 
test as specified in 20.6. 


20.3 Elevated Temperature Test 


20.3.1 This test shall be carried out on cylinders which 
have been filled with solvent and charged with acetylene 
confirming to IS 308 to the maximum content as 
prescribed by the manufacturer plus an overcharge of 
5 percent acetylene. 


20.3.2 Each cylinder shall be placed in a water bath 
the mean temperature of which is maintained at 65 + 
2°C, until the pressure in the cylinder constant or the 


IS 7312 : 2018 


pressure curve shows that hydraulic pressure has 
developed. 


20.3.3 If during this test, the pressure curve indicates 
that hydraulic pressure has developed in the cylinder, 
or if the maximum pressure in the cylinder exceeds the 
cylinder test pressure the cylinder has failed. 


20.3.4 All cylinders selected are required to pass the 
elevated temperature test. 


20.4 Vibration Test 


20.4.1 Cylinders with saturation gas shall be subjected 
to vibration test. 


20.4.2 The purpose ofthe test is to examine the behavior 
of the porous substance in the cylinder under those 
conditions such as occurring during transportations. 
The test shall be carried out as detailed in 20.4.3. 


20.4.3 The cylinders will saturation gas shall be placed 
in a vertical position on a apparatus so arranged as to 
subject the cylinder to successive drops from a height 
of not less than 100 mm, so as to strike the end of the 
cylinder on a steel or cast iron surface solid supported 


700 
HEIGHT OF TRAVEL 


a) The protective plate shall consist of 25 mm thick plate. 


QUICK RELEASE 


SOUND PROOFING 
(OPTIONAL) 


SAND 


by aconcrete foundation or equivalent. Cylinders shall 
be subjected to this drop 5 000 times consecutively. 


20.4.4 The cylinders will then be sectioned 
longitudinally and the filling mass carefully examined. 
To meet the requirements of this test no appreciable 
setting or breaking up of the filling mass shall be noted 
after this treatment nor shall there be any voids in the 
filing material. The two halves so cut shall be 
photographed in full size. 


20.5 Backfire Test 


The back fire test comprises two steps, drop treatment 
20.5.1 followed by the back fire procedure 20.5.2. 


20.5.1 Drop Treatment 


20.5.1.1 Each cylinder shall be filled with the mass of 
solvent as specified by the manufacturer and saturated 
with acetylene conforming, to IS 308 at atmospheric 
pressure. It shall be dropped 10 times with negligible 
friction between the cylinder and the guides from a 
height of 0.70 m on to a concrete block covered with a 
protective plate similar to that as shown in Fig. 3. 


SYSTEM 


LI 


PROTECTIVE 
PLATE 


b) Recommended concrete grade for foundation below the plate is required. The concrete shall be cast in one piece. 
It is important that the surface on which the protective plate is placed be smooth and horizontal. 


All dimension in millimetres. 
FiG. 3 TvPICAL APPARATUS FOR THE DROP PROCEDURE 


20.5.1.2 Each cylinder shall be fitted with a device 
(valve and safety plugs) that will prevent loss of 
cylinder contents during the drop treatment. 


20.5.1.3 Any subsidence or other defect of the porous 
mass which has taken place during the drop treatment 
shall not be corrected before submitting the cylinders 
to the backfire procedure. 


20.5.2 Backfire Procedure 
20.5.2.1 Explosion tube 


For the purpose of this procedure the cylinder, after 
having undergone the drop treatment in 20.5.1, shall 
be fitted with an explosion tube directly connected to 
the cylinder similar to that as shown in Fig. 4. The 
capacity of the explosion tube shall be 75 ml with an 
internal diameter of 30 mm terminating in a passage 
4mm in diameter with a length of 70 mm, connecting 
directly into the cylinder. The explosion tube shall be 
provided with the means of ignition consisting of a 
suitable wire, such as tungsten, 0.2 mm in diameter and 
15 mm in length. 


20.5.2.2 Acetylene charging 


The cylinders fitted with the appropriate equipment 
shall be charged with acetylene, conforming to IS 308, 
to the maximum acetylene content proposed by the 
manufacturer plus an overcharge of 5 percent, taking 
all necessary steps to purge the cylinder of non-soluble 
gases as far as is practicable. 


20.5.2.3 Test sequence 


After filling, each cylinder shall be subjected to the 
following procedure: 


a) Stored horizontally for at least three days at a 
temperature of 15°C (+ 5°C/-0°C). 

Placed vertically in water bath, maintained at a 
temperature of 35°C with a maximum variation 
of +1°C for three hours except for cylinders 
below 10 litre water capacity in which case the 
heating time shall be one-and-a-half hours. The 
maximum pressure shall also be recorded. 
Placed vertically in the firing test position and 
fired when the pressure inside the cylinder has 
fallen to a value 3 to 4 percent below the 
maximum pressure attained in the cylinder 
during its heating as described in (b) above. 
Adequate precautions against the possibility 
ofa cylinder bursting shall be taken in carrying 
out this procedure. 

There shall be an adequate means of verifying 
that the required energy has been provided to 
initiate the acetylene decomposition in the 
explosion tube (e.g. by inspection of the wire 
after firing to ensure that it has fused). 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


Ifthere is evidence of a fault in the equipment 
or in the procedure, the test shall be repeated. 


11 


IS 7312 : 2018 


VALVE ENABLING THE 
TEST CYLINDER TO BE 
FITTED WITH ACELYTENE 


IGNITION 
SOURCE 


) 


| 
) 
( 


N 


as, 


TAPER PART 
TO SUIT VALVE 
THREADS IN 
CYLINDER 


LXT 


All dimension in millimetres. 
Fic. 4 TYPICAL EXPLOSION TUBE FOR BACKFIRE 
PROCEDURE 


20.5.2.4 Failure criteria 


A cylinder has failed the test if it bursts, or if there is 
any release of gas from safety devices within 24 h of 
the backfire test. 


20.5.2.5 All cylinders selected are required to pass the 
backfire test. The cylinders passing the type test shall 
be destroyed. 


20.6 Bonfire Test 


Bonfire test shall be conducted on cylinders having 
safety devices according to 10.2. The fully charged 
cylinder, connected to a remotely located recording or 
continuously observed pressure gauge which can be 
observed during the course of the test, shall be placed 
horizontally on a rack. While on the rack the cylinder 
shall be subjected to the fire resulting from the 
combustion of the following pieces of dry, yellow pine, 
or similar timber: 


a) 80 pieces of 25 x 25 x 300 mm 


b) 40 pieces of 25 x 50 x 750 mm 
C) 40 pieces of 25 x 50 x1 000 mm 
The pieces of timber shall be arranged around the 


cylinder and two litres of kerosene shall then be poured 
over the timber, in such a manner that it is mainly 


IS 7312 : 2018 


absorbed by the timber. Paper may be used to assist in 
the firing ofthe timber. 


The test shall be considered satisfactory when there 1s 
at least a 170 kPa (1.734 kgf/cm?) increase in the 
cylinder pressure, prior to release ofa fusible plug and 
when the fusible plug releases within 10 min from the 
time the fire was started. 


The cylinder shall be considered satisfactory when there 
Is no appreciable bulging of the shell, no extensive 
penetration ofthe filler by decomposition, and no break 
up of the filling material. 


20.7 Failure of Type Tests 


If a cylinder fails in any of the type tests given 
in 20.3, 20.4, 20.5 or 20.6, all the type tests shall be 
repeated for type approval. 


21 MARKING 


21.1 General Instructions 


a) Each cylinder shall be clearly and permanently 
marked in accordance with the following 
conditions by stamping or similar processes 
on such a part which is inseparately bound 
with the cylinders which is not or only 
negligibly affected by stresses due to the gas 
pressure within it. 

b) The name plate shall not be affixed to the 
cylinders shoulder if there is a risk of corrosion 
or embrittlement. 

c) In conjunction with the original markings, 
space shall be provided for stamping the date 


of the test. 


d) Marking shall be legible and their size shall 


be 6 mm minimum. 
e) Thestamps used for marking shall have small 
radii at changes of section to avoid formation 


of sharp edges in the stamped marking. 


21.2 Permanent Marking 


Each cylinder shall be permanently marked on the 
shoulder or on a reinforced part of the cylinder or on 
the collar or neck ring, provided it can be demonstrated 
in the bursting test that fracture does not initiate in these 
markings, with the following permanent marking: 


a) The number of this standard; 

b) Gas identification ‘ACETYLENE’ and the 
chemical symbol C,H,; 

c) Identification of the manufacturer and owner 
together with the serial number of the 
completed cylinder; 

d) Identification of the porous mass; 

e) Tare weight in kg; 

f) Maximum mass of the acetylene to be charged 


12 


into the cylinder not inclusive of the saturation 
mass of acetylene, in kg; 


g) Identification of the solvent when not acetone; 

h) Working pressure at 15°C, in MPa (see 3.13); 

j) Water capacity, in litres; 

k) Test pressure, in MPa; 

m) Date of filling of porous mass; 

n) A symbol to indicate the nature of heat 
treatment; 

p) Inspector's official mark; 

q) Inspecting authority licence No.; 

r) Weight of solvent, in kg; and 

s) Inlet thread (neck thread). 


21.3 BIS Certification Marking 


21.3.1 Each cyliner may also be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 


21.3.2 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions ofthe Bureau of Indian Standards Acts, 
2016 and the Rules and Regulation made thereunder. 
The details of conditions under which the licence for 
the use of Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


21.4 Colour Identification 


Each cylinder shall be given zinc or aluminum metal 
coating over which it shall be painted in accordance 
with IS 4379 for the identification of the contents. 


22 RECORDS 


A record shall be kept of all tests made at the cylinder 
manufacturers works and copies shall be made available 
to the inspecting authority and purchaser ofthe cylinder 
(if desired). A Test certificate duly approved and signed 
by the inspecting authority shall be forwarded to the 
statutory authority and the purchaser. 


a) Certificate of analysis covering the material 
of the sheet of which the particular cylinder 
was made; 

b) Result of the tensile test; 

c) Resultofthe hydrostatic stretch test indicating 
compliance only; 

d) Result of leakage test indicating compliance 
only; 

e) Water capacity in kg; 

f) Weight of each cylinder when empty and dry 
plus those of fusible plugs, valve pad and 
footring, if any, and any part permanently 
attached to the cylinder, but not including 
valve or cap; 

g) Weight of complete cylinder, that is, weight 


of item (f) plus weight of porous filling, but 
not including valve or cap; 


h) Weight of cylinder in item (g) plus weight of 


saturation gas, solvent at atmospheric pressure 


IS No. 
170 : 2004 


308 : 1988 


817 : 1966 


1079 : 2017 


1182 : 1983 


1875 : 1992 


2062 : 2011 


2825 : 1992 


3196 (Part 3) : 


2012 


3224 : 2002 


IS 7312 : 2018 


and valve, but not including valve cover, if 


any; and 


j) Type of porous filling and percentage porosity 
of the filling material. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFFERED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 
Acetone — Specification (fourth 
revision) 
Dissolved acetylene (gas) (third 
revision) 


Code of practice for training and 
testing of metal are Welders 

Hot rolled carbon steel sheet plate 
and strip — Specification (seventh 
revision) 

Recommended practice for 
radiographic examination of fusion 
welded but joints in steel plates 
(second revision) 

Carbon steel billets, blooms, slabs 
and bars for forgings (fourth revision) 
Hot rolled medium and high tensile 
structural steel (seventh revision) 
Code for unfired pressure vessels. 
Welded low carbon steel cylinders 
exceeding 5 litre water capacity for 
low pressure liquelible gases : Part 3 
Methods of test (fifih revision) 
Valve fittings for compressed gas 
cylinders excluding liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG) cylinders (third 
revision) 


13 


IS No. 
3657 : 1978 


4379 : 1981 


6240 : 2008 


7241 : 1981 


7283 : 1992 


7285 


(Part 1) : 2018 
(Part 2) : 2017 


9550 : 2001 


9639 : 2017 


13497 : 1992 


Title 


Radiographic image 
indicators (first revision) 
Identification of content of industrial 
gas cylinders (first revision) 

Hot rolled steel plate (up to 6 mm) 
sheet and strip for the manufacturer 
of low pressure Liquefiable gas 
cylinder (fourth revision) 

Glossary of terms used in gas cylinder 
technology (first revision) 
Hot-rolled bars for production of 
bright bars 

Refillable seamless steel gas 
cylinders — Specifications : 
Normalised (fourth revision) 
Quench and tempered (fourth 
revision) 

Bright steel bars — Specification 
(first revision) 

Visual inspection of low pressure 
welded steel gas cylinder during 
manufacture — Code of practice 
(first revision) 

Fusible plugs for dissolved acetylene 
gas cylinders — Specification 


quality 


NOTE — The standards referred above should be read with 
latest revisions and amendments irrespective to their original 
dates mentioned above at the time of references. 


IS 7312 : 2018 


ANNEX B 
[Clauses 19.2.4, 20.1.3 c) and 20.2.4 a)] 
DETERMINATION OF POROSITY OF THE POROUS MASS 


B-1 A cylinder filled with the porous mass shall be fitted 
with a valve and weighted. It shall be subjected to the 
action of vacuum so that, after standing for 12 h with 
the valve closed, the pressure does not exceed 
2.666 kN/m? (0.027 2 kgf/cm’). It shall be then filled 
with acetone under pressure not exceeding 1569 kN/m? 
(16 kgf/cm?). when the acetone no longer penetrates, 
the valve shall be closed and the cylinder weighed. 


B-2 The cylinder shall be again subjected to the action 


container disconnected and the cylinder weighed. 


B-5 The difference between the final weight and that 
of the cylinder before the introduction of the acetone 
represents the weight of acetone introduced. 


B-6 The porosity is given by the following formula: 


P=100x — 


vxd 


of vacuum for 15 min and further acetone admitted. where, 
The cycle of operations shall be repeated until all air 1s P = porosity in percentage, 
a from the cylinder and constant weight w = weight of acetone introduced, in kg. 

v = the water capacity of the cylinder in litres 
B-3 The cylinder shall be then placed in a room where without porous mass, and 
the temperature is constant, leaving the valve open and d = density of acetone at the temperature at 
connected to a vessel containing acetone, for a period which the cylinder is finally weighed, in 
of 24 h. kilogram per litre. 
B-4 The valve shall be then closed, the acetone 

ANNEX C 


[Clauses 19.2.5 and 20.2.4 b)] 
DETERMINATION OF CRUSHING STRENGTH OF THE POROUS MASS 


C-1 PRINCIPLE 


At ambient temperature a test piece of specified 
dimensions is subjected to an increasing load until either 
the test piece collapses or its height is reduced to 90 
percent of its original value. The crushing strength is 
calculated from the maximum force and the dimensions 
of the test piece. 


C-2 APPARATUS 


C-2.1 Mechanical or hydraulic crushing strength 
machine that will enable the load to be increased 
progressively and smoothly, and with a system of 
measurement that will enable the force exerted on the 
test piece to be known within + 2 percent shall be used. 
One of the platens of the machine shall be mounted on 
a spherical seating that will compensate for any small 
error of parallelism between the face of the test piece 
and the platen. The platens of the machine shall be 
ground and the lower one shall be marked so as to 
facilitate placing the test piece at its centre. 


14 


C-2.2 Micrometer, or other suitable instrument shall 
be used to measure the deformation of the test piece. 


C-2.3 Equipment to measure the size of each test piece 
and to verify its geometrical form. 


C-2.4 Drying oven, capable of being controlled 
a 110 € 5°C. 


C-2.5 Desiccator for cooling the specimen. 


C-3 TEST PIECES 


C-3.1 Section the cylinder tested for porosity according 
to 19.3.1 into two pieces and recover the porous mass 
from each half. Discard 50 mm from the top and bottom 
ofthe porous mass. From the balance porous mass make 
one cube each from top, middle and bottom one-third 
of the mass. Inspect the cubes for voids, cracks, water 
marks, etc. The cubes shall not have the above said 
defects. 


C-3.2 The sides of test cube shall be of 45 + 1 mm 
size. 


C-3.3 The load bearing faces of each test pieces shall 
be parallel within a tolerance of 1 mm. This condition 
shall be checked by making four measurements of the 
height of the test piece, one at the centre of each of its 
four sides; the measurement shall not differ among 
themselves by more than 1 mm. 


C-3.4 The axis ofeach test piece shall be perpendicular 
to its base within a tolerance of 1 mm. This condition 
shall be checked by placing the test piece on a surface 
table or surface plate and presenting a set square to the 
centre of each of its four sides: any gap between the set 
square and the side of the test piece shall not 
exceed 1 mm. 


C-4 PROCEDURE 


C-4.1 Measure the sides of each load-bearing face of 
the test piece to the nearest 0.5 mm 


C-4.2 Dry the test piece to constant mass in the oven, 
controlled at 110 + 5°C for a maximum period of 8 h 
and cool it to room temperature in a desiccator. 


C-4.3 Place the test piece on one of its faces in the 
centre of the lower pattern of the testing machine. 


IS 7312 : 2018 


C-4.4 Gradually and continuously increase the load. 


C-4.5 Continue increasing the load until the test piece 
collapses (fails to support the load). Record the 
maximum load indicated during the test. 


C-5 EXPRESSION OF RESULT 


C-5.1 The crushing strength is given, in newtons per 
square millimeter, by the formula 


C= T max 
yz 
where, 
C = crushing strength of the porous mass; 
F4; maximum load, in newtons indicated during 
the test; and 
A = mean of the four measurement of the each 


side of the top face, in millimetres. 


C-5.2 The crushing strength shall be expressed 
in newtons per square millimeter, to the nearest 
0.1 N/mm’. 


NOTE — The SI unit for crushing strength is the Newton per 
square meter, but the Newton per square millimetre has been 
chosen for practical reason. 


ANNEX D 
(Clauses 3.13 and 19.1.2) 
CALCULATION OF THE WORKING PRESSURE 


D-1 The working pressure at a uniform reference 
temperature of 15?C in a cylinder containing the 
maximum acetylene content and the specified solvent 
content shall be calculated by the following equation 
(rounded up to the next integer). 


= a,x 


where 


P „ = working pressure, in bar; 


15 


m, = Maximum acetylene content, in kg; 
ms = specified solvent content, in kg; and 


a, 4,,4,” constants with value as given in table below: 


Constant Solvent 
-—— on 
Acetone DMF 
ay 59.853 —50.671 
ay —0.0 202 0.0 958 
az 1.5 247 -2.5 253 


The constants are taken from MILLER 


IS 7312 : 2018 


ANNEX E 
(Clauses 7.6, 19.2.8 and 20.2.4) 
TESTING OF THE INTEGRITY OF THE POROUS MASS IN THE AREA OF JOGGLE WELDS 


E-1 PROCEDURE 


This test may be carried out by or on behalf of the 
manufacturer of the porous mass (material). 


This test shall be carried out using cylinders that have 
not previously been filled with solvent or acetylene. 


Two cylinders of the largest and two cylinders of the 
smallest water capacity shall be subjected to the drop 
treatment as specified in 20.5.1. They shall be sectioned 
longitudinally and inspected for voids and damage to 
the porous mass (for example excessive clearance, 
cracks, disintegration) in the area ofthe cylinder welds. 
The porous mass (material) shall not show excessive 


16 


voids or damage. 


E-2 CRITERIA 


For passing the type test, the porous mass (material) 
shall not show excessive voids or damage and shall 
not be loose in the area of the joggle welds in any of 
the cylinders. In general, the test should be considered 
to have passed 1f the largest diameter of the voids 
between the porous mass (material) and the area ofthe 
joggle welds of the cylinder are smaller than 3 mm or 
the maximum allowed top clearance ( whichever 1s the 
smaller) and if no cracking has been caused that would 
loosen the porous mass (material). 


ANNEX F 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Ashok Leyland Limited, Chennai 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd, Allahabad 


BOC India Ltd, Kolkata 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 


GSPC Gas Co Ltd 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 
Indraprastha Gas Limited, Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Ltd, Kolkata 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Ltd, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Ltd, Mumbai/Surat 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Ltd, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Praxair India Ltd, Bangalore 


Research & Development Estt (Engineers), Pune 


Sakha Engineers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
SICGIL India Ltd, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), New Delhi 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Salem 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 


17 


Representative(s) 


Sarı T. R. Thomas (Chairman) 
SHRI ASHENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


Suri M. Ravi 
Suri S. Arun (Alternate) 


Suri VisuNU D. SONAWANE 
SHRI A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 
Sarı P. G. Cuoupuury (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU 
Suri PRADEEP (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. K. Kuamxar (Alternate I) 
Sarı H. D. Kuarni (Alternate II) 


Suri K. S. R. PRASAD 


SHRI S. NANDI 
Sarı P. N. Kantu (Alternate) 


SHRI S. M. RAMBHAL 


SHRI PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 
SHRI ALOK SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA K. GARG 
Suri NIKHILESH K. GARG (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
Sun Kunal Kasra (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. Dey 
Suri S. B. Bomar (Alternate) 


Suri P. KRISHNAN Kurrv 
DR A. Krishna (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MURALI 
Suri ARUN Nayak (Alternate) 


Suri Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. SARAN (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI, JASG 
Suri K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI MILAN SARKAR 
Suri ARINDAM Das (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJIT S. KOHLI 


SHRI FAROOQUE DADABHOY 
Suri R. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. Gandhi 
Suri Amir Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri M. PRABAKARAN 
Suri N. K. VuAvAVARGIA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
Dr B. K. Jua (Alternate) 


IS 7312 : 2018 


IS 7312 : 2018 


Organization 
Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi 
Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 

The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 

Trans Valves (India) Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 

Vanaz Engineers Ltd, Pune 

In personal capacity (Menon & Patel, 14/1, Mile, Mathura Road, 


Faridabad) 


In personal capacity (303, Shantikunj, Pandav Bunglows Lane 
Athwalines, Surat) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
Suri AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


Suri Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. BEHANI (Alternate) 


Dr S. S. Turse 
Suri S. D. RARIKAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. JAN 
Suri P. K. Matuor (Alternate) 


Suri K. P. VELAYUDHAN 
Suri S. J. Vispute (Alternate) 


SHRI EBRAHIM M. PATEL 


Suri L. D. THAKKAR 


Suri T. V. Singh, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI VISHAL TOMER 
Scientist ‘C? (MED), BIS 


Dissolved Acetylene Cylinders, Generators, Acetylene Pipe Lines and High Pressure 
Gas Cylinders Subcommittee, ME 16:3 


Organization 
BOC India Ltd, Kolkata 
Al-Can Exports Pvt Ltd, Distt Thane 


All India Indl Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd, Allahabad 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 


Hindalco Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 
Indraprastha Gas Limited, Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Ltd, Kolkata 


Jai Maruti Gas Cylinders Gases Ltd, Gwalior 


KVK Corporation, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Ltd, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


18 


Representative(s) 
Suri VuTukuru Ramana (Convener) 


Suri Vijay K. PARIKH 
Sarı D. C. Dave (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SMT VEEN A. PETER (Alternate) 


SHRI MoHAN Kumar 
Suri P. G. Cuoupuury (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. K. Kuamxar (Alternate I) 
Sarı H. D. Kuarni (Alternate ID 


SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 
Suri V. Ramaswamy (Alternate I) 
SHRI SUDHIR Jam (Alternate II) 


Suri S. NANDI 
Sarı P. N. Kantu (Alternate) 


Suri S. M. RAMBHAL 


SHRI PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 
SHRI ALOK SHARMA (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. GARG 
Sarı N. K. Gare (Alternate) 


SHRI AsHOK K. NIGAM 
Suri Manu K. Nicam (Alternate) 


SHRI R. CHANDGOTHIA 
Suri V. CHANDGOTHIA (Alternate) 


Suri Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. Saran (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TrwARI 
Lr Cor Ravi Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri T. R. THOMAS 
SHRI ASHENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


Organization 


Praxair India Ltd, Bangalore 


Rama Cylinders Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Sicgil India Ltd, Chennai 


Sahuwala High Pressure Cylinder (P) Ltd, Visakhapatnam 


SICGIL India Ltd, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), New Delhi 


Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


19 


Representative(s) 


SHRI MILAN SARKAR 
Suri ARINDAM Das (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY R NAPHADE 
Suri SANJAY S MANDE (Alternate) 


Suri RugsHAD DADABHOY 
Suri R. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. Gupta 
Suri Srinivas Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI FARooQUE DADABHOY 
Suri R. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. Gandhi 
Suri Amir Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
Suri AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


Suri Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. BEHANI (Alternate) 


Dr S. S. Turse 
Suri S. D. RARIKAR (Alternate) 


IS 7312 : 2018 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (1205). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 

Published by BIS, New Delhi 


