NAT Ta IS 13395 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


TMT URTA % 49 A єптї атеї 
жей afi Feat зга AT 
aiaia — ӘТ 


( Teel JAGT ) 


Performance of Handles and 
Handle Assemblies Attached to 
Cookware — Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 97.040.60 


© BIS 2021 


anda HIS Sm 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH APT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2021 Price Group 7 


Utensils, Cutlery Domestic Hardware Sectional Committee, MED 33 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Utensils, Cutlery Domestic Hardware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Divisional Council. 


This standard was originally published in 1995. In this revision, following major modifications have been done: 
a) New terminology has been introduced; 
b) Selection criteria of the handle clause has been modified; 
c) Fatigue resistance test procedure has been modified; and 
d) Brief procedure for heat resistance test has been added. 
This standard sets levels of performance for cookware for use on the top of a stove, or any other heating appliance 
by the accelerated simulation of hazards experienced in normal service. This standard is applicable to the handles 
and fixings of a wide range of cookware, such as saucepans, pressure cookers, frying pans and deep-fat fryers. In 


addition, certain requirements are extended to include the knobs, which might be encountered on the lids etc, of 
cookware. 


The relationship between the diameter of an item of cookware and of the heat source upon which it is regularly 
used is critical to the service life of that item. The use of too small a pan or too large a heat source, either of which 
will allow heat to pass up the outside of the pan and play directly upon the handles and/or its fixing system, can 
severely affect the anticipated performance of an item. This relationship 1s only within the control of the ultimate 
user and attention is drawn to the need for this to be considered when selecting and using cookware, particularly 
on ring-radiant electric burners and with Gas/LPG flame. 


This standard is not intended to be suitable for certification purposes in its own right, but to serve as a reference 
standard to be called up in appropriate individual product standards or in cases of dispute. 


A suggested sequence for testing cookware to the requirements of this standard is given in Table 2. 


In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from BS EN 12983-1 : 2000 ‘Cookware. Domestic 
cookware for use on top of a stove, cooker or hob. General requirements’. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex H. 


In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if final value, observed or 
calculated, 1s to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 *Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 13395 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


PERFORMANCE OF HANDLES AND HANDLE 
ASSEMBLIES ATTACHED 
TO COOKWARE — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies safety and performance 
requirements for the handles and knobs on items of 
cookware for use on the top of a stove or any other 
heating appliance and: 


a) Fixing systems used for attachment to the 
cookware; 


b) Cookware regardless of material or method of 
manufacture with the exceptions of glass, ceramic 
and glass ceramic articles; and 


с) Cookware intended for use both “on top” and “in 
oven". 


1.2 This standard does not cover: 
a) Any other requirements for cookware; and 


b) Items of ovenware specifically confined to use 
within the oven. 


NOTE — Handles, knobs and fixing systems are tested as 
complete items of cookware. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below are necessary adjuncts to 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards: 


IS No. Title 
2347 : 2017 Domestic pressure cookers — 
Specification (sixth revision) 
4955 : 2001 Household laundry detergent 
powders — Specification 
(fourth revision) 
3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Cookware — Utensil, in the form of a hollow 
container, intended for use in the preparation and/or 
cooking of food or beverages on the top of a stove, or 
any other heating appliance. 


3.2 Cookware Body — That part of an item of 
cookware intended to retain the contents during use 
and including the base, side(s), lid and any movable or 
removable section(s). 


3.3 Fixing System — The attachment method or 
methods utilized in fastening a handle to the body of 
an item of cookware or to fix a knob/handle to a lid or 
movable section. 


3.4 Gross Capacity — The capacity in litres obtained 
when the cookware body 1s filled to the brim with water 
at ambient temperature, allowed to level off for one 
minute, with the cookware placed on a level surface. 


3.5 Handle/Side Handle — Projection integral with 
or affixed to the cookware body intended to facilitate 
carrying and handling of the cookware body in normal 
use. 


3.6 Knob — Projection integral with or affixed to the 
lid of the cookware to facilitate handling, positioning, 
or removal in normal use. 


3.7 Handle (or Knob) Assembly — Complete 
arrangement of a handle (or knob) and its fixing 
system as embodied in a finished, manufactured item 
of cookware or mounted onto a rigid support such that 
the position and fixing conditions in an actual item of 
cookware are exactly simulated. 


3.8 Removable Handle — Handle designed to be 
attached and removed from the body of the cookware 
without the use of tools. 


3.9 Shallow Item — Articles of cookware of overall 
internal depth 75 mm or less. 


3.10 Base Diameter — Dimension, measured on the 
exterior bottom of the cookware, across the maximum 
circumference of contact when placed on a flat surface. 


4 CONSTRUCTION, 
FITMENT AND USE 


MATERIALS, SIZE, 


4.1 Construction 


Handles and knobs shall be of such proportions that 
they can be held safely and with a secure grip. The 


IS 13395 : 2021 


provision of moulded finger grips and/or a textured, 
matt finish may be of assistance in providing secure 
gripping features. 


Any exposed length of metal or flame guard between 
an insulated handle, if used, and the body of the 
cookware shall not exceed 25 mm for sauce pans, etc, 
or 40 mm for shallow items when measured in the 
direction parallel to the axis of the handle. 


4.2 Materials 


All materials shall be finished smooth and free from 
burrs, splinters or sharp edges. All surfaces intended to 
come into contact with food shall be easily cleanable 
under normal circumstances. 


4.3 Selection and Size 


The type and minimum number of handles to be 
used on cookware of a given gross capacity shall be 
in accordance with Table 1. When only one single 
straight handle is used (see Fig. 1), the handle 
length shall not be less than 150 mm measure from 
the outer edge of the handle to the point of contact 
at the cookware (including any flame guard). With 
two side handles (Loop or flange handles) the handle 
length shall be not less than 50 mm from the point of 
contact to the cookware (see Fig. 2). Knobs should 
be of such dimensions that, in normal use, the hand 
cannot readily contact the material of the cookware. 
The material at the base of the handle can have an 
extended ring around the base of the knob to act as a 


finger guard. 
HANDLE LENGTH и 


Fic. 1 SINGLE HANDLE 


4: 


Table 1 Selection Criteria 
( Clause 4.3 ) 


SI No. Size of Cookware Number and Type of 


Gross Capacity, litre Handle(s) 


a) (2) (3) 
i) Less than 2 litre 


ii) More than 2 litre less 
than 3.75 litre 


ii) 3.75 Litre and above or 
more than 5 kg when 
filled to capacity with 
water shall be fitted 
with two handles 


1 straight 
1 straight or 2 Side handle 
(loop/flange) 


l straight and 1 side handle 
(loop/flange) or 2 side Handles 
(loop/flange) which enables 
use of both hands 


4.4 Position of Handle and Knob with Respect to 
Cookware 


Handles shall be positioned above the centre of gravity 
of the cookware when filled to its gross capacity. For 
shallow items there shall be a minimum clearance of 
30 mm between the handles and the horizontal projection 
of the base of the cookware at the point 0.33 times the 
length, in the case of side handles, the measurement is 
taken at the lowest point where they are held in normal 
use, as shown in Fig. 3(a) and Fig 3(b).The mass of a 
handle shall be fitted such that to ensure the cookware is 
stable when placed empty, and without any lid, on a level 
surface. Knobs shall be positioned so as to provide ease 
of movement and/or maximum stability to any removable 
section or lid during and after its removal. It shall not be 
possible to contact a heated surface of the cookware in 
using the knob for its normal purpose. 


4.5 Attachment to Cookware 

Attachment shall be by riveting, welding and/or threaded 
fixing for handles and knobs not integral with the body 
of the cookware. A symmetrical knob shall be fixed at 
two points. 

Welded stud fixing shall be capable of withstanding an 
applied torque of 11 N.m per stud for handle attachment 
and 4 N.m per stud for knob attachment without visible 
distortion of the stud or weld. 


L = SIDE HANDLE LENGTH 


Fic. 2 Two Sipe HANDLE 


IS 13395 : 2021 


yo 


FIG.3(a) TYPICAL HANDLE POSITION FOR FIG.3(b) TYPICAL HANDLE POSITION FOR 


THE GENERAL COOKWARE 


THE SHALLOW COOKWARE 


All dimensions are in millimeters 


Fic.3 TypicAL HANDLE POSITION FOR GENERAL COOKWARE AND SHALLOW COOKWARE 


Threaded fixing shall incorporate a locking washer 
or similar device like suitable thread locking/sealing 
adhesive to hold them secure. 


Attachment of handles and knobs to cookware shall 
be firm and close, presenting no traps for dirt within 
inner surface (which comes in contact with the food in 
normal use) of the cookware. 


It shall not be possible to touch, from the exterior of 
the cookware body with a spherical probe of diameter 
14 mm, any part of a metal fixing system in the holding 
zone of the handle directly attached to or protruding 
of the cookware body which may reach a temperature 
exceeding 50 °C in normal use. 


5 PERFORMANCE 


5.1 General 


The requirements specified in this clause are intended to 
be applied to complete items of cookware, incorporating 
the handle and knob and its fixing system, as produced 
for sale. 


Permanent deformation or failure of the handle or 
the body of the cookware adjacent to a handle in a 
performance test shall be regarded as failure to satisfy 
the related requirement. 


Handle/side handle assemblies/knob assemblies, 
shall satisfy each of the appropriate requirements as 
specified in 5.2 to 5.10. A handle/side handle/knob/part 
of a handle, affixed to a body/lid shall satisfy only those 
requirements appropriate to knob assemblies. 


NOTES 


1 It is possible for a minimum number of samples to be taken 
through all of the tests in a programmed sequence but it is not a 
requirement of this standard that samples should pass all of the 
tests sequentially and failure at any point in a sequential series 
of tests may be overruled by the satisfactory performance 
of new samples. A suggested sequence for testing cookware 


to the requirements of this standard is given in Table 2 
(testing sequence). For the purpose of proof testing or 
quality control of handles, knobs or handle assemblies or 
knob assemblies the requirements and tests specified shall 
be applied to handles, knobs and/or fixing systems suitably 
mounted to simulate their use in actual cookware but in making 
recommendations based on the results of such evaluations, 
the selection and size requirements given in 4.3 shall be 
adhered to. 


2 For materials not known to be impact sensitive it is desirable 
that the performance tests of Annex A to Annex D should 
induce, at their end-point, a gradual, or ductile, failure rather 
than a sudden or brittle one. 


3 The cookware (if deformed after testing) after shall function 
for its intended use. 


5.2 Bending Strength 


A handle assembly shall withstand a bending force of 
75 N when tested as described in Annex A, without 
visible failure of, or damage to, any part thereof and 
without permanent distortion or permanent loosening 
of the fixing system. 


5.3 Torque Strength 


A handle assembly shall withstand a torque of 5 N.m 
and a knob assembly a torque of 3 N.m when tested 
as described in Annex B, without visible failure of, or 
damage to, any part thereof and without permanent 
distortion or permanent loosening of the fixing system. 


5.4 Impact Strength 


A handle assembly shall withstand an impact mass 
equal to one half of the mass of the empty item of 
cookware or 500 gram, whichever is less subject to 
a minimum mass of 250 gram, and a knob assembly, 
an impact mass of 250 gram, when tested as described 
in Annex C, without visible failure of, or damage to, 
any part thereof and without permanent distortion or 
permanent loosening of the fixing system. 


IS 13395 : 2021 


Table 2 Testing Sequence 
( Foreword, Clause 5.1 and 5.6 ) 


A Suggested sequence for testing cookware to the requirements of this standard is shown below 


FOUR SAMPLES 


Two Samples Two Samples 


One Sample Two Samples 


One Sample | 


5.6 Leakage ** 
4.] Construction 5.7 Thermal Insulation 
5.2 Bending Strength 
4.3 Selection and size 5.10 Burning Resistance 


5.3 Torque Strength 


4.4 Position 5.4 Impact Strength 


5.4 Impact Strength 
4.2 Materials 5.6 Leakage * 


5.5 Fatigue Test 


4.5 Attachment 


| 


5.6 Leakage *** 


One Sample One Sample 


5.9 Washing Resistance 
5.2 Bending Strength 


5.8 Heat Resistance 


5.2 Bending Strength 


5.3 Torque Strength | 5.3 Torque Strength | 


5.4 Impact Strength 


5.4 Impact Strength 


5.5 Fatigue test 5.5 Fatigue test 


* See 5.6 Para 1 ** See 5.6 Para 2 *** See 5.6 Para 3 


NOTES 

1 The handle tests should be done at least once a year. 

2 Tests for handles of same size (if it is of same design as tested already) need not be repeated. 
3 One from each size is sufficient for complying with handle testing requirements. 

4 Breakage of handle during lid opening test is termed a failure of the pressure cooker. 


5 There shall be no leakage through any fixing system of the sample Pressure cooker which has undergone tests given at 5.10, when the 
pressure cooker is subjected to proof pressure testing as per IS 2347. 


6 All the materials shall be finished smooth and free from burrs, splinters or sharp edges. 


5.5 Fatigue Resistance 


A handle assembly shall withstand 15 000 cycles, 
without permanent distortion or permanent loosening 
of the handle or its fixing system, when tested as 
described in Annex D. Distortion of less than 5 percent 
of the handle length measured at the end of the handle 
is ignored unless it affects safety or function or intended 
use. 


NOTE — The handle assembly if deformed after testing shall 
function for its intended use. 


5.6 Leakage 


There shall be no leakage of the content of the cookware 
through its handle/side handle fixing system protruding 
of the body of the cookware during the performance of 
the test described in Annex E. 


This test shall be carried out as described in testing 
sequence, Table 2. 


For a pressure cooker, the test for leakage shall be a 
proof pressure test performed in accordance with 
IS 2347. 


5.7 Thermal Insulation 


The maximum temperature rise above ambient of a 
handle material or knob material to be contacted by the 
hand in normal use shall not exceed the following, as 
appropriate, when tested as described in Annex E: 


Plastic, wood, rubber 250°C 
Glass, porcelain, vitreous material : 40°C 
Metal : 30°C 


If the values exceed 30 °C above ambient, the 
manufacturer shall indicate in the user instructions or 
on the cookware that the use of protection is required in 
order to ensure a safe handling of the cookware. 


NOTE — This is also applicable for cookers. 


5.8 Heat Resistance 


A handle assembly or knob assembly shall continue 
to meet the appropriate requirements of 5.2 to 5.5 
following: 


a) For thermosetting plastics material, heating in an 
air circulating oven at 150 °C + 5 °C for 1 h and 
cooling at ambient temperature for 3 h; and 


b) For all other materials, heating in an air circulating 
oven at 100 °C + 5 °C for 168 h and cooling at 
ambient temperature for 3 h. 


IS 13395 : 2021 


NOTES 
1 Brief procedure for testing is given in Annex E. 


2 However blisters appearing on plastic handles, will not 
constitute failure under this test 


5.9 Washing Resistance (Type Test) 


A handle assembly or knob assembly shall continue 
to meet the appropriate requirements of 5.2 to 5.5 
following either: 


a) 100 wash and dry cycles, simulating hand 
washing of immersion in a 2 percent V/V solution 
of domestic washing-up liquid (see IS 4955), for 
6 + 1 min at 60 + 5 °C, followed by drying 
suspended in air at room temperature for 
6+ 1 min; 


b 


wm 


25 cycles in a domestic dishwashing machine, 
operating at 70 + 5 °C, with a 35 gram charge of 
detergent approximately to the following analysis: 
1) 32 percent 
(anhydrous); 


sodium X triolyphosphate 


2) 25 percent sodium carbonate (anhydrous); 
3) 35 percent sodium metasilicate (anhydrous); 
4) 5 percent calcium hypochlorite (anhydrous); 


5) Remainder surfactant caustic alkannity = 
15 percent as NaO (sodium oxide) (anionic 
type) or 35 g charge of detergent sold by 
dishwasher manufacturers. 


The test temperature shall be that measured on the 
article under test during the hot washing part of the 
cycle. Allow the article under test to rest for not less 
than 1 h at ambient conditions between each cycle. 


5.10 Burning Resistance 


A handle shall not melt or drip molten and/or burning 
material with the applied flame in either of position 
when tested as described in Annex G. Any burning 
shall either extinguish itself within 15 s of removal of 
the flame, or if burning continues beyond 15 s, it shall 
be extinguished by a steady drought of 5 m/s applied 
across the area of burning. Once extinguished the 
handle material shall not spontaneously re-ignite. 


With the test flame applied at the body/handle junction 
there shall be no loosening or distortion of the handle 
attachment during or after the test. 


Following the application of the flame to both positions 
and cooling for 3 h, a handle assembly shall continue to 
satisfy the requirements given in 5.4 (impact strength) 
and the first paragraph of 5.6 (leakage). 


IS 13395 : 2021 


ANNEX А 
( Clauses 5.1 and 5.2 ) 
BENDING STRENGTH TEST 


A-1 APPARATUS 


A-1.1 A means of applying a force of 75 N at a speed 
not exceeding 50 mm/minute. 


NOTE — A tensile testing machine is an appropriate means of 
achieving this force. 


A-1.2 A D-section loading bar, diameter 10 + 1 mm, to 
transmit the applied force evenly across the width of a 
handle under test. 


A-1.3 A means of attaching the cookware firmly to a 
rigid base throughout the test, for example, a G clamp, 


or for attaching a handle via its fixing system to an 
appropriate support. 


A-2 PROCEDURE 


A-2.1 Attach the cookware firmly to the rigid base so 
that the contacting face of the loading bar is 10+1 mm 
from the end of the handle (see Fig. 4). 


A-2.2 Apply the loading bar at a speed not exceeding 
50 mm/minute, until a force of 75 N is applied or until 
failure of the assembly occurs, whichever is the sooner. 


LOADING 


All dimensions are in millimeters 


Fic. 4 TYPICAL POSITION FOR BENDING STRENGTH TEST 


ANNEX B 
( Clauses 5.1 and 5.3) 
TORQUE STRENGTH TEST 


B-1 APPARATUS 


B-1.1 A calibrated torque wrench capable of applying a 
torque of up to 5 N.m. 


B-1.2 A means of attaching the cookware firmly to a 
rigid base throughout the test, for example, a G clamp, 
or for attaching a handle or knob via its fixing system 
to an appropriate support. 


B-2 PROCEDURE 


B-2.1 Attach the cookware firmly to the rigid base and 
clamp the torque wrench to the handle or knob adjacent 
to the fixing system at 90° to the major axis of the 
fixing system. 


B-2.2 By means of the wrench twist the handle or knob 
until a torque of 5 N.m for a handle or 3 N.m for a knob 
is applied or until failure of any part of the assembly 
occurs, whichever is the sooner. 


IS 13395 : 2021 


ANNEX C 
( Clauses 5.1 and 5.4 ) 
IMPACT STRENGTH TEST 


C-1 APPARATUS 


C-1.1 A means of dropping a weighted striker from a 
height of 500 + 5 mm so that it falls vertically, essentially 
without friction, using guides. 


C-1.2 A steel striker of hemispherical striking surface 
25 + | mm in diameter and mass 250 + 5 gram capable of 
being weighted to a total mass of 500 + 5 gram. 


C-1.3 A means of attaching the cookware firmly to a rigid 
base throughout the test, for example, a G clamp, or for 
attaching a handle or knob via its fixing system to an 
appropriate support and arranged such that the cookware 
may also be turned through 90° and 180° so that the 
handle or knob may additionally be struck on its side and, 
if appropriate, on its lower surface. 


C- 2 PROCEDURE 


C-2.1 Attach the cookware or the lid firmly to the rigid base 
so that it is correctly aligned below the striker. Support the 
underside of a lid when striking the knob directly. 


HEMISPHERICAL STRIKING 


C-2.2 Load the striker to the appropriate mass 
(one half of the mass of the empty cookware of 
500 gram, whichever is less for a handle, 250 gram for 
knob or for the handle of cookware of mass less than 
500 gram) and release it so that it strikes the handle 
within 10 mm of its end (see Fig. 5) or the knob directly. 


C-2.3 Inspect the assembly and report any visible 
damage. 


C-2.4 Rotate the assembly through 90° so as to strike 
the handle or knob on one side. 


C-2.5 Repeat the procedures described in C-2.2 and 
С-2.3. 


C-2.6 Rotate the assembly through a further 90? so 
as to strike the handle or knob (if appropriate) on its 
underside. 


SURFACE @25 


All dimensions are in millimeters 


Fic. 5 TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT FOR IMPACT STRENGTH TEST 


IS 13395 : 2021 


ANNEX D 
( Clauses 5.1 and 5.5 ) 
FATIGUE RESISTANCE TEST 


D-1 APPARATUS 


D-1.1 A means of continuously raising and lowering a 
loaded item of cookware, from a level surface covered 
by a rubber plate (thickness 5 mm; hardness 50 + 10 
Shore), 25 times per minute by means of its handle. The 
general form of a suitable apparatus is shown in Fig. 6. 


D-1.2 Materials allowing the cookware to be steadily 
loaded during the test, for example aluminium oxide, 
mesh size 46. 


D-2 PROCEDURE 


D-2.1 Precondition the cookware by subjecting it to the 
heat resistance test described in Annex G. 


D-2.2 Attach the cookware securely to the apparatus, 
as shown in Fig. 6, appropriate to the type and number 
of handles. Ensure that it sits flat on the table and that 
there is a gap of 1 mm between the cam and the follower 
when the cam is at its lowest point. 


D-2.3 Place into the cookware a loading (W) equivalent 
to 1.5 times the mass of water (V) at the capacity of the 
cookware. 


D-2.4 Run the apparatus for the required number of 
cycles. After which, remove the cookware from the 
apparatus and examine and record any permanent 
damage to the handle or fixing system. 


KEY 


CIRCULATION 

CIRCULAR CAM IS LOW POSITION 
CIRCULAR CAM IS HIGH POSITION 
CAM CENTRE 

ROTIONAL CENTRE 


Dow М a 


All dimensions are in millimeters 


Fic. 6 TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT FOR FATIGUE RESISTANCE TEST 


IS 13395 : 2021 


IS 13395 : 2021 


ANNEX E 
( Clauses 5.6, 5.7 and 5.8 ) 
LEAKAGE TEST AND THERMAL INSULATION 


E-1 APPARATUS AND 


CONDITIONS 


MATERIALS 


E-1.1 Gas ring or hot plate rated at 3 kW in still air and 
of sufficient size to heat the whole area of the base of 
the cookware under test without extending beyond this 
in the area below the handle. 


E-1.2 Thermocouple, or any other temperature 
measuring device accurate to + 3 °C over the range 
30 °C to 100 °C and consisting of a surface contact 
probe capable of being held in intimate contact with a 
handle or knob. 

NOTE — Temperatures are measured on the underside of a 


handle and half way up at the sides of a knob or a handle fixed 
to a lid. 


E-1.3 Water of no special degree of purity and cooking 
oil of flash point in excess of 250 °C. 


E-1.4 The tests are carried out in draught free conditions 
at room temperature. The actual room temperature 
at the time of the measurements required by E-2.1.3, 
E-2.2.3 or E-2.3.3 is recorded to an accuracy of 
+3 °С to enable calculation of the temperature rise 
above room temperature (see 5.7) 


E-2 PROCEDURE 


E-2.1 Cookware in which cooking oil is not normally 
intended to be used, other than pressure cookers 
(see E-2.3). 


E-2.1.1 Fill the cookware with cold water to above the 
level of the main handle connection(s) and attach the 
lid, if any. 


E-2.1.2 Raise the temperature of the water to boiling 
point and maintain at a constant, moderate rate of 
ebullition. 


E-2.1.3 By means of the thermocouple or any 
other temperature measuring device, measure the 
temperatures reached at each of the points specified 
in Fig. 7A to 7D, as appropriate and record these after 
30 min ebullition. 


E-2.1.4 During the test observe and record whether 
there is leakage through any fixing penetrating the body 
of the cookware. 


E-2.2 Cookware in which cooking oil is intended to be 
used. 


10 


E-2.2. Fill the cookware with cooking oil to 
50 percent of gross capacity for shallow items or 
90 percent of gross capacity for other items. 


NOTE — For reasons of safety, it is essential that this test be 
carried out without any lid or cover on the cookware unless the 
product under evaluation is expressly intended to be covered. 


E- 2.2.2 Raise the temperature of the cooling oil to: 


a) 220 +5°C for shallow items of cookware; and 
b) 180 +5 °C for other items of cookware. 
Maintain the cooking oil at the appropriate temperature. 


E-2.2.3 By means of the thermocouple measure the 
temperature reached at each of the point specified in 
Fig. 7A to 7D as appropriate and record these after 
15 min at the appropriate temperature. 


E-2.2.4 During the test observe and record whether 
there is leakage through any fixing penetrating the body 
of the cookware. 
WARNING NOTE — Due care should be exercised when 
conducting this test with cooking oil. The temperatures 
specified are close to the flash point of the oil and adequate 
ventilation is essential. 


E-2.2.5 If the level of oil in the test does not come 
above the level of the main handle connections carry 
out test described in E-2.1 omitting the temperature 
measurements of E-2.1.3. 


E-2.3 Pressure Cooker 


E-2.3.1 Fill the pressure cooker to one half of its gross 
capacity with cold water and attach the lid in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s instructions. 


E-2.3.2 Raise the temperature of the water to the 
nominal operating pressure of the cooker and maintain 
it steadily at the nominal operating process with the 
burner adjusted to the minimum setting required to 
achieve this. 


E-2.3.3 By means of the thermocouple measure the 
temperature reached at each of the points specified 
in Fig. 7A to 7E as appropriate and record these after 
10 minutes of steady operating at the nominal operating 
pressure. 


NOTE — A handle, or part of a handle, affixed to the lid of a 
pressure cooker is measured at the point specified in Fig. 7E. 


IS 13395 : 2021 


0.33 L 


FIG. 7A LONG HANDLE 


FIG. 7D KNOB 


FIG. 7C LOOP HANDLE 


0.33L 


FIG. 7E PRESSURE COOKER HANDLE (S) 


All dimensions are in millimeters 


Fic. 7 POINTS FOR TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT 


IS 13395 : 2021 


ANNEX F 
( Clause 5.8 ) 
HEAT RESISTANCE 


F-1 APPARATUS 


F-1.1 An air-circulating oven capable of maintaining 
the set temperature + 2 °С. 


F-1.2 A means of measuring the duration of the test 
+ 1 min. 


F-2 PROCEDURE 


F-2.1 Bring oven to the required temperature. 


F-2.2 Place the item to be tested in the oven. 


F-2.3 Allow oven to return to the set temperature. 


F-2.4 Start timer and maintain the oven at the required 
temperature for the specified time. 


F-2.5 Remove test item, place on a dry surface and 
allow to cool to ambient temperature. 


F-2.6 Visually examine the test item (reference 
distance 250 mm between the cookware and eyes) for 
any damage. Record findings. 


ANNEX G 
( Clause 5.10 and D-2.1 ) 
RESISTANCE TO BURNING 


G-1 APPARATUS 


G-1.1 A burden burner, tube diameter 9.5 + 0.5 mm 
fuelled by natural gas/LPG and adjusted to a flame 
height of 38 + 2 mm with the air inlet to the burner 
closed. 


G-1.2 A means of attaching the cookware firmly to a 
rigid base throughout the test for example, a G clamp, 
or for attaching a handle or knob via its fixing system 
to an appropriate support. 


G-1.3 A draught free area provided with a facility for 
the extraction of any fumes immediately following the 
test. 


G-2 PROCEDURE 


G-2.1 Attach the cookware to the rigid base. 


G-2.2 Position the burner (align) so that the centre of 
the burner tip is 18 + 2 mm below the bottom surface of 
the end of the handle (see Fig. 8). 


LLLLILLLLL &hs 


G-2.3 Expose the handle to the flame for 30 + 1 s, 
remove the flame, and allow the handle to burn either 
until any flame extinguishes or for 15 s whichever 
occurs first. Observe whether molten or burning 
material falls from the handle during this period. 


G-2.4 Measure and record the length of time the handle 
continues to burn following removal of the flame. If 
this reaches 15 s, immediately apply a steady draught 
of 5 m/s across the area of burning for 5 s and record 
whether burning continues or is extinguished. 


G-2.5 Reposition the burner under the handle, 
ignoring any flame guard, as close as practicable to the 
body/handle junction and repeat the procedures 
described in G-2.2 to G-2.4. 


G-2.6 Allow the cookware to cool for 3 h at ambient 
temperature and then carry out the appropriate tests 
(see 5.1) 


GAS 


All dimensions are in millimeters 


Fic. 8 TYPICAL POSITION OF BURNER 


12 


IS 13395 : 2021 


ANNEX H 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Composition Utensils, Cutlery Domestic Hardware Sectional Committee, MED 33 


Organization 


Office of Development Commissioner, Chennai 


Aligarh Locks Manufacturers and Traders Association, 


Aligarh 
Anna Aluminium Ltd, Cochin 


Butterfly Gandhimati Appliances Ltd , Chennai 
(Formerly Gangadharam Appliances) 


Central Electrochemical Materials Science Division, 


Karaikudi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Consumer Voice, New Delhi 
Delhi Test House, New Delhi 


D P Garg and Co Pvt Ltd 


Federation of Hardware Mfg and Traders Welfare 


Association, Gurgaon 
Godrej and Boyce Mfg Co Ltd, Mumbai 


Hawkins Cookers Ltd, Thane 
HINDALOC Industries Ltd, Distt Sonebhadra 


In Personal Capacity ( 179, Sri Sai, 13th Cross, 
Ananthnagar Phase 1, Electronic City Post, 
Bengaluru, 560100) 


Jindal Stainless Limited, Hisar 
J. K. Metal Industries, Jagadhri 


Ministry of Defence (Dgqa), Kanpur 


Ministry of Railways, New Delhi 
MSME Testing Centre, New Delhi 


National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur 


Pritam Internation, Baddi 


Representative(s) 


SHRI О. SHANMUGANATHAN (Chairman) 


SHRI P. L. SHIROMANI 
Suri DHRUV Misuna (Alternate) 


SHRI K. CHANDRASHEKRAN PILLAI 
Suri V. THULASIDHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI V. M. KUMARESAN 
Suri K. SHANMUGAVELU (Alternate) 


Dr S. VASUDEVAN 
Dr S. MURALIDHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SURINDER KUMAR 
Suri R. K. Saraswat (Alternate) 


Suri B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
Suri M. Au. Kuan (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH GOEL 
Suri Конт GoEL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDIP GARG 


SHRI AJAY BHASIN 
SHRI RAJESH BANSAL (Alternate) 


Suri T. S. MURALI 
SHRI Pravin Nayak (Alternate) 


SHRI B. S. SETHI 
Suni RAHUL PATHAK (Alternate) 


SHRI RAM AWADHESH SINGH 
SHRI ARUN Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri B. VISWANATH SHENOY 


SHRI BISwABASU Roy CHOWDHURY 
SHRIMATI JALAJA MENON (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH GARG 
Suni BHARAT GARG (Alternate) 


ER M. SATYANARAYANA 
Suri S. J. KOLARKAR (Alternate) 


SR COMMERCIA OFFICER 


SHRI B. S. SRIVASTAVA 
Suri A. K. MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


Dr S. GHOSH CHOWDHURY 
Dn К. L. Sanoo (Alternate) 


SHRI RAHUL KHERA 
Suri Ronit KHERA (Alternate) 


13 


IS 13395 : 2021 
Organization 
Rationale Iron and Steel Corpn, Kanpur 


Republic Engineers, Delhi 
Royal Kitchen Appliances Pvt Ltd, Sonepat 
Sat Rattan Engg Works, New Delhi 


Sriram Institute For Industrial Research, New Delhi 
Steel Authority of India, Salem 
TTK Prestige Ltd, Bengaluru 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI S. K. SRIVASTAV 
Suri R. P. TriraTHY (Alternate) 


Suri M. P. SINGH 
SHRI SURESH AGARWAL 


SHRI G. L. KHERA 
Suri RAHUL КНЕКА (Alternate) 


DR TARSAME SINGH SIAN 
SHRI ANEESH Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri M. VELMURUGAN 
Suri N. К. VuAvAVARGIA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANTO VIMAL ANAND 
SHRI RAJASEKARAN S. (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHosLA ScIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


CHANDAN GUPTA 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


14 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 33 (14101). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
КОГКАТА 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


