,:i.

U DC 621'791'55'053'6

: 669'14

: 620'177
Indian Standard

IS0

lS:3600( Part6)-1983 5177 - 198T
( Reaffirmed 2003 )

METHOD
PART
6

OF TESTING FUSION WELDED AND WELD METAL IN STEEL
SIDE BEND
Revision

JOINTS
WELDS

TRAfUSVERSE

TEST
)

ON BUTT

m

1

I
( ISO

( Second Title : Fusion

Welded Butt Joints in Steel Side Bend Test )

Transverse

National

Foreword

This part of the Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 517:7-l 981 `Fusion welded butt joints Organization for Standardization in steel - Transverse side bend test' issued by the International (ISO), was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on the recommendations of the Welding General Sectional Committee and approved by the Structural and Metals Division Counci!. ln the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions in Indian Standards attention is specially drawn to the following : i Comma ( ,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian &e full point ( . ) on the base line as the decimal marker. Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'.
0

are not Standards to this

identical

with

those used is to be

the current practice standard, they should

Standard'

appear,

referring

8 ..

Additional.

Information

\

This standard was first published in 1966 and was revised in 1973 and covered the various tests on fusion welded joints and weld metal in steel. In view of tha experience gainad and in order to bring the test and test requirements in the line with other international standards published so far, it has.been decided to revise this standard in the following parts : Part 1 Cruciform fillet weld tensile test* Part 2 Beam impact (Charpy V-notch) test* Part 3 Transverse tensile test on butt welds Part 4 Longitudinal tensile test on cylindrical Part 5 ( IS0 5173-1981

weld mstal test pieces on butt welds

) Transverse root and face bend test on butt welds

Part 6 ( IS0 5177-1981 ) Transverse side bend test on butt welds Part 7 Longitudinal root and face bend test on butt welds* Part 8 Nick break test and fillet weld fracture test* Part 9 Marco and micro examination* This part is one of them. In this revision free-bend test has been deleted as the ductility of the weld zone is being assessed more and more by other bend tests. Special tests such as tests for ths susceptibility to lameller tearing, reheat cracking, brittle fracture and creep fatigue will be covered in separate standards,, The main purpose of this standard is to recommsnd test procedures and test specimens that should be quoted or incorporated in engineering application standards that deal with welded constructions primarily for the qualification of welding procedures and operators. Where differences still exist between application standards, the methods of test given in this standard should be preferred. A general'indication is given of the purpose served by the tests specified in this standard, but this standard does not indicate the choice of test method for a particular application nor the number of Such requirements are specimens to be tested or the repeat tests to be allowed in the ej'ent of failure, matters to be dealt with in the particular application standards where they exist or to be agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser. It should be realized that variations in welding procedure and the preparation can give rise to variations in the test results.
l

of test specimens

Under preparation. Adopted 15 December 1983 Q May 1984. ISI INSTITUTION

I

Gr

3

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN.

9 B4IiAOUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO NEW DELHI 110001

IS : 3600 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 IS0 5177 - 1981

1

Scope

4.3

This International Standard specifies two methods for carrying out transverse side bend tests on test pieces taken from a fusion welded butt joint in prder to assess the ductility of, or the absence of internal defects in, the joint ifself. It also gives the dimensions of the test pieces.

The test piece shall be taken by appropriate means. Shearing is excluded. If thermal cutting or other methods which could affect the cut surfaces are used, the cuts shall be at a distance from the test piece greater than or equal to 8 mm, but in any case sufficient, according to the process used not to induce alterations which could modify the test results.

2

Field of application

5

Machining

of the test piece

This International Standard applies to ferrous materials having a thickness not less than 10 mm with butt joints made by any
fusion welding process.

3

Principle

5.1 The test piece shall be finished by machining or grinding, suitable precautions being taken to avoid superficial strainhardening or excessive heating of the material. Within the length L (see figures 3 and 4). the surfaces shall be free from scratches or notches transverse to the teat piece direction. The test piece shall have a rectangular cross-section practically constant for all its length. The cross-sectional shape shait conform to figure 1. 5.3 The upper and lower surfaces of the weld shall be dressed flush with the original surfaces of the parent metal. The teat piece thickness a shall be at least 10 mm and have a ratio with the diameter of the former or of the roller conforming to the requirements of the application standard; its width b shall be equal to the thickness of the parent metal near the welded joint. When the original joint thickness exceeds 40 mm, it is permissible, instead of a single test piece having a width corresponding to the full joint thickness, to take several test pieces from the welded joint, provided the width b of each test piece is in the range from 20 to 40 mm and the test pieces cover the full thickness of the joint (see figure 21.2) In such a case the position of the test piece in the welded joint thickness shall be identified.

Submitting a test piece to,plastic deformation by bending it without reversing the bending direction. The test piece is taken transversely from a welded joint in such a way that its width corresponds to the joint thickness. The test may be made according to either of two methods described in clauses 6 (bending test using a former) and 7 (bending using a roller).

5.2

5.4

4

Taking of test pieces

4.1 The test piece shall be taken from a part of a welded fabrication or a welded test assemblyt' transversely to the welded joint in such a way that, after machining, the weld cross-section will remain in the middle of the length of the test piece and will correspond to its width (see figure 1). 4.2 Each test piece shall be marked in such a way that after

5.5

its removal it is possible to identify its exact position in the part

of the fabrication or in the test assembly from which it has been taken. No heat treatment shall be applied to the test assemblies unless it is specified or allowed by the application standard for the welded joint to be tested. Details of any heat treatment shall be recorded in the test report.

5.6

The corners of the test pieces on the face in tension shall be rounded by machining to a radius R not exceeding 0,2 a (maximum : 3 mm).

1) "Test assemblies" are welded joints which do not belong to a fabrication but are made for purposes of approval (for example procedure qualification). control (for example production test coupons) or studies and reseach.

21

A reduced number of test pieces, or test pieces removed from different positions may be required by particular application standards.

2

IS : 3600 ( Part 6 ) - I983 ISO5177-1981. `I+

6 Method of bend testing (see figure 3)
6.1

using a former

7 Method of bend testing (see figure 4)
7.1

using a roller

Before starting the bend test, the shape of the crosssection of the welded joint and its position in the test piece can be made apparent, if necessary, by lightly, macro-etching the surface of the test piece to be put in tension.

The test shall be carried out by firmly clamping one end of the test piece in a testing device having two parallel rollers. The test piece shall be slowly and continuously bent by applying a concentrated load on the test piece by means of the rotation of the outer roller, having a radius R. through an arc centred on the axis of the inner roller.

6.2

The test shall be carried out by placing the test piece on two supports consisting of parallel rollers. The test piece shall be slowly and continuously bent, by applying in the middle of the span, on the axis of the weld, a concentrated load (three point bending) perpendicularly to the test piece surface.

7.2 The'diameter D of the inner roller shall conform to the requirements of the application standard concerning the welded joint under examination.*) 7.3 The test is completed when the bending
4) reaches the welded joint under examination. angle

a, (see
standard

The load shall be applied by means of a former having an end diameter D that conforms to the requirements of the application standard concerning the welded joint under examination.1)

6.3

figure

the value given in the application

concerning

6

Results

6.4

The distance L (see figure 3) between the rollers shall be not greater than L = D + 3 a.

After bending, both the external surface and the sides of the test piece shall be examined. The evaluation of the bent test piece shall be made in accordance with the appropriate application standard for the welded joint under examination. In the test report the method of bending shall be recorded.

The bend test is completed when the bending angle a (see figure 3) reaches the value given in the application standard concerning the welded joint under examination.

6.5

1) When it is not otherwisespecifiedin the application standardconcerning the weldedjoint underexamination,the diameterD of the former should be chosen in such a way that, after bending, the width Ls of the weld face is included in an angle not exceeding 9o" (see figure 3). 2) When it is not otherwise specified in the application standard concerning the welded joint under examination,the diameterD of the inner roller should be chosen in such a way that, after bending, the width LS of the weld face is included in an angle not exceeding 9o" (see figure 41.

3

IS : 3600 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 IS0 5177 - 1981

I

\

w
Ls
Rounded edges

Figure 1

a b b a
a
b
VI

= thickness of the test piece
= width

-IIa

L, = width of the weld S = thickness of the joint

b

Figure 2

I,3 L, -a

Figure 3

4

IS : 3600 ( Part 6 ) - 1983. IS0 5177 - 198-l

.

1

(D

t

Figure 4 -.

L

Printedat Offset Printing Centre, New Delhi, India

5

