**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 1378 (1987): Oxidized-copper finishes [MTD 7: Light 
Metals and their Alloys] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 669-369-1 






IS : 1378 


•1987 






Indian Standard 


( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 






SPECIFICATION FOR 










OXIDIZED-COPPER FINISHES 










( Third Revision ) 






1. Scope — This 
of zink aad 2inc 


standard prescribes requirements for oxidized-copper 
alloys, steels, copper and copper alloys. 


finishes on articles made 


2. Terminology 


— For the 


purpose of this standard, the following definition shall apply. 





o 
o 

(0 

o 

o 
O 

% 



O 
O 

CO 

S 

3- 

E 
E 
o 
U 

(0 

c 
o 

o 

CO 



2.1 Significant Surface — A significant surface is defined as that part of the surface of an article 
which is required to be given an oxidized copper finish for the sake of appearance or serviceability 
of that article. 

Note — Portions of the article to be designated as significant surfaces shall be subject to agreement between 
the purchaser and the supplier. 

3. Classification — The oxidized-copper finishes on different basis metals and the corresponding 
minimum thickness of copper plating shall be as given below: 

Basis Metal Minimum Tfiickness of Copper Minimum Tliickness of Copper 

Piating Prior to Oxidizing Plating After Oxidizing 

MfTi fim 

Zinc and zinc-base alloys 40 38 

Steel 25 23 

Note — in case of copper base alloys, a flash coating of copper may be given prior to oxidizing, if necessary. 

4. Thickness Test for Copper Plating of Oxidized Finished Material 

4.1 Clean the sample with an organic solvent, such as trichloroethylene, and then with dilutes 
sodium hydroxide solution to remove oil, grease and paint. 

4.2 Remove the copper oxide layer by dipping in dilute hydrochloric acid (1:1). 

4.3 Measure the thickness of the copper coating by any of the methods specified in IS : 3203 - 1982 
'Methods of testing local thickness of electroplated coatings {first revision Y ox IS : 6012 - 1970 
'Method for measurement of coating thickness by eddy current.' 

Note — Any lacquer coating applied over the copper plating should be removed before the test. 

5. Oxidizing and Bronzing 

5.1 Oxidizing and bronzing may be done by using the process given in Appendix A or any of the 
conventional processes to produce an oxidized coating on copper and copper plated articles. The 
processed parts shall be thoroughly cleaned before and after processing. The coating may not 
produce any dimensional change of the treated parts. 

5.1.1 The shades of colour produced by the bronzing processes depend on the form of the copper, 
for example, electroplated or cast, and the way it has been pre-treated, for example polished or 
annealed. For reproducible colours, the pre-treatment should always be similar. 

5.2 Finist) — The finish shall be uniform, adherent and free from any defects which are detrimental 
to its use. 



Adopted 20 November 1987 



@ June 1988, BIS 



Gr2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



18:1378-1987 

5.2.1 The gloss may be subject to agreement between the supplier and the purchaser. When 
finished part is to be coated with lacquer conforming to IS : 349 - 1981 'Specification for lacquer, 
cellulose nitrate, clear, finishing, glossy for metal ( first revision )\ there shall be a slight change in 
the shade of bronze finish and it may be necessary to change the bronzing conditions to allow for 
this fact. 

6. Sampling 

6il Lot— A lot shall consist of the articles, parts or components, approximately of the same size, 
shape and processed at one time in the same bath. 

6.LI For the purpose of acceptance, a lot shall be div^ided into sub-lots of 100 articles or part 
thereof. Samples shall be taken from each sub-lot for ascertaining the conformity of the sub-lot 
to the specified requirements. 

6.2 Criteria for Acceptance— If these samples pass the tests, the sub-lot represented by them' shall 
be accepted, if one or both the samples fail, two further samples shall be selected from the same 
sub-lot and subjected to the tests. If these samples pass the tests, the sub-lot shall be accepted. 
If any of the second set of samples fails in any test, the sub-lot shall be rejected. 

6.3 Separate Specimen — VJhen processed articles cannot be subjected to any of the specified, tests, 
two specimens of the same basis metal conforming in size and shape of the article, as far as 
possible, should be plated along with the article under identical conditions for the purpose of 
testing. 

7. Marking — Articles with oxidized-copper finish shall be marked with the class and thickness of 
the copper coating given prior to oxidizing. 

7.1 Standard Marking — Details available with the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 5*1 f 
METHODS FOR OXIDIZING AND BRONZING FOR COPPER 

A-l. Innmersion Processes 

A-I.l Brown Shades ( Florentine Bronze ) — This process is applicable to articles made of copper 
or having a coppered surface and is extensively used for finishing medallions, ornamental plaques, 
metal bases and a variety of domestic and electrical fittings. 

A-l. 1. 1 Bronzing solution ~ DWuie 3-Q ml of ammonium hydrosulphide to one litre. 

A- 1. 1. 2 Procec/t/re — The articles, on removal from cleaning or plating bath, are swilled well in 
clean cold water and then immersed in a bronzing solution. This solution is contained in a steel 
or plastic vessel and is used cold. The articles are immersed for a few seconds only and must be 
kept moving, swilled in cold water and wet scratch brushed with a fine brass wire wheel. After this, 
the articles are re-immersed in the bronzing solution, taken out, rinsed well in cold water, then put 
through boiling water, dried and again scratch brushed with the same type of wire wheel but used 
dry instead of wet. Finally, the articles should be lacquered with a clear or slightly tinted lacquer 
to preserve the finish. The purpose of double bronzing and scratch brushing operation is to 
ensure an even tone, the colour being patchy and very iridescent if the process is restricted to a 
single dip in the bronzing solution. 

Note 1 — When wet scratch brushing 5 ml/1 of detergent maybe added to the water used, to act as a lubricant. 
The usual brushing speed should be 1 400 to 1 600 rpm ; higher speeds would tend to frost the surface. 

Note 2 — For the final dry scratch brushing of the bronzed finish, a speed of 1500 to 1 800 rpm is recommen- 
ded; with higher speeds, there may be dragging or tearing of the bronzed finish. 

A-l. 2 Dark Brown to Black ( Oxidized Copper Finisti ) — This process is very similar to the preceding 
one, both finishes depending upon the production of a dark film of copper sulphide on the surface 
of the metal. In this instance, a more concentrated solution is necessary. 



IS : 1378-1987 

A-l.2.1 Bronzing solution —DWuie 12-25 ml of ammonium hydrosulphide. Dilute 12-25 ml of 
ammonium hydrosulphide or alternatively 12-25 g of potassium polysulphide ( potash sulphuret ) to 
one litre where an intensely black finish is required 3 ml/I of 0*880 sp gr ammonia shouldibe added 
to the above solutions. This is used cold and should be contained in a steel or plastic vessel. 

fiA.lJl Procedure — The coppered articles are taken direct from thejplating vat, swilled well in 
cold water and placed in the bronzing solution, in which they should be kept constantly moving. 
A few seconds immersion will suffice to give a dark chocolate shade, but if a blue-black finish is 
required as is usually the case in copper 'oxidizing', the articles should be allowed to remain a little 
longer until a dirty slate colour is obtained. On removal from the bronzing solution, the articles 
are swilled thoroughly in cold water, rinsed in clean boiling water and then dried by means of warm 
boxwood sawdust or spontaneously in air afterwards, they are dry scratch brushed with a fine brass 
wire wheel to remove any bloom from the surface and reveal the true colour of the bronze finish. 
The articles are then relieved, if necessary, with satene composition, peerless polish or pumice and 
are finally lacquered with Ercalene lacquer. 



EXP LA N ATORY NOTE 

For imparting oxidized-copper finish, basis metal is plated with copper, dipped in an oxidizing 
liquid and if necessary protected by a lacquer coating. Oxidized-copper finish is used as a decora- 
tive finish on fans, switches, builder's hardware, furniture fittings and other domestic wares. Since 
oxidized copper finish is very sensitive, the articles should be degreased perfectly. Depending 
on the ultimate finish, the basis surface may be polished or otherwise. 

This standard was first published in 1959, and subsequently revised in 1967 and 1979. In this 
present revision, the oxidizing and bronzing processes for copper or one having a coppered surface 
have been included and are given in Appendix A. 



Printed atSaini Printers, Shahdara, Delhi 110032 



