WATT AAR IS 5115 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Tardis $ are ware 
Ug USRU erga Ul w Slax — 
LEUE 


( TET FAT ) 


Domestic Storage Type Water Heaters 
For Use with LPG — Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 97.040.20 


© BIS 2022 


UR AAS Sl 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAP Yor, 9 TIGR Mle THX AMT, Ag facet - 110002 
\ «= MANAK BHAVAN , 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110 002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2022 Price Group 8 


Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances (Pressure Type) Sectional Committee, 
MED 23 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
recommendation of the Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances (Pressure Type) 
Sectional Committee, and approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


This standard was first published in 1969. This standard is being revised again to keep pace 
with the latest technological developments and international practices. In this revision, the 
following major changes have been made: 


a) A reference clause has been added mentioning the latest version of all the referred 
standards. 


b) Editorial corrections have been done. 
c) Clause 6 ‘Performance Requirements' has been modified. 


Compliance with this standard does not in itself guarantee that satisfactory service will be 
attained. Conditions of use vary greatly and it is necessary to relate the standards of 
performance to the actual use to which the appliance will be subjected during its life. 


This standard specifies the constructional and performance requirements of domestic storage 
type water heaters for use with liquefied petroleum gases at a working pressure of 30 gf/cm?, 
designed to provide a ready supply of hot water at a maximum water temperature of 85°C, 
having nominal capacities between 6 and 100 litres 


This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on various domestic and commercial gas 
burning appliances (pressure type) used with liquefied petroleum gases (LPG). General 
requirements of this equipment are covered in IS 5116 : 2020 Domestic and Commercial 
Equipment for Use with LPG — General Requirements ', which is a necessary adjunct to this 
standard. Should, however, any deviation exist between the requirements given in IS 5116 
and those given in this standard, provisions of the latter shall apply. Other standards 
published so far in the series are IS 4246 : 2002 'Domestic gas stoves for use with liquefied 
petroleum gases — Specification (fifth revision)’, IS 15558 : 2005 ‘Mini domestic water 
heater for use with LPG — Specification’, IS 4473 : 2002 ‘Domestic gas ovens for use with 
liquefied petroleum gases (first revision)' and IS 11480 : 1998 'Domestic grillers for use with 
liquefied petroleum gases — Specification (first revision)’. Specification for bulk water heater 
for use with liquefied petroleum gases (LPG) covered in IS 5776 : 1988 'Bulk water heaters 
for use with LPG (first revision)’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in 
Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied 
with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be 
rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second 
revision)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be same 
as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5115 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


DOMESTIC STORAGE TYPE WATER HEATERS FOR USE WITH LPG — 
SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 
1.1 This standard specifies the 
constructional and performance 


requirements of domestic storage type 
water heaters for use with liquefied 
petroleum gases at a working pressure of 
30 gf/cm?, designed to provide a ready 
supply of hot water at a maximum water 
temperature of 85 °C, having nominal 
capacities between 6 and 100 litres. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain 
provisions which, through reference in this 
text, constitute provisions of this standard. 
At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of the 
standards listed below. In case the 
standards are to be referred in this clause 
they are to be listed as follows: 


IS No Title 


404 (Part Lead pipes — Specification : 


1) :1993 Part 1 for other than chemical 
purposes (third revision) 

554 : Pipe threads where pressure- 

1999 tight joints are made on the 


threads — Dimensions, 
tolerances and designation 
(fourth revision) 


1239 (Part Steel tubes, tubulars and 

2) :2011 other steel fittings — 
Specification : Part 2 steel 
pipe fittings (fifth revision) 


IS No Title 
5116 : Domestic and commercial 
2020 equipment for use with LPG 


— General requirements 
(fourth revision) 


6480 : Glossary of terms relating to 

1988 domestic and commercial gas 
burning appliances (first 
revision) 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 For the purpose of this standard the 
following definitions, in addition to the 
definitions given in 2 of IS 6480 shall 


apply. 


3.2 Storage Type Water Heater — A 
self-contained appliance in which a 
volume of water is heated under 
thermostatic control and stored for use 
when required. 


4 MATERIALS 


In addition to the relevant material 
requirements specified in 5 of IS 5116, the 
requirements given in 4.1 to 4.4 shall 


apply. 


4.1 Apparatus plates and all bosses for 
screwed connection shall be made of 
gunmetal or brass of brazing quality. All 
pipes for water and gas shall be of copper, 
brass or other suitable material not inferior 
to copper or brass in resistance to 
corrosion under normal working 
conditions. 


4.2 Outer casing of the water heater shall 
be constructed from corrosion resisting 


IS 5115 : 2022 


material or shall be adequately protected 
from corrosion on all surfaces. 


4.3 The material used for lagging the water 
heater shall be such that it does not 
corrode the container or other parts in 
contact with it and does not crumble, sag, 
or deteriorate in use to such an extent that 
its efficiency is impaired. It shall be 
immune to attack by vermin and moisture. 


4.4 The gas cocks and taps shall be made 
of a material prescribed in 5.6 of IS 5116. 


5 CONSTRUCTION 


In addition to the relevant constructional 
requirements specified in Section 1 of IS 
5116, the requirements given in 5.1 to 5.17 
shall apply. 


5.1 The material used for the container 
shall be of adequate thickness to provide 
sufficient mechanical rigidity and adequate 
strength to withstand the pressure test as 
given in Annex A. 


5.2 All seams, joints, bosses for screwed 
connections and flanges of permanent 
nature shall be secured by welding or 
brazing or soldering. If soft solder (tin-lead 
alloy) is used for jointing, the solder shall 
not be depended upon for mechanical 
strength and this shall be assured by spot 
welding, dovetailing, riveting or other 
similar methods. 


5.3 The lagging material if provided shall 
be packed and supported in a manner that 
precludes the possibility of large air 
pockets developing within it. 


5.4 Fixing 


There shall be adequate provision for 
fixing and supporting the water heaters so 
that no stress is transmitted to water pipes 
or gas pipes. 


5.4.1 Water heaters may be arranged for 
floor or wall mounting. 


5.5 Facility of Maintenance 


Similar parts of water heaters of the same 
make, model and size shall be readily 
interchangeable. The parts which may 
require maintenance or replacement shall, 
as far as practicable, be so located as to 
assure easy access and replacement. 


5.5.1 Each gas jet or burner complete with 
jet shall be readily accessible for 
replacement and shall hear a characteristic 
jet or burner identification mark. 


5.5.2 It shall be possible to remove the 
burner without breaking the inlet and 
outlet water connections or the flue gas 
connection of the appliance or draining the 
tank. 


5.5.3 To remove the water and gas sections 
the use of screwdrivers and adjustable 
spanners only shall be required. 


5.5.4 The component parts and particularly 
heat exchanger shall be easily-accessible 
and easy to clean. (Vessels whose interiors 
are inaccessible shall be accepted if fitted 
with a suitable drain plug easily 
recognizable and accessible). 


5.6 Gas inlet connections shall conform to 
the requirements given in 5.6.1 below and 
18 of IS 5116. 


5.6.1 The gas inlet connections for 
different appliance ratings shall be as 
follows : 


SI Maximum rating of Minimum 

No. appliance bore 
mm 

(1) (2) (3) 

i) Upto and including 10 6 

080 kcal/h 
ii) Over 10 080 kcal/h and 9 
including 25 200 
kcal/h 
iii) Over 25 200 kcal/h 13 


5.7 Water Connections 


Whenever the water connections to the 
water haters including valves, taps, pipes 
and pipe fittings are threaded, the threads 
shall comply with IS 554. The diameter of 
water connections for inlet and outlet used 
on water heaters shall be as follows [see 
also IS 404 (Part 1) and IS 1239 (Part 2)]. 


SI No. Capacity Minimum Size 


l mm 


1) 6 15 


ii) 70 20 
100 


5.7.1 It shall be possible to descale all 
waterways susceptible to the formation of 
scale. 


5.8 Gas and Water Taps 


The water heaters shall be provided with 
such gas and water taps as are essential for 
the normal operation of the appliance by 
the user. This requirement does not include 
water taps for control at outlets remote 
from the appliance. If taper-plug type 
water taps are used as a part of the water 
heater, they should comply with the 
requirements of taper plug gas cocks. 


5.8.1 Gas Taps 


These shall conform to 8.1 to 8.12 of IS 
5116. These taps shall be accessible to the 
user, to enable the gas supply to the pilot 
and main burner to be turned on and off. 
On heaters with an input exceeding 10 080 
kcal/h either a pilot gas tap that interlocks 
with the main gas tap or a 2 stage gas tap 
with a ‘pilot’ position, should be provided. 


IS 5115 : 2022 


5.9 Gas Rate Adjusters 


Where provided, gas rate adjusters shall be 
set and sealed by the manufacturer and 
shall not be liable to accidental alteration. 


5.10 Primary Air Regulator 


Any aeration adjuster shall not be capable 
of closing the air inlet completely and shall 
not the liable to accidental alteration. 


5.11 Jet Fixing 


It shall not be possible to loosen 
completely burner jets or injector jets 
without the use of tools. 


5.12 Pilot Burner 


A lighting pilot shall be provided if the 
heat input exceeds 1 500 kcal/h. 


5.12.1 Pilots shall conform to the 
requirements given in 13 of IS 5116. 


5.12.2 Pilot burners must be so fitted that 
they can be easily removed. 


5.13 Flame Failure Device 


Every appliance shall be incorporated 
with, a flame failure device and shall 
satisfy the requirements specified in 14 of 
IS 5116. 


5.14 Flue Outlet 


The appliance shall have provision for 
connection to a flue outlet unless the heat 
input does not exceed 1 500 kcal/h or the 
storage capacity does not exceed 25 litres. 


5.14.1 All appliances of capacity over 14 
litres of water or gas consumption of over 
250 g/h, shall be fitted with a connection 
to a vent pipe for the combustion gases. 


5.14.2 Draught Diverter 


Every water heater requiring connection to 
a flue shall incorporate a draught diverter. 


5.15 Gas Pressure Tapping 


IS 5115 : 2022 


A gas pressure tapping shall be fitted after 
the automatic gas valve. The pressure 
required at the point shall be durably 
marked in gf/cm? near the tapping. 


5.16 Filter 


A suitable filter shall be provided in the 
gas way before the thermostatic valve and 
the pilot gas tapping. 


5.17 Water Regulator 


Appliances with water surfaces open to the 
atmosphere must be provided with a 
device intended for regulating the rate of 
flow of the water. 


6 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


In addition to the relevant requirements 
specified in Section 2 of IS 5116, the 
requirements given in 6.1 to 6.16 shall 


apply. 
6.1 General Conditions of Test 


The requirements as given in 19 of IS 
5116 shall apply. 


6.1.1 General Test Condition 
6.1.1.1 Test room 


The appliance shall be installed in a well- 
ventilated, draught-free room that has an 
ambient temperature of 20 to 30 °C. 


Test room conditions shall apply for 
thermal efficiency, combustion, gas 
consumption and resistance to draught. All 
other performance requirements may be 
tested at actual room conditions. 


6.1.1.2 Accuracy of measurements 


Except where otherwise specified, the 
instruments used shall permit 
measurements to be made with the 
following accuracy : 


SI Parameters Accuracy 
No. Required 
(1) (2) (3) 

i) Water temperature, °C +0.5 
ii) Surface temperature, +2 

°C 
iii) Gas temperature, °C +0.5 
iv) Gas volume, percent +0.5 

v) Time, s +0.5 
vi) Weight, percent +0.1 
vii) Gas pressure, gf/cm? +0.3 

vill) Water pressure, £2 
percent 

ix) Test air pressure, +2 
percent 

x) Atmospheric pressure, El 

gf/cm? 


6.2 Draw-off Water Temperature 


When tested according to method given in 
Annex B, draw-off water temperature shall 
be according to the requirements given in 
6.2.1 and 6.2.2. 


6.2.1 The maximum water temperature 
obtainable at the highest thermostat setting 
shall be as follows : 


a) It should not exceed 70 °C under 
equilibrium conditions and unless 
the water is required for special 
purposes; and 


b) It shall not exceed 90 °C, if 
successive small quantities are 
drawn at frequent intervals. 


6.2.2 The outlet water temperature 
obtained after drawing-off quantity of 
water equal to half the total capacity of the 
water heater shall be within 8 °C of the 
highest temperature, obtained. 


6.3 Anti-drip Device 


The storage water heaters with open 
delivery shall be provided with an anti- 
drip device. The quantity of water required 
to cause water to flow through the outlet 
shall be between 2.5 and 4 percent 
inclusive of water capacity of the container 
when tested in accordance with the method 
described in Annex C. The device shall be 
so designed that a continuous flow from 
the outlet of the heater is obtained with not 
more than 50 percent of the 
manufacturer’s normal flow rating, and 
that the flow of water is interrupted 
cleanly. 


6.4 Loss by Evaporation 


The evaporation loss from an appliance 
with inlet water control shall not exceed 5 
percent of the total contents, when 
operated for 12 hours at maintenance gas 
rate. 


6.5 Water Temperature in Feed 
Cisterns 


The temperature rise of the water is an 
integral ball-valve-feed cistern after 
heating the appliance up when cold and 
operating it at maintenance gas rate for 4 
hours shall not exceed 15 °C at an initial 
water temperature and ambient air 
temperature of 27 + 2 °C. 


6.6 Thermal Efficiency 


The thermal efficiency, when tested as 
described in Annex D, shall be not less 
than 70 percent. 


6.7 Combustion 


IS 5115 : 2022 


When sampled as detailed in 6.7.1, the 
carbon monoxide/ carbon dioxide ratio of 
the products of combustion shall not 
exceed 0.02 at any rate between the 
minimum operational rate and an overload 
rate of 12.5 percent above the 
manufacturer’s normal rate. The test shall 
be made at a sufficient number of heat 
input rates to determine the combustion 
performance over the whole of the 
prescribed range. 


6.7.1 All appliances shall be fed with cold 
water so as to maintain a temperature rise 
of 16 + 5 °C at normal heat input, and 
sampling shall be carried out when thermal 
equilibrium has been established. 
Wherever practicable a sampling hood 
shall be used having the following 
characteristics: 


a) It shall collect all the products from 
the appliance, 


b) Products shall not spill from the 
periphery of the hood, 


c) There shall not be undue dilution of 
products with excess air, and 


d) The hood shall not interfere with the 
combustion of gas in the water 
heater. 


A hood suitable for most purposes is 
shown in Fig. 1, where the hood would 
interfere with test conditions, the products 
of combustion shall be collected from a 
convenient part of the flue duct. This may 
be done by means of L shaped probe 
inserted into the duct and arranged so that 
the open end can scan the duct cross- 
section while sample is withdrawn. When 
the infra-red gas analyzer is used, 
complete mixing may be ensured by 
passing the sample to a 1-litre flask; 
alternatively, the products may be drawn 
from the probe into an aspirator. 


IS 5115 : 2022 


REGULATOR WITH 
FRICTION SPRING 


SAMPLING TUBE, 


5 DIA 
in 


255 DIA 


125 DIA 


All dimensions in millimeters 


FIG 1. HOOD FOR WATER HEATER 


6.8 Gas Soundness 


The relevant requirement given in 16 of IS 
5116 shall apply. 


6.9 Water Soundness 


All water carrying parts of the appliance 
individually and when assembled to form 
the water circuit of the appliance shall not 
leak or show any permanent distortion 
during or after the test when tested at a 
hydrostatic pressure 4 kgf/cm’. The water 
circuit shall be kept under pressure for a 
minimum 5 min. 


6.10 Gas Consumption 


With the taps fully opened and with the 
burners operating at the maximum 
consumption, the appliance shall give 
within +8 percent of the manufacturer's 
recommended gas consumption in g/h or 
heat input in kcal/h at 2.942 kN/m? (30 
gf/cm’) gas inlet pressure, when tested as 
per 20.4 of IS 5116 at STP (by using air 
and then converting to LPG). 


6.11 Ignition and Flame Travel 


6.11.1 There shall be easy and safe access 
for lighting the pilot burner by a 


matchstick and it shall be easy to see that 
the burner or burners are lighted from the 
pilot. Where the burner or burners are 
lighted by automatic ignition, it shall not 
be possible for gas to be admitted to the 
main burner without igniters being on. 


6.11.2 If the flame is applied to any one 
burner port, when the gas is flowing, flame 
travel shall be complete. This applies for 
all pressures from 25 gf/cm? to 35 gf/cm? 
taps being fully open. 


6.11.3 If the burner is ignited from a pilot 
flame, ignition shall be smooth at 
pressures from 25 gf/cm? to 35 gf/cm? with 
the tap turned full on and ignition shall be 
affected without delay after turning on the 
taps. 


6.12 Flame Stability 


It shall be possible to operate the appliance 
with tap fully open at gas inlet pressure 
from 2.452 kN/m’ to 3.432 kN/m? (25 
gf/cm? to 35 gf/cm’) without the flame 
either extinguishing, blowing off or 
striking back and without the formation of 
soot. The pilot flame shall be stable, 
without lifting or soot deposition, at this 
gas inlet pressure. 


6.13 Noise Control 


The ignition of the burner flame, their 
operation and turning off shall not give 
rise to undue or excessive noise during all 
the operation tests. 


6.14 Flash-Back 


While the appliance is in operation at full 
gas consumption, the flame shall be 
immediately reduced to the minimum 
possible and then brought back to full size. 
The operation shall be repeated five times. 
No flash-back shall occur during the test. 
This applies to all pressures from 25 
gf/cm? to 35 gf/cm?. 


IS 5115 : 2022 


6.15 Resistance to Draught 


There shall be no extinction of the flame 
on any of the burners operating at 
maximum consumption when the 
appliance is placed in a normal (not 
localized) current of air with a velocity of 
2 m/s, as measured with a rotating vane 
anemometer. The location of the appliance 
relative to adjacent walls and the direction 
of the draught shall be varied to 
correspond to likely conditions of 
appliance installation. This applies for all 
pressure from 2.452 kN/m? to 3.432 kN/m? 
(25 gf/cm? to 35 gf/cm’). 


6.16 Fire Hazard and Limiting 
Temperature 


The relevant requirements given in 23 of 
IS 5116 shall apply. 


7 INSTRUCTIONS 


In addition to the requirements specified in 
24 of IS 5116, the requirements specified 
in 7.1 to 7.4 below shall apply. 


7.1 Water heater shall be supplied with 
clear instructions supplemented, if 
necessary, with diagrams or illustrations 
indicating the method of installation and 
connection and precautions necessary to 
provide for the expansion of water during 
heating and relief of partial vacuum, if 
likely to occur. Attention may also be 
drawn to the requirements of statutory 
authorities, 


Attention should be drawn to the need for 
periodical descaling of the inner container 
of the water heater depending upon the 
hardness of the water being used. 


7.2 Instructions sheet shall contain the 
warning against installing appliances in 
confined space, for example shower 
cubicles. 


IS 5115 : 2022 


7.3 Total weight of appliance when full 
and warning against mounting on walls or 
floors of insufficient strength. 


7.4 Warning against connecting the 
appliance directly to the mains if it is not 
designed to withstand an inlet water test 
pressure of 15 kgf/cm”. 


8 MARKING 


8.1 Each water heater shall be legibly and 
indelibly marked with the following : 


a) Permissible maximum working 
head of water (for controlled outlet 
water heaters); 


b) Water capacity in litres; 


c) Total heat input in kcal/h with 
commercial butane; 


d) Recovery time for water to reach 65 
°C (average) from 15 °C with an 
ambient temperature of 15 °C; and 


e) Hot and cold-water connections 
shall he clearly and permanently 
identified; 

f) Manufacturer's name, initials or 

registered trade-mark; 


g) Serial number; 


10 


h) The words for use with liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG) at 2.942 
kN/m? (30 gf/cm’); 


j) The total gas consumption at 30 
gf/cm?; 


k) Warning — 'For use in well 
ventilated areas only’ — To be 
written on the front of the body of 
the appliance in Red Colour as well 
as prominently on the outer 
package; 


m) Any special instructions for safe 
operation; 


n) Country of origin; 


p) Temperature chart corresponding 
to the thermostat setting, if the 
adjustable thermostat is provided. 


8.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the 
requirements of this standard may be 
certified as per the conformity assessment 
schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and 
the Rules and Regulations framed 
thereunder, and the products may be 
marked with the Standard Mark. 


9 PACKING 
9.1 The requirements given in 25 of IS 
5116 shall apply. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 5.1) 


IS 5115 : 2022 


PRESSURE TEST FOR WATER HEATER CONTAINERS 


A-1 The container of every water heater 
shall be subjected for a period of 5 minutes 
to a hydraulic or pneumatic test pressure as 
follows, and shall not show any leakage or 
appreciable permanent distortion. 


a) 


b) 


Heaters intended to withstand only 
the head of water they contain (for 
example, those with a broken feed) 
shall be sound when completely 
filled with water at maximum 
water temperature. 


Other heaters intended for 
connection to a cistern supply shall 
not leak or show any sign of 
distortion at a water pressure 50 
percent greater than the 
recommended maximum head. 


11 


c) 


d) 


Other heaters with inlet water 
controls shall not leak or show any 
sign of distortion at a pressure to be 


agreed to between the 
manufacturer and the testing 
authority. 

Heaters intended to withstand 


mains water pressure shall not leak 
or show any sign of damage or 
distortion at a static water pressure 
of 20 kgf/cm’. 


NOTE — Heaters designed to expose the 
water surface open to the atmosphere are 
exempted from the above test. 


IS 5115 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 6.2) 
METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF DRAW — OFF TEMPERATURE 


B-I PROCEDURE 


B-1.1 Light the gas and continue heating 
until three consecutive readings of the gas 
rate indicate that a minimum has been 
reached in the case of a gradual acting 
thermostat, or that the main gas supply has 


12 


been closed in the case of a snap-acting 
thermostat. Turn out the gas, admit cold 
water at the manufacturer’s rated flow, and 
plot a curve of outlet water temperature 
against the volume of water delivered, 
taking temperature readings every few 
seconds. 


IS 5115 : 2022 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 6.3) 
METHOD OF TEST FOR ANTIDRIP DEVICE 


C-1 PROCEDURE 


C-1.1 Fit a suitable water flow meter in the 
inlet water supply and note the minimum 
inlet water flow rate required to give a 
continuous delivery whilst the device is 
operating. Turn off the water control tap, 


13 


and when flow through the outlet has 
ceased add water (for example, via funnel 
connected to a 2-way cock in the inlet 
supply) until water flows from the outlet. 
Determine the minimum quantity required 
to cause water to flow. 


IS 5115 : 2022 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 6.6) 
METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF THERMAL EFFICIENCY 


The gas is taken in a small bottle weighing 
1 kg or 2 kg. The bottle is fitted with an 
‘ON/OFF’ valve and is connected to a 
regulator which, in turn, is connected to a 
pressure gauge and to the appliance. A 
second 'ON/OFF' gas valve shall be 
inserted in the gas way up stream of the 
regulator as near the possible to the gas 
bottle. 


D-1 PROCEDURE 


D-1.1 The appliance shall be filled with 
cold water at 20 + 5 °C to its normal 
capacity of less than 1 litre for each 20 
litres and fraction thereof. Weight of the 
water shall be noted. The lid of the 
appliance shall be fitted with an 
aluminium stirrer and a mercury-in-glass 
thermometer calibrated to 0.5 °C least 
count. 


D-1.2 To commence the test, initial 
temperature of water shall be recorded and 
the burner lighted; simultaneously the 
stopwatch shall be started and meter 
reading noted. The thermometer shall be 
observed periodically and stirring 
commenced when the temperature reaches 
80 °C. When the temperature reaches 85 
°C, the gas shall be turned off and the 
watch stopped. Stirring is continued until 
the maximum temperature is reached on 
the thermometer. 


D-1.3 Cold water at a measured 
temperature and at a steady flow shall be 
admitted at the top. The displaced water 
shall be drawn off through the shortest 
possible length of pipe at the bottom into 


14 


weighed- bin (or sequence of bins ), the 
temperature is measured at the point of 
draw-off every few seconds and 
observations shall be continued until the 
temperature of the water being drawn off 
is within 1 °C of the inlet water 
temperature. A smooth curve of 
temperature against time shall be plotted; 
the area A below the curve shall be 
computed, and from this area and the rate 
of flow of water, the total heat content of 
water shall be calculated. 


D-2 CALCULATIONS 


D-2.1 The thermal efficiency of the 
appliance shall be calculated as follows : 


RA 100 
WQ 


Thermal efficiency, percent = 


where 


R = Rate of flow of water in 
kg/min, 


A = Area under time-temperature 
curve in min °C, 


W = Weight of the gas in g, and 


Q = Net calorific value of the gas 
used in kcal/g. 


NOTE — 


1) In the above calculations, the water 
equivalent of the appliance is not taken 
into account. 


2) The net calorific value of gas is used. If 
this is not determined experimentally, the 
value may be taken as 10.9 kcal/g for 
calculation. 


IS 5115 : 2022 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances Sectional Committee, MED 23 


Organization 


L.P.G. 
Bengaluru 


Equipment Research Centre, 


Agnisumukh, Bengaluru 


BSH Household Appliances Manufacturing 
Private Limited, Chennai 


Bharat 
Mumbai 


Petroleum Corporation Limited, 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 


Delton Industries, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance 
(Stores), Kanpur 


Gorani Industries Limited, Indore 


Goyal Engineers Private Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, 
Mumbai 


Kabsons Gas Pvt. Ltd., 


Hyderabad 


Equipment 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
Guwahati 
Indian Oil 
Mumbai 


Corporation (Marketing), 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ASHISH BERA (Chairman) 


SHRI HARI RAO 


SHRI VIJAY KUMAR LOGANATHAN 


SHRI SUDIPTA SARKAR 
SHRI MOHIT RANE (Alternate) 


MS PRAVATANALINI SAMAL 
SHRI KAMRAN SHAIKH (Alternate) 


SHRI R. C. NANGIA 
SHRI VIVEK NANGIA (Alternate) 


SHRI H. H. P. TIWARI 


SHRI ANIL GORANI 


SHRI AJAY GOYAL 
SHRI NEERAJ GOYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI DILIP KUMAR RAY 
SHRI SIVA SHANKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
SHRI KUNAL KABRA (Alternate) 


SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR ARYA 


SHRI MUTHU KUMAR 


SHRI J SHYAM SWAROOP 


15 


IS 5115 : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi SHRI BHUDEV SINGH 
SHRI K. C. DEWANGAN (Alternate) 


L.P.G. Equipment Research Centre, SHRIP.R.DEODHAR 


Bengaluru SHRI RAHUL SHARMA (Alternate) 


Petroleum Conservation Research SHRI SURENDRA PRATAP 
Association, New Delhi 
Ariston Thermo India Private Limited, Pune SHRI ABHIJITBANSHELKIKAR 
SHRI MAHESH BHANGALE (Alternate) 


Rama Domestic Appliances, New Delhi SHRI AMARJEET SINGH KOHLI 
SHRI MANMOHAN KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Shri Krishna Test House, New Delhi SHRI SUNIL TALWAR 


Sunflame Enterprises Private Limited, SHRIK.L. VERMA 


Faridabad SHRI SANDEEP JUNEJA (Alternate) 


Superflame Enterprises Private Limited, SHRI VIKRAM VERMA 
Faridabad 
Vanaz Engineers Limited, Pune SHRI A. A. TAMBOLI 

SHRI V. N. PUJARI (Alternate) 
In Personal Capacity S-139, Greater SHRIM.K. GUPTA 


Kailash-I (1 & 2"! Floor), New Delhi — 
110048 


BIS Directorate General SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA,Scientist ‘E’ And 
Head (MED) [Representing Director General 
(Ex- Officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SANDEEP KESHAV 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


16 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 23 (18752). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, [ 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


