lS/lSOIPAS

17004:2005

hcikm Sku7ckm# CONFORIVHTY ASSHH'V'IENT INFORMATION -- PRINCIPLES -- DISCLOSURE OF AND REQUIREMENTS

Ics

03.120.20

@ BIS 2007

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI 110002 August 2007

Price Group 2

NatiGnal Mirror Committee

of CASCO. IRD 1

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with lSO/PAS 17004:2005 `Conformity assessment -- Disclosure of information--Principles and requirements' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the National Mirror Committee of CASCO and approval of the Director General, Bureau of Indian Standards under Rule 8(3)C of B/S Ru/es, 1987. The text of lSO/PAS Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as

b)

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, use a point (.) as the decimal marker.

the current practice is to

lS/lSO/PAS

17004:2005

Introduction
In 2001 the ISO Council asked its policy committee on conformity assessment (CASCO) to study and prepare a group of common elements for application in future ISO documents on conformity assessment. Subsequent to this request, lSO/CASCO approved the formation of Working Group 23, Common elements in lSO/lEC Standards for conformity assessment activities, to undertake this task. The working group has identified several common elements, including among others

--

impartiality

(lSO/PAS

17001),

--. confidentiality -- -- --
complaints

(l SO/PAS 17002),

and appeals (l SO/PAS 17003), (lSO/PAS 17004),

disclosure of information management

systems (lSO/PAS of developing
Group

17005).

LSO/PAS 17002, which addresses the common element of "confidentiality", the need to elaborate on the related common element of "disclosure of This Publicly Available Specification (PAS) addresses the "disclosure of information" element information". that occurs in many of the lSO/lEC Guides and International Standards on conformity assessment.
CASCO Working 23 identified

In the process

This Publicly Available Specification covers the agreed disclosure of information, and also provides requirements International Standards on conformity assessment. This Publicly Available Specification assessment by lSO/CASCO. Clause 4 (Background) assessment, is intended

principles that give substance to the element of clauses intended to be included in future lSO/lEC

to apply

to the drafting

of documents

on conformity

contains some comments

on the importance

of disclosure

of information

to conformity

Clause 5 (Principles) contains statements that are intended to orientate lSO/CASCO task of creating requirements to address disclosure of information in their documents.

working

groups in their

The requirements to be inserted into future lSO/CASCO documents that cover the common element of "disclosure of information" are detailed in Clause 6. lSO/CASCO has adopted a common structure for the presentation of requirements, Requirements are grouped under one or more of the following headings: a) b) c) d) e) General requirements; Structural requirements; Resource requirements; Process requirements; Management system requirements. will have requirements related to it grouped under one or more of the

As such, each of the common elements headings given in a) to e).

This PAS is not intended to become a future International Standard. At the end of three years after the date of publication, it is expected this PAS will be withdrawn and its contents incorporated as appropriate in relevant lSO/CASCO normative and guidance documents.

lS/lSO/PAS

17004:2005

Indian Standard CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT -- DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION -- PRINCIPLES AND REQUIREMENTS

1

Scope
for the element of disclosure

This Publicly Availabl~ Specification (PAS) contains principles and requirements of information as it relates to standards for conformity assessment.

It is an internal tool for use in the lSO/lEC standards development process by lSO/CASCO working groups when considering the element of disclosure of information in preparation of their documents. This Publicly Available assessment activities. Specification is not a standalone . normative document to be used directly in conformity

2

Normative

references

For dated The following referenced documents are indispensable for the application of this document. references, only the edition cited applies. For undated references, the latest edition of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies. 1S0/1EC 17000:2004, Conformity assessment -- Vocabulary and general principles

3

Terms

and definitions
the terms and definitions given in lSO/lEC 17000 apply.

For the purposes of this document,

NOTE The use of the term "body" in this Publicly Available Specification means either an accreditation body or a conformity assessment body as defined in lSO/lEC 17000.

4

Background

to information

disclosure

4.1 Managing the balance belween confidentiality and disclosure of information related to fulfillment of requirements affects stakeholders' trust and their perception of value in the conformity assessment activity being performed, 4.2 Legal requirements may provide the basis for what, how and to whom, information associated with conformity assessment activities may be disclosed. The content of this Publicly Available Specification, and the application of any subsequent requirements in CASCO documents, are subservient to the provisions found in those legal requirements,

5

Principles

of disclosure
included

of information
in the common element of disclosure of information apply to bodies and their

The following principles activities.

lS/lSO/PAS

17004:2005

a)

Openness: A body needs to disclose information about its conformity assessment activities to any user.

Subject to relevant legal requirements, the current status of an attestation for any object of conformity that the body has made an assessment of, may be publicly disclosed with the permission of the customer, or in response to a query about the authenticity of a claim by a user. A body needs to provide access or disclosure to specific interested parties of non-confidential and non-proprietary information about the attestations it has made for specific objects of conformity, in order to gain or maintain confidence in its conformity assessment activities. b) Access to information: Any information held by the body on an object of conformity that is the subject of an assessment should, upon request, be made accessible to the person or organization which contracted the conformity assessment body to undertake the conformity assessment activity. c)

Challenging confidentiality and disclosure of information:
An individual or organization should be able to submit a challenge to the body concerning that body's

conformity with requirements related to confidentiality and disclosure of information.

6 6.1

Requirements General

for disclosure

of information

In developing this Publicly Available Specification, it was recognized that there are varying degrees of specificity that lSO/CASCO working groups should consider. Consequently, the requirements in this clause are categorized into three levels of specificity as follows: a) Obligatory: These are specific drafted requirements that shall be used by lSO/CASCO working groups where the element has to be addressed, without modification, except for substitution of more specific terms. For example, the phrase "Conformity assessment activities shall be undertaken impartially", may be substituted more specifically with "Management system certification activities shall be undertaken impartially". Justification is required from lSO/CASCO working groups that do not use these requirements when dealing with the relevant common element. b) Recommended: These are drafted requirements that working groups should use if they wished to have a greater degree of specification. Modification is permissible. c) Suggested: These are considerations that could lSO/CASCO working group. be taken into account in the drafting of requirements by the

levels of specificity, the Publiclv Available Specification achieves the BV providing for these different iSO/CASCO- intent to have an agreed statement on el_ements that a~e common to all conformity assessment activities and, at the same time, maintains some flexibility for specific wording by individual lSO/CASCO working groups. When formulating requirements that are related to disclosure take into account the following aspects: of information, CASCO working groups should

lS/lSO/PAS

17004:2005

--

whelher all information is confidential unless explicitly stated as not being so, or whether all information considered freely available unless explicitly stated as being confidential:

is

--

in cases where disclosure of information is permitted, the extent to which the conformity assessment body should be obligated to be proactive in disclosing that information (including any obligation to voluntarily inform stakeholders of changes in attestation status); whether the organization or person for whom the assessment of the object of conformity was performed needs to be informed of the disclosure of such information.

--

As an aid to future CASCO working groups, the following text that they shall either use (obligatory requirements) or otherwise incorporate-( recommended requirements) in future- International Standards is that which is contained in the boxes; the rest of the text is explanatory in nature.

6.2

General requirements

-- obligatory

requirement

The body, or the issuer of a supplier's declaration of conformity, shall upon request provide a general description of the conformity assessment system and the status of the attestation for objects of conformity it has assessed.
6.3
6.3.1

Process requirements -- Recommended requirements
7

The body shall have a process by which individuals and organizations can complain about, or appeal against, a decision by the body to publicly disclose information or keep it confidential. 6.3.2 In response to any complaint or appeal, the body shall determine whether its originaJ decision remains valid, and shall also provide reasons why it has decided to publicly disclose information or keep it confidential.

3

ISIISOIPAS

~7004 :2005

Bibliography

[1] lSO/PAS 17002, Conformity [2] CANICSA-Q830-03,

assessment

-- Confidentiality

-- Principles and requirements

Model Code for the Protection

of Personal Information

Bureau

of Indian

Standards institution established under Act, 1986 to promote the Bureau of Indian Standards of standardization, marking and quality certification of in the country.

61S is a statutory

harmonious development of the activities goods and attending to connected matters Copyright

61S has the copyright of all its publications. No part of the these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the
course of implementing designations. Enquiries the standard, of necessary details, relating to copyright be addressed such as symbols to the Director and sizes, type or grade BIS. (Publications),

Review

of Indian

Standards

Amendments

are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard alongwith amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of '61S Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard

has been developed Amendments

from Dot: Issued
Date

No. IRD 1 (01 O). Since Publication
Text Affected

Amend

No.

of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131, 23233375, 23239402 Website : www.bis.org. Regional Central Offices : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme KOLKATA 700054 SCO 335-336, Shah Zafar Marg

in Telephones 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Eastern

Vll M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi

Northern

Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

160022

Southern

C.I.T. Campus,

IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600113

Western

Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri MUMBAI 400093

(East)

Branches

AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPU RAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printadat Shri GaneshAssociates,Delhi

