IS 14176: 1994 IS0 9660 : 1966 ( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard
INFOkMATlON PROCESSING - VOLUME AND FILE STRUCTURli OF CD-ROM FOR INFORMATlON 1NTERCHANGE

UDC 681327.28

CQBIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

June 1994

PtlceGroupll

Computer Peripherals

and Media Sectional Committee, LTD 37

NATIONAL

FOREWORD and for the and

This Indian Standard, which is identical with IS0 9660 : 1988 `Information processing - Volume file structure of CD-ROM for information interchange', issued by the International Organization Standardization was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Computer Peripherals and Media Sectional Committee (LTD 37) and approval of the Electronics Telecommunication Division Council.

The text of the IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards; attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) b) c) Wherever the words `International read as `Indian~Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. For the purpose of this Indian Standard metric dimensions are applicable.

CROSS REFERENCES In this Indian Standard, the following International places the following: International Standard IS0 646 Information processing - IS0 7-bit coded character set for information interchange IS0 1539 Programming guages - FORTRAN lanStandards are referred to. Read in their respective Corresponding Indian Standard IS 10315 : 1994 -/-bit coded character set for information interchange (first revision) IS 10680 : 1983 Programming languages - FORTRAN IS 12326 (Part 1) : 1987 7-bit and 8-bit coded character sets Code extension techniques

Degree of Equivalence Identical

Identical Identical

IS0 2022 Information processing-IS0 7-bit and 8-bit coded character sets - Code extension techniques

The ComputerPeripherals and Media Sectional Committee has reviewed the provisions of the following IS0 Standard and has decided that this is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard : IS0 2375 Data processing -Procedure for registration of escape sequences

IS 14176 : 1994 IS0 9660: 1988

Indian Standard
INFORMATION PROCESSING - VOLUME AND FILE STRUCTURE OF CD-ROM FOR INFORMATION INTERCHANGE

Section

one : General

1

Scope and field of application

2.2 Conformance system

of an information

processing

This International Standard specifies the volume and file structure of compact read only optical disks (CD-ROWl) for the interchange of information between users of information processing systems. This International Standard soecifies

_ the attributes recorded on it;
_ _

of

the

volume

and the

descriptors

An information processing system shall be in conformance with this International Standard if it meets the requirements specified in sections two and three of this International Standard either for an originating system, or for a receiving system, or for both types of system. A statement of conformance shall identify which level of these requirements can be met by the system.

the relationship among volumes of a volume set; the placement of files; the attributes of the files;

3

References
IS0 7-bit coded character

IS0 646, Information processing set for information interchange.

IS0 1539, Programming languages -

FORTRAN.

record structures intended for use in the input or output data streams of an application program when such data streams are required to be organized as sets of records; _ three nested levels of medium interchange; two nested levels of implementation;

IS0 2022, Information processing - IS0 7-bit and B-bit coded character sets - Code extension techniques. IS0 2375, Data processing escape sequences. Procedure for registration of

IS0 4873, Information processing - IS0 Shit code for information interchange - Structure and rules for implementation. International Register of Coded Character With Escape Sequences. Sets to Be Used

requirements for the processes which are provided within information processing systems, to enable information to be interchanged between different systems, utilizing recorded CD-ROM as the medium of interchange; for this purpose it specifies the functions to be provided within systems which are intended to originate or receive CD-ROM which conform to this International Standard.

Standards for recording : This International Standard assumes the existence of a standard for recording (see 4.15).

4

Definitions
the following

2
2.1

Conformance
Conformance of a CD-ROM

For the purposes of this International Standard, definitions apply :

4.1

A CD-ROM shall be in conformance with this International Standard when all information recorded on it conforms to the requirements of section two of this International Standard. A statement of conformance shall identify the lowest level ot interchange to which the contents of the CD-ROM conform. A prerequisite to such conformance is conformance CD-ROM to a standard for recording (see 4.15). of the

application program : A program that processes the contents of a file, and may also process selected attribute data relating to the file or to the volume(s) on which the file is recorded.
NOTE - An application program is a specific c!ass of user, as defined in this InternationalStandard.

4.2 unit.

byte

: A string of eight binary digits operated upon as a

1

IS

14176:

IS0

1994 9660 : 1988

4.3

Data

Field

of a sector

: A fixed-length field containing

the data of a sector. 4.4 data preparer : A person or other entity which controls the preparation of the data to be recorded on a volume group.
NOTE A data preparer IS a specific class of user as defined in this International Standard.

The specifications of the standard for recording that are relevant for this International Standard are

-

a unique Physical Address for each recorded sector; the location of the Data Field within each sector: the length of the Data Field within each sector.

4.5 descriptor : A structure containing mation about a volume or a file.
4.6

descriptive

infor-

NOTE - The standard for recording used in conjunction with this International Standard is subject to agreement between the Qriginator and the recipient of the volumes.

ECtent : A set of logical blocks, the logical block numbers of which form a continuous ascending sequence.

4.16 user : A person or other entity (for example, an application program) that causes the invocation of the services provided by an implementation.

4.7

file

: A named collection of information.
4.17 volume

: A dismountable CD-ROM.

4.8

File Section

: That part of a file that is recorded in any
4.18 Volume Set : A collection of one or more volumes, on which a set of files is recorded.

one extent. 4.6 implementation : A set of processes which enable an information processing system to behave as an originating system, or as a receiving system, or as both types of system. 4.10
Iagical

5

Notation

~Logical Block
unit, where

: A group of 2" + g bytes treated as a
integer.

The following notation is used in this International Standard.

n equals 0 or a positive

5.1 4.11 originating system : An information processing system which can create a set of files on a volume set for the purpose of data interchange with another system. 4.12 receiving system : An information processing system which can read a set of files from a volume set which has been created by another system for the purpose of data interchange. 4.13 record information.

Decimal

and

hexadecimal

notations

Numbers in decimal notation are represented by decimal digits, namely 0 to 9. Numbers in hexadecimal notation are represented by hexadecimal digits, namely 0 to 9 and A to F, shown in parentheses.

: A sequence of bytes treated as a unit of

5.2
BP

Other notation

: Byte position within a descriptor, starting with 1 : Byte position within a descriptor field, starting with 1 : A single bit with the value 0 : A single bit with the value 1 : Any digit from DIGIT ZERO to DIGIT NINE

4.14 sector : The smallest addressable part of the recorded area on a CD-ROM that can be accessed independently of other addressable parts of the recorded area. 4.15 standard for recording : A standard that specifies the recording method and the addressing method for the information recorded on a CD-ROM.

RSP ZERO ONE Digit(s)

2

IS lCl76 : 1994 IS0 9660 : 1988

Section
6
6.1 Volume structure

two

:

Requirements

for the medium

Arrangement

of data

on a CD-ROM

The System Area shall occupy the Logical Sectors with Logical Sector Numbers 0 to 15. The System Area shall be reserved for system use. Its content is not specified by this International Standard. The Data Area shall occupy the remaining Logical Sectors of the Volume Space.

6.1.1

Physical

Addresses

Each sector shall be identified by a unique Physical Address as specified in the relevant standard for recording.

6.2.2

Logical

Block

6.1.2

Logical

Sector

The sectors of a volume shall be organized into Logical Sectors. Each Logical Sector shall consist of a number of bytes equal to 2 046 or 2", whichever is larger, where n is the largest integer such that 2" is less than, or equal to, the number of bytes in the Data Field of any sector recorded on the volume. The number of bytes in a Logical Sector shall be referred to as the Logical Sector Size. Each Logical Sector shall begin in a different sector from any other Logical Sector, and shall begin with the first byte of the Data Field of the sector in which it begins. If the number of bytes of the Data Field of each sector recorded on the volume is less than 2 046, a Logical Sector shall comprise more than one sector, and the set of the Physical Addresses of its constituent sectors shall form a consecutive ascending sequence. The data of a Logical Sector shall be recorded in the Data Fields of its constituent sectors, Each Logical Sector shall be identified by a unique Logical Sector Number. Logical Sector Numbers shall be integers assigned in an ascending sequence, in order of ascending Physical Addresses of the constituent sectors, starting with 0 for the Logical Sector containing the sector having the lowest Physical Address which may contain recorded information. The numbering shall continue through successive Logical Sectors, each of which begins with the sector with the next higher Physical Address than that of the last sector constituting the previous Logical Sector.

The Volume Space shall be organized into Logical Blocks. Each Logical Block shall consist of 2 " +g bytes, where n equals 0 or a positive integer. The number of bytes in a Logical Block shall be referred to as the Logical Block Size which shall not be greater than the Logical Sector Size. Each Logical Block shall be identified by a unique Logical Block Number. Logical Block Numbers shall be integers assigned in ascending order starting with 0. Logical Block Number 0 shall be assigned to the Logical Block which begins with the first by:e of the Volume Space. Each successive Logical Block Number shall be assigned to the Logical Block which begins with the byte in the Volume Space immediately following the last byte of the preceding Logical Block.

6.3

Arrangement

of the

Data

Area

File Sections shall be recorded in the Data Area. More than one File Section of a file may be recorded on the same volume. The following types of descriptors shall be recorded in the Data Area to desc:, .je the use of the Data Area :

--

Volume Descriptors Fiie Descriptors Directory Descriptors Path-Tables

6.1.3

Volume

Space -

The information on a volume shall be recorded in the set of all Logical Sectors on the volume. This set shall be referred to as the Volume Space of the volume. The bytes in the Volume Space shall be numbered consecutively. The numbering shall start with 1, which shall be assigned to the first byte of the first Logical Sector of the Volume Space. The numbering shall continue through successive bytes of the first Logical Sector, and then through successive bytes of each successive Logical Sector, of the Volume Space.

The Volume Descriptors shall be recorded in consecutively numbered Logical Sectors starting with the Logical Sector having Logical Sector Number 16. The Logical Sectors in the Data Area shall be available for the assignment of Volume Partitions and the recording of File Sections, File Descriptors, Directory~Descriptors and Path Tables. Each File Section shall be recorded in an Extent, and shall be identified by a descriptor in a directory. An Extended Attribute Record can be associated with the File Section. If present, it shall be recorded in the same Extent as the associated File Section, and shall be identified by the descriptor that identifies the associated File Section. Each directory shall be recorded as a file in a single Extent, and shall be identified by a Directory Descriptor either in another directory or in a Volume Descriptor. Each directory shall also be identified by a record in a Path Table. Each Path Table shall be identified in a Volume Descriptor. 3

6.2

Arrangement

of the

Volume

Space

6.2.1

System

Area

and Data Area

The Volume Space shall be divided into a System Area and a Data Area.

IS 14176: IS0 9660:

1994 1988

Space Volume

within

the Data

Area

may be assigned Partition by a Volume

to one or more in Descriptor.

6.4.3.3 When Section,

Relation

of File Section is recorded

to File Unit in interleaved Attribute mode, Record, the File if any, to

Partitions,

Each Volume

shall be recorded

an Extent

and shall be identified

a File Section

and its associated

Extended

shall be recorded

over the sequence

of File Units assigned

6.4

Arrangement

of Extents

ttic F-ile Section.

6.4.1

Extent shall be a set of Logical of which form a continuous Blocks, the Logical Block

6.4.3.4

Recording

of an Extended
Record

Attribute

Record

it an Extended An Extent Numbers ascending sequence.

Attribute

is recorded

it shall be recorded shall begin Block, and if

in the first File Unit of the sequence. continue through successive bytes

The recording of that Logical Logical

at the first byte ot the first Logical Block of the File Unit. It shall then through successive bytes of successive Blocks,

6.4.2

Mode

of recording

a File Section Extended Attribute Record if

any, of the File Unit, A File Section, and its associated mode. is recorded. The assigned any, shall be recorded in non-interleaved in an Extent either in interleaved mode or

until all of the Extended

Attribute

Record

Extended

Attribute

Record

length

shall be equal

to the assigned 6.4.3

File Unit Size.

Interleaved File Unit

mode
6.4.3.5 Recording parts,

of a File Section
if any, of the File Section from Attribute shall be reFile is rep if Record

6.4.3.J

The a set of Logical Blocks that are within Block Numbers of which form a Unit

successive

A File Unit shall comprise an Extent continuous When Blocks, Extent. and the ascending

corded corded,

in successive and starting Attribute

File Units, from

starting

the second

Logical

in the sequence

if an Extended Record

sequence. is recorded in interleaved mode, wrthin one or

the first File Unit in the sequence is recorded.

no Extended

a File Section

more File Units,

each consisting of Logical

of the same number

of Logical the same

6.4.3.6

Data

Space the successive be the Data parts ofthe of the File File

shall be assigned The number

to the File Section

Blocks in the File Unit shall be

The set of File Units in which Section Section. are recorded shall

the assigned

File Unit Size for the File Section. Block of each that File Unit shall have a Logical Logical Block Number Logical Block. to in the

Space

The first Logical Block Number Logical Sector

which

is the lowest

The bytes in the Data Space The numbering the Data Space. bytes

shall be numbered

consecutively. to the suc-

that contains

shall start from The

1 which

shall be assigned through

lrrst byte of the first Logical Block of the first File Unit, if any, of The sequence the sequence Block of each of the File Units in an Extent shall correspond of the Logical File Unit. a File Unit awgned to a File Block Numbers numbering Logical Logical Unit, shall continue then Block, if any, of the first Logical cessive of that Block, through successive

bytes of each successive Unit, and then through of each successive File

if any, of the first File assigned to the File

successive

bytes of the Logical Block(s)

NOTE - The Logical Blocks comprising Section may ~ ~-

Section. File Section, and/or The numbering bytes in which or this number recorded shall end with a number the File Section equal to the number of

also each be assigned to a different

is recorded

in the Data Space;

compnse part of one or more Volume Partitions.

shall equal zero if there are no bytes of the file

in the Data Space.

6.4.3.2

Interleave

Gap
the set of Logical Block Numbers Blocks that of which When a File Section is recorded in non-interleaved Extended Attribute of Logical mode Record, Blocks the if in in the File Section, an Extent. and its associated 6.4.4 Non-interleaved mode

An Interleave are within lie between first Logical sequence. Blocks.

Gap shall comprise

an Extent

and the Logical

the last Logical Block Number Block Number All Interleave Gaps between

of a File Unit and the if any,

of the next File Unit, the same

the File Units assigned number Interleave of Logical Gap Size

any, shait be recorded

over the sequence

to a File Section

shall comprise

This number

shall be the assigned

for the File Section. NOTE ~ The Logical Blocks comprismg dn Interleave Gap between the File Units assigned to a File Section may also c'dch he asstgned to a different comprise File Section, Partmom and/or

6.4.4.1

Recording

of an Extended

Attribute

Record

If an Extended which tent. form

Attribute

Record is recorded, ascending

it shall be recorded of The recording Block of the Ex-

over one or more Logical Blocks, a continuous

the Logical Block Numbers sequence.

shall begin at the first byte of the first Logical part of or)<: or wore Volume It shall continue through successive

bytes of that Logical

4

IS

IS0

14176: 9660

1994 : 1989

Block, and then through successive bytes of successive Logical Biocks, if any, of the Extent, until all of the Extended Attribute Record is recorded. The number of Logical Blocks over which the Extended Attribute Record is recorded shall be the assigned Extended Attribute Record length for the File Section. NOTE - The Logical Blocks comprisingan Extended Attribute Record assigned to a File Section may
also each be assigned to a different File Section, and/or comprise part of one or more Volume Partitions.

The other attributes identified in an Extended Attribute Record shall apply to that File Section and all preceding File Sections of the file [see 6.5.1). If no Extended Attribute Record is recorded in association with the last File Section of a file, then these attributes are not specified for the file.

6.4.7

Recording

of a Volume

Partition

6.4.4.2

Recording

of a File Section

The File Section shall be recorded over zero or more Logical Blocks, the Logical Block Numbers of which form a continuous ascending sequence. If no Extended Attribute Record is recorded, the sequence shall start with the first Logical Block of the Extent. If an Extended Attribute Record is recorded, the sequence shall start with the first Logical Block, if any, immediately following the last Logical Block over which the Extended Attribute Record is recorded. 6.4.4.3 Data Space

If a Volume Partition is recorded, it shall be recorded over one or more Logical Blocks, the Logical Block Numbers of which form a continuous ascending sequence. The recording shall begin at the first byte of the first Logical Block of the Extent. It shall continue through successive bytes of that Logical Block, and then through successive bytes of successive Logical Blocks, if any, of the Extent, until all of the Volume Partition is recorded. The first Logical Block of each Volume Partition shall have a Logical Block Number which is the lowest Logical Block Number in the Logical Sector that contains that Logical Block. The number of Logical Blocks over which the Volume Partition is recorded shall be the assigned Volume Partition Size for the Volume Partition.

6.5

File structure

The set of Logical Blocks over which the File Section is recorded shall be the Data Space of the File Section. The bytes in the Data Space shall be numbered consecutively. The numbering shall start from 1 which shall be assigned to the first byte of the first Logical Block, if any, of the Data Space. The numbering shall continue through successive bytes of that Logical Block, then through successive bytes of each successive Logical Block, if any, of ~the Data Space. The numbering shall end with a number equal to the number of bytes in which the File Section is recorded in the Data Space; or this number shall equal zero if there are no bytes of the file recorded in the Data Space.

6.5.1

Relation

to File Sections

Each file shall consist of one or more File Sections. Each File Section of a file shall be identified by a record in the same directory. The sequence of the File Sections of a file shall be identified by the order of the corresponding records in the directory. A File Section may be part of more than one file and may occur more than once in the same file. A File Section may be identified by more than one record in the same or a different directory. Each File Section of a file may be recorded on a different volume.

6.4.6

Data length

of a File Section 6.5.2 Numbering of bytes in a file

The data length of a File Section shall be the number of bytes in which the File Section is recorded in the Data Space. If this number is less than the number of bytes in the Data Space, then any remaining bytes in the Data Space shall be ignored in interchange.

6.4.6 Relation Section

of Extended

Attribute

Record-to

File

The bytes comprising a file shall be numbered consecutively. The numbering shall start from 1 which shall be assigned to the first byte of the first File Section, if any. The numbering shall continue through successive bytes of that File Section and then through successive bytes of each successive File Section, if any. of the file. The numbering shall end with a number equal to the sum of the number of bytes in all File Sections of the file.

An Extended Attribute Record may be associated with a File Section. If present, the Extended Attribute Record shall identify certain attributes of the file of which the File Section forms a part. A subset of those attributes shall apply to all File Sections of a file that contains records according to 6.10. If any of those attributes are assigned to the file, an Extended Attribute Record shall be recorded in association with each of the File Sections of the file.

6.5.3

Contents

of a file

The information in a file shall be interpreted according to the relevant standards for the coded representation of information. NOTE - The identification of these standards is the subject of an agreement between the originator and the recipient of the file.

5

IS 14176 : 1994 IS0 9660: 1966

6.5.4 Associated

File

6.7.1.1 The sequence shall contain one Descriptor (see 8.4) recorded at least once.

Primary

Volume

An Associated File has a relationship not specified by this International Standard to another file that has been assigned the same File Identifier (see 7.5) as that of the Associated File in the same directory.

The Primary Volume Descriptor shall describe the Volume Space, and identify the attributes of the volume, the locations of a Root Directory and of a group of Path Tables, and the number of volumes in the Volume Set. 6.7.1.2 The sequence may contain zero or more Supplementary Volume Descriptors (see 8.5) each recorded at least once. A Supplementary Volume Descriptor shall describe the Volume Space, and identify the attributes of the volume, the locations of a Root Directory and of a group of Path Tables, and the number of volumes in the Volume Set. It shall also identify the coded graphic character set used within selected fields of this descriptor, and of the fields in associated File Descriptors, Directory Descriptors and Path Tables. 6.7.1.3 The sequence may contain zero or more Volume Partition Descriptors (see 8.6). A Volume Partition Descriptor shall identify a Volume Partition within the Volume Space, its position and size, and its attributes. 6.7.1.4 The sequence may contain zero or more Boot Records (see 8.2). A Boot Record shall contain information which may beused_to achieve a specific state in a receiving system or an application program. 6.7.1.5 The sequence shall be terminated by the recording of one or more Volume Descriptor Set Terminators (see 8.3).

6.6

Volume

Set

A Volume Set shall be the set of volumes on which a set of files is recorded. a A Volume Set shall consist of one or more volumes having common volume set identification and identifying the same coded graphic character sets for use within selected descriptor fields (see 7.4). All volumes in a Volume Set shall be numbered consecutively starting from 1. A Volume Group within a Volume set shall consist of one or more consecutively numbered volumes the contents of which are established at the same time. The sequence number of the volume that has the highest sequence number within the Volume Group shall be the assigned Volume Set Size. Each volume of a Volume Set shall contain a description of all the directories and files that are recorded on those volumes the sequence numbers of which are less than, or equal to, the assigned Volume Set Size of the volume. NOTE - Such description recorded on a volume shall supersede the description recorded on any volume of the Volume Set having a lower
assigned Volume Set Size.

The Logical Block Size shall be the same for all volumes of a Volume Set.

6.8 6.7 Volume Descriptors
6.8.1 A Volume Descriptor shall be one of the following types

Directory
Directory

structure

:
A directory shall be recorded as a file containing a set of records each of which identifies a File Section or another directory. A directory shall not be recorded as an Associated File, shall not be recorded in interleaved mode and shall consist of only one File Section. The identification of a file shall be different from the identification of any other file, unless the file is an Associated File (see 6.5.3), or of any directory identified in the same directory. The identification of a ~directory shall be different from the identification of any file or of any other directory identified in the same directory. The first Logical Block of the Extent in which a directory is recorded shall have a Logical Block Number which is the lowest Logical Block Number in the Logical Sector that contains that Logical Block. 6.8.1.1 Directory Record

-

Primary Volume Descriptor Supplementary Volume Descriptor

Volume Partition Descriptor Boot Record Volume Descriptor Set Terminator

6.7.1

Volume

Descriptor

Set

A Volume Descriptor Set shall be a sequence of volume descriptors recorded in consecutively numbered Logical Sectors starting with the Logical Sector with Logical Sector Number 16. Each successive Volume Descriptor shall be recorded in the Logical Sector with the next higher Logical Seclor Number than that of the Logical Sector in which the previous Volume Descriptor is rscorded. The sequence shall consist of two or more volurne descriptors consecutively recorded as follows.

A Directory Record shall contain information to locate a File Section;

6

IS 14176: IS0 9660:

1994

1988

information to locate any Extended Attribute associated with the File Section; the identification of the file:

Record

If a directory is at level ?t?of the hierarchy, its Parent Directory shall be at level 0~1). The Parent Directory of the Root Directory shall be the Root Directory. 6.8.2.1 Depth of Directory Hierarchy

certain attributes of the file; certain attributes of the File Section. The number of levels in the hierarchy shall not exceed eight. In addition, for each file recorded, the sum of the following shall not exceed 255 :

The first or onlyDirectory Record recorded in a LogicatSector shall begin at the first byte of the first Data Field of that Logical Sector. Each subsequent Directory Record recorded in that Logical Sector shall begin at the byte immediately following the last byte of the preceding Directory Record in that Logical Sector. Each Directory Record shall end in the Logical Sector in which it begins. Unused positions after the last Directory Record in a Logical Sector shall be set to (001.

-

the length of the File Identifier (see 7.5.2);

the length of the Directory Identifiers (see 7.61 of a6 relevant directories; the number of relevant directories. Identification of directories

6.8.2.2 6.8.1.2 Order of Directory Records

For a Root Directory The records in a directory shall be ordered according to 9.3. _ the first Directory Record -of the Root Directory shall describe the Root Directory and shall have a Directory Identifier consisting of a single (00) byte; the second Directory Record of the Root Directory shell describe the Root Directory and shall have a Directory Identifier consisting of a single (01) byte; a Directory Record describing the Root Directory shall be contained in the Root Directory field of the volume descriptor that identifies the directory hierarchy. For each directory other than the Root Directory the first Directory Record of the directory shall describe that directory and shall have a Directory Identifier consisting of a single KXI) byte; the second Directory Record of the directory shall describe the Parent Directory for that directory and shall have a Directory Identifier consisting of a single (011 byte;

6.8.1.3

Directory

length

The length of a directory shall be the sum of -the lengths of all Directory Records in the directory;

_ the number of unused positions after the last Directory Record in all Logical Sectors in which the directory is recorded.

6.8.2

Directory

Hierarchy

A Directory Hierarchy shall be a set of directories related to each other as follows. The root of the hierarchy, called the Root Directory, shall be a directory identified either in a Primary Volume Descriptor or in a Supplementary Volume Descriptor. Each directory, other than the Root Directory, ified by a record in another directory. shall be ident-

a Directory Record in its Parent Directory shall describe the directory.

A directory identifying another directory shall be called the Parent Directory of the identified directory. Each directory shall contain a record which identifies its Parent Directory. Different directories may have the sa,ne Parent Directory. A hierarchical relationship shall exist between the Root Directory and all other directories :

6.8.3

Relation

of Directory Directory

Hierarchies shall be recorded on a

One or more volume.

Hierarchies

A Directory Hierarchy shall be identified in the Primary Volume Descriptbr. Root / SUB 1 / SUB 3 \ \ SUB 2 Each additional Directon/ Hierarchy shall be identified in a Supplementary Volume Descriptor. The directories within each hierarchy shall identify zerd or more of the files that are recorded in those volumes, the sequence numbers of which are less than, or equal to, the assigned Volume Set Size of the volume. A directory shall not--be a part of more than one Diractoy Hierarchy. 7

The hierarchy shall consist of a number of levels (i.e. for n levels : level 1, level 2,..., level n). The Root Directon/ shalfbe the one and only directory at level 1 of the hierarchy.

Is 14176:1994 Iso 9660:1988

6.9

Path

Table

A Path Table Group shall comprise one or two identical Type L Path Tables and one or two identical Type M Path Tables. 6.9.3 Recorded Occurrences of the Path "Table shall be recorded on a volume. shall'identify the size and IOTables of a Path Table Group. the directories in the Directory the Primary Volume Descriptor.

A Path Table recorded on a volume of a Volume Set shall contain a set of records describing a directory hierarchy for those volumes of the Volume Set the sequence numbers of which are less than, or equal to, the assigned Volume Set Size of the volume. For each directory in the directory hierarchy other than the Root Directory, the Path Table shall contain a record which identifies the directory, its Parent Directory and its location. The records in a Path Table shall be numbered starting from 1. The first record in the Path Table shall identify the Root Directory and its location. The directory number of a directory shall be the ordinal number of the Path Table Record that identifies the directory.

One or more Path Table Groups The Primary Volume Descriptor cations of the constituent Path These Path Tables shall identify Hierarchy which is identified by

Corresponding to each additional Directory Hierarchy recorded on a volume an additional Path Table Group shall be recorded on the volume. For each such Path Table Group the corresponding Supplementary Volume Descriptor shall identify the size and locations of its constituent Path Tables. These Path Tables shall identify the directories in the corresponding Directory Hierarchy. 6.9.4 Consistency Volume Group of Path Tables between volumes of a

6.9.1

Order~of

Path Table

Records

The records in a Path Table shall be ordered by the following criteria in descending order of significance : in ascending hierarchy;

_

order according

to level in the directory

6.9.4.1 The contents of a Type L Path Table identified in a Primary Volume Descriptor shall be identical with the contents of any other Type L Path Table identified in a Pnmary Volume Descriptor on a volume of the same Volume Group. The contents of a Type M Path Table identified in a Primary Volume Descriptor shall be identical with the contents of any other Type M Path Table Identified in a Primary Volurne Descriptor on a volume of the same Volume Group. 6.9.4.2 The contents of a Type L Path Table identifted rn a Supplementary Volume Descriptor shall be identical with the contents of any other Type L ~Path Table identified in a Supplementary Volume Descriptor, having the same volume set identification and identifying the samecoded graphrc character sets for use within selected descnptor fields (see 7.4). on a volume of the same Volume Group. The contents of a Type M Path Table identified in a Supplementary Volume Descriptor shall be identical with the contents of any other Type M Path Table identified in a Supplementary Volume Descriptor, having the same volume set identification and identifying the same coded graphic character sets for use within selected descriptor fields (see 7.41, on a volume of the same Volume Group,

in ascending order according to the directory number of the Parent Directory of the directory identified by the record; in ascending order according to the relative value of the Directory Identifier field in the record, where the Directory Identifiers shal! be valued as follows : If the two Directory Identifiers do not contain the same number of byte positions, the shorter Directory Identifier shall be treated as if it were padded on the right with all padding bytes set to (20). and as if both Directory Identifiers contained the identical number of byte positions. After any padding necessary to treat the Directory Identifiers as if they were of equal length, the characters in the corresponding byte positions, starting with the first position, of the Directory Identifiers are compared until a byte position is found that does not contain the same character in both Directory Identifiers. Thegreater Directory Identifier is the one that contains the character with the higher code position value in the coded graphic character set used to interpret the Directory Identifier of the Path Table Record.

6.10

Record

structure as a set of records

6.9.2

Path Table Group

The information in a file may be organized according to this clause.

A Path Table shall be either a Type L Path Table or a Type M Path Table. In a Type L Path Table, a numerical value shall be recorded according to 7.2.1 if represented as a 16.bit number and according to 7.3.1 if represented as a 32.bit number. In a Type M Path Table, a numfjrical value shall be recorded according -to 7.2.2 if represented as a 16-bit number and according to 7.3.2 if represented as a 32-bit number.

6.10.1

Characteristics be a sequence of bytes treated as a unit of

A record shall information. The length record.

of a record

shall be the number

of bytes

in the

A record shall be either a fixed-length length record.

record, or a variable-

8

IS 14176: IS0 9660

1994

: 1988

All records in a file shall be either fixed-length variable-length records. 6.10.2 6.10.2.1 Measured Contents Data Units (MDU)

records or

7
7.1

Recording

of descriptor
values

fields

8-bit

numerical

of an MDU

A Measured Data Unit shall contain either a fixed-length recorti or a variable-length record. An MDU shall comprise an even number of bytes. 6.10.2.2 Relationship to File

A numerical value represented in binary notation by an 8-bit number shall be recorded in a field of a descriptor in one of the following two formats. The applicable format is specified in the description of the descriptor fields.

7.1.1

I-bit

unsigned

numerical

values

Each MDU shall comprise a set of successive bytes of the file. The first or only MDU shall begin at the first byte of the file. Each successive MDU shall begin at the byte in the file immediately following the last byte of the preceding MDU. 6.10.3 Fixed-length records

An unsigned numerical value shall be represented in binary notation by an 8-bit number recorded in a one-byte field.

7.1.2

I-bit

signed

numerical

values

A signed numerical value shall be represented in binary notation by an 8-bit two's complement number recorded in a onebyte field.

A fixed-length record shall be a record contained in a file that is assigned to contain records that must have the same length. 7.2 A fixed-length record shall be contained in an MDU. The MDU shall consist of the fixed-length record, immediately followed by a (00) byte if necessary to give the MDU an even length. The minimum assigned length of a fixed-length be 1. 6.10.4 Variable-length records A numerical value represented by the hexadecimal representation (wx yz) shall be recorded in a two-byte field as (yz wxl. NOTE - For example, the decimal number 4 660 has 112 34) as Its hexadecimal representation and is recorded as 134 12). record shall 16-bit numerical value

A numerical value represented in binary notation by a 16-bit number shall be recorded in a-field of a descriptor in one of the following three formats. The applicable format is specified in the description of the descriptor fields.

7.2.1

Least significant

byte first

A variable-length record shall be a record contained in a file that is assigned to contain records that may have different lengths. The value recorded in the Record Format field of an Extended Attribute Record for a file containing variable-length records shall contain the same value as that~recorded in the Record Format field of any other Extended Attribute Record of that same file. A variable-length record shall be contained in an MDU. The MDU shall consist of a Record Control Word (RCW) immediately followed by the variable-length record, immediately followed by a (00) byte if necessary to give the MDU an even length. The RCW shall specify as a 16-bit number the length of the record. The RCW shall be recorded according to 7.2.1, if the value in the Record Format field of the Extended Attribute Record associated with the File Section is 2, or 7.2.2, if the value in the Record Format field of the Extended Attribute Record associated with the File Section is 3. A maximum record length shall be assigned for a file. The length of any record in the file shall not exceed this value. The assigned maximum record length shall be in the range 1 to 32 767. The minimum length of a variable-length record shall be 0.

7.2.2

Most

significant

byte first

A numerical value represented by the hexadecimal representation Iwx yz) shall be recorded in a two-byte field as (wx yzj. NOTE - For example, the decimal number 4 660 has 112 34) as its hexadecimal representation and is recorded as (12 341.

7.2.3

Both-byte

orders

A numerical value represented by the hexadecimal representation (wx yz) shall be recorded in a four-byte field as (yz wx
wx yz).

For example, the decimal number 4 660 has 112 34) as 11s hexadecimal representation and is recorded as (34 12 12 341

NOTE -

7.3

32-bit

numerical

values

A numerical value represented in binary notation by a 32.bit number shall be recorded in a field of a descriptor in one of the following three formats. The applicable format is specified in the description of the descriptor fields.

9

1s Iso

14176: 9660:

1994 1966

7.3.1

Least significant

byte first

7.4.2.7

al-characters

A numerical value represented by the hexadecimal representation (st uv wx yz) shall be recorded in a four-byte field as (yz wx uv stl. NOTE - For example, the decmal number 305 419 896 has (12 34 56 78) as Its hexadecfmal representation and is recorded as (78 56 34 121.

A subset of the c-characters will be referred to as al-characters. This subset shall be subject to agreement between the originator and the recipient of the volume. 7.4.2.2 dl-characters

7.3.2

Most

significant

byte first

A subset of the al-characters will be referred to as dl-characters. This subset shall be the subject of agreement between the originator and the recipient of the volume. 7.4.3 Separators of a File Identifier

A numerical value represented by the hexadecimal representation (st uv wx yzl shall be recorded in a four-byte field as (st
uv wx yz). NOTE ~- For example. the decimal number 305 419 896 has (12 34 56 781 as Its hexadecimal representation and IS recorded as (12 34 56 78).

The characters separating the components shall be SEPARATOR 1 2

represented by the bit combination (2EI represented by the' bit combination (38)

7.3.3

Both-byte
value yzi

orders
represented shall by the hexadecimal in an eight-byte represenfield as

SEPARATOR

A numerical tation

1st uv wx

be recorded

7.4.4

Use of characters

in descriptor

fields

(yz wx uv St St LIV wx yz). NOTE For example, the decimal number 305 419 896~has (12 34 56 78) as Its hexadecimal representation and IS recorded as (78 56 34 12 12 34 56 781.

The characters in the fields of the following descriptors shall be a-characters or d-characters as specified in clause 9. Directory records within a Directory Hierarchy that is identified in a Primary Volume Descriptor; _ Path Table records within a Path Table Group identified in a Primary Volume Descriptor; -~ Extended Attribute records identified in a directory of a Directory Hierarchy that is identified in a Primary Volume Descriptor. The characters in the fields of the following descriptors shall be al-characters or dl-characters as specified in clause 9. _ Directory records within a Directory Hierarchy that is identified in a Supplementary Volume Descriptor; _ Path Table records within a Path Table Group identified in a Supplementary Volume Descriptor; Extended Attribute records identified in a directory of a Directory Hierarchy that is identified in a Supplementary Volume Descriptor.

7.4 7.4.1

Character d-characters

sets

and

coding

and a-characters

Except as specified in 7.4.4, the characters in the descriptors shall be coded according to IS0 646 (see annex A). The 37 characters in the following positions of the International Reference ,Version are referred to as d-characters : 3/o 4/l 5/15 The 57 characters in the following positions of the International Reference Verston are referred to as a-characters : 2/o 215 3/o 411 5:o 5115 to 212 to 21'15 to 3115 to 4115 to 5110 to 319 to 5110

7.4.5

Justification

of characters

In each fixed-length field the content of which is specified by this International Standard to be characters, the characters shall be left-justified and any remaining positions on the right shall be set to (20).

7.5 The apolicable set of characters is specified in the description of the descriptor fields. 7.5.1

File

Identifier format

File Identifier

7.4.2

c-characters

A File Identifier shall consist of the following sequence

:

The characters of the coded graphic character sets identified by the escape sequences in a Supplementary Volume Descriptor are referred to as c-characters. 10

File Name dl -characters;
-

: A sequence of zero or more d-characters or
1;

SEPARATOR

IS 14176: IS0 9660

1994

: 1988

File Name Extension: A sequence d-characters or dl-characters; SEPARATOR 2;

of zero or more

8

Volume

Descriptors

File Version Number: from 1 to 32 767.

Digits representing

a number

The Volume Descriptors shall identify the volume, the partitions recorded on the volume, the volume creator(s), certain attributes of the volume, the location of other recorded descriptors and the version of the standard which applies to the volume descriptor. 8.1 Format of a Volume Table 1 BP

This sequence shall meet the following requirements: If no characters are specified for the File Name then the File Namefxtension shall consist of at least one character. If no characters are specified for the File Name Extension then the File Name shall consist of at least one character.

Descriptor Descriptor
Content numerical value CD001 numerical value (Depends on Volume Descriptor Type)

Volume

I

Field name Volume Descriptor Type Standard Identifier Volume Descriptor Version (Depends on Volume Descriptor Type)

I

1 2 to 6 7 8 to 2 048

-

The sum of the following shall not exceed 30: if there is a File Name, the length of the File Name

;
6.1.1 Volume Descriptor Type (BP 1)

if there is a File Name Extension, the length of the File Name Extension.

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number the Volume Descriptor Type. Number 0 shall mean that the volume Descriptor is a Boot Record ;

7.5.2

File Identifier

length shall be the sum of the

The length following :

of the File Identifier

Number 1 shall mean that the Volume Descriptor is a Primary Volume Descriptor; Number 2 shall mean that the Volume plementary Volume Descriptor; Descriptor is a Sup-

-

if there is a File Name, the length of the File Name,

if there is a File Name Extension, the length of the File Name Extension, if there is a File Version Number, the number of digits in the File Version Number, the number of SEPARATORS.

-

Number 3 shall mean that the Volume Descriptor is a Volume Partition Descriptor; Numbers 4 to 254 are reserved for future standardization; Number 255 shall mean that the Volume Descriptor is a Volume Descriptor Set Terminator. This field shall be recorded according to 7.1 .I. 8.1.2 Standard Identifier (BP 2 to 6) of this International

7.6 7.6.1

Directory Directory

Identifier Identifier Format

A Directory Identifier shall consist of a sequence of one or more d-characters or dl-characters (see 7.4.4). except as specified in 7.6.2.

This field shall specify an identification Standard.

The characters in this field shall be CDOOl. 8.1.3 Volume Descriptor Version (BP 7)

7.6.2

Reserved

Directory

Identifiers

The Directory Identifier of a Directory Record describing the Root Directory shall consist of a single fO0) byte. The Directory Identifier of the first Directory Record of each directory shall consist of a single (00) byte. The directory Identifier of the second Directory Record of each directory shall consist of a single (01) byte.

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number the version of the specification of the Volume Descriptor. The content and the interpretation of this field shall depend on the content of the Volume Descriptor Type field. This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 8.1.4 Depends on Volume Descriptor Type (BP 8 to 2 046)

7.6.3

Directory

ldentifier~length The content and the interpretation of this field shall depend on the Volume Descriptor-Type field.

The length of a Directory Identifier shall not exceed 31.

11

IS 14176: 1994 IS0 9660 : 1966

8.2

Boot Record

8.3

Volume

Descriptor

Set Terminator

The Boot Record shall identify a system which can recognize and act upon the content of the field reserved for boot system use in the Boot Record, and shall contain information which is used to achieve a specific state for a system or for an application. Table 2 BP

The recorded set of Volume Descriptors shall be terminated by a sequence of one or more Volume Descriptor Set Terminators. Table 3 Volume Descriptor Set Terminator

Boot Record Content numerical value CD601 numerical value a-characters a-characters not specified

Field name Volume Descriptor Type Standard Identifier Volume Descriptor Version Boot System Identifier Boot Identifier Boot System Use

1 2 7 a 46 72

to 6 to 39 to 71 to 2 046

8.3.1

Volume

Descriptor

Type (BP 1)

This field shall specify an 8-bit number indicating that the Volume Descriptor is a Volume Descriptor Set Terminator. 8.2.1 Volume Descriptor Type (BP 1) The number in this field shall be 255. This field shall specify an 8-bit number indicating that the Volume Descriptor is a Boot Record. The number in this field shall be 0. This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 8.2.2 Standard Identifier (BP 2 to 6) The characters in this field shall be CDOOl. This field shall specify an identification Standard. of this International 8.3.3 The characters in this field shall be CDOOl. 8.2.3 Volume Descriptor Version (BP 7) This field shall specify as an 8-bit number the version of the specification of the Volume Descriptor Set Terminator. 1 shall indicate the structure of this International Standard. This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. Volume Descriptor Version (BP 7) This field shall be recorded according to 7.1 .l.

8.3.2

Standard

Identifier

(BP 2 to 6) of this International

This field shall specify an identification Standard.

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number the version of the specification of the Boot Record structure. 1 shall indicate the structure of this International Standard.

8.3.4 This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1.

Reserved

for future

standardization

IBP 8to

2 048)

All bytes of this field shall be set to KIOI. 8.2.4 Boot System Identifier (BP 8 to 381

8.4
This field shall specify an identification of a system which can recognize and act upon the content of the Boot Identifier and Boot System Use fields in the Boot Record. The characters in this field shall be a-characters. 8.2.5 Boot Identifier (BP 40 to 71)

Primary

Volume

Descriptor

The Primary Volume Descriptor shall identify the volume, a system which can recognize and act upon the content of the Logical Sectors with Logical Sector Numbers 0 to 15, the size of the Volume Space, the version of the standard which applies to the Volume Descriptor, the version of the specification which applies to the directory records and the Path Table records and certain attributes of the volume.

This field shall specify an identification of the boot system specified in the Boot System Use field of the Boot Record. The characters in this field shall be a-characters. 8.2.6 Boot System Use (BP 72 to 2 648)

8.4.1

Volume

Descriptor

Type (BP 1)

This field shall specify an 8-bit number indicating that the volume descriptor is a Primary Volume Descriptor. The number in this field shall be 1.

This field shall be reserved for boat system use. Its contents is not specified by this lnternationrl Standard.

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1 .l.

12

IS 14176: IS0 9660

1994 : 1988

Table 4 BP 1
2 to 6 7 8 9 to 46 41 to 72 73 to 80 81 to88 89to120 121 to 124 125 to 128 129 to 132 133 to 146 141 to 144 145 to 148 149 to 152 153 to 156 157 to 196 191 to 318 319 to 446 447 to 574 575 to 702 703 to 739 746 to 776 777 to 813 814 to 836 831 to 847 848 to 864 865 to 881 882 883 884 to 1 395 1396t02048

Primary

Volume

Descriptor content
numerical value CD001 numerical value (00) byte a-characters d-characters (00) bytes numerical value 100) bytes numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical value 34 bytes d-characters a-characters a-characters a-characters d-characters, SEPARATOR 1, SEPARATOR 1, SEPARATOR 1, SEPARATOR 2 2 2 d-characters, SEPARATOR d-characters, SEPARATOR Digit(s), numerical value Digit(s). numerical value Digit(s), numerical value Digit(s), numerical value numerical value (00) byte not specified (00) byte

Field name
Volume Descriptor Type Standard Identifier Volume Descriptor Version Unused Field System Identifier Volume identifier Unused Field Volume Space Size Unused Field Volume Set Size Volume Sequence Number Logical Block Size Path Table Size Location of Occurrence of Type L Path Table Location of Optional Occurrence of Type L Path Table Location of Occurrence of Type M Path Table Location of Optional Occurrence of Type M Path Table Directory Record for Root Directory Volume Set Identifier Publisher Identifier Data Preparer Identifier Application Identifier Copyright File Identifier Abstract File Identifier Bibliographic File Identifier Volume Creation Date and Time Volume Modification Date and Time Volume Expiration Date and Time Volume Effective Date and Time File Structure Version (Reserved for future standardization) Application Use (Reserved for future standardization)

8.4.2
This

Standard

Identifier

(BP 2 to 6)
of this International

8.4.5

System

Identifier

(BP 9 to 40)
of a system which can with

Field shall specify

an identification

This field shall specify recognize logical Sector Numbers

an identification

Standard.

and act upon the content

of the Logical Sectors

0 to t5 of the volume.

The characters in this field shall be CDOOl.

The characters in this field shall be a-characters. 8.4.6 Volume Identifier (BP 41 to 721

8.4.3

Volume

Descriptor

Version

IBP 7)

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number an identification of the version of the specification of the Primary Volume Descriptor. 1 shall indicate the structure of this International Standard. This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1.

This field shall specify an identification of the volume. The characters in this field shall be d-characters. 8.4.7 Unused Field (BP 73 to 80)

All bytes of this field shall be set to (60) 8.4.8 Vdlume Space Size (BP 81 to 98)

8.4.4

Unused

Field (BP 8) This field shall specify as a 32.bit number the number of Logical Blocks in which the Volume Space of the volume is recorded. 13

This field shall be set to KIO~.

-IS 14176: 1994 IS0 9660 : 1988

This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.3.

8.4.16 Location of Occurrence of Type M Path Table (BP 149 to 162) This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent which contains an occurrence of the Path Table. Multiple-byte numerical values in a record of this occurrence of the Path Table shall be recorded with the most significant byte first. This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.2. of Type M Path

8.4.9

Unused Field (BP 89 to 120)

All bytes of this field shall be set to (00).

8.4.10

Volume Set Size (BP 121 to 124)

This field shall specify as a 16.bit number the assigned Volume Set Size of the volume. This field shall be recorded according to 7.2.3.

8.4.17 Location of Optional Table (BP 163 to 166)

Occurrence

8.4.11

Volume

Sequence

Number

(BP 126 to 1281

This field shall specify as a 18bit number the ordinal number of the volume in the Volume Set of which the volume is a member. This field shall be recorded according to 7.2.3.

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent which contains an optional occurrence of the Path Table. If the value is 0, it shall mean that the Extent shall not be expected to have been recorded. Multiple-byte numerical values in a record of this occurrence of the Path Table shall be recorded with the most significant byte first. This field shall be recorded according to~7.3.2.

8.4.12

Logical Block Size (BP 129 to 132) number the size, in bytes, of a

This field shall specify as a l6bit Logical Block.

8.4.18 Directory Record for Root Directory (BP 167 to 190) This field shall contain an occurrence of the Directory Record for the Root directory. `This field shall be recorded according to 9.1.

This field shall be recorded according to 7.2.3.

8.4.13

Path Table Size (BP 133 to 140) 8.4.19 Volume Set Identifier (BP 191 to 318)

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the length in bytes of a recorded occurrence of the Path Table identified by this Volume Descriptor. This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.3.

This field shall specify an identification of the Volume Set of which the volume is a member. The characters in this field shall be d-characters.

8.4.14 Location of Occurrence of Type L Path Table (BP 141 to 144) This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent which contains an occurrence of the Path Table. Multiple-byte numerical values in a record of this occurrence of the Path Table shall be recorded with the least significant byte first. This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.1.

8.4.20

Publisher

Identifier

(BP 319 to 446)

This field shall specify an identification of the user who specified what shall be recorded on the Volume Group of which the volume is a member. If the first byte is set to (5F). the remaining bytes of this field shall specify an identifier for a file containing the identification of the user. This file shall be described in the Root Directory. The File Name shall not contain more than eight d-characters and the File Name Extension shall not contain more than three d-characters. If all bytes of this field are set to (20), it shall mean that no such user is identified. The characters in this field shall be a-characters.

8.4.15 Location of Optional Table (BP 145 to 148)

Occurrence

of Type L Path

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent which contains an optional occurrence of the Path Table. If the value is 0, it shall mean that the Extent shall not be expected to have been recorded. Multiple-byte numerical values in a record of this occurrence of the Path Tablz shall be recorded with the least significant byte first. This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.1. 14

8.4.21

Data Preparer Identifier (BP 447 to 674)

This field shall specify an identification of the person or other entity which controls the prepapration of the data to be recorded on the Volume Group of which the volume is a member.

IS 14176 ? 1994 IS0 9660 : 1988

If the first byte is set to (5F), the remaining bytes of this field shall specify an identifier for a file containing the identification of the data preparer. This file shall be described in the Root Directory. The File Name shall not contain more than eight d-characters and the File Name Extension shall not contain more than three d-characters. If all bytes of this field are set to (201, it shall mean that no such data preparer is identified. The characters in this field shall be a-characters.

The characters in this field shall bed-characters, and SEPARATOR 2. This field shall be recorded as specified in 7.5.

SEPARATOR

1

8.4.25

Bibliographic

File Identifier

(BP 777 to 813)

8.4.22

Application

Identifier

(BP 575 to 702)

This field shall specify an identification for a file described by the Root Directory and containing bibliographic records interpreted according to standards that are the subject of an agreement between the originator and the recipient of the volume. If all bytes of this field are set to (20). it shall mean that no such file is identified. The File Name of a Bibliographic File Identifier shall not contain more than eight d-characters. The File Name Extension of a Bibliographic File Identifier shall not contain more than three d-characters. The characters in this field shall be d-characters, SEPARATOR and SEPARATOR 2. This field shall be recorded as specified in 7.5. 1

This field shall specify an identification of the specification of how the data are recorded on the Volume Group of which the volume is a member. If the first byte is set to (5F), the remaining bytes of this field shall specify an identifier for a file containing the identification of the application. This file shall be described in the Root Directory. The File Name shall not contain more than eight d-characters and the File Name Extension shall not contain more than three d-characters. If all bytes of this field are set to (20), it shall mean that no such application is identified. The characters in this field shall be a-characters.

8.4.26

Volume

Creation

Date and lime

(BP 814 to 830)

This field shall specify the date and the time of the day at which the information in the volume was created. It shall be recorded according to 8.4.26.1.

8.4.23

Copyright

File

Identifier

(BP 703 to 739)

8.4.26.1

Date and Time

Format by a 17-byte field

This field shall specify an identification for a file described by the Root Directory and containing a copyright statement for those volumes of the Volume Set the sequence numbers of which are less than, or equal to, the assigned Volume Set Size of the volume. If all bytes of this field are set to, (20), it shall mean that no such file is identified. The File Name of a Copyright File Identifier shall not contain more than 8 d-characters. The File Name Extension of a Copyright File IdenC iet shall not contain more than 3 d-characters. The characters in this field shall be d-characters, SEPARATOR and SEPARATOR 2. This field shall be recorded as specified in 7.5. 1

The date and time shall be represented recorded as follows. Table 5 -

Date and Time Format Interpretation

I

RBP
1 to4 5 to 6 7 to 8 9 to 10 11 to 12 13 to 14 15 to 16 17

1

I

Content
Digits Digits Digits Digits Digits Digits Digits numerical

I

Year from 1 to 9999 Month of the year from 1 to 12 Day of the month from 1 to 31 Hour of the day from 0 to 23 Minute of the hour from 0 to 59 Second of the minute from 0 to 59 Hundredths of a second Offset frcm Greenwich Mean Time in number of 15 min intervals from -48 (West) to + 52 (East) recorded according to 7.1.2

8.4.24

Abstract

File

Identifier

(BP 740 to 776) If all characters in RBP 1 to 16 of this field are the digit ZERO and the number in RBP 17 is zero, it shall mean that the date and time are not specified.

This field shall specify an identification for a file described by the Root Directory and containing an abstract statement for those volumes of the Volume Set the sequence numbers of which are less than, or equal to, the assigned Volume Set Size of the volume. If all bytes of this field are set to (201, it shall mean that no such file is identified. The File Name of an Abstract File Identifier shall not contain more than 8 d-characters. The File Name Extension of an Abstract File Identifier shall not contain more than 3 d-characters. 15

8.4.27 Volume (BP 631 to 847)

Modification

Date and Time

This field shall specify the date and the time of the day at which the information in the volume was last modified. This field shall be recorded according to 8.4.26.1.

IS 14176: IS0 9660

1994

: 1988

8.4.28

Volume

Expiration

Date and Time (BP 848 to 884)

8.4.31

Reserved

for future

standardization

(BP 883)

This field shall specify the date and the time of the day at which the information in the volume may be regarded as obsolete. If the date and time are not specified then the information shall not be regarded as obsolete. This field shall be recorded according to 8.4.26.1.

All bytes of this field shall be set to (00).

8.4.32

Application

Use (BP 884 to 1 395)

This field shall be reserved for application use. Its content is not specified by this International Standard.

8.429

Volume

Effective

Date and Time (BP 885 to 881)

8.4.33 Reserved (BP1396to2048)

for future

standardization

This fielld shall specify the date and the time of the day at which the information in the volume may be used. If the date and time are not specified then the information may be used at once. This field shall be recorded according to 8.4.26.1.

This field shall be set to (00).

8.5

Supplementary

Volume

Descriptor

8.4.30

File Structure

Version

(BP 882)

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number the version of the specification of the records of a directory and of a Path Table. 1 shall indicate the structure of this International Standard. This field shall be recorded according to 7.1 .l.

The Supplementary Volume Descriptor shall identify the volume, a system which can recognize and act upon the content of the Logical Sectors with Logical Sector Numbers 0 to 15, the size of the Volume Space, the version of the standard which applies to the Volume Descriptor, the version of the specification which applies to the directory records and the Path Table records, certain attributes of the volume and the coded graphic character sets used to interpret descriptor fields that contain characters.

Table 8 BP
1 2 to 6 7 8 9 to 40 41 to 72 73 to 80 81 to88 89 to 120 121 to 124 125 to 128 129 to 132 133 to 140 141 to 144 145 to 148 149 to 152 153 to 166 157 to 190 191 to 318 319 to 446 447 to 574 575 to 702 703 to 739 740 to 776

Supplementary Field name

Volume

Descriptor Content
numerical value CD001 numerical value 8 bits al-characters dl-characters (00) bytes numerical value 32 bytes numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical value 34 bytes dl-characters al-characters al-characters al-characters dl-characters, SEPARATOR 1, SEPARATOR 2 dl -characters, SEPARATOR 1,

Volume DescriptorType Standard Identifier Volume Descriptor Version Volume Flags System Identifier Volume Identifier Unused Field Volume Space Size Escape Sequences Volume Set Size Volume Sequence number Logical Block Size Parh Table Size Location of Occurrence of Type L Path Table Location of Optional Occurrence of Type L Path Table Location of Occurrence of Type M Path Table Location of Optional Occurrence of Type M Path Table Directory Record for Root Directory Volume Set identifier Publisher Identifier Data Preparer Identifier Application Identifier Copyright File Identifier Abstract File Identifier

777 to 813 814 to 830 831 to 847 848to864 865 to 881 882 883 884 to 1 395 1396t02048

Bibliographic File Identifier Volume Creation Date and Time Volume Modification Date and Time Volume Expiration Date and Time Volume Effective Date and Time File Structure Version (Reserved for future Standardization) Application Use
(Reserved for future standardization)

SEPARATOR 2 dl-characters, SEPARATOR 1, SEPARATOR 2 Digit(s), numerical value Digit(s), numerical value Digit(s), numerical value Digit(s), numerical value numerical value (001 byte not specified
(00) bytes

16

IS 14176: IS0 9660

1994 : 1966

Within a Volume Descriptor Set the contents of the fields of this descriptor shall be identical with the contents of the corresponding fields in a Primary Volume Descriptor except for the following fields.

environment according to IS0 2022 to interpret descriptor fields related to the Directory Hierarchy identified by this Volume Descriptor (see 7.4.4). If the G 1 set is designated, it is implicitly invoked into columns 10 to 15 of the code table. These escape sequences shall conform to IS0 2022, except that the ESCAPE character shall be omitted from each designating escape sequence when recorded in this field. The first or only escape sequence shall begin at the first byte of the field. Each successive escape sequence shall begin at the byte in the field immediately following the last byte of the preceding escape sequence. Any unused positions following the last sequence shall be set to KIO). If all the bytes of this field are set to (00). it shall mean that the set of a l-characters is identical with the set of a-characters and that the set of dl-characters is identical with the set of d-characters. In this case both sets are coded according to IS0 846.

.

85.1

Volume

Descriptor

Type (BP 1)

This field shall specify an 8-bit number indicating that the Volume Descriptor is a Supplementary Volume Descriptor. The number in this field shall be 2. This field shall be recorded according to 7.1 .l. 8.5.2 Volume Descriptor Version (BP 7)

This field shall specify as an 8bit number an identification of the Version of the specification of the Supplementary Volume Descriptor. 1 shall indrcate the structure of this International This field shall be recorded according to 7.1 .l. Standard.

8.5.7

Path Table

Size (BP 133 to 148)

8.5.3

Volume

Flags (BP 8)

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the length in bytes of a recorded occurrence of the Path Table identified by this Volume Descriptor. This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.3.

The bits of this field shall be numbered from 0 to 7 starting with the least significant bit. This field shall specify certain characteristics of the volume as follows. Bit 0: - if set to ZERO, shall mean that the Escape Sequences field specifies only escape sequences registered according to IS0 2735; _ if set to ONE, shall mean that the Escape Sequences field specifies at least one escape sequence not registered according to IS0 2375. Bits 1 to 7:These bits are reserved for future standardization and shall all be set to ZERO. 8.5.4 System Identifier CBP 9 to 48)

8.5.8 Location of Occurrence (BP 141 to 1441

of Type L Path Table

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent which contains an occurrence of the Path Table. Multiple-byte numerical values in a record of this occurrence of the Path Table shall be recorded with the least significant byte first. This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.1.

*

8.5.9 Location of Optional Table~fBP 145 to 148)

Occurrence

of Type L Path

This field shall specify an identification of a system which can recognize and act upon the content of the Logical Sectors with Logical Sector Numbers 0 to 15 of the volume. The characters in this field shall be al-characters.

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent which contains an optional occurrence of the Path Table.' If the value is 0, it shall mean that the Extent shall not be expected to have been recorded. Multiple-byte numerical values in a record of this occurrence of the Path Table shall be recorded with the least significant byte first. This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.1.

8.5.5

Volume

Identifier

(BP 41 to 72) of the volume. 8.6.10 Location (BP 148 to 152) of Occurrence of Type M Path Table

This field shall specify an identification

The characters in this field shall be dl-characters.

8.5.6

Escape

Sequences

(BP 88 to 1201

This field shall specify one or more escape sequences according to IS0 2022 that designate the GO graphic character set and, optionally, the G 1 graphic character set to be used in an 8-bit

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent which contains an occurrence of the Path Table. Multiple-byte numerical values in a record of this occurrence of the Path Tabie shall be recorded with the most significant byte first. This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.2.

17

IS 14176: 1994 IS0 9660 : 1988

8.5.11

Location of Optional Table (BP 153 to 156)

Dccurrence

of Type M Path

This field shall specify as a 32.bit number the Logical Block Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent which contains an optional occurrence of the Path Table. If the value is 0, it shall mean that the Extent shall not be expected to have been recorded. Multiple-byte numerical values in a record of this occurrence of the Path Table shall be recorded with the most significant byte first. This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.2. 8.5.12 Directory (BP 157 to 190) Record for Root Directory

If the first byte is set to (5F). the remaining bytes of this field shall specify an identifier for a file containing the identification of the application. This file shall be described in the Root Directory. If all bytes of this field are set to (201, it shall mean that no such application is identified. The characters in this field shall be a l-characters.

8.5.17

Capyright

File Identifier

(BP 703 to 739)

This field shall contain an occurrence of the Directory Record for the Root Directory. This field shall be recorded according to 9.1. p.5.13 Volume Set Identifier (BP 191 to 318)

This field shall specify an identification for a file described by the Root Directory and containing a copyright statement for those volumes of the Volume Set the sequence numbers of which are less than, or equal to, the assigned Volume Set Size of the volume. If all bytes of this field are set to (20), it shall mean that no such file is identified. shall The characters in this field SEPARATOR 1 and SEPARATOR 2. be dl-characters,

The field shall be recorded as specified in 7.5. This field shall specify an identification which the volume is a member. of the Volume Set of 8.5.19 Bibliographic File Identifier IBP 777 to 813)

The characters in this field shall be d l-characters.

8.5.14

Publisher

Identifier

(BP 319 to 445)

This field shall specify an identification of the user who specified what shall be recorded on the Volume GFOUP of which the volume is a member. If the first byte is set to (5F), the remaining bytes of this field shall specify an identifier for a file containing the identification of the user. This file shall be described in the Root Directory. If all bytes of this field are set to (201, it shall mean that no such user is identified. The characters in this field shall be a l-characters.

This field shall specify an identification for a file described by the Root Directory and containing bibliographic records interpreted according to standards that are the subject of an agreement between the originator and the recipient of the volume. If all bytes of this field are set to (201, it shall mean that no such file is identified. in this field The characters SEPARATOR 1 and SEPARATOR shall 2. be dl-characters,

The field shall be recorded as specified in 7.5. 8.5.19 Bibliographic File Identifier (BP 777 to 813)

8.5.15

Data Preparer

Identifier

(BP 447 to 574)

This field shall specify an identification of the person or other entity which controls the preparation of the data to be recorded on the Volume Group of which the volume is a member. If the first byte is set to (5F), the remaining bytes of this field shall specify an identifier for a file containing the identification of the data preparer.`This file shall be described in the Root Directory. If all bytes of this field are set to (20). it shall mean that no such data preparer is identified. The characters in this field shall be a l-characters.

This field shall specify an identification for a file described by the Root Directory and containing bibliographic records interpreted according to standards that are the subject of an agreement between the originator and the recipient of the volume. If all bytes of this field are set to (20), it shall mean that no such file is identified. The characters in this field shall SEPARATOR 1 and SEPARATOR 2. be dl-characters,

The field shall be recorded as specified in 7.5. 8.5.20 Application Use (BP 884 to 1 395)

This field shall be reserved for application use, Its content is not specified by this International Standard.

8.6
8.5.16 Application Identifier (BP 675 to 702)

Volume

Partition

Descriptor

This field shall specify an identification of the specification of how the data are recorded on the Volume Group of which the volume is a member.

The Volume Partition Descriptor shall identify a volume partition within the Volume Space, a system which can recognize and act upon the content of fields reserved for system use in the Volume Descriptor, the position and size of the volume par-

18

IS 14176:
IS0 9660 :

1994

1968

titian, and the version of the standard which applies to the Volume Descriptor. The contents of the volume partition are not specified by this International Standard. Table 7 BP
1

8.6.5

System

Identifier

(BP S~to 461
which can

This field shall specify an identification of a system
recognize and act upon the content Descriptor. in this field shall be a-characters. Partition Identifier (BP 41 to 72) of the Volume of the System the Volume

Use field in

Volume

Partition

Descriptor Content
numerical value CD001 numerical value @JO)byte a-characters d-characters numerical value numerical value not specified

Field name Volume Descriptor Type Standard Identifier Volume Descriptor Version Unused Field System Identifier Volume Partition Identifier Volume Partition Location Volume Partition Size System Use

The characters 8.6.6 Volume

2 to 6 7 8 9 to 40
41 73 81 89 to to to to 72 80 55

This field shall specify The characters 8.6.7 This

an identification

Partition.

in this field shall be d-characters.

Volume
field shall

Partition
specify

Location

(BP 73 to 80)
number the Logical Block Par-

2 048

as a 3Zbit

8.6.1
This

Volume
field shall

Descriptor
specify

Type (BP 1)
number Partition indicating Descriptor. that the

Number tition.

of the first Logical

Block allocated

to the Volume

an 8-bit

Volume

Descriptor

is a Volume

This field shall be recorded 8.6.8 Volume Partition

according

to 7.3.3.

The number

in this field shall be 3. according to .l.l.

Size (BP 81 to 88)

This field shall be recorded

Thus field shall specify as a 32.bit number the number of Logical
Blocks in which the Volume Partition according is recorded. to 7.3.3.

86.2
This

Standard
field shall

Identifier
specify

(BP 2 to 6)
of this International

This field shall be recorded 8.68

an identification

Standard. The characters in this field shall be CD001

System

Use (BP 89 to 2 048)
for system Standard. use. Its content IS not

This field shall be reserved specified by this International

8.6.3

Volume

Descriptor

Version

(BP 71
an identification Partition of the

This field shali specify as an 8bit version of the specification the structure

number

9 9.1

File and Format

Directory

Descrip~tors Record
Record are given in table 8.

of the Volume

Descriptor.

of a Directory
of a Directory

1 shall indicate

of this International according to 7.1.1.

Standard. Details of the format

This field shall be recorded

9.1.1
8.6.4 Unused Field (BP 8)

Length

of Directory

Record

fLEN_DRl

(BP II

This tield shall specify as an 8bit This field shall be set to (00). Table 8 BP
1 2 3 to 10 11 to 18 19 to 25 26 27 28 29 to 32 33 34 to (33 + LEN_FI) the Directory Record.

number the length in bytes of

Format

of a Directory

Record Content
numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical values 8 bits numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical value d-characters, d 1-characters, SEPARATOR 1, SEPARATOR 100) or (01) byte DO) byte LEN SU bytes 2.

Field name
Length of Directory Record (LEN_DR) Extended Attribute Record Length Location of Extent Data Length Recording Date and Time File Flags File Unit Size Interleave Gap Size Volume Sequence Number Length of File Identifier (LEN _ FI) File Identifier

(34 + LEN-F11 fLEN_DR-LEN_SU + 1) to LEN_DR NOTE LEN _SU

Padding Field System Use

denotes the length of the System Use field.

19

IS 14176:1994 IS0 9660:1968

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1 .l. 9.1.2 Extended Attribute Record Length (BP 2)

The date and time shall be represented by seven 8-bit numbers each of which shall be recorded according to 7.1.1 as follows. Table 9 RBP

Recording Interpretation

Date

and Time Content numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical value numerical value

This field shall contain an 8-bit number. This number shall specify the assigned Extended Attribute Record Length if an Extended Attribute Record is recorded. Otherwise this number shall be zero. This field shall be recorded according to 7.1 .l. 9.1.3 Location of Extent (BP 3 to 10)

Number of yearssince

1909

Month of the year from 1 to 12 Day of the month from 1 to 31 Hour of the day from 0 to 23 Minute of the hour from 0 to 59 Second of the minute from 0 to 59 Offset from Greenwich Mean Time in number of 15 min intervals from -48 (West) to +52 (East) recorded according to 7.1.2

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent. This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.3. (BP 11 to 18) 9.13

If all seven numbers are zero, it shall mean that the date and time are not specified. File Flags IBP 26)

9.1.4

Data

Length

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the data iength of the File Section. This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.3.
NOTE - This number does not include the length of any Extended Attribute Record.

The bits of this field shall be numbered from 0 to 7 starting with the least significant bit. If this Directory Record identifies a directory itions 2, 3 and 7 shall be set to ZERO. then bit pos-

9.1.5

Recording

Date and Time

(9P 19 to 25)

If no Extended Attribute Record is associated with the File Section identified by this Directory Record then bit positions 3 and 4 shall be set to ZERO. This field shall specify certain characteristics of the file as

This field shall indicate the date and the time of the day at which the information in the Extent described by the Directory Record was recorded.

Table 10 -

File flags

BP

1

Bit -name If set to ZERO, shall mean that the existence of the file shall be made known to the user upon an inquiry by the user.

If set to ONE, shall mean that the existence of the file need not be made known to the user.
If set to ZERO, shall mean that the Directory Record does not identify a directory. If set to ONE, shall mean that the Directory Record identifies a directory. 1 1 AsAsted File If set to ZERO, shall mean that the file is not an -Associated File. If set to ONE, shall mean that the file is an Associated File. If set to ZERO, shall mean that the structure of the information in the file is not specified by the Record Format field of any associated Extended Attribute Record (see 9.58). If set to ONE, shall meanthat the structure of the information in the file has a record format specified by a number other than zero in the Record Format Field of the Extended Attribute Record (see 9.5.8). 4 If set to ZERO, shall mean that an Owner Identification and a Group Identification are not specified for the file (see 9.5.1 and 9.5.2); any user may read or execute the file (see 9.6.3).

If set to ONE, shall mean that ran Owner Identification and a Group Identification are specified for the file (see 9.5.1 and 95.2); at least one of the even-numbered bits or bit 0 in the Permissions field of the associated Extended Attribute Record is set to ONE (see 9.5.31. and shall be set to ZERO.

1
I

5to6 7

t- Reserved

These bits are reserved for future standardization

[

MumExtent

(

If set to ZERO, shall mean that this is the final Directory Record for the file; if set to ONE, shall mean that this is not the final Directory Record for the file.

20

1

IS

14176:

IS0

1994 9660 : 1966

9.1.7

File Unit Size (BP 271

If present, this field shall be set to (00).

This field shall contain an 8-bit number. This number shall specify the File Unit Size for the File Section if the File Section is recorded in interleaved mode. Otherwise this number shall be zero. This field shall be recorded according to 7.1 .l. 9.1.8 Interleave Gap Size (BP 26)

9.1.13 System to LEN_DRI

Use [BP (LEN_DR-LEN_SU

+ 1)

This field shall be optional. If present, this field shall be reserved for system use. Its content is not specified by this International Standard. If necessary, so that the Directory Record comprises an even number of bytes, a Ml1 byte shall be added to terminate this field.

This field shall contain an 8-bit number. This number shall specify the Interleave Gap Size for the File Section if the File Section is recorded in interleaved mode. Otherwise this number shall be zero. This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 9.1.9 Volume Sequence Number (BP 29 to 32)

9.2

Consistency

Directory

Records

of File Attributes of a File

between

The following fields of each Directory Record for the same file shall contain the same values: Existence bit of the File Flags field; Directory bit of the File Flags field; Associated File bit of the File Flags field; Record bit of the File Flags field; Reserved bits of the File Flags field; Length of File Identifier field; File Identifier field; Padding field.

This field shall specify as a 18bit number the ordinal number of the volume in the Volume Set on which the Extent described by this Directory Record is recorded. This field shall be recorded according to 7.2.3.

9.1.10 Length of File Identifier (LEN_FI) (BP 33) This field shall specify as an 8-bit number the length in bytes of the File Identifier field of the Directory Record. This field shall be recorded according to 7.1 .I. 9.1.11 File Identifier [BP 34 to (33 + LEN-F111 -

The interpretation of this field depends as follows on the setting of the Directory bit of the File Flags field. If set to ZERO, it shall mean : The field shall specify an identification for the file. The characters in this field shall be d-characters or dl-characters, SEPARATOR 1, SEPARATOR 2. The field shall be recorded as specified in 7.5. If set to ONE, it shall mean: The field shall specify an identification for the directory. The characters in this field shall be d-characters or dl-characters, or only a (00) byte, or only a (01) byte. The field shall be recorded as specified in 7.6. 9.1.12 Padding Field [BP 34 + LEN_FI)l

9.3

Order of Directory

Records

The records of a Directory shall be ordered according to the relative value of the File Identifier field by the following criteria in descending order of significance: a) in ascending order according to the relative value of File Name, where File Names shall be valued as follows: If two File Names have the same content in all byte positions, then these two File Names are said to be equal in value. _ If two File Names do not contain the same number of byte positions, the shorter File Name shall be treated as if it were padded on the right with all padding bytes set to (20) and as if both File Names contained the identical number of byte positions. After any padding necessary to treat the File Names as if they were of equal length, the characters in the corresponding byte positions, starting with the first position, of the File Namesare compared until a byte position is found that does not contain the same character in both File Names. The greater File Name is the one that contains the character with the higher code position value in the coded graphic character set used to interpret the File Identifier field of the Directory Record.

This field shall be present in the Directory Record only if the number in the Length of the File identifier field is an even number.

21

IS 14176 : 1994 IS0 9660 : 1966

b) in ascending order according to the relative value of File Name Extension, where -File Name Extensions shall be valued as follows: If two File Name Extensions have the same content in all byte positions, then these two File Name Extensions are said to be equal in value. If two File Name Extensions do not contain the same number of byte positions, the shorter File Name Extension shall be treated as if it were padded on the right with all padding bytes set to (20) and as if both File yame Extensions contained the identical number of byte positions. After any padding necessary to treat the File Name Extensions as if they were of equal length, the characters in the corresponding byte positions, starting with the first position, of the File Name Extensions are compared until a byte position is found that does not contain the same character in both File Name Extensions. The greater File Name Extension is the one that containsthe character with the higher code position value in the coded graphic character set used to interpret the File Identifier field of the Directory Record. c) in descending order according to the relative value of File Version Number, where File Version Numbers shall be valued asfollows: If two File Version Numbers have the same content in all byte positions, then these two File Version Numbers are said to be equal in value. If two File Version Numbers do not contain the same-number of byte positions, the shorter File Version Number shall be treated as if it were padded on the left with all padding bytes set to (30) and as if both File Version Numbers contained the identical number of byte positions. After any padding necessary to treat the File Version Numbers as if they were of equal length, the characters in the corresponding byte positions, starting with the first position, of the File Version Numbers are compared until a byte position is found that does not contain the same character in both File Version Numbers. The greater File Version Numb& is the one that contains the character with the higher code position value in the coded graphic character set used to interpret the File Identifier field of the Directory Record. d) in descending order according to the value of the Associated File bit of the File Flags field.

e) 9.4

The order of the File Sections of the file.

Format
Length

of a Path Table Record
of Directory Identifier (LEN__DI) (BP 1)

9.4.1

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number the length in bytes of the Directory Identifier field of the Path Table Record. This field shall be recorded according to 7.1 .l 9.4.2 Extended Attribute Record Length (BP 2)

This field shall contain an &bit number. This number shall specify the assigned Extended Attribute Record Length if an Extended Attribute Record is recorded. Otherwise this number shall be zero. This field shall be recorded according to 7.1 .l. 9.4.3 Location of Extent (BP 3 to 61

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent in which the directory is recorded. This field shell be recorded according to 7.3. 9.4.4 Parent Directory Number (BP 7 to 8)

This field shall specify as a 1Sbit number the record number in the Path Table for the parent directory of the directory. This field shall be recorded according to 7.2. 9.4.5 Directory Identifier [BP 9 to (8 + LEN_DI)]

This field shall specify an identification for a directory. The characters in this field shall dl-characters or only a (00) byte. be d-characters or

This field shall be recorded as specified in 7.6. 9.4.6 Padding Field [BP (9 + LEN_DI)]

This field shall be present in the Path Table Record only if the number in the Length of Directory Identifier field is an odd number. If present, this field shalt be set to (00).

Table 11 BP 1 2 3 to 6 7 to 8 9 to (8 + LEN_DI) 1 (9 + LEN_DI)

Path Table Record
Content numerical value numGricalvalue numerical value numerical value d-characters, dl-characters, IOO)byte 1 @O) byte

Field name Length of Directory identifier (LEN_DI) Extended Attribute Record Length Location of Extent Parent Directory Number -Directory Identifier

1 Padding Field

22

IS 14176: IS0 9660

1994

: 1966

Table
BP 1 to 4 5 lo 8 9 to 10 11 to27 28 to 44 45 to 61 62 to 78 79 X0 81 to84 85 to 116 117 lo 180 I81 182 183 to 246 247 to 250 251 to (250 -t LEN-AU) 1251 + LEN_ AU) to 1250 + LEN_ESC LEN-AU) +

12 -

Extended
Field name

Attribute

Record Content
numerical value numerical value 16 bits Digit(s), numerical value Digit(s), numerical value Digit(s). numerical value Digit(s), numerical value 8 bits 8 bits numerical value a-characters, not specified numerical value numerical value (00) bytes numerical value LEN _ AU bytes al-characters

Owner Identification Group identification Permissions File Creation Date and Time

File Modification Date and Time
File Expiration Date and Time File Effective Date and Time Record Format Record Attributes Record Length System Identifier System Use Extended Attribute Record Version Length of Escape Sequences (LEN_.ESC) (Reserved for future standardization) Length of Application Use (LEN-AU) Application Use

Escape Sequences

LEN _ ESC bytes

9.5

Format

of an Extended

Attribute

Record

If present, an Extended-Attribute at least one Logical Block.

Record shall be recorded over

The values for this number from 1 to a number subject to agreement between the data preparer and receiving system shall identify the group as belonging to the class of user referred to as System. If the number in this field is 0, this shall indicate that there is no group identification specified for the file. In this case, the Owner Identification field shall contain zero. This field shall be recorded according to 7.2.3. 9.5.3 Permissions (BP 9 to 10)

9.5.1

Owner

Identification

(BP 1 to 4)

This field shall specify as a Is-bit number an identification of the file owner who is a member of the group identified by the Group Identification field of the Extended Attribute Record. If the number in this field is 0, this shall indicate that there is no owner identification specified for the file. In this case, the Group Identification field shall contain zero. This field shall be recorded according to 7.2.3.

The bits of this 16-bit field shall be numbered from 0 to 15 starting with the least significant bit of the byte recorded in byte position 10. Bits 0 to 3 may be ignored in interchange. If requested by the owner, bits 4 to 7 may be ignored in interchange. This field shall specify access permission for certain classes of users as follows.

9.5.2

Group

Identification

(BP 5 to 8)

This field shall specify as a 18bit number an identification of the group of which the file owner is a member.

23

IS 14176: 1994 IS0 9660 : 1968

Table 13 Bit 0

Permissions

If set to ZERO, shall mean that an owner who is a member of a group of the System class of user may read the file. If set to ONE, shall mean that an owner who is a member of a group of the System class of user may not read the file.

Bit 1

Shall be set to ONE.

Bit 2

If set to ZERO, shall mean that an owner who is a member of a group of the System class of user may execute the file. If set toONE, shall mean that an owner who is a member of a group of the System class of user may not execute the file.

Bit 3 Bit 4

Shall be set to ONt. If set to ZERO, shall mean that the owner may read the file. If set to ONE, shall mean that the owner may notTead the file.

Bit 5
Bit 6

Shall be set to ONE.
If set to ZERO, shall mean that the owner may execute the file. If set to ONE, shall mean that the owner may not execute the file.

Bit 7 Bit 8

Shall be set to ONE. If set to ZERO, shall mean that any user who is a member of the group specified by the Group Identification field may read the file. If set to ONE, shall mean that of the users who are members of the group specified by the Group Identification field, only the owner may read the file. Shall be set to ONE. If set to ZERO, shall mean that any user who is a member of the group specified by the Group Identification field may execute the file. If set to ONE, shall mean that of the users who are members of the group specified by the Group Identification field, only the owner may execute the file.

Bit 9 Bit 10

Bit 11 Bit 12

Shall be set to ONE. If set to ZERO, shall mean that any user may read the file. If set to ONE, shall mean that a user not a member of the group specified by the Group Identification field may not read the file.

Bit 13 Bit 14

Shall be set to ONE. If set to ZERO, shall mean that any user may execute the file.

.

If set to ONE, shall mean that a user not a member of the group specified by the Group Identification field may not execute the file. Bit 15 Shall be set to ONE.

9.5.4

File Creation

Date and Time (BP 11 to 27)

9.5.7

File Effective

Date and Time (BP 52 to 76)

This field shall specify the date and the time of the day at which the information in the file was created. This field shall be recorded according to 8.4.26.1.

This field shall specify the date and the time of the day at which the information in the file may be used. If the date and time are not specified then the information may be used at once. This field shall be recorded according to 8.4.26.1.

9.5.5

File Modification

Date and Time (BP 28 to 44) 9.5.8 Record Format (BP 79)

This field shall specify the date and the time of the day at which the information in the file was last modified. This field shall be recorded according to 8.4.26.1.

This field shall contain an 8-bit number specifying the format of the information in the file. Number 0 shall mean that the structure of the information recorded in the file is not specified by this field; shall mean that the information in the file is a sequence of fixed-length records (see 6.10.3); shall mean that the information in the file is a sequence of variable-length records (see 6.10.4). in which the RCW is recorded according to 7.2.1;

9.5.5

File Expiration

Date and Time (BP 45 to 61) Number 1

This field shall specify the date and the time of the day at which the information in the file may be regarded as obsolete. If the date and time are not specified then the information shall not be regarded as obsolete. This field shall be recorded according to 8.4.26.1.

Number 2

24

IS 14176: 1994 IS0 966Q : 1988

Number 3

shall mean that the information in the file is a sequence of variable-length records (see 6.10.4). in which the RCW is recorded according to 7.22. are reserved for future standardization.

9.5.12

System

Use (BP 117 to 190)

This field shall be reserved for system use. Its content is not specified by this International Standard. 9.5.13 Extended Attribute Record Version (BP 181)

Numbers 4 to 127 Numbers 128 to 255

are reserved for system use.

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1.

This field shali specify as an 8-bit number the version of the specification of the Extended Attribute Record. 1 shall indicate the structure of this International Standard.

9.59

Record

Attributes

(BP 80)

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1 9.5.14 Length of Escape Sequences

.l .

This field shall contain an 8-bit number specifying certain processing of the records in a file when they are displayed on a character-imaging device. Number 0 shall mean that each record shall be preceded by a LINE FEED character and folfowed by a CARRIAGE RETURN character; shall mean that the first byte of a record shall be interpreted as specified in IS0 1639 for vertical spacing; shall mean that the record contains the necessary control information. are reserved for future standardization. the Record

(BP 182)

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number the length in bytes of the Escape Sequences field in the Extended Attribute Record. This field shall be recorded according to 7.1,l. 9.5.15 Reserved (BP 183 to 246) for future standardization

Number 1

All bytes of this field shall be set to (00). 9.5.16 Length of Application Use (BP 247 to 250)

Number 2

Numbers 3 to 266

This field shall specify as a Is-bit number the length in bytes of the Application Use field in the Extended Attribute Record. This field shall be recorded according to 7.2.3. 9.5.17 Application Use [BP 25110 (250 + LEN_AUH

If the Record Format field contains zero then Attribute field shall be ignored in interchange. This field shall be recorded according to 7.1 .l.

This field shall be reserved for application use. Its content is not specified by this International Standard. 9.510 Record Length (BP 81 to 84) 9.5.18 Escape Sequences [BP (251 + LEN--AU) to (250 + LEN_ESC + LEN_AUlI This field shall be optional. If present, this field shall contain escape sequences that designate the coded character set to be used to interpret the contents of the file. These escape sequences shall conform to IS0 2022, except that the ESCAPE character shall be omitted from each escape sequence. The first or only escape sequence shall begin at the first byte of the field. Each successive escape sequence shall begin at the byte in the field immediately following the last byte of the preceding escape sequence. Any unused positions following the last escape sequenm@iall be set to KM)).

This' field shall specify a M-bit number as follows. If the Record Format field contains the number 0, the Record Length field shall contain zero. If the Record Format field contains the number 1, the Record Length field shall specify the length in bytes of each record in the file. If the Record Format field contains the number 2 or 3, the Record Length field shall specify the maximum length in bytes of a record in the file. This field shall be recorded according to 7.2.3.

9.6 Caoelstency of File Attributes between Extended Attribute Records of a File
9.511 System Identifier (BP 85to 116) ,The following fields of the Extended Attribute Record associated with the File Sections of a file shall contain the same values :

Thii field shall specify an identification of ~a system which can recognize and act upon the content of the System Use fields in the Extended Attribute Record and associated Directory Record. The characters in this field shall be a-characters or.al-characters.

-

Record Format field; Record Attributes field;

Record Length field, if the records are fixed-length records (see 6.10.31.

25

IS 14176 : 1994 IS0 9660 : 1966

10

Levels

of interchange
Standard specifies three nested levels of

a File Name Extension shall not contain more than 3 d-characters or 3 dl-characters;
a Directon/ Identifier shall not contain ~more than 8 d-characters or 8 dl-characters.

This International interchange.

10.1

Level 1

10.2

Level 2

At Level 2 the following restriction shall apply: At Level 1 the following restrictions shall apply: each file shall consist of only one File Section.

< -

each file shall consist of only one File Section;

10.3

Level 3

a File Name shall not contain more than 8 d-characters or 8 dl-characters;

At Level 3 no restrictions shall apply.

26

IS 14176: 1994 IS0 9660 : 1988

Section three:
11 Requirement systems for the description of

Requirements
-

for systems

Volume Creation Date and Time Volume Modification Date and Time

This International Standard specifies that certain information shall be communicated between a user and an implementation (see clauses 12 and 13). An information processing system that conforms to this International Standard shall be the subject of a description which identifies the means by which the user~may supply such information, or may obtain it when it is made available, as specified in this International Standard.

Volume Expiration Date and Time Volume Effective Date and Time Application Use

For each Path Table Record: Extended Attribute Location of Extent Parent Directory Number Directory Identifier Record Length

12
12.1

Requirements
General

for an originating'system

-

For each Directory Record

:
Record Length

The implementation shall be capable of recording a set of files, and all descriptors that are specified in this International Standard, on a Volume Set in accordance with one of the interchange levels specified in this International Standard.

-

Extended Attribute Location of Extent Data Length

Recording Date and Time Existence bit of the File Flags field Directory bit of the File Flags field Associated File bit of the File Flags field Record bit of the File Flags field Protection bit of the File Flags field File Unit Size Interleave Gap Size Volume Sequence Number File Name of a File Identifier File Name Extension of a File Identifier File Version Number of a File Identifier System Use

12.2

Files

-

-The implementation shall obtain from the data preparer the information that constitutes the set of files to be recorded.

12.3

Descriptors

12.3.1 The implementation shall allow the data preparer to supply the information that is to be recorded in each of the descriptor fields listed below, and shall supply the information for a field if the data preparer does not supply it. For the Primary Volume Descriptor: System Identifier Volume Identifier Logical Block Size Location of Occurrence of Type L Path Table Location of Optional Occurrence of Type L Path Table Location of Occurrence of Type M Path Table Location of Optional Occurrence of Type M Path Table Volume Set Identifier Publisher Identifier Data Preparer Identifier Application Identifier

-

12.3.2 The implementation shall allow the data preparer to supply the information that is to be recorded in the descriptor fields listed below, and shall not record the Supplementary Volume Descriptor if the data preparer does not supply the information.
For each Supplementary System Identifier Volume Identifier Logical Block Size Location of Occurrence of Type L Path Table Location of Optional Occurrence df Type 1 Path Tsbie Volume Descriptor:

Copyright File Identifier Abstract File Identifier

Bibliographic File ldentiii

27

-IS 14176: 1994 IS0 9660 : 1966

-

Location of Occurrence of Type M Path Table Location of Optional Occurrence of Type M Path Table Bit 0 of the Volume Flags field Escape Sequences Volume Set Identifier Publisher Identifier Data Preparer Identifier Application Identifier Copyright File Identifier Abstract File Identifier Bibliographic File Identifier Volume Creation Date and Time Volume Modification Date and Time

For each Extended Attribute Owner Identification Group Identification Permissions

Record

:

_ _ -

File Creation Date and Time File Modification Date and Time

File Expiration Date and Time File Effective Date and Time Record Format Record Attributes Record Length System Identifier System Use Length of Escape Sequences

Volume Expiration Date and Time Volume Effective Date and Time Application Use

-

Length of Application Application Use

Use

Escape Sequences

12.3.3 The implementation shall allow the data preparer to supply the information that is to be recorded in the descriptor fields listed below, and shall not record the Volume Partition Descriptor if the data preparer does not supply the information. For each Volume Partition Descriptor:

12.4

System

Area

The implementation shall allow the data preparer to supply the information that is to be recorded on the Logical Sectors with Logical Sector Numbers 0 to 15.

-

System Identifier Volume Partition Identifier Volume Partition Location Volume Partition Size System Use

13 13.1

Requirements General

for a receiving

system

12.3.4 The implementation shall allow the data preparer to supply the information that is to be recorded in the descriptor fields listed below, and shall not record the Boot Record if the data preparer does not supply the information. For each Boot Record: Boot System Identifier

The implementation shall be capable of reading the files and the recorded descriptors from a Volume Set that has been recorded in accordance with one of the interchange levels specified rn this International Standard, except Associated Files.

13.2

Files to the user the files, except any

The implementation shall make available information that constitutes the recorded Associated File.

- Boot Identifier
Boot System Use

If the implementation allows the user to specify that the information constituting a file is to be interpreted according to 6.10, the implementation shall make available to the user the length of each record in the file.

12.3.5 The implementation shall allow the data preparer to supply the information that is to be recorded in the descriptor fields listed below, and need not record the Extended Attribute Record if the data preparer does not supply the information for any of the descriptor fields 1ists.d below. If the Extended Attribute Record is recorded, the implementation shall supply the information for a field if the data preparer does not supply it. 28

13.3

Descriptors

13.3.1 The implementation shall allow the user to supply information sufficient to enable the implementation to locate the files required by the user, and to locate the volumes on which these are~recorded.

Is 14176: 1994 1% 9660 : 1988

13.3.2 The implementation shall make available to the user the information that is recorded in each of the descriptor fields listed below.
For the Primary Volume Descriptor: Volume Identifier Volume Set Identifier Copyright File Identifier Abstract File Identifier Bibliographic File Identifier Descriptor:

-

File Name Extension of a File Identifier File Directory bit of the File Flags field

-13.4 Restrictions
The implementation may impose a limit on the length of a record to be made available to the user. The implementation is not required to make available to the user any byte beyond the first n bytes of a record, where n is the value of the imposed limit.

13.5

Levels of Implementation
Standard specifies two nested levels of im-

For each SupplementaryVolume Volume Identifier

This International plementation.

Bit 0 of the Volume Flags field Escape Sequences Volume Set Identifier Copyright File Identifier Abstract File Identifier Bibliographic File Identifier

13.5.1

Level 1 is permitted not to make

At Level 1 the implementation available to the user:

the information that constitutes the files identified in a Directory Hierarchy that is identified in a Supplementary Volume Descriptor; the information that is recorded irr the descriptor fields of a Supplementary Volume Descriptor and of the associated Path Table Records, associated Directory Records, and Extended Attribute Records identified by the associated Directory Records.
13.52 Level 2

For each Path Table Record: Parent Directory Number Directory Identifier

For each Directory Record:

-

File Name of a File Identifier

At Level 2 no such restrictions shall apply.

29

IS

14176:

1994

IS0

9660 : 1988

Annex

A

(informative) IS0 646: International Reference Version (IRV)

Table 14

I

1.
I

_.

_.

..

-.

1

h41531bZlt

Ohi2f3i415i617

The d-characters are those which are not shaded in table 14.

IS 14176: 1994 IS0 9660: 1968

Table 15

rh7lI-I

10

10

10

11

11

1

11

olllllolo
1~1 t-II II 01 1

Ill
nr

The a-characters

are those which

are not shaded

in table

15

31

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright
BIS has the copyright

of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of-BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications >, BIS. Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along withamendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot No. LTD 37 (1693) Amendments Amend No. Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi I IO002 Telephones : 331 01 31,331 I3 75 Regional Offices : Central
:

Telegram : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 331 01 31

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI I 10002

Eastern

:

l/l 4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054

378499, 37 86 26,

378561 37 86 62

Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C CHANDIGARH

i 60036

53 3843, 53 23 84 235 02 16. 235 IS 19,

53 1640

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 13

235 04 42 235 23 IS

Western

:

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) BOMBAY 400093

6329295, 6327891,

6327858 6327892

Branches:

AHMADABAD. BANGALORE BHOPAL BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR, LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
PrInted at Slmco Printing Prrre. Delhi. India

