**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 4794-1 (1968): Push-button switches. Part 1: General 
requirements and tests [LITD 3: Electromechanical 
components and Mechnical Structures for Electronic 
Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18 : 4794(Part l)*im 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
PUSH-BUTTON SWITCHES 

PART I GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS 



Second Reprint MAY 1990 
( Incorporating Amendment No. 1 ) 



UDC 62I-316-542*3 



O Copyright 1975 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAPAR MARO 

NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 7 December 196S 



IS : 4794 ( Part I ) •- 1968 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
PUSH-BUTTON SWITCHES 

PART I GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS 

Electromechanical Components for Electronic Equipment 
Sectional Committee, ETDC 37 

Chairman Ripresenting 

Shri H. J. MiRCHAKDANf Indian Telephone Indaetriee Ltd, Bangalore 

Members 

Shri S. D. Maki ( Alternate to 
Shri H. J. Mirohacidani ) 
Db 0. N« AdiiABYA Central Eleotrontos Sngineering Reaearoh In$ti« 

tute, Pilani 
Shri R, Ramaohandran ( Alternate ) 
Shri^A. Das Oupta Plnlips India Ltd. Calcutta 

•Siiiii K. J. Qazdrh ( Alternate ) 
DiHKCToR Naval Abmamknt Naval Hoadquartere 
Material 
Deputy Director ( Air 
M \TKBiAL ) ( Alternate ) 
Dn R. R. DuTTA Oopta Directorate General of Inepeotion ( Minietrv »^ 

Defence ) 
Sdri SxiiiJiT SiHou ( Alternate ) 
SiiRt JoQN FiiANCia Dircotoraro Genernl q( Potitii & Telegraphs ( Tr w>. 

communication Research Centre), Xe^* 
Delhi 
Siiiii B. P. Ghosh National Test Houae, Calcutta 

Kujii K. N« GopALAKRiaUHAN Ducctor General of Civil Aviation (Ministry of 

Tourism 8l Civil Aviation ) 
Shri S. Kaxgarajak ( Alternate ) 
SiiHi S. J AIKSL Has AM Hylam Ltd, Hyderabad 

SiiRr wS. 8, CARoMAaxER ( Alternate ) 
8iiRi R. R« JuNKjA Elektio^oars Pvt Ltd. Calcutta 

Suui K* 8. Kklkau Uhaiut Elect rontcs Ltd. Bangalore 

Sum K. GuttiTRAJA { Alternate ) 
bHKi j4. O, V. M vNi Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabnd 

( Depfirlmont of Atomic Energy ) 
8hkx J. S. Mono \ All India Radio Merclianta* Aaaociat) n 

( AIRMA), Bombay 
Shri V, J. Hmatt ( Alternate ) 

( Dombay ) 
vSnni D. X. Chai;dhuri ( Alternate ) 

{ Calcutta) 
Sunr L. 8, V. Easivar { Alternate ) 
( Madras ) 

( Continued on page '• ; 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MAMAK DUAVAN, » UAHADUR SILUI Z^WMi MAKG 

NuwutiiuaiuMxri 



IS ; 4794 ( Part I ) - 1968 

{ Continued from patje I ) 

Members Representing 

Sbbi p. R, MuLOiiAMDANi Mulchandani Electrical A Radio Indudtriat Ltd» 

Bombay 
Shei L. Vbnkatesan ( Alternate ) 
Wo Cdh S« Rao Directorate of Technioal Development Sl Produc- 

tion ( Air ) ( Mmistry of Defence ) 
Shbz p. M. Shavkah Rao ( Alternate ) 
SflBX S« SxKOUFTA Formica India Ltd, Poona 

Shbi R. B. F. Rosario ( Alternate ) 
Shbi C, L* Suabma M. C. Engineering Co, New Delhi 

Shbi C. Q. Subbamanyan Research and Development Organization. Direc* 

torate of Standardization ( Mtniatry of 
Defence ) 
Shbi A. K. Datta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. M. Topbani Telecom Industries Pvt Ltd» Bombay 

Shbi H. S. Viswbswaraiah Radio A; Electrical^ Mfg Co Ltd, Bangalore 

Shbi M. A. Dv^abari ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Y, 8. Vbkkatkbwaran, Director General. ISI ( Ex^officlo Afember ) 

Dtrootor ( Biao tach ) 

Secretary 

Shbi S. Mukhofadhtat 

Aesiatant Director ( Elec tech )» ISI 



IS: 4794 (Part I)- IMC 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
PUSH-BUTTON SWITCHES 

PART I GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part I) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 7 October 1968, after the draft finalized by 
the Blectromechanical Components for Electronic Equipment Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division 
Council. 

0.2 This standard deals with the general requirements and tests fc: 
push-button switches for electronic and telecommunication equipment, 
it is not intended to cover micros witches and other specialized swit- 
ches in this standard. 

0.3 These switches may comprise a button actuating a switch connect- 
ed to a supply network. 

0,4 The object of thii standard is to establish uniform requirements 
for: 

a) the electrical, climatic and mechanical properties as well as 
safety aspects; 

b) test methods; 

c) inteachangeability and compatibility; and 

d) classification of pu^ih-button switches into groups according to 
their ability to withstand extrc«nes of temperature and 
humidity. >^. 

0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian ^andards on electro- 
mechanical components for electronic cquipmont. 

0.6 Assistance has been derived from lEC document 48C (Central 
Office ) 9 ' Draft push-button switches; general requirements and 
measuring methods ' issued by the International Electrotechnical 
Commission. 



IS : 4794 ( Ptrt I ) - 1968 

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a pai ticular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed oi calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained m the rounded 
otT value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1,1 This standard ( Part I ) relates to push-button switches having 
a rated voltage not exceeding 500 V dc or ac and rated current 
not exceeding 25 A for use in electronic and telecommunication 
equipment. 

1«2 This standard does not cover electiomagnetically operated switches. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the followmg definitions shall 
apply. 

2.1 Posh-Battott Switch 

2.1.1 Single-Button Switch ^ A switch consisting of o(ie cell and its 
associated mountings, actuated by a push-button or rod, which requires 
pushing for each action. The action may l>e momentaiy with spring 
( mechanical ) return. 

2.ht Multi-Button Switch-^ A fiame as*»« mbly containing two or 
more cells and their associated mountincfs. The cells may or may not 
be inter-locked (for example, one button icturns when another is 
pressed). The frames may be stacked horizontally and/or vertically. 

2.1.3 Piano Key Button Switch — A switch, the buttons of which are 
assembled and actuated in the manner of piano kevs. 

2.1.4 Double Pressure Button Switch — A switch, the buttons of 
which engage at the first pressure and still remains en£;agcd ( locked ) 
after the removal of the applied foi cc. The button is di^engac^ed when 
a second pressuie is applied. 

2.2 Cell — Assembly formed by a pnsh-buttun, the mechanical system 
and the electrical contacts. 

2.3 Posh-Butfon/Button — That pait of the switch upon which external 
pressure is applied to operate the switch. 

NoTB — The -woffl 'push-button* iniv Ije iic(<oinp<iriie<l by u qualiH m^ 
ftdjeotive * mdeponUent * which, in fuut, expiedsos u {nupotiy ol tbo uittoliui>«<.ai 
•ystein. 

*RuIes for rounding off nuracricul values ( rc\iseJ).. 



IS: 4794 (Part I) -Ml 

2.3.1 Illuminated Button — A button which has associated ynth it a 
lamp which can give a visual indication by illumination. The lamp 
circuitry shall be related to the button action. 

2.3.2 Locking Button-^ h button which remains in the operated 
position even after tlic removal of the applied pressure. 

2.3.3 Nort'locking Button — A button which remains in the operated 
position only while the pressure 15 applied. Removal of this preMure 
restores the button to its nonr.Ml position. 

2.3.4 Interdependent Button — Two or more buttons, such chat the 
operation of one of them causes the tripping of all the others. The 
same switc>^ may comprise several distinct groups of interdependent 
buttons. 

2.3.5 Independent Button — A button, which when subjected to 
normal mannual action has no effect on other buttons; similarly the 
other buttons, when actuated, have no effect on the independent button. 
Includes locking and non-locking types. 

2.3.6 Cancelling Button — A button in a multi-button twitch, which 
when operated restores tn normal, a predetermined number of previous* 
ly operated buttons. 

2.3.7 Push'tO'Lock Button — A button .which makes it possible to 
lock in either the ' on * position or the 'off' position a given number of 
buttons. 

2.4 Mechanical System — A system ensuring the transinission of the 
pressure on the push-buttons to the movable contacts. 



NoTB — The irMitmiMion of this raovemsnt may b« acoompaoiMl la 
oasea by ono or mor« of the following oporations: 

a) Cliango of dirootion of movoroant, 

b) ClianKe of luuvamant iniliattad by the panh.button into a rotatinf mo^va- 
inant of tho part carrying tha inovaabla contaota, and 

o) Looking of tha button and of tlia machaniam oonnaoiad with i% ( doaU* 
pi'Ofl^uta button). 

23 Mechanical Features 

2.5.1 Operation — The movement of button of the full extent of its 
permissible travel when a pressure is first applied and then lubiequent- 
ly removed. 

2.5.2 Positions — The number of positions of rest ( including noo* 
locking ) that the button may occupy. 

2.5.3 Normal Position — The position assumed by the push-bttttoil 
when no pressure is exerted upon it. 



*'i:4794(PiirtI.)»1968 

Z,5.4 Operated ( Actuated ) Position — - The position assumed by the 
puih button when a pressure resulting in its displacement is exerted 
upon it. 

2.5.5 Accumulative Latching — An action such that any number of 
f>uttont will remain opciated until a separate cancelling button is 
operated. 

2.5.6 Contact Actions — The nature of operations executed by the 
contacts. The contact actions normally to be envisaged are: 

a) Make — Contacts close with button in operated position, 

b) i?reaA:c- Contacts open with button in operated position, 

c) Break before make — One contact open completely before 
the next contact is made, 

d) Make before break — One contact maintained until after 
the next contact is made, and 

e\ Changeover — A contact unit having a contact mcmbei 
common to two contact circuits one of which is open and 
the other closed when the relay is not energized. It mary 
have break before make or make before break actions. 

2.5.7 Blocking Action — A system preventing the operation of more 
than one button at a time. 

2.6 Rated Voltaire ( f/g ) — The maximum voltatre which the con- 
tacts are capable of interrupting for the specified number of operations 
at the switch breaking capacity. 

2.7 Rated Corrent — The maximum cunent which tin* contacts arc 
<.:apable of interrupting for the spcrifird nuinbci of oprratious at 
the switch breaking capacity 

2.9 Switch Breaking Capacity — is the * volt-ampere * capacity which 
the contacts aie capable of interrupting. The ' voU-.\nipe»c* capacity 
is the product of the voltage across the contact^ wlu ii open and the 
current through the contacts when closed. 

2.9 Type — Components havino; similar design fcatujcs (exclusive of 
mountinti; accessoi ics, provided they have no significant effect on the 
test results ) and falling within the manufacturei<>* usual lange of tatings 
for such a design. 

2.10 Type Tests — Tests carried out to prove conformity with the 
requirements of this standard. These are intended to prove the general 
qualities and design of a given type of push-button switch. 

2.11 Acceptance Tests — Tests carried out on samples selected from a 
lot for purpuse of vciif)ing the acceptabilit) of the lot. 



IS: 4794 (Part I). 1968 

2.11.1 Lot — All push-button switches of the same type, category 
and lating, manufactured by the same factory during the same periqdt 
using the same process and materials. 

2.12 Rotftloe Tests — Tests carried out on each push-button switch to 
check the requirements which arc likely to vaiy duiing production. 

3. CATEGORIES 

3.1 The push-button -^witches shall be divided into the following <|Ate- 
gorics based on their ability to withstand the climatic severities lilted 
below: 



Climatic Test 
's^c' IS: 589-1961*) 




Severity 




Category 1 


Category 2 


1 
Category 3 


Di y heat 
Cold 


+ 100''C 
~ 55'C 


~40''C 


-lO'C 


Damp heat ( long term ) 

Damp heat (accelerated ) 

Rapid change of tempera- 
ture 


56 days 

6 cycles 

-flOO'^Cto 
- 55^0 


56 days 
6 cycles 
+ 85«Cto 
-.40"C 


21 days 
2 cycles 
Not appli- 
cable 


Low air pr«»ssurc 


44 robar 


300 mbar 


600 mbar 



NoTB — In case of special requiremontt whore the above categoriee can- 
not be applied, difToient ooinbinationa of eiimatio eeveritio* may be agreed to 
between ihn purchasor and the supplier, provided that the degrees of severity 
arrt choHGu from those Rp«oi6ed in Ifi *. fi80>ld6l*. 

4. ELECTRICAL RATINGS 

4.1 The relevant individual specification of the switch shall specify: 

a) rated voltage, 

b) rated current, 

c) switch breaking capacity, and 

d) circuit conditions and asiociated combinations of voltage and 
curicnt. 



5. MATERIALS AND WORKMANSHIP 

5.1 Materials — The push-button switches shall be constructed from 
suitable materials which shall be free from flaws and other defects and 
shall as far as practicable, confocm to the relevant Indian Standard, if 

any. 



*Basio citmaiic and mechanical durability t-osts for eloctronic component* 



ISt4794(FartI).lM8 

When dissimilar metals arc used In intimate contact with each 
other, protection against electiolysis and corrosion shall be provided. 
The use of dissimilar metals in contact, which lends towards active 
electrolytic corrosion ( particularly brass, copper and steel used in con- 
tact with aluminium or aluminium alloy ) is not acceptable. However, 
metal plating or metal spraying of dissimilar base metals to provide 
similar or suitable abutting surface is permitted. 

5.2 Workmanship — All parts of the switch shall be manufactured in a 
thoroughly workmanlike manner, and in accordance with the good 
engineering practice. 

6. MARKING 

6«1 Each push-button switch shall be clearly marked with the following 
information, whenever relevant, in the order given below: 

a) Manufacturer's name and/or trade-mark; 

b) Manufacturer's typ>e number or code number; 

c) Manufacturer's batch number; 

d) Any additional requirement if required by the purchase •' or any 
other marking agreed by the manufacturer and th'^ ^ u chaser; 
and 

c) Country of manufacture. 

6tLl The following information shall be made available, when called 
for, in addition to those specified in 6.1; 

a) Electrical relating as given in 4.1, 

b) Category, 

c) Contact configuration, and 

d) Any other details. 

6tL2 The manufacturer's catalogue for the switch shall contain 
information about the rating, category, and reference to relevant 
individual specification* 

6.2 The push-button switches or their cartons m\ay also be marked with 
the ISI Certification Mark. 

Mora — The use of the ISI Certification Mark i% governed by the pro^isioni of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. The ISI Mark on product covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements 
or that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quahty control 
which ii devised and sup**rvised by ISI and operated by the producer, ISI marked 

f>roduets are also continuously checked by ISI fur conformity to that standard as a 
urther safeguard* Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI 
Certification Mark may be granted to manufariurcrs or processors, may be obtained 
from the Indian Standards Institution. 



8 



IS:47f4(P«irtI)-1968 

7. CONDITIONS FOR TVSTS 

7*1 OtMiinaM of Ttttt 

7.L1 Typ€ Tuts '— The procedure for type approval shall be ai re* 
commendea by IS : 2612-l9o5*. The ininiinum number ofiamples for 
type teit »hall be 20. The sequence of type test shall be as given in 
Appendix A. 

7.1.2 Acceptance Test — The acceptance test shall be carried out on 
aiimited number of saniples which have passed the routine tests. The 
samples shall be selected in accordance with IS : 26I2«1965*. Two 
groups of samples one for non-destructive tests ( Group A ) and the 
other for destructive tests (Group B ) shall be selected and each group 
shall' be subjected to the tests as given below in the sequence indicat< ') 

Qroun A ( For Non-Destructlfc Group B (For Destructive 

Tests ) Tests ) 

a) Operating Charmcteriitics a) Dimensions ( 7.S,2 ), 
(7.5.9), b) Soldering ( 7.5.3 ), 

b) Contact resistance (7.3.1 )i c) Bump (7.5,6), 

c) Insulation resistance (7J3)« d) Robustness of tertninations 
and (tSA), and 

d) Voltage proof (high volt- e) Climatic sequence (7.6.1). 
age) (7.3.4). 

7.1^ Routine Test — The foUonving shall be carried out on each and 
every switch: 

a) Visual examfaution ( 7.5*1 ), and 

b) Functional check (73.9). 

7.2 General Condition for Tctti 

7.2.1 General — The tesu shall be carried out on the switches as rr* 
ccived from the manufacturer or supplier. In no case shall the contact 
parts be cleaned or otherwise prepared prior to the tests unless explicit- 
ly so agreed. 

1X2 Selection of Samples — The samples for testing shall be so 
selected as to be representative of each type, category and rating. 

7A3 Atmospheric Conditions for Testing --VnXtsi otherwise Fp^'cifi- 
ed» all tests shall be carried out und^r standard atmospheric condwuns 
specified in IS :589-196tt. 



*R«ooinmcadation for iyp« approval and tamplinf prooedurM for eltctrcni* 
oompooontft. 

tB«iIe eliinatio and nMohanical durability t««ta for oltotroAM oompooeats 
{rMvittdh 



IS:4794(Partnrl968 

7.2.4 Preconditioning — Before meaiurement* are made, the twitches 
shall be stored at the measuring temperature for a time sufficient to 
alk>w the entire switch to reach that temperature. The recovery period 
called for after conditioning is adequate for this purpose. 

7.2^ Mounting — Where mounting is specified in a test, the switches 
shall be rigidly mounted on a metat plate using its normal fixing device, 
the dimensions of the mounting plate being such that the contour of the 
specimen under test is exceeded. 

7.2.6 Correction to be Applied — When measurements are made at an 
ambient temperature other than the reference temperature, the results 
shall, where necessary, be corrected to that temperature. The ambient 
temperature during the test shall be stated in the test report. 

7.2.7 Drying — Where drying is called for in this standard, the switch* 
es shall be conditioned, before measurement is made, for 96 i: 4 hours 
in a dry oven at a temperature of $5" ± 2''C. The switches shall then 
be allowed to cool in a desiccator using a suitable desiccant, such as 
activated alumena or silicagel and shall be kept therein from the time 
of removal from the oven to the beginni|ig of the sp^ified test. 

7.2.8 Other Precautions — During misa^surement the switches shall 
not be exposed to draughts, direct sua, rays or other influences likely to 
cause errors. 

73 Electrka] Tests 

73.1 Contact Resistance 

7.3.1.1 Generai measuring rf^uir^m^/i/j — Measurement may be 
carried out with direct curient or alternating current. The contart re- 
sisunce shall normally be calculated from the potential difference 
measured between each pair of associated terminations. The contact 
shall be made before the measuring voltage is applied. In order to pre- 
vent the break-down of insulating film on the contact, the source emf shall 
not exceed 20 mV ( dc or ac peak ). In order to prevent undue heat- 
ing of the contacts the current shall not exceed 1 ampere or the value 
specified by the relevant individual specification. For ac measivements 
the frequency shall be 1 kc/s ± 200 c/s. The measuriVig apparatus shu!? 
be such as to ensure an accuracy of at least ±_ 10 percent. 

7.3.1.2 Measuring cycle: meaiufement with dc-- One m'^asiiung 
cycle consists of: \, 

a) making the contact, 

b) connection of voltage source, 

c) measurement with current flowing in one direction, 

10 



ISt47M(PtetI).15Mi 

d) n^eaiurement \nth. current flowing in the opposite 

durection, 
e^ difconnection of voltage iource> and 
f) breaking the contact. 

7.3.13 MeoMWiment with ae — One measuring cycle coniists of: 

a) making the contact, 

b) connection of the voltage source, 
ci measurement, 

d) disconnection of voltage source, and 

e) breaking the contact. 

7.3«1.4 Measurement — The contact resistance shall be measured 
between an/ two terminations that are to be connected by tne switch. 
'rhere shall be five measuring cycles. Measuring cycles shall be carri^ 
ed out in immediate succession. 

7.3tl.S Requirements — The value of the contact resistance for any 
individual measurement shall not exceed the value specified by the 
relevant individual specification. 

Nova — For low onrront oonUota for om in the miorovoli tMigo, modllea- 
tiOBS of lb« moasorinK method or apooiAl roquiromenU or both may bo qpoeiflad 
hy iba rolovant individoAl •peeiflMtioo. 

When the test mentioned in the note above is required by the 
relevant individual specification the following details shall be specified: 



Maximum value of the current, if other than 1 ampere; 
Maximum value of the contact resistance; and 
c) Any deviation from the standard test method. 



bi 



733 Variation of* Contact Resistance 

733.1 Method of measurement — The variation of contact resist- 
ance shall b<^ determined during the vibration test. The measurement 
of the contact resistance shall be made throughout the whole of the 
"Mt frequency sweep in each direction. 

The variation of contact resistance shall be determined by me^ns 
of a cathode-ray oscilloscope ( with a long persistance screen ) display- 
ing the potential difference between the points intended for the con- 
nection of wiring to the contact when a direct current of 10 i: 2 mA it 
passed thiough the contact. The source emf shall not excer^ ''0 mV. 

The measuring apparatus shall; 

a) have a frequency characteristic which is substantially flat 
between 400 c/s and 1 000 c/s with a decay below and above of 
not more than 3 dB at 70 c/s and 5000 c/s, 

11 



18 t 4794 (Part I). 1968 

b) be such as to ensure a measuring accuracy better than db 20 
percent, and 

c) be calibrated with a sinusoidal voltage at 1 kc/s. 

The number of contacts to be tested and the severity of the vibra- 
tion test shall be specified by the relevant individual specification 

7.3.2,2 Requirements — The values of the voltages ptoduced b\ 
variation of switch resistance shall not exceed the value specified by 
the relevant individual specification. 

When the test mentioned in 7.3.2 is requiFcd by the relevant 
individual specification, the following details shall be specified: 

a) Limit of the values of the voltage produced by vaiiation of 
contact resistance, 

b) Severity of the vibration test, 

c) Number of contacts to be tested and number of measurement, 
and 

d) Any deviation fiom the standard vest iiutUod. 

7.3.3 Insulation Resistance — The inMilatmn rtslst.uKc shall be 
measured with a i\c voltage of 100 ± 15 V oi 500 ± 50 V ^"^ '>{>ctjli' d by 
the relevant indi\i<lual specification. The switch shall be * mouni«.d * 
as specified in 7.2.5. The insulation resistance shall be mrasurcd after 
an electrification time of 1 niinuic 4:5 seconds. 

NoTS— \\hcn oppropriato, Iho luadiiig ma} be taken after n sliortor period. 

The measuicment sUall be canied out fir each switihing position 
between: 

a) two adjacent tep -ninations having minimum spacing, and 

b) all terminations connected together and all othci exposed 
metal parts. 

7.3.3.1 Requirement — The value of the insulation lesistance shall 
be not less than tlie value specified by the relevant individual 
specification. 

When the insulation resistance test is requited by the relevant 
'ndividual spec ification, the following details should be specified: 

a) Value of the test voltage, 

b) Minimum value of the insulation resistance, and 

c) Any deviation from the standaid test method. 

7.3.4 Voltage Proof ( High Voltage ) — Switches shall withstand 
without bieakodown or fiasli-over the voltage specified by the relevant 
individual spe( iHcation. An ac test voltaife shall be applied for one 
i"inutc bet\ve« > the points indicated in 7.3.3. 

12 



IS:4794(P«rtI).1968 

The relation betweca die imfeed voltage Vu ( rnis value ) and the 
test voltage E ( run value ) it gmaa aa: 

a) For swiiekes with rated wabagg dbmm 34 V {pe^ ) 

£ « 2 C^B + 1300 Vwitlia wininmm of 2000 V 

b) For MwitcUs with rated foiig^ktUm 34 W {peak) 

£»500V 

When this test is required b^ the vdevant individual specification, 
the foUowing details shall be specified: 

a) Value of the test voltaffc^ and 

b) Deviation, if any, from tbe standard test method. 

7J.5 Jt. F. Shunt ResUttmee — The rrwif n ce -shall be measured at a 
frequency of 1 Mc/s. The switch ahnO be oMninted as specified in 7.2.S. 
For each basic cell, a measuremeaft shall he carried out for each switdi- 
ing position between: 

a) two terminations whose oomracti are open, and 

b) one termination and all other terminations which are con- 
nected to earth. 

The R. F. shunt resistance shall be greater than 2 megohms. 

7.3.6 Current Rating — Each switch contact shall be capable of 
carrying its rated current for a periodof 5 hours without the rise in 
temperature at the terminations rwmr^mg 20X! above the ambient 
temperature. 

7.3.7 Overload — Bach contact shaB be capable of making or break- 
ing a circuit carrying a current 50 percent greater than the rated 
current at a rated voltage 10 p e j cc a t m. excess of normal with a resis- 
tive load. 

NoTM — Tlii< fqmtmumA apylias —I— slhf ■Im sp»cifl»d in tli« retorant 
individiml sparttleatioB. 

T}i« test alwll be applied W SiHwe* « nieef 6 operaUona per dkiaute. 

There shall be no external indication of mechanical damage, loosen- 
ing of parts or extensive burning; or pitting of the contacts. 

7.3.8 Capacitance — The switch dhall be mounted as specified in 7.23. 
The capacitance shall be incasured hct w cci 

a) individual terminatioBS forming a part of a circuit but not 
in electrical contact, and 

b) individual terminations and all other terminations connect- 
ed to tbe finune. 

The connections shall not be toldcied. The measuring frequency 
shall be 1 Mc/s ± 10 percent. 

13 



IS: 4794 (Part IX- 1968 

7.3.8.1 Requirements — The values of cap«citancc shall not exceed 
the values specified by the relevant individual spcdfication. 

When this test is required fay the relevant individual specification, 
the following details shall be 



a) The maximum values of the capacitances; and 
bjT Deviation fiom the standard test method, if any. 

7.3.9 Functional Check — The siritchcs shall be connected to circuits 
of test lamp or other indicating device and subjected lo one or more 
cycles of operation as specified in the relevant specification. 

The switch shall be actuated by an even motion. The operation 
shall be satisfactory and shall rmhibif no discontinuity or intermittent 
operation. There shall be no intemediatc hold up of the mechanism, 
nor undue wobbling of the push hnttoiu. In case of interlocked buttons, 
if all such buttons can be pressed^in and locked Simultaneously, it shall 
be possible to release the buttoiu fay pressing a button. 

7.4 Illumination Test 

7.4.1 Chromatieity -^ThiM test is applicable only if called for in the 
detailed specification. 

The colour of a light signal is measufed in terms of its chromaticity 
co-ordinates using the trichromatic syttem reoonunended by the Inter- 
national Commission on lUuminatson in 19SI. The colour is expressed 
in the chromaticity co-ordinates X, Y and Z; the sum of which is unity. 

The co-ordinate X is analogoos to the proportion of red, Y to the 
proportion of green, and Z to the proportioii of blue. 



7.4.1.1 Measwenunt — The light sjgnaT shall be operated under the 
conditions stipulated by the mannfiictnrer and, if the light source can be 
colour-matched by a full radiator, its eokmr temperature shall be stated 
by the manufacturer. The coloar of the light signal shall be defined by 
the chromaticity of the light leftHCled at an angle of 45 degrees from a 
magnesium oxide icreen which is |rfaced normal to the optical axis of the 
lighr signal at a distance sufficient to ens*ire that the apparent colour of* 
the screen is uniform. MeasDffanents shall be carried out at a 
temperature of 20^*0, unless <ttliennse specifiecl, using any of the methods 
defined in 7,4.3.2. 

7.4.1.2 5armmtff^ — When this test is required by the relevant sheets 
the following details shall be specified: 

a) Limits of the chromaticity co-ordinates, 

14 



IS:4794(PirtI)-lMI 

b) The lumiiious mUUBitf nt tke ligbt onitttd ptr unit projected 
surface eree, 

c) CokNirtenperatun of te Unlit M«ee, and 

d) Any deviatioa trot the m mdmA tm method. 

7.4^ lUmmmitd Smfu» Tmiftmlm-^'thm turface temperatun of 
a button shall be in e asui ed aftor n period of iUuijaination of one hoar. 
The axts of the button ttawal of d» iwHCiUi mounted as f^vea in IJLSk 
shall be in the vertical plane, wUk tlM intinial l«mp to be below the 
surface of the button. I, 



7«4ut.l ig ifynm a ff -The jeagiiainn ilsi shall not exceed the 
maximum value spe ci 6ed bf tlw 



7*4.2.2 Summmf — Vthm this teet ie requited by the relevant sheet, 
the following detaib than be spedied: ^ 

a) The maximum fmiiaiusa Mise^ and 

b) Any deviation from the ftemJiwI leet na^fifid. 



7.4J rraaimitfjacy — The traMmsttency of a ^lour filter if expressed 
as the percentage ratio of the hoainanoe of a truely >vhite screen, 



illuminated from a light muroe, fa the Imninance of the same screen 
when the colour filter it i ^e plac e d by a non-awrbing medhiin of the 
»ame pattern and refractive n 



7.43.1 Mtastmrnnit — The testa shall be carried bv using any of the 
metluKls given iii 7.4.3L2. 



7.4.S.2 MHk»i$ rf imumttmm — M e asui e m ents may be made with 
a colorimeter by spectfophommcirsc analysis, by comparison with 
calibrated colour filMrt or by any method which gives the results in 
term^ of the system reoosnoMnded by the International Commission 
on Illumination in 1931. 

7.5 Mechanical Teau 

7.5.1 Visual Examinatiom — The m.irking shall be in accordance 
with 6. The workmanship and inith slult be satbfactory. 

There shall be no visible de toi iw a tion after electrical, mechanical 
and climatic tettt. The tivitch thaO be mechanically operable and 
there shall be no displacrmet or Ihneming nf contacts. 

7.5.3 INiiiriiflewr— -Tbedmmntiaai of the twitch shall be checked 
and shall be in accofdanoe wtth thoae tpeciicd in the relevant individual 
tpecification for the type under test. 

15 



IS : 4794 ( Part I ) - 196S 

7.53 Soldering — la order to dctcnHuie the ability of the termina* 
tions to wet easily and to check that the switch ittelf will not be dam- 
aged by soldering processes, the witch shall be tested in accordance 
with 7.18 of IS : 589-1961*. 

After the test, there shall be no sign of mechanical damage or 
loosening of parts and the switch shall still be mechanically operable. 

When this test is required by the rdevawt mdividual specification, 
the following details shall be sp r ci Jcd : 

a) Method of test, incliirting sise of the soldering iron where 

applicable; 

b) Period of recovery; and 

c) Deviation, if any, from the standard test method. 

7.5.4 Robustness of Terminatiom 

7.5.4.1 Tensile test — This test shaU be carried out in accordance 
with 7.19.1 of IS : 589-1961*. The loading weight shall be as specified 

in the relevant specification. 

745.4.2 Bend lej/ — This test shaB be carried out in accordance 
with 7.19.2 of IS : 589-1961*. For tarn terminations two consecutive 
bends shall be applied in accordaaoe imh 7.19.23 of IS : 589-1961*. 



7.5.4.3 Torsion test an screw HermfiMb — This test shall be carri- 
ed out in accordance with 7Jf.4of IS: 589-1961*. 

After each of the test, the switch shall be vbually examined. 
There shall be no sign of vc^uuiGBl damage or loosening of parts 
and the switch shall still be mechaaically opendde. 

When the test for R oh mtn c m of terminations b required by the 
relevant individual speciftcation, the following details shall be specified: 

a) Tests to be carried out; 

b) Test conditions, such as value of the forces; and 

c) Deviation from the stamfard test method, if any. 

7.5.5 Vibration — This teat shall be carried out in accordance 
with 7.6 of IS: 589-1961* using the appropriate degree of severity. 
Ther^ shall be no measuremcots prior to the test, those which have 
been carried out during final measurements of the proceeding testi^ shall 
i>e regarded as the initial measufcment of the vibration test. The 

*Basio olimuttu and madiaikical ilf Ithty imm for i-Ilmi runic comnoiH-ntii 
( nvised ), 

16 



IS:4794(PtrtI).196C 

switch ihall be mounted as specified m 7^5. The following tests shall 
then be carried out: 

a) the verification of opening ol the contacts. The break of 
contacts means a break in excess of 10 Ms. 

b) if specified, the variation of contact resistance. 

There shall be no intermittancy of current greater than those 
specified in the relevant individual specification. 

NoTK — A ooniinuoui mowioriiig eireuit is under ooQtidoration. 

The switches shall then be visually inspected and they shall show 
no sign of deterioration. 

When this test is required by the relevant individual specification 
the following details shall be .specified: 

a) Severity of test, 

b) Requirements for the variation of contact resistance, 

c) Final measurements, and 

d) Any deviation from the standard test method. 

7*5^ Bump — The switch shall be mounted on the table of a bump 
test machine and connected in a circuit with a suitable device, such as a 
lamp which will indicate momentary spurious operations during the 
test. 

NoTJB — A oontiouous monitoring oireuit ia under consideration. 

7.5.6.1 The switches shall be subjected to the bump test in accord* 
ance with 7.5.1 of IS : 589-1961*. 

7.5.6.2 There shall be no spurious operation, no fracture or loosen- 
ing of parts, or other mechanical failure. The fixing shall not become 
loose. 

When this test is required by the individual specification the 
following details shall be specified: 

a) Number of bumps, and 

b) Any deviation from the standard test method. 

7.5.6.3 The contact resistance shall be measured as in 7.3.1 aftei 
the test and the values shall not exceed the limits specified in the rele* 
vant individual specification. 

7.5.7 Acceleration — The switches shall be mounted in the normal 
manner on a table of acceleration test machine. During the test the 
electrical continuity shall be continuously monitored. There shall be nr 

*Bastc ilimatic and mechanical durability tcttt for electronic components (rnistd), 

17 



IS : 4794 ( Part I ) - 1968 

mtermittcncy electrical continuity of duration greater than that specified 
m the relevant individual sponfication. 

7.5.7«1 The switches shjll he subjected to me acceleration test 
m accordance with 7*7 of IS 589-1961*. The severities of acceleration 
shall be as specified n\ the lelevant specification. 

7.5t7.2 The duration oi the acceleration te^t in each cjkse shall be f>f 
H nunut€*s. 

7*5%7.3 l)urin;4 the acceleialion test, their shall be no ^^punous 
operation. Afici ihr acceleration test, ihe switches ^hall be visually 
examined and there shall be no fracture oi loosenint; of paits or an> 
other mechanical failure. The fixiiig shall not becom« loose, 

7.5 J A The contact resistance shall t'icii be measured and tlie value 
of the contact resistance shall not exceed the Imui snecified m the 
relevant specification. 

1.5.B Shock — The component shall be mounted on the moving table ot 
shock test apparatus in its three principal axes in turn and subjected to the 
shock test in accordance with 7.5.2 of IS: 58^1%! ♦. 

7.5.8«1 During the test, electrical continuity sliall bo continuously 
monitored. There shall be no intermittency of electrical continuity of 
duration greater than that specified in the relevant incli\idual specifica- 
tion ( This is not applicable for category ^ componoms. ) 

7.3.8.2 During the shock test, there shall be no spinous operation. 
After the shock test, the components shall be visually examined and 
there shall be no fracture or loosening of parts «)i othei oiechanical 
failure. The fixing shall not become loose. 

7«5«8.3 The contact resistance shall be measured and the value shall 
not exceed the limits specified in the relevant specification. 

7.5.9 Operating Characteristics —The Mloy^inv; items shall be tested 
according to the relevant individual spcufitation: 

a) Button travel to release a previous!) opoated button, 

b) Button tiavel to operate its own lamp (licuitiy, 

c) Button travel to operate its own < oni u Is, 

d) Force on a double ptcs^n* button to achieve locking 
action, 



•Banio climatin and iiioelianKMl duiMbilily tisls foi **!.•* tioinc coiupoiionl 
( revised)* 

18 



IS:4794(PartI.)-19M 

e) Force on a button to lelease a previously operated button, 
and 

f) Maximum force on a button for which it will not come off 
its fixing. 

7.6 Climatic Tests 

7.6.0 General — Where applicable, the switch shall be mounted at 
specified in 7.2.5. In each test, the final measurements stated shall be 
carried out in the order stated. 

7.6.1 Climatic Sequence 

^.Ikl.l Dry heat-^Thu test shall be carried out in accordance 
with i.l of IS : 389-1961*, using the appropriate degree of severity. 

While still at the high temperature, the insulation resistance shall 
be measured and shall be not less than tne values specified by the rele- 
vant individual specification. 

In addition, while the switches are at the high temperature, there 
shall be a check that the switch is mechanically operable. 

The switches shall then be removed from the chamber and expos- 
ed to the standard recovery conditions appropriate to the test. 

7.6.1.2 Damp heat accelerated {first cycle ) — The switches shall 
be subjected to the first cycle of this test in accordance with 7.4 of 
IS : 589-1961*. After the specified period of conditioning, the switches 
shall be removed from the chamber and allowed to remain under 
standard recovery conditions appropriate to the test. 

After recovery, the switches shall be visually examined. There 
shall be ru> corrosion or mechanical deterioration or any other visible 
diimai^c. I'hc marking shall be legible. 

7.6.1.3 Cold — This test shall be carried out in accordance with 7.1 
of IS : 589«I961*, using the appropriate degree of severity. While still 
at the .low temperature, there shall be a check that the switch is 
mechanically operable. The switches shall then be removed from the 
chamber and exposed to the standard recovery conditions appropriate 
to this tcil. 

Thr switches shall then be visually examined and they shall show 
1)0 sign ot deteiioration. 



ance 



7.6.1.4 Low air pressure — Tliis test shall be carried out in accord- 
with 7.12 of IS : 589-1961*, using the appropriate degree of severity. 



'Untie cliinaiie ttnd m^chunicttl duraUility t««tt for •Uctronic components 
( rexisfd i. 

19 



IS : 4794 ( Part I ) - 1968 

Tl\Q test chamber shall br maintained at a lempeiaturc of IS'' to ^S'^C 
'V\w duration of the test shall be five minutes. 

During the test, a voltaic shall be applied between: 

a) two adjacent terminations having minimum spacing, and 

b) all terminations connected together and the mounting frame. 

The value of the test voltage shall be specified by the relevant 
individual specification. 

Dui ing and after this test, there shall be no signs of glow discharge, 
breakdown, flashovcM or harmful deformation of the device. 

7.6.1.5 Damp heat accelerated ( remaining cycles ) - The switches 
shall be subje( ted to the remaining number of cycles of this test in 
accordance with 7.4 of IS : 589-1961*. 

NoTifi — Remaining damp heat cycles required are aa follows: 

Category 1 : 6 cycles 
Cato;j;oiy 2 : 5 cycles 
Category 3 ; 1 cyvls 

The switches shall then be removed from the chamber and expos- 
ed to the standard recovery conditions appropriate to this test. 

7.6.1.6 Final measurements — The switches shall then be subjected 
to the following tests and shall meet the icquirements specified by the 
relevant individual specification: 

a) Insulation resistance (7.3,3), 

b) Voltage proof ( high voltage ) ( 7.3.4 ), 

c) Contact resistance ( 73.1 ), 

d) Functional check ( 7.3.9 )> and 

e) Visual examination (7.5.1). 

NoTic — The first two tests ^haU be carried out iininedfately fulloviin^ 
the recovery period and in the contact position in uhi<}i tlie devices aio 
lemovod from the chamber. Insulation refiiglanro und vulture proof ( hi^h 
voltoge ) may bo checked in other positions after ttte conlact reaihtance has 
bean measured. 

7.6.2 Damp Heat ( Long Term Exposure ) — This test shall be carried 
out in accordance with 7*3 of IS : 589-1961*. Specimens sihall be 
divided into thiee lots and a polarizing voltage shall be applied to 
specimens in two of the lotii as follows: 

Lot I : non^polaiized. 

Lot 2 : two adjacent terminations havinij minimum spacing. 



♦H^isic t'limatii* iwul iiiohiuic.il dtirubility to;4<8 for o!(^:trouic cf>iapnnoiitsi 

20 



IS : 4794 ( Pert I ) - 1968 

Lot 3 : all terminations connected together and to all other 
metal parts. The positive potential shall be applied 
to the terminations. 

The value of the polarizing voltage shall be 15 V dc unless other- 
wise specified. 

The switches shall then be removed from the chamber and expos- 
ed to the standard recovery conditions appropriate to this test. 

7.6.2.1 Final measurement — The switches shall then be subjected 
to the following tests and shall meet the requirements specified by the 
relevant individual specification: 

a) Insulation resistance ( 7.3.3 ), 

b) Voltage proof ( high voltage ) ( 7.3.4 ), 

c) Contact resistance (73.1), 

d) Functional check ( 7J.9 ), and 

e) Visual examinaaon ( 7.5.1 ). 

KoTjjB — Th* first tiro tattt chAlI b« oarried out immediately following the 
recovery period ftnd in the ooni*ot position In which the switches are removed 
from the chamber, {nsulation resistance and voltage proof may also be checlced 
in other contact positions after the contact resistance has been measured. 

When this test is required by the relevant individual specification, 
following details shall be specified: 

a) Value of the polarizing voltage if other than 15 V dc; 

b) Requirements for the final measurements; and 

c) Deviation, if any, from the standard method. 

7.6.3 Rapid Change of Temperature -^Thi^ test shall be carried out 
in accordance with 7,14 of IS ; 589-1961*. The total number of cycles 
shall be five. The switches shall then be ren^oved fiom the chamber 
and exposed to the standard recovery conditions appropriate to this 
test. 

7.6.3.1 Final measurement — The switches shall then be subjected 
to the following tests and shall meet the requirements specified by the 
relevant individual specification: 

a) Insulation resistance ( 7.3.3 ), 

b) Voltage proof ( high voltage ) ( 7.3.4 ), and 

c) Visual examination ( 7.5.1 ). 

*Basic cliinatio and mechanical durability toHiM for electronic components 
(rt\ised), 

21 



ISt47M(PartI)-l968 

When this test i^ required by the relevant individual specification, 
the following details shall be specified: 

a) Requirements for the final measurement, and 

b) Any deviation from the standard test method. 

7,6.4. Sealing ( Where Applicable ) — This test shall be carried out in 
accordance with 7.15 of IS : 589-1961*. When this test is required by the 
relevant individual specification it sliall specify all details for the test 
procedures together with the requirements. 

7.6.5 Mould Growth — The switches shall be subjected to mould 
growth test in accordance with 7.9 of IS : 589-1961*. 

After the expiry of the specified peiiod of exposure, there shall be 
no mould growth on the switches visible to the naked eye. 

7.6.6 Salt Miit — The switches shall be subjected to salt mist test in 
accovdancc with 7.10 of IS: 589-1961*, the period of cxposuie being 
four days. 

After the expiry of the test, the switches shall be removed from 
the chamber and visually examined, foi any deterioiation, such as cor- 
rosion, damage and legibility of mat king. 

7.6.7 Dust — Under consideration. 

7.7 Endurance Tests 

7,7.1 The switches shall be operated mechanically to make and break 
the main contacts a*numbci of times as specified in the relevant indivi- 
dual specification. If the elcctiical ratings of the main contacts cover 
more than one combination ol' voltage and current, the test shall be 
carried out with the rated cuncnt and the associated voltage, A cycle 
of operation shall be as follows: 

The movement of a button from its * off position * ( normal 
position ) to the * on position * ( operated position ), and rctui it 
to its * off position * ( see 2.5.3 and ISA ), 

Dottble pressure locking buttons shall have the second pies- 
sure applied as bring part of a cycle* of opciation. 

Where the speed of the button travel is critical, it shall be 
specified in the detail .specific, a lion. 

Th<' number of cycles of operation per minute shall be between 
10 and 15. 



*Ba«ie -^inuaiic and moohanioal dtirahihly tests for oloctronic eoroponnnta 
{revised). 

22 



IS : 4794 ( Part I )^ 1968 

7.7.2 Test at Normal Air Pressure — The following tests shall be 
carried out on separate switches 15000 cycles being performed in each 
case. Each button shall be operated in turn to complete the cycle. 
For category 1 and 2 switches the test shall be carried out at maximum 
category temperature: 

a) Inductive circuit 

1) The test shall be carried out using an inductive circuit 
with the dc voltage anu current as specified in the rele- 
vant individual specification. 

2) The circuit used for this test shall have a time constant 
between 2 and 3 ms, 

3) The duty cycle shall be approximately 25 percent * on * 
and 75 percent * oflf *. 

b) Lamp had 

1) The test shall be carried out using a lamp load with the 
voltage and current as specified in the relevant indivi- 
dual specification. 

2) For switches having a dc or dc/ac rating, the test shall 
be carried out with dc. 

3) For switches having an ac rating only, the test shall be 
carried out with ac. 

4) Only tungsten lamps each of which having a nominal 
power not exceeding 25'W at the voltage specified by 
the relevant individual speci6cation shall be used for 
the load. 

5) For independent buttons the duty cycle shall be approxi- 
mately 25 percent * on ' and 75 percent * off', 

c) Resistive circuit 

1) The test shall be carried out using a resistive ciroiit 
with the ac voltage and the current as specified in the 
relevant individual specification. 

2} For independent buttons the duty cylce shall be appro- 
ximately 50 percent * on * and 50 percent * off*. 

d) Final measurement — The switches shall then be subjected 
to the following tests and shall meet the requirements speci- 
fied by the relevant individual specification: 

1) Insulation resistance ( 7.3.3 ), 

2) Voltage proof ( high voltage ) ( 7.3.4 ), 

3) Contact resistance ( 7.3.1 ), 

23 



IS : 47M ( Ptrt I ) - 196S 

4) Functional check ( 7.3.9 ), and 

5) Visual examination ( 7,5.1 ). 

Wiicn this test is required by the relevant individual speci' 
fication, the following details shall be specified: 

a) Values of test voltages and currents, 

b) Requirements for the final measurement, and 

c) Any deviation fjom the iktandard test method. 



24 



lS:47i4(Partl).lfM 

APPEN01X A 

(C/tfUM 7.1.1) 

sCQuiNCt bt Tfw nans 

AIlMaite(Sa) 

▼iMMl «nHafawtioB(7J.l) 

DiBM0iioM(7JL2) 

IllinitiiM«<0D(74) 

iJMfDtotioa vMialMMt ( 7J3 ) 

VoHH* Proo' ( l»*f ^ ^'^■l*^^ > ( 734 ) 

OatotMt ratistaBM ( 7 Jwl ) 

R. F. Shoal fJirtuMM ( 7JJ ) 

SMifaf < wb«» mliMlil» M 7wM ) 

Ftr«tlot(4Muaple«) SMondloi Thini lot roorlh lo» FiftLlol 

1 , . ,, (4MniplM) (ittniplM) (♦••mplwt) (iaunplM 

Operating oharsoteristics | i I i 

(fSS) Oarr«nt D»mp heat SodorMiM Mould 

_, L , ., n^c ( 7 JUi ) ( long term ) iMUf7.7) growtih 

BobastBMsoftMmiMiion* '•^•J'**'^ ^|^j * (7.4S) 

(7A4) (hr«rlo*d 

Soldmriotf (7A3) ^^'^'^^ 

Bapid oh«ng« oT »Mnp*r*tiir« ,iJi*^ 

YibniiMi iDoludiag TwUtioa ^^**"* 1 7A7 ) 
of eontael w » to t a nc» ( 7AS ) 

AocelermlMB ( 7J.7 ) 

Shook tMiHJ^) 

Bamp(754) 

Olinftti* MquMiM ( 7A1 ) 



SmUu ( wWfo appUeoble ) 



•>5 



INDIAN STANDARDS 



IS: 

1885 ( P«rt VI ).19«5 
S61M96(( 

2828 ( Part I y.1084 

2«28(P»rtII).19«7 

tM6.l984 

nM(PteiIM9M 

|854(PMtIIHM8 

SS84(Pftr«inHMV 
8|M(P»niV).198T 

l45S(PwiI).196« 

8944.1866 
8720.1866 
8826 ( Part I ).1966 

4007 ( Part I ).1867 

4086.1868 



ON 
ElcctroMfcluiBittl Om fomf ts 

El«otrotaobiiioa1 vooatmlaiT: Part VI Printad oirenita I'dO 

Raoommandation for (ypa approval and MmpHng 
prooadurat for alaotroaio eonponanta ... ... 3*00 

Rotary wafar awitohaa ( low mutant rating ): Part I 

Tetta and ganaral raquiramanta ... ... 4*00 

Rotary wafar awitohaa ( low onrrant rating ): Part II 
Rotary wafar awitcbaa with eantral mounting ... €'S0 

Dimanaionaofoonnaotora for radio battariaa ... 2*00 

Valva aoekata: Part I Ganaral raquiramanta and t«*ta 5*00 

Valve aookata: Part II Dimenaiona and oonatruotion 

of gaugaa and toola ... ... ... ... 2*00 

Valva aookat: Part III Valva aookata for ocUl baaa 3'SO 

Valva aookat: Part IV Valva aookata for 8>pin 
miniatura baaa ... ... ... ... S*00 

Spaoifloation for toggia awitohaa: Pftrt I Gaaaral 
raquiremanta'and taata ... ... ... 4*00 

Oaoaral raqniiamanta and taata for tag atripa . .. 9-00 

Dimanaiona of polariaad pluga fot h aa ring afcia . . . 1*00 

Connootora uajd for fraquanoiaa balow 8 Mo/a: Patt I 
Qenaral raquiramanta and taata ... ... g'OO 

Tarminala for alaotrooio aqnipmant: Part I Qa«taral 
raquiramanta and taata ... ... ... 5*00 

Dimanaiona of apindlaa and dataila of maohaliiaal 
fixing davioaa uaad in alaotranio aqoipmant ... 2*B0 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELH1 110002 
Ttlaphones : 331 01 31 , 331 1 3 75 Telegrama : Manaksantlha 

( Common to all officas ) 



Regional Officer, 

Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 

NEW DELHM 10002 

1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M. V. I. P. Road, 

Manlktola, CALCUTTA 700054 

SCO 445-446, Sector 35'C, 

CHANDIGARH 160036 



Central 

^Eaatern 

Northern 



Southern 
tWestern 



C. I. T. Campua, MADRAS 600113 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East), 
BOMBAY 400093 
Branch Offices: 
'Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 

AH MED AB AD 380001 
tPeenya industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road 

BANGALORE 560058 
Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 

BHOPAL 462003 
Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road. BHUBANESHWAR 751002 
53/5, Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road. 5th Byelane, 

GUWAH ATI 781003 
6-8-56C L N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), 

HYDERABAD 500001 

R14 Yudhister Marg. C Scheme. JAIPUR 302005 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar. KANPUR 208005 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 80001 3 
TC. No. 14/1421. University P.O., Palayam 

TRIVANDRUM 695035 
Inspection Office (With Sale Point) : 
Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A West High Court Road. 

Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 
Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building. 1332 Shivajl Nagar. 

PUNE 411005 

*Sales Office In Catcuttt It at 5 ChowrlnghM Approach, P.O. Princep 
Straet, Calcutta 700072 

tSalea Offlca In Bombay It at Novtlty Chambart, Grant Road, 
Bombay 400007 

tSalea OfAce In Bangalora it at Unity Building, Naratlmharaja Squara 
Bangalore 560002 



Telephones 

r331 01 31 
13311375 

36 2499 

r21843 
1316 41 

42 
19 

16 
6 329295 



r41 244; 

^41251! 

L4129K 



r2 6348 

12 63 49 

r38 49 55 

138 49 56 

6 6716 

5 3627 
3 3177 

231083 

r6 3471 

16 98 32 

r21 68 76 

121 8292 

6 2305 
r6 21 04 
16 2117 



25171 
5 2435 

27^00 
89 65 28 
22 36 71 



printed at Simeo Printino Preee. Delhi, India 



