l8:4496-1968 \

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

SCREEN LUMINANCE FOR THE PROJECTION OF 16 mm FILM BY INCANDESCENT LAMPS ( First
Reprint MARCH 1989)

UDC

535.241.44:778.24:778.55

@ Copyright 1968 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO NEW DELHI 110002 Or 2

April

I%8

lS:4496-1968

Indian Standard
SCREEN LUMINANCE FOR THE PROJECTION OF 16 mm FILM BY INCANDESCENT LAMPS
Cinematographic chahan
SERI P. N. D~oB-A

Equipment

Sectional

Committee,
Reprcsmting

ETDC 47

Directorate Gem4 of Technical Development ( Ministry of Iridustrial Development and Company Affairs ) to

Department of Defence Production ( Ministry of Defence), New Delhi ". S~LDRD. P. MUKXERJEE( Alternate) Films Division (Ministry of Information & BroadSHRIJ. N. BISARIA casting ), Bombay National Physical Laboratory ( Acoustics Division ) Da A. F. CHHAPCMR ( CSIR ), New Delhi Cine Mechanical Works, Calcutta SXRI BHUPON Gtrosx SHIU MANNA LADIA ( Al&mate ) Kine Engineers, Bombay %su P. H. &pILA Amco Engineering Corporation, Madras z ~I$~~~t Department bf Audio Visual Education, New Delhi &I N. P. BHATTAOHARYA (Altsmatc ) In personal capacity ( Han' Niwas, Bombay ) Smu B. A. MISTRY Photophone Equipments Ltd, Bombay SxruM. E. NAGARAJAN SHIU R. R+JAOOPALAN ( Akmatc ) Directo~t;)ti~eneral of Supplies & Disposals, . SEIU ht. SANKRALINOAM SHSUG. R. BIiATtA (Al&m& BEN K. S. S-MA SExsU. c. StmiA ) National Physical Laboratory (Optics Division ) ( CSIR ), New Delhi Film Institute of India ( Ministry of Information & Broadcasting ), Poona Hindustan Photo Films Mfg Co Ltd, Ootacamund Director General, IS1 ( J%x-o&o hfember) se.creta~ SEW T. ibJARAWU4 Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), IS1

SARI BALRAJBIUH~T ( Al&mote Sbri P. N. Deobbakta) Da B. M. 4iDALJA Sxxx S. N. AGARWAL SHIUJ. R. D. Bwm Swat M. M. L. Jzi~ ( Altumatr) DuH.B. BHAXTACUIWI

1 ,. i *,. Film Federationx$@dia, Bombay Cinccita Private I&d, Bombay General Radio d :$cpliances Ltd, BoAbay

DR M. A. THOU sB&u Y. s. vE3xATaswAahN, Director(Elcctcch)

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BtiAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Indian Standard
SCREEN LUMINANCE FOR THE PROJECTION OF 16 mm FILM BY INCANDESCENT LAMPS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 16 January 1968, after the draft Enalixed by the Cinematographic Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Civision Council. 0.2 Work on the formuiation of standards for various cinematographic equipment has been undertaken with a view to establishing acceptable levels of quality and performance as weil as hinging about a degree of interchangeability in these units. This is one of the series of Inclian Standards on cinematographic equipment. 0.3 In contrast with 35 mm projectors, which are customarily permanently installed in a separate projection room and use high power an illuminants, 16 mm projectors are usually small and portable with an incandescent lamp. 0.4 In an architect-designed cinema, consideration is given to the shape and height of the auditorium, the control of stray light from doors and windows, properly designed ` Exit ' signs and auditorium lighting, specially chosen colours for walls, ceilings, and decorations, and the location of the projectors in a separate projection room. All of these factors are so designed and co-ordinated as to achieve the required luminance of the screen from the projector with tile minimum of stray light faning on the acreen. On the other hand 16 mm films are most frequently projected where the conditions are by no means SO good. The facilities for darkening the hall or room cannot, in general, compare with the superior conditions of the cinema auditorium, and an appreciable quantity of stray Jight may enter from windows and doors, and either reach the screen direct or be reflected on to it from walls and ceiling. Some light may be spilled from the projector, which is usually located in the auditorium itself Of the light reflected from the screen some will be re-reflected on to the screen from walls and ceiling, and the amount of this re-reflected light will be relatively much higher than in a cinema, for the occasional auditorium the ceiling will usually be much lower, and the cokour of walls and ceiling much lighter. 2

l

.

lSt4496-1966 0.5 Stray

light falling on the screen inevitably degrades the contrast of black-and-white pictures and both the colour"and contrast of colour pictures, and it is, therefore, important to keep stray light to a minimum. 0.6 Notwithstanding the fact that the light output of 16 mm projectors is limited by the nature of the light source, there is a tendency among users of 16 mm equipment to demand a picture which is larger than that which the projector can give at this ` ideal ' luminance on a matt white screen. However, by the use of beaded or metaliized screens a much larger picture may be obtained with the ` ideal ' luminance, but this level of luminance is available only to those of the audience who sit near the centre line of projection; towards the sides of tile rlditorium the level of luminance may be less than would be the case if a matt white screen were used. 0.7 On a matt white screen an over-large picture should necessarily .esult in a level of luminance below the ` ideal `. Fortunately, the human eye is very adaptable, and experiment has shown th;t projected pictures, both colour and black-and-white, are acceptable at levels of luminance less th?.n the ` ideal `.- 111 a well-darkened auditorium 211 acceptable picture is obtainable at levels down to a luminance of 21 cd/m2. Below this level the degradation of contrast and colour quality results in unsatisfactory pl esentation. 0.8 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded off IS : 2-1960+. value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE
1.1 This standard recommends the screen luminance ( brightness ) fcr the projection of 16 mm colour, and black-and-white cinematograph film by incandescent lamps.

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. Its magnitude is 2.1 Candela ( Cd) - The unit of luminous intensity. one-sixtieth of the luminous intensity of one square centimetre df a blackbody radiator operated at the temperature of solidification of platinum, 2.2 J.,&nance
( Brightness )-

(at a Point of a Surface in a Given Direction ) The quotient of the luminous intensity in the given

*Rules for roundi,lg off numerical values (reck-d ).

3

1

lS:4496-1968

direction of an infinitesimal element of the surface containing the point under consideration, by the orthogonally projected area of the element of a plane perpendicular to the given direction. 2.3 Brightness - The attribute of the visual appearance with which an area seems to emit more or less light. This attribute is sometimes referred to as luminosity or * apparent brightness ' and are not expressed in ordinary photometric terms.
NOTE - A good way of explaining the essential di&xepce between ` brightness ' and ' luminance ' is to quote the following sentence: ` An automobile headlight aeema to have much higher brightness at night than in the day time, but its lwniaaacr remaina unchanged `.

2.4 Side - It is a position on the horizontal axis of the projected picture 5 percent of its width inwards from the edge.

3. SeRBEN

LUMINANCE

(BRrGEITNEss)

3.1 It is recommended that the luminance of the screen, measured from any seat in the auditorium by the method and under the conditions speci6ed in Appendix A, should be aa HOLLOWS: The luminance a> than 55 cd/ma.
Nora I -In

of the centre should be not less than 27 nor more which the projector is capable oP givingwith the
Experiment haa ahown that a reject a picture

which ia larger than that

certain circumrtancea it may be desired to

Iuminance of 21 cd/m2 can provide an acceptable picture.

lower limit of Iummance recommended above.

certain circumatancer it may be desired to project at a NOTE 2 -In luminance higher than the upper limit recommended above. Experiment haa ahown that some 16 mm film may be shown satisfactorily, without noticeable grain or 6icker, at levels of luminance up to 82 cd/m%

b)

The luminance of each side measured on the horizontal axis should not be less than O-6 times the measured luminance at the centre, and should preferably be as near as practicable to 0.7.
NOTE- Experiment baa shown that the moat artistic presentation of the icture rcrulta not when the screen is illuminated uniformly over ita whole area, g ut when the luminance diminishes towards the sides and cornera. It ir for &a reason that it is recommended that the luminance at the sides should be as
near aa practicable to O-7 times the luminance at the centre.

4. STRAY
stray light,

LIGHT

that the level of luminance of the screen due to from all sources, should not exceed 1 percent of the luminance of the centrc of the screen, determined under the conditions given in Appendix A. 4

4.1 It is recommended

i8:4496-1968 4.2 It is related to the total of stray light from whatever source. Such sources will include light entering the auditorium from doors and windows, all lighting within the auditorium including that spilled frcm the projector, whether reaching the screen directly or by refhxtion from walls and ceiling, and reflected light from the screen re-reflected from walls and ceiling. 4.3 A method of measurement of luminance due to stray light falling on the screen is given in Appendix B. 4.4 With directional ( beaded or metallized 1 screens, the ratio of the luminance of the screen due to stray light to the luminance of the screen due to the projected hgnt, will vary from seat to seat in the auditorium. To determine compliance with 4.1 when directional screens are used, it is necessary for measurements to be made of both projected light lummance and stray light 1uminance, from a number of seats in the auditorium. Every pair of measurements should give,a ratio complying with 4.1. 45 Whilst with levels of stray light up to that qvoted above the picture still remains acceptable, it should nevertheless be kept in mind that any stray light whatever tends to degrade the picture to some extent. To achieve black-and-white presentation of good contrast, and colour presentation of good contrast and colour quality, every endeavour should be made to reduce stray light to a minimum particularly at the lower levels of screen luminance. For high contrast black-and-white pictures, for example, cartoons or line drawings, a level of luminance due to stray light up to 2 percent may not be objectionable. 4.6 Tfle colour of the stray light has an appreciable &ect on the acceptability of the picture, particularly in the case of colour film. Stray light which tends to have a pronounced colour will degrade a picture appreciably more than an equivalent level of white light.

APPENDIX
CONDITIONS

A

( Clauses 3.1 and 4.1 )
AND METHOD FOR M&UURING SCREEN LUMINANCE

A-l.

CONDITIONS

OF MEASUREMENT

A-l.1 The measurement of the luminance of the screen shall be made with the projector running under normal operating conditions, with no film in the gate, and with the auditorium darkened as for normal projection. The conditions shall remain constant throughout the complete series of measurements. 5

ISt446-1968 A-2. PHOTOMETER A-2.1 The screen luminance shall be measured with %`visual photometer in which the screen or a suitable part of it is viewed &rough a small telescope which has centrally in its field of view a small comparison spot, obscuring not more than 1" of this field. The comparison spot is illuminated to a sensibly uniform lance by 2 small electric lamp, the luminous intensity of which Can be adjusted so as to br: kept constant. The luminance of the comparison spot is to be capable of variation by suitable means, for example, neutral wedges, so as to be made to match that of the screen whose luminance is required. The device which alters the luminance of the comparison spot is calibrated so that the h*minance of the spot, and hence that of the screen with which it is matched, can be determined.
The error in the indication of the instrument at any point within the eEective range shall not exceed 20 percent of the indication.

AS.

NUMBER

OF MEA!XJREMENTS

of the hnninanet of each selected portion cf the screen should b* made from each selected position in the auditotiurn. The mean value of these four measurements shall be re arded as the measured luminance of that portion of the xreen as view e8 from that position in the auditorium. If more than one observer takes measurements, then each observer should make the same number of observationa, which should be not less than four for each observer.

A-3.1 At least four measurements

APPENDIX ( Chuse 4.3 )

B

METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF LUMINANCE OF SCREEN DUE TO STRAY LIGHT B-1. GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD
B-1.1 To measure the luminance of the screen due to the incidence, on the screen, of all the stray light that will be present under normal projection conditions, it is necessary to run the projector with the auditorium normally darkened and to project, on to the screen, a quantity of light approximately equal to that projected when an average scxe is being shown, and this in practice is about 10 percent of the total light outpur of the projector. It is necessary to prevent the direct light from the projector lens ft,>rn falling on a small part of the screen and to measure the luminance of that part. The magnitude of this luminance, expressed as a 6

Ist44%-1968 percentage of the luminance of the centre of the screen under the conditions of Appendix A, will indicate whether the projection conditions comply with 4.1. B-2. METHOD OF MEASUREMENT B-2.1 Darken the auditorium as f&r normal projection. B-2.2 Run the projector, using some means to reduce its light output to about 10 percent of the value obtained with no film in the gate. Some of t&e suitable means are: a) Run a 6lm having, over all the picture area, a density of2.0, and having spaced approximately uniformly in tale top end bottom thirds of the picture arca, .a number of clear areas, the sum of these areas w such that the total light incident on the screen is the desired reduced light output. b) Insert in the projector gate, or immed&ely inr front of the projection lens, a neutral density f&r of such density as to give the desired reduced light output. If a filter is used in front of the lens it should be of a type thz* does not diEi or scatter the light Cillmg on it. c) Cover the projection lens with a cap having a central circular hole the diameter of which has been determined by trial to give the desired reduced light output. B-2.3 Place a circular opaque bafile, matt black on both sides. of diameter approximately 10 percent of the picture width, between the projector and the centre of the screen at a distance from the latter equal to one picture width. NIXE- With a ba5le dimensioned and positioned a.~indicated in E2.3 the penumbra

will be sufficiently amall, and the size of the shadow will `be adequate ( it will subtend an a&e of approximately 1 degree at a distance of 5 lcmn widths ). Ft-ahermorc, it will be pouible to measure the hmiinance of the shadowed area from any position esept within 3 de ea of the normal to the acreen passing through the centre of +Ae erence between a measurcrnent normal to the screen and the one shadow The difP 3 degreea 05 ia likely to be small ( less than 10 percent ) even with a beaded screen.

B-2.4 Measure the luminance of the screen in the shadow of the baffle, which is the luminance of the screen due to stray light. The photometer used for this measurement shall comply with the requirements of A-2.1 and shall be capable of measuring down to at least 02 cd/m2.
the case where a matt acreen L in use and equipment for measuring Nols -in luminance b not available, the stray light luminance ratio may be determined to a suffitiently do,e approximation by using an illumination meter. In thir ea5e, first measure the ilhunina tion at the ccntre of, the screen under the conditiona described in Appendix A, and then mcanurc the iSlaudon in the hdow d the b&?e *mda the conditiona deaeribed in 82. The ratio of that twca illumination valacawill be, ih the cue of matt screen, app-oximateiy the ratio required.

7

BUREAU OF
Headquarters .-

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones : 3 31 01 31.3 Regional Offices : 31 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

*Western ; Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6 32 92 95 BOMBAY 400093 tEastern : l/l4 C. i. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, 36 24 99 Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, CHANDIGARH Sector 35-C 160036 21843 { 3 1641 I "4: tt 7; 141 29 16 Branch Offices : Pushpak,' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur. AHMADABAD 380001 `F' Block, Unity Bldg, Narasimharaja Square, BANGALORE 560002 Gangotri Complex. 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, B HO PAL 462003 Plot No. 82193, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 53/5 Ward No. 29. R. G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane. GUWAHATI 781003 5-B-56C L N. Gupta Marg. (Nampally Station Roao,. HYDERABAD 500001 R14 Yudhister Marg. C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 117/41BB Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 2 63 46 C 2 63 49 22 48 05

.

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113

6 27 16
5 36 27 22 10 a3 6 3471 { 69832 21 68 76 21 a2 92 6 23 05 52 27

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 Hantex Bldg ( 2nd Floor ), Rly Station Road, TRIVANDRUM 695001 inspection Office ( With Sale Point ):

Institution of Engineers ( India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 5 24 35 PUNE 410005 *S&r Office in Bombay ir II Novelty Chrmbmro, Grant Road. Bombay 400007 $%I08 Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringher Approach, P. 0. Princap Strwt, Calcuttr 700072
89 65 28 27 68 00

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

