( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 11466 ( Part 2 ) - 1985

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR PACKING, STOWAGE AND SECURING OF CARGO INSIDE THE FREIGHT CONTAINERS
PART 2 DANGEROUS GOODS

Freight
Chairman
CAPT

Containers

Sectional
Container

Committee,
Representing
Information

MCPD
& Services

7
Co, Bombay

N. A. TAMHANE Members

SHRI MURARILAL BAHRI

The

Indian Roads & Transport Association, Bombay

Development

SHRI M. P. SANGHVI ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Factory Advice Service SHRI S. K. BAJA] & Labour Institute, Bombay SHRI V. L. KATHANE ( Alternate ) Balmer Lawrie & Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI P. K. BISHNOI SHRI P. SETH ( AIter?fate > The Scindia Steam Navigation Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. R. CHOKSI Trans-Freight Containers Limited, Bombay SHRI N. L. DALhllA SHRI S. MITTAL ( Alternate ) Department of Explosives, Nagpur SHRI B. R. DAVE Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay SHRI P. G. DESHMUKH Federation of Freight Forwarders' Association SHRI PRAWN KANAKIA in India, Bombay CAPT N. A. TAMHANE ( Alternate ) Voltas Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. KAUSHIK SHRI D. V. BAL ( Alternate ) Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay SHRI S. R. KHARE American Bureau of Shipping, Bombay SIUU MADAN L. KOCHHAR SHRI R. C. BHAVANANI (

SHRI RAM V. KOTAK

Alternate

Intermodal Transport Pvt Ltd, Bangalore

)

and

Trading

Systems

SHRI M. 0. SHARIEFF ( Alternate ) Cochin Port Trust, Cochin SHRI V. L. KRISHNAMURTHY SHRI M. VELU ( Alternate ) The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay CAPT S. B. KUNDARGI

CAPT C. P. ALEXANDER ( Alternate

) ( Conrinued on page 2 )
1986
INSTITUTION

@ Copyright
INDIAN STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 11466 ( Part 2 ) - 1989
( Continued

from page 1 )
Repr&ente@ Indian National Bombay Shipowners' Association,

Members
CAPT S. B. KLJNDARGI

Lloyd's Register of Shipping, SHRI D. MAUHOK SHRI J. N. GOSWAMY ( Alternate ) Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta SHRI A. K. MAJUMD'AR SHRJ N. N. MOOKHERJEE ( Alternare ) Bombay Port Trust, Bombay SHRI G. S. E. I. MAMPI~ LI SHRJ M. J. MATHEW ( Alternate ) Federation of Association SHRI V. S. MANERKAR SHRJ J. S. MARWAHA SHRI K. L NIRWAN ( Alternare SHRI T. N. OBHAN Ministry

Bombay

of

Stavadores,

Madras

of Railways

( RDSO of

), Lucknow Operators,

)

Indian Federation Bombay

Transport Bombay

SHRJ HARKJRAT SJNGH KOHLI ( Alternate) Seatord Containers SHRJ L. M. PRABHAKAR SHRI M. G. MEHTA ( A/tern&e ) In personal capacity SHRJ 1. N. PRADHAN SHRI S. R. PRASAD SHRI M. G. ScrNDJ:4 SHRJ R. C. SHARMA SHRJ LOVE DEV RAJ ( Alternate SHRI RAJ JAWANT SINCH

Limited,

( Naraln Nfvas, 21, North Avenue, Suntayuz West, Bombay ) TheBy2bfy Contmental ShippIng Conferences, European &Asian ( Ministry of Technical Container of Express, ),

Peninsular

Railway Board New Delhi

Bombay

Railways Development,

)

Directorate General New Delhi

SHRT KAMAL KRISHNA ( Alternote ) Mahindra Owens Ltd. Pune SHRJ G. C. SINCHAL SHRI B V. BALIGA ( Alfrrnate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D )I, NeW Delhi SHRI 0. P. SIUVA~TAVA SHRI A. K. SIWGH ( Altrrnate ) Ministry of Shipping and Transpart,r\iew Delhi SHRI A. B. TfrAICuR Nathani Steel Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. VENKATAC~IALAM SHRI A. V JAGANNATM ( Alternate ) Bureau Veritas, Bombay SHRI P. B. WARRIER SHRJ M. C. BHATIA ( Alternate ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-oflcio SHRJ El. L. RAINA, Director ( MCPD 1

SHRI S. N. SUMAN ( Alternate

)

Member)

SZIRI V. K. SEHGAL

Joint Director

( MGPD ), 231

2

IS : 11466( Part 2 ) - 1985 ,

Inditin Standard
GUIDELTNES FOR PACKING, STOWAGE AND SECURING OF CARGO INSIDE THE FREIGHT CONTAINERS
PART 2 DANGEROUS GOODS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 September 1985, after the draft finalized by the Freight Containers Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 0.2 Use of freight containers substantially reduces the hazards to which goods are exposed while improper or careless loading of goods into a container may be the cause of personal injury when the container is handled or transported; in addition to serious damage which may occur to the goods inside or to the equipment. The person who packs and secures goods into the container, may be the last person to look inside the container. It is only opened by the consignee at its final destination. Consequently, a great many persons will rely on his skill; road vehicle drivers and other highway users, when the container is carried by road; railway personnel and others when the container is carried on a rail ca:-; dock workers when the container is lifted on or off the ship and crew members of the ship which may be taking the container through its most difficult conditions; as well as shippers and consignees, etc. All these persons may be at risk from a poorly packed container, especially one which is carrying dangerous goods. 0.3 Dangerous goods are the goods which, as a result of their hazards, may cause injury or damage to people, animals, installations, road or rail vehicle or ships and other property. These goods are classified and listed in the International Maritime Dangerous Goods ( IMDG ) Code, published by the International Maritime Organization. 0.4 Section 12 of IMDG code particularly refers to the use of freight containers for carrying dangerous goods and should be strictly complied with. In addition, it may also be necessary to comply with national or other statutory regulations, 3

IS : 11466 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 0.5 Infl-ingement

of these rules can make the cargo vessels liable to pay heavy fines. Therefore, dangerous cargo should be loaded with full knowledge and approval of ship owners and carriers. 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressmg the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2 - 1960". The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 2 ) gives guidelines for the safe packing, stowage and securing of dangerous goods in freight containers.

2. CLASSlFICATION

OF DANGEROUS

GOODS

-2.1 Dangerous goods are divided into the following Nith IS : 1446 - 1959p :

classes in accordance

Class 1 Class 2 Class 3 Class 4

Explosives Gases; compressed, Inflammable Inflammable liquids solids solids liable to spontaneous combustion liqtied or dissolved under pressure

Class 4.1 Inflammable Class 4.2 Substances

Class 4.3 Substances emitting inflammable gases when wet Class 5 Oxidizing substances : organic peroxides Class 5.1 Oxidizing substances Class 5.2 Organic peroxides Poisonous and infectious substances Class 6 Class 6.1 Poisonous ( toxic ) substances Class 6.2 Infectious substances Radioactive substances Class 7
*Rules for rounding off numerical values tClassification of dangerous goods. ( revised 1.

4

IS : 11466 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 Class 8 Class 9 Corrosives Miscellaneous dangerous subtances, that is, any other substances which experience has shown or may show to be of such a dangerous character that the provisions of the other classes do not apply to it. GOODS

3. GUIDELINES FOR PACKING OF DANGEROUS INSIDE THE FREIGHT CONTAINER 3.1 Before Packing 3.1.1 Dangerous designed for them. goods should only be stowed

in the containers

3.1.2 The containers, into which dangerous goods are to be packed, should be examined visually for damage and if there is evidence of material damage, the container should not be packed. Container should be clean, dry and fit for use. Irrelevant dangerous goods labels should be removed or masked before packing begins. 3.1.3 Information should be provided by the shipper about the hazardous properties of the dangerous goods to be handled. The shipper should also ensure that dangerous goods are packed, marked and labelled in accordance with ZMDG Code. Dangerous goods should not be handled unless packed, marked and labelled in accordance with these regulations. 3.1.4 Dangerous goods should only be handled, packed and secured under direct and identifiable: supervision of a responsible person who is familiar with the risks involved and knows which emergency measures should be taken, if the need arises. He should also ensure that any necessary protective equipment is also available. 3.1.5 Smoking should be prohibited while work is going on and suitable fire protection measures should be taken. 3.1.6 Packages should be examined and if found to be damaged, leaking or sifting should not be packed into a freight container. Packages showing evidence of staining, etc, should not be packed into a container without first determining that it is safe and acceptable to do so. Water, snow, ice or other matter adhering to packages should be removed before packing into a freight container. 3.1.7 If goods are palletized or otherwise unitized, they should be compact and secured in a manner unlikely to damage the individual packages comprising the unit load. The materials used to ~band the unit load together should be compatible with the substances unitized
5

IS : 11466 ( Part 2 ) - 1985

and retain temperature

their efficiency and sunlight.

when exposed

to moisture,

extremes

of

3.1.8 When dangerous goods are packed in temperature controlled containers, the power supply and the machinery should be of a type unlikely to cause hazard to the goods or adjacent containers. 3.1.9 A container intended to carry dangerous goods under temperature controlled conditions, should be inspected and operated to ensure that the machinery is in proper working order before the shipment is made. A record of this inspection should also be made.

3.2 Packiug and Securing
3.2.1 Special care should be taken during handling to ensure packages are not damaged.

that the

3.2.2 If a package containing dangerous goods is damaged during handling, so that the contents leak out, the immediate area, should be evacuated until the hazard potential can be assessed. The damaged package should not be transported under any circumstances. 3.2.3 If leakage from dangerous goods results in the risk of explosion spontaneous combustion, poisoning or similar danger personnel should be immediately moved to a safe place and the emergency response organization, such as fire services be notified. 3.2.4 Where substances emitting inflammable gases when wet ( Class 4.3 ) are to be packed in a container, the possibility that the container could suffer from heavy condensation on the internal surfaces should be kept in mind. The degree of such condensation is dependent upon the amount of moisture contained within the closed container and on the The risk is temperature differences experienced during transportation. minimized if the moisture content of the packing aud securing material, that is dunnage is kept low. 3.2.5 General cargo which is incompatible or may suffer damage as a result of being in contact with dangerous goods must not be stowed together in the same container. 3.2.6 It is also class should not incompatible, for oxidizing agents ( in the event of an possible that in some instances, goods of the same be packed -into the same container as they may be example, peroxides and permanganates are both Class 5.1 ). However, they may iuteract dangerously accident. 6

1s : 11466 ( Part 2 ) - 1985

3.2.7 Dangerous good$ which may cause damage by taint, odour or contamination to other products should not be packed in the same contaifier, as goods may be susceptible to such damage. 3.2.8 When dangerous goods such as poisons ( Class 6.1 ) end corrosives ( Class 8 ) are handled, consumption of any form of food or drink should be prohibited while handling these goods. 3.2.9 Special packing instructions detailed on individual packages or otherwise available, should be strictly observed. For example : a) Goods marked `protect from frost' from the walls of the container. should be stowed away

b) Goods marked this way up should be packed accordingly. 3.2.10 When a dangerous goods consignment forms only a part of the load of a container, it should preferably be stowed as close to the door of the container as possible, keeping in view the even distribution of load on the floor. 3. ON COMPLETION OF PACKING

3.3.1 The containers should be sealed prior to despatch. However, they should not be locked unless specifically required and agreed to by the container operator. In such cases, a key should be readily available at all times. 3.3.2 Container, in which dangerous goods are packed shall bear dMDG Code class labels ( plarards ) not less than 250 X 250 mm in size. Except where not required by lhe /MDG Code, there should be at least four such lables placed externally, preferably one on each side and one on each end. Labels for the sides of the container should be afixed In such a position that they are not obscured when the container doors are opened. 3.3.3 It is preferable that the container should also bear externally the correct technical name of each of the dangerous substances packed tberein. 3.3.4 Additional authorities. labels may be required by rail and road transport

3.4 Packing Cettlficate - The person responsible for packing of dangerous goods into a freight container shall be provided with a `Container Packing Certificate', ccl tifying that this has been properly carried out, embodying the following provisions. 7

IS : 11466( Part 2 ) - 1985 3.4.1 The container

was clean, substances

dry and apparently

fit to receive the

goods.
3.4.2 No incompatible

have been packed in the container. inspected for damage and

3.4.3 All packages have been externally only dry, sound packages packed.

3.4.4 All packages are in accordance with relevant specification and codes and have been properly packed and secured in the container, using suitable securing material. 3.4.5 The labelled. container and packages are appropriately marked and

3.4.6 The dangerous goods in the container are those for which acceptance has been specifically obtained with the shipment in question. 3.4.7 The consigner of the dangerous goods has in each case, issued a dangerous goods declaration as to the nature of the hazard and that the goods are packaged suitably for transport by sea. 3.4.8 The container packing certificate should be forwarded with the container, to be available at the time of loading on board ship. 4. GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR RECEIPT CONTAINING DANGEROUS GOODS OF CONTAINERS

4.1 Containers containing dangerous goods should be unpacked with care always beaiing in mind that th: cargo may have been damaged in transit. Before the doors are opened, this possibility should be borne in mind in relation to the properties of the cargo, for example, depending on the contents of the container, there may exist the possibility that leakage has caused an unsafe concentration of toxic, inflammable or explosive vapour, or to have produced an oxygen enriched or depleted atmosphere. If there is evidence that damage has occured and such a condition exists, expert advice must be sought before commencing to unpack the container. 4.2 Any containes which carries dangerous cargo, particularly toxic products, should be ventilated before unpacking commences that is, the door should be left open for a short period. 4.3 After a container containing dangerous goods has been unpacked This particular care should be taken to ensure that no hazard remains. may entail special cleaning particularly if toxic spillage has occured or is suspected When satisfied that a container has no hazard, the dangerous goods labels should be removed. 8

4.4 If any container shows signs of heat, it should be removed to a safe place and fire services immediately notified. Care should be taken to see that any fire fighting methods to be used are suitable for the caTgo in question. 4.5 Attention is drawn to the fact that cQns@ee is normally obliged t.o return the container, after discharging, clean `and suitable for the transport of every kind of cargo. This applies especially when poisonous, dangerous or obnoxious cargo has been transported.

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units QUMWTY

SYSTEM

OF UNITS ( SI UNITS 1

UNIT metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole UNIT radian steradian

SYMBOL m kg ?I K cd

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary
QUANTITY

Units SYMBOL

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units

rad sr

QUANTITY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress

UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

SYMBOL N W Wb T HZ S V Pa I N = 1 J = 1 W = 1 Wb = 1' T= I Hz = 1 S = 1 V-l 1 Pa = 1 kg.m/ss 1 N.m 1 J/s 1 V.s 1 Wb/ms 1 c/s (s -1) 1 A/V W/A 1 N/ms

