( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS :

11393- 1985

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR SCINTILLATION COUNTERS
Electromedical
Chairman REAB STJR~E~N A. K. DEB Members Department of Electronics, New Delhi SHRJ B. S. BEDI SHRI B. S. CHETTY ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi PROF S. K. GUEA Encardio-Rite-Electronics Pvt Ltd, Lucknow DR P. K. GUJRAL SRRI AKHILESH MISRA ( Alternate ) Bhahha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay DR G. HARIDASAN Armed Forces Medical Services, New Delhi COL S. K. JAIN MAJ GEN J. M. GROVER ( Alternate ) Central Scientific Instruments Organization, SHRI R. S. KHANDPUR Chandigarh SRRI V. K. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SRRI D. B. MALIK New Delhi Electromedical Pvt Ltd, Indore SHRI P. K. MANTRI Directorate of Standardization, Ministry of Defence, LT-COL S. S. MOHANTY New Delhi SRRI A. S. KRISHNA~WRTHY ( Alternate ) All India Instruments Manufacturers' & Dealers' SRRI B. PASRIOHA Association, New Delhi SHRI M. M. KALA ( Alternate ) Siemens India Ltd, Bombay SHRI D. NAC+ARAJ RAO SHRI R. P. RAO ( Alternate ) Elpro International Ltd, Pune SHRI B. SARKAR SRRI D. L. SULE ( Alternate ) Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi DR R. S. SAXENA J. N. Marshall & Co, Pune SHRI K. VOHRA SHRI BHARDWAJ ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( ( Ex-o#cio Member ) SHRI S. P. SAUEDEV, Director ( Elec tech ) Secretary SHRI B. K. MARATA Joint Director ( Elec tech ), IS1 ADMIRAL Ministry of New Delhi

Equipment

SectionaI

Committee,
Representing Defencc,

ETDC

50

R & D

Organization,

@ Cofiyright 1986
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Acf ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 11393 - 1985

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR SCINTILLATION COUNTERS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 22 August 1985, after the draft finalized by the Electromedical Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 Scintillation counters are used to measure radioactivity. The quantity of radiation is measured in units of `n' disintegration per unit time. Radioactivity from `test samples' can be estimated using scintillaThey are used to assess gross or total activity. tion counters. 0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard applies to gross scintilIation operation from ac main supply. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions in addition to the relevant definitions given in IS : 1885 ( Part 43 )-1977t shall apply. 2.1 Scintillation - Scintillation is a phenomenon by which a flash of light is produced in a detector by a radiation passing through it. Only those materiaIs transparent to their own scintillations can be used as Opaque scintillators must be as thin layers. detectors.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rcviscd ). tElectrotechnica1 vocabulary: Part 43 Electrical equipment used in medical practice.

counters

intended for

2

IS : 11393 - 1985 Scintillation light can be detected by a photomultiplier which is a device that converts light into proportionate electrical output. As the flashes or scintillations are discrete in occurrence, the electrical output will be in the form of randomly occurring electrical pulses. Such pulses are counted using electronic counters. 2.2 Activity - The activity, the quotient of dN by dt where taneous nuclear transformations interval `dt' or A = -$-.. A of a quantity of radioactive nuclide is dN is the expected number of sponwhich occur in this quantity in the time

The quantity of radiation is measured in units of `n' disintegrations per unit time. Radioactivity from `test samples' is estimated using scintillation counters. Scintillation counters can be used to assess gross or total activity in samples or sources. Using suitable electronic circuits, the activity of composite source can also be assessed. In the later case, it is called scintillation spectrometer. We shall deal with only gross counting units. 2.3 Scintillators - A number of different detectors have been found suitable for the detection of different types of radiation. They are called Scintillators. For example, zinc sulphide consisting a trace of silver, ZnS ( Ag ) is often used for the detection of alpha particles. On the other hand, large crystals of anthracene or napthalene containing Plastic scintia small amount of anthracene are use for beta detection. llators are becoming the material of choice in beta detection devices. For gamma counting, sodium iodide crystals containing a trace of thallium as an activator are almost exclusively used. This is referred to as a NaI ( TI ) crystal. 2.4 Decay Time of Scintillators In general, the light quanta emitted as a function of time follows a simple exponential function for all scintillation detectors. The time interval for the emission of 67 percent of light quanta is referred to as the decay time. Every detector has its own decay time. Decay time is equal to the rise time of electrical pulses at the output of detector. 2.5 Detector Assembly - This refers to scintillation detector and photo multiplier combination. For alpha counting, ZnS ( Ag ) coated over a plastic disc is optically coupled to the photo multiplier. For beta counting, Anthracene or plastic scintillator is optically coupled to the photomultiplier. For gamma counting, NaI ( TI ) is optically coupled to the photomultiplier. 2.6 Photomultipliers Photomultipliers light-to-electrical are converters and hence should be operated inside an assembly which is light proof. The operating voltage of the photomultiplier varies from 3

IS : 11393 - 1985 500 VDC to 1 500 VDC and the electrical output from the photomultiplier detector assembly will vary depending upon the scintilla tor, operating vohage of the photomultiplier-tube and the basic sensitivity of the Photomultipliers are classified as end window or side window tube, etc. types and also have different response to various wavelengths. The response characteristics for u, p or y counting are indicated under appropriate headings 9.2, 9.3 and 9.4 respectively. Manufacturers should specify the type and response of photomultipliers used in their unit. 2.7 Pre-amplifier - The electrical output from photomultipliers is coupled to this section, called pre-amplifier. Gain of this stage varies from 1 to 10 ( variable depending upon the manufacturer's specification). The impedance level at the output will be 50n or less. The manufacturers are expected to specify this figure. output is connected to this section, 2.8 Main-Amplifier - Pre-amplifier called main-amplifier. This section amplifies the amplitude level of the pulses and sends them to a discriminator unit. 2.9 Discriminator - This section electrical pulses up to a pre-determined the counters. This provision enables cuts off the amplitude level of the level and passes higher pulses to reducing the counts due to noise.

2.10 Counter Timer - This section counts and accumulates the number of electrical events for a known time interval. The interval can also be chosen. These parameters are to be specified by the manufacturer. 2.11 Counting Errors - Nuclear radiations are random in nature and follow expressed in terms of standard deviation which is defined as the square root of the count ( d/. standard deviation 100 d/N with which counting can be Percentage

=- 2/N
So, larger performed. the counts

N

x 100 a-

higher

the accuracy

2.12 Shielding the Detector - The detector cannot differentiate source of radiations from background activity. To minimize background the A common shielding material is lead. detector shall be shielded. 3. CLASSIFICATION 3.1 Scintillation detectors shall be classified into alpha-scintillation counters, Beta-scintillation counters and Gamma-scintillation counters depending on the type or radiation to be detected. Neutron-Scintillation counters are not commonly employed and so it is not included in this standard. 4

IS : 11393 - 1985 4. ENVIRONMENTAL 4.1 Scintillation CONDITIONS
laboratory based arrary instruments. will be affixed on the door of the room

are counters Symbols or radiation warning where the unit shall be operating. REQUIREMENTS

5. GENERAL

5.1 The relevant provisions of'IS : 8607 ( Part 1 )-1977X shall apply. The photomultiplier used in scintillation counters are light sensitive and SO should not be exposed to outside with the high voltage applied to it. 6. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTS while testing the counting pulse generator. unit.

6.1 The detector shall be disconnected The input signal shall be from standard 7. CONSTRUCTIONAL

COUNTERS

REQUIREMENTS
shall contain incorporating unit, units with scaler/timer, Low voltage supplies.

OF

SCINTILLATION
basic sub-units:

7.1 A scintillation
a) Detector

counter assembly counting

the following

a pre-amplifier; and scintillator may be

b) Amplifier-discriminator c) Electronic d) EHT and required

7.1.1 Detector Assembly - The choice governed by the follwing factors: a) Type of radiation b) Efficiency c) Selectivity 8. DESCRIPTION COUNTING 8.1 A scintillation a) Detector b) Amplifier d) Electronic of detection, to wanted OF counter assembly and

of the detector range

and the energy and unwanted

to be detected, ) radiation. FOR CROSS

( background COUNTER

SCINTILLATION shall contain

the following

basic sub-units:

with pre-amplifier, supplies, and

discriminator, counter-timers.

c) Low and high voltage

The classification is These sub-units may or may not be separate. purely functional. Manufacturers are expected to provide block diagram and circuit diagram details as supporting document for the inspection team.
*General and safety requirements Part 1 General. for electrical equipment used in medical practice:

5

IS:11393

-1985 The choice of the detector

8.1.1 Detector Assembly with Pre-amplijer is governed by following factors: a) Type of radiation b) Efficiency c) Selectivity to be detected, of detection,

to wanted and unwanted ( background ) radiation,

and

d) Decay time of detector, etc. The choice of a detector ( see Table 1 ) is often difficult because of that exists among the above factors particularly for very the co-relation . . . low or very high count rates.
TABLE 1 CHOICE OF DETECTOR DETECTORS USUALLY EYPLOYED CSI ( TJ )

TYPICOE RADIATION Alpha Beta

Zns ( Ag )

Plastic scintillators Anthracene . Liquid scintillators NaJ ( TI )

Gamma

Pre-amplifier converts the low-amplitude pulses from the output of photomultiplier-tube into a higher amplitude of proper shape. The output impedance of the pre-amplifier shall be 50 $& or less. Manufacturer to specify. 8.2 Amplifier Discriminator - Photomultiplier tube itself is an efficient amplifier and so the gain requirement is not very large ( < 104 ). A linear pulse-amplifier raises the signal level at the detector sufficiently The specification of this section will be as to operate the discriminator. follows: Gain : This figure depends on Photomultiplier energy of alpha and such variables. Manufacturer 100 ( approximately ) to specify. lOvolts (MUX) Differential linearity Integral linearity f2 f5 percent

MUX Output Linearity Bandwidth

: : :

percent

The relation T X BW = 0'35 will be used where T = Rise time, and BW = Bandwidth of amplifier Threshold is normally set such that noise pulses are not counted 6

Discriminator threshold

:

IS:11393 Decay time of detector output of the detector. is equal to the

-1985

rise time of the pulses at

8.3 Low and High Voltage Supplies - The voltage supplies used in The high voltage the system shall be specified by the manufacturer. supplied to the photomultiplier ( variable from 600-I 500 VDC ) shall also be specified. 8.4 Electronic counter-timer - Electronic counter-timer used in the Manufacturers are expected to system will depend on the application. specify details. ,9. GUIDELINE SYSTEMS SPECIFICATIONS FOR TYPICAL COUNTING

9.1 Exact specifications for all types of counting systems cannot be spelt out, because a variety of configuration by manufacturers is possible. Following specification is expected to serve only as guidelines. Each manufacturer has to specify the product designed and applications, for which the unit can be used in detail. 9.2 Specifications Detector Density Efficiency Background Photomultipler Size Operating Amplifier voltage gain count of a Typical Alpha Counting System

Zns ( Ag ) Screen 5-8 mg/cme 25 percent ( approx ) _ Less than 5 per hour END window, S-l 1 response type ( Photomultiplier data sheet to be consulted 50.8 mm dia ( 2" dia ) 600-l 500 V energy 500-I 000 ( Depends on photomultiplier, of the radiation, etc. Manufacturer to specify on the circuits to specify ) ) employed It depends Manufacturer )

Resolution Counting

of basic circuit

Preset time for counting Counting error

10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 500 Sets ( optional

9/B

to be minimum S = source count, and count.

where

B = background
7

IS :11393-1985 Additional features of internal clock, start and stop switches are desirable. Photomultiplier-detector mounted inside a dark assembly Manufacturer to will have provision to introduce radioactive samples. provide detailed mechanical rawings. 9.3 Beta Scintillation Counting System -- For efficient detection, low background Halogen quenched Geiger-Muller counters are used preferably. It is not a scintillation type of counter.

9.3.1 Scintillation Detector for Beta Counting -- Anthracene crystal of 2" diameter mounted on a photomultiplier. The thickness will depend on application and manufactures's specification must include this parameter. Electronic counting system is similar to that used for alpha counting, but with increased capacity for counter. scintillation counting many 9.3.2 Liquid Scintillators -- For liquid They are matched for current gain and photomultipliers are used. noise figures 12 stage photomultipliers are normally used. Operating voltages range from 1`5 kV to 2"0 kV for detecting low energy beta particles. Manufacturer source for which 9.4 Gamma Detector to specify details, such as amplifier the unit is designed and so on. Counting System gain, energy of

Scintillation

NaI( TI ) 44"45 mm diameter 50'80 mm thick crystals are optically coupled to end window type of photomultipliers. Welltype detectors are also employed for detecting low activity Gamma radiations END window type with S-1 1 or S-13 response ( Manufacturer to specify details of photomultiplier data sheet to be supplied by the manufacturer ) 600-1000 volts

Photomultiplier

Operating

voltage

Gain of amplifier

1000 ( approximately ): It depends on energy of the source, photomultiplier used and so manufacturer to specify a) To cut off extraneous radiations lead shields are employed. Lead shields are made flexible in design by making them in sub-units or building blocks 8

Lead

shield

IS : 11393 - 1985 b) Lead shields in the form of inter-locking rings, internal dia 90 mm with bottom and top plates suitable for accommodating scintillation heads are provided normally c) The inside of the shield is lined aluminium to minimize scattering Specification normally tailor pected to specify counting system but with increased with

of Electronics system vary in great detail. They are Manufacturers are exmade to specific applications. In principle electronic details with relevant drawings. will be similar to that used for alpha or beta counting capacity of counters.

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units QV ANTITY `Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplemas+$y. Qn ANTITY Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units QUANTITY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stress force Units

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS)

SYMROL

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin

m kg S

A K cd mol

'

cahdela mole ? ,. UNIT radian steradian

SYdiGL
rad sr

UNIT

SYMBOL N 1 1 1 1 1 1

DEFINITION N = 1 kg.m/ss J = 1 N.m W =_l J/s 1 V.s T = 1 Wb/ms S = 1 A/V V = 1 W/A

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

J
W Wb T Hz S V Pa

1 Wb -

1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-l)

1 Pa = 1 N/m2

