( Reaffirmed 2012 )

IS : 9795 ( Part I ) - 1981

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR THE CHOICE OF THE TYPE OF DIVERSION WORKS
PART I COFFER DAMS

Diversion
Chairman
SHRI

Works

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

BDC

51

G. M. VAIDYA Members

Central Water Commission,

New Delhi

Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab CIHIEFENGINEER ( PROJEOT ) SUPERINTENDINGENGINEER ( Alternate ) Beas Designs Organization, Nangal Township SHRI 0. P. DATTA SHRI R. N. BANSAL ( Altcrnata ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi DIREOTOR ( B & CD-I ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( B & CD-I ) ( Alternate ) National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, SHRI S. L. GUPTA New Delhi SHRI V. K. GUPTA Engineer-in Chief's Branch, Ministry of Defence SHRI J. R. D'GAMA ( Alternate ) Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar SRRI HARI MOHAN Pradesh SHRI N. K. GUPTA ( Alternate ) S. B. Joshi & Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. B. JOS~I SHRI R. M. BHAKTA (Alternate ) Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI Y. K. MEHT+ SRRI M. G. DANDAVATE ( Alternate ) National Projects Construction Corporation Ltd, SHRI T. S. MURTHY New Delhi SHRI S. K. MURTHY ( Alternate ) The Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. N. SHANKAR NARAYAN SHRI M. V. S. IvENaAn ( Alternate ) M. N. Dastur & Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI C. B. PATES M/s Gammon India Ltd, Bombay SH~I S. R. PINHEIRO SRRI S. V. CHOUKULKAR ( Alternate ) Public Works and Electricity Department, SRRI K. RAMAOHANDRAN Government of Karnataka SHRI S. R. SUBBA RAO ( Alternate ) Andhra Pradesh Engineering Research LaboSHRI P. V. RAUHAVENDRA RAO ratories, Hyderabad SHBI M. -4. RABEEM (Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) Q Copyright 1981 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the nublisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copvright under the said Act.

IS : 9795 ( Part I ) - 1981
( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Representing

hfembers SHRI B. BALWANT RAO

Ministry of Shipping and Transport (Roads Wing ), New Delhi SHRI G. VENEATASULU ( Alternate ) Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune SRRI P. C. SAXENA SERI N. V. PRAHLAD ( Alternate ) Ministry of Railways, New Delhi SENIOR ENGINEER Public Works Department, Government of SHRI R. Cl. SINQH Himachal Pradesh Department, ENor NEE R Irrigation Government of SUPERINTENDINU Maharashtra ( NAC+PURIRRIQATION CIRCLE ) Public Works Department, Government of SUPERINTENDINQ ENCINEER Tamil Nadu ENQINEER, EXECUTIVE PARAMBIKULAM DIYCSION ( Alternate) Bhakra Management Board, Nagal Township SERI J. C. VERMA SHRI I. P. PURI ( Alternate ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-o&o Member) SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SRRI V. KALYANASTJNDARAM Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

?

IS:9795(PartI) -1981

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR THE CHOICE OF THE TYPE OF DIVERSION WORKS
PART I COFFER DAMS

0. 0.1This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 4 March 1981 after the draft finalized by the Diversion Works Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Prior to the commencement of construction of any work in the bed of a river, it becomes obligatory to exclude temporarily the river flow from the proposed work area during the construction period, so as to permit An efficient the work to be done in dry or semi-dry conditions. scheme of diverting the river flow away from the work area should aim at limiting the seepage into the work area to a minimum, so that the work area can be kept dry with minimum pumping capacity. 0.3 A temporary river diversion scheme essentially consists of: a) coffer dam(s) built across a part or full width of the river to divert the flowing water away from the work area, and b) works to transfer the diverted water from upstream to the downstream of the work area without affecting the same, such as : 1) diversion through ( construction ) sluices in the main work; 2) diversion by one or more tunnels along the side of the main work area; 3) diversion through low-level blocks of the main structure left for the purpose or through channels excavated outside the main structure; and 4) secluding part of the work area for construction and allowing the river to flow through the remaining work area. 0.4 There are different types of coffer dams in vogue, such as masonry/ concrete/colloidal concrete/earthfill/rockfill, and steel and timber coffer The suitability of the particular type of coffer dam will dams. 3

IS : 9795 ( Part I ) - 1981
depend on a number of factors such as the availability of space and materials, construction programme, rate of construction, incorporation of the coffer dam as a part of main structure, foundation characteristics, The proper choice of the type of coffer dam and river flow conditions. shall be made after considering all the relevant aspects. 0.5 This standard on guidelines for choice of type of diversion works is proposed to be formulated in four parts, of which this is Part I. The other parts are listed below: Part Part Part II III IV Diversion Conduits, Utilization channel and of permanent structures for diversion. and open
cuts,

1. SCOPE 1.1 This different concrete,
standard lays down the guidelines for the choice of the types of coffer dams (such as masonary/concrete/colloidal earthfill/rockfill, steel and timber coffer dams ).

2. TERMINOLOGY
of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 6461 IS : 4410 ( Part VIII )-19687 and IS : 4410 ( Part (Part IV)-1972*, XII )-1973$ shall apply. 3. TYPES

2.1 For the purpose

OF COFFER

DAMS

3.1 The different types of coffer dams, the guidelines for choice of which have been discussed in this standard, are (i) masonry/concrete/ colloidal concrete coffer dams, (ii) earthfill/ rockfill coffer dams, (iii) steel coffer dams, and (iv) timber coffer dams.
3.1.1 Masonry/Concrete/Colloidal Concrete Gofer Dam - A masonry/concrete coffer dam on a rocky foundation is similar to a masonry/concrete dam This can be of gravity or arch type, usually the constructed at site. A brief description of a colloidal concrete coffer dam generally former. adopted for river diversion works is given below. 3.1.1.1 A colloidal concrete coffer dam consists of two rows of piles of 1 to 1.25 m diameter, spaced suitably apart and having inter-locking points. Cylindrical steel liners are driven penetrating into the bed rock
*Glossary of terms relating to cement concrete : Part IV Types of concrete. ?Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part VIII Dams and dam section. $Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects : Part XII Diversion works.

4

Es : 9795 ( Part I ) - 1981
by about 1 m. The overburden of sand and gravel in front of and in the immediate vicinity of the inter-locking points is grouted to make the points more effective. After placement of suitable reinforcement inside the cylindrical liner, the same is concreted to form an RCC pile. To facilitate rubble dumping and grouting simultaneously with piling work, the coffer dam is divided into cells by providing cross-rows of piles, penetrating in the overburden to a short depth. Horizontal bracings connecting the two rows are also provided for ensuring stability of piles. Later, the space between the two rows of piles is filled with rubble and concreted so that the whole structure is stable as one unit and prevents seepage into the work area. For typical plan, section and details of such a colloidal concrete coffer dam, see Fig. 1. to the usual type of 3.1.2 Earthjll~Roc~fill Gofer Dam - In addition earthfill/rockfill coffer dam with a central core of impervious soil, a coffer dam with single sheet pile at the centre, backed by earthfill/rockfill A typical section of such a coffer dam is on either side of it is also used. a coffer dam with a single sheet pile at the shown in Fig. `2. Sometimes, centre, backed on either side by sand bags, caged suitably by G. I. wire mesh of appropriate gauge, is also adopted. However, due to the possibility of rotting of gunny bags and sand spreading thereby, this type of coffer darn can be suitable only for short durations. 3.1.2.1 Where the height of the coffer dam is not more than 3 m and a simpler type of coffer dam with two the foundations are impervious, rows of parallel walls of sand bags with the space between them filled with impervious soil can also be adopted. 3.1.3 Steel Co$er Dams

3.1.3.1 Steel coffer dams suitable for rocky foundations at very shallow depths are generally of two types, viz, direct strutted steel dam and cantilevered steel dam [ refer IS : 4410 ( Part VIII )-1968* for definitions]. However, these steel dams are very rarely used as coffer dams. 3.1.3.2 In alluvial construction of a coffer of the cantilever type, where the bed is rocky, shown in Fig. 3B, may reaches, where only limited area is available for dam, sometimes single steel sheet pile coffer dams However, shown in Fig. 3A may also be used. single sheet pile coffer dams of strutted type, be useful.

3.1.3.3 In alluvial reaches, the steel coffer dam used in diversion works of river valley projects mainly refers to steel sheet pile coffer dam. There are two types of such steel sheet pile coffer dams generally in use. They are (i) double wall sheet pile with earth/sand filling type, and (ii) cellular sheet pile with earth/sand filling type.
*Glossary ofterms relating to river valley projects

. Part VIII

Dams and dam section.

5

MS GROUl PIPES

ANGLE,

\MS

FLAl

CENTRAL

CELL

\

\r/

INTERLOCKING PILES

RUBBLE

FILLING

FOR COLLOIDAL CONCRETE (1.2) HELICAL REINFORCEMENT PERFORATED
FOR

ENLARGED

DETAIL

ATA

SUITABLE OIA
GROUTING

PIPES OF

SAND WITH

MIXEO GRAVEL

SEUION

XX

FIG. 1

COLLOIDAL

CONCRETE

COFFER

DAM

IS : 9795 ( Part I ) - 1981 3.1.3.3.1 Double wall sheet pile coffer dam double wall sheet piIe coffer dam with earth/sand For typical section of a filling, see Fig. 3C.

3.1.3.3.2 Celluldr sheet pile coffer dam - For typical plan of a cellular sheet pile coffer dam with earth/sand filling, see Fig. 3D. 3.1.4 Timber Coffer Dams foundations at very shallow generally of three types, viz., and (iii) Beaver type. In view type of coffer dam is not likely for low height coffer dams. Timber coffer dams suitable for rocky depths made of framed members are (i) A-frame type, (ii) rockfilled crib type, of the high cost of timber in India, this to be economical, except in circumstances

FIG. 2

EARTHFILTJROCKFILL COFFER DAM WITH SINGLE SHEET PILE AT THE CENTRE

SIEEL

SHEET

3A

==== ------B
WL BRACES

L ROCKY BED

Single Sheet Pile Coffer Dam Cantilever Type

3B

Single Sheet Pile Coffer Dam Strutted Type

3C

Double Wall Sheet Pile Coffer Dam with Earth/Sand Filling

FIG. 3

STEEL COFFER DAM

Contd

7

1s : 9795 ( Part

I) - 1981

CIRCULAR

DfAPHRAGM 3D Typical Plan of Cellular FIG. Sheet Pile Coffer Dam with Earth/Sand Filling

3

STEEL COFFERDAM

4. GUIDELINES

FQR

SELECTION

4.1 In addition to the criteria of the cost of the structure and the overall economy of the project, there are some specific guidelines which dictate the selection of a particular type of coffer dam. Among these are the availability of space and materials, construction programme, rate of incorporation of coffer dam(s) as part of the main dam, construction, foundation characteristics, river flow conditions and passing of floods, The choice of the different types of coffer dams with reference to these guidelines is given in the following par-as. The final choice of the type of coffer dam may be made based on a study of relevant criteria and commensurate with economy.
4.2

Availability

of Space

4.2.1 An earthfill/rockfill coffer dam requires more space due to its wider base. For the sites where only limited area is available for construction of the coffer dam over rocky foundations, in addition to masonry/
8

IS : 9795 ( Part I ) - 1981 concrete/colloidal concrete coffer dams, steel and timber coffer dams are However, since the latter types can be considered only also suitable. for depths up to 2 m, for conditions of limited area and rocky foundations, a masonry/concrete coffer dam is better suited than other types. 4.2.2 However, the coffer dam(s), choice. where there is no problem of space for the location of an earthfill~rockfill coffer dam may be the suitable

4.2.3 In alluvial foundations, where limited space is available for construction of coffer dam(s) due to the construction of certain etc, a double wall steel sheet pile structures like navigation facilities, coffer dam with proper earth/sand backing may be preferable. 4.3 Availability of Materials

4.3.1 Where construction materials like earth, rockfill, steel and timber for the construction of coffer dam ( s ) are not easily available, if foundation conditions and other relevant criteria are satisfied, a masonry/concrete/ colloidal concrete coffer dam may be chosen. 4.3.2 However, where sufficient quantities of embankment materials and equipment for the construction of the embankment( s) are easily available an earthfill/rockfill coffer dam is preferable. 4.3.3 The selection of a steel coffer dam will depend on the easy availability of the required steel sections and the necessary accessories in sufficient quantity, besides satisfying the other criteria like depth of water, foundation conditions, etc. In the alluvial reaches, the suitability of steel sheet pile coffer dam will depend on the easy availability of the required sheet pile sections, its quantity and driving equipment and transportation thereof to the site. The availability of the required amount of foreign exchange needed for procurement of sheet piles and their driving equipment is also a factor to be taken note of. 4.3.4 Subject to satisfying other criteria, chosen where timber is cheap and available 4.4 Construction Programme a timber coffer dam may be in plenty.

4.4.1 Where the coffer dam needs to be retained for more than one concrete coffer dam is working season, a masonry/concrete/colloidal preferable, as it can be made to withstand overtopping with proper protection. 4.4.2 However, with the recent advancement in construction techniques, rockfill coffer dams are also sometimes allowed to be overtopped 9

IS : 9795 ( Part I ) - 1981 by provision of adequate crated protection. Under such circumstances, rockfill coffer dams may also be considered where they are required to be retained for more than one working season. 4.4.3 Where a cellular type of steel sheet pile coffer dam is preferred due to other criteria, proper protection against overtopping needs to be provided in addition to increased depth of driving and other protective works. 4.5 Incorporation of Coffer Dam as Part of the Main Structure Where a diversion coffer dam of appreciable volume is to be built up, it can be economically incorporated in the main dam with proper care taken This type of construction is more in the design of the main structure. suitable for earthfill/rockfill dams, than for masonry/concrete/colloidal concrete coffer dams. 4.6 Rate of Construction 4.6.1 As the progress of construction of an earthfill/rockfill coffer dam can be maintained at comparatively higher rates, this type of coffer dam is preferable where the time available for the construction of coffer dam is very limited, subject to availability of space. 4.6.2 As it takes comparatively more time for the construction of a masonry/concrete/colloidal concrete dam than for the other types of coffer dams, the availability of construction time for the coffer dams needs to be kept in view while selecting this type of coffer dam. However, in underwater works, either a earthfill/rockfill coffer dam or a concrete coffer dam may be preferred. The choice of any of these types depends on the different relevant aspects outlined in this standard. 4.7 Foundation Characteristics 4.7.1 Where a rocky foundation is availableat the bed level of the river or at very shallow depths, masonry/concrete/colloidal concrete coffer dam, steel and timber coffer dams may be preferable for certain considerations. However, from considerations of depth of water, availability of materials, etc, generally steel and timber coffer dams may not find favour. 4.7.2 An earthfill/rockfill foundation. coffer dam is suitable for almost any kind of

4.7.3 Steel sheet pile coffer dams are preferable for rivers with alluvial beds of great depths and with higher depths of flow in the lean period. 4.8 River Flow Conditions 4.8.1 Where the depth of flowing water in the lean season is low and suitable rocky foundations are available at shallow depths, masonry/ 10

IS : 9795 ( Part I ) - 1981
concrete/colloidal concrete coffer dams and steel and timber coffer dams may be preferable. However, subject to the availability of materials, steel and timber coffer dams are not generally useful for depths of water more than 2 m. 4.8.1.1 However, where suitable rocky or boulder foundations are available at shallow depths, but the depth of flowing water in the lean season is more, concrete coffer dams may be useful. 4.8.2 In alluvial reaches, for construction of structures across rivers where the flow during lean period would not go down low at any time, steel pile coffer dams are preferable. 4.8.2.1 For depths ofwater up to 6 to 8 m, double wall steel sheet pile coffer dams are suitable. Where the depth of water exceeds this value, cellular coffer dams are preferable. 4.8.3 In alluvial reaches! where the estimated scour is of the order of 6 m and more below the river bed during the period of construction and the coffer dam has to remain in position for more than one season, it is preferable to adopt a cellular sheet pile coffer dam. 4.9 The various guidelines and requirements for choosing the type of coffer dam to be adopted have been listed is Table 1 for ready reference.

11

TABLE

1 GUIDELINES

FOR CHOICE

OF TYPE

OF COFFER

DAM

( Clause4.9)
h

3
ul

SL
No.

TYPEOF COFFER DAM

REQUIFGEXENT OF SPACE

REQUIBEMENT MATERIALS

CONSTRUCTION PROQRAMME

INCORPORATION OF COFFER DAMAS PARTOF MAIN STBUCTUBE

RATEOB CONSTRUCTION

REQUIREMENTOB FOUNDATION CHARACTERISTICS

REQUIREMENTOF RIVER FLOW CONDITIONS

REMARKS

27 ;

(1)
z 1.

(2)
EarthfilljRockfill coffer dam Masonry/c oncrete/colloida1 concrete coffer dam

(3) Larger space due to wider base

(4) Sufficient quantities of embankment materials Limited over rocky foundations

(5) Any*

(6)
More suitable Suitable

m
High

(8)
Any kind

(9)

(10)

Any depth

2.

Limited over rocky foundations

Any

More time required

Rocky bed at bed level or very shallow depths

Any depth

3,

Steel dam:

coffer La;:: space to wider base Sufficient quantitles of embankment materials One working season More time required Alluvial bed of great depth Depth of flow up to 2 m

(a) S i n g 1 e sheet pile with fill Oil both sides

(b) Do u b 1 ewall sheet pile

Limited over alluvial foundation

Sufficient quantities of required sheetpile section Sufficient quantities of required sheetpile sections

Any'

-

More time required

Alluvial bed of great depth Alluvial bed of great depth

Depth of flow upto6toSm

(c) Cellular sheet pile

Larger

space

Any"

-

More time required

Depth of flow up to 8 m and estimated scour of the order of 6 m or more below bed level Depth of flow up to 2 m

4.

Timber dam

coffer

Limited over rocky foundations but depths of water up to 2 m only

Sufficient quantities of timber at cheap rates

One working season

-

More time required

Rocky bed bed Eve1 or very shallow depths

*When coffer dams are required to be retained for more than one working season, special protection shall have to be provided to withstand overlopping during floods.

measures/treatment

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units
QUANTITY

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS)

UNIT

SYXBOL m kg s A K cd mol

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary
QVANTITY

mefre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

Units UNIT radian steradian UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal SYMBOL rad sr DERINITION 1 N = 1 kg.m/s* 1J = 1 N.m IW 1 Wb IT 1 H 1s 1 V 1 Pa = = = = = = 1 V.s 1 Wb/ms 1 c/s (s-l) 1 A/V 1 W/A 1 N/m'

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units

QUAYTITY

SYMBOL

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress

7

W Wb T H S V Pa

1 J/s

