UDC

681'7 : 620'199

IS : 10236 ( Part 17 I- 1988
Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 1998 )

PROCEDURE FOR BASIC CLIMATIC AND DURABILITY TESTS FOR OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS
PART 17 ACCELERATION ( STEADY-STATE ) TEST

1. Scope instruments.

Covers

the

procedure

for

conducting

acceleration

( steady-state

)

test for

optical

2. Terminology - For the purpose of this `Procedure for basic climatic and durability oreparation )`, shall apply.

standard the definitions given in IS : 10236 ( Part 1 ). tests for optical instruments: Part 1 General ( under

3. Object -To determine the structural suitability and the satisfactory performance of optical instruments when subjected to force produced by steady acceleration environments ( other than gravity) such as that occuring in aircrafts, helicopters and manned aerospace vehicles. 4. Initial ~Measurements -The mechanically checked as required instrument shall be visually examined, and optically, by the relevant instrument specification. electrically and

5. Test Equipment - Normally a centrifuge shall be used for this test. In some cases, a special test squipment may be required ( see 5.2 ) which shall be specified in the relevant instrument specification. 5.1 The centrifuge shall be capable of being brought up to a speed of rotation sufficient steady acceleration corresponding to any severity given in 6.1 and shall also be capable this value for the specified duration. to develop a of maintaining

5.2 The centrifuge shall be such that the acceleration is directed towards the centre of the rotating system. In certain special cases, however the specimen may-be sensitive to gyroscopic couples and it may only be possible to perform the test by using a machine capable of applying linear acceleration. In such cases, the relevant instrument specification shaH specify a suitable test equipment for performing this test. Note-When a machine capable of applying less than that required in case of a centrifuge.
linear acceleration is used, the duration of the test shall be much

5.3 Tangential Acceleration - While increasing the rotational speed of the centrifugefrom zero to the value necessary to achieve the specified acceleration or while decreasing back to zero, the machine should be so controlled that the specimen is not subjected to a value of tangential acceleration greater than IO percent of the specified steady acceleration. of the centrifuge 5.4 Acceleration Gradient - The dimensions shall be such that no part of the instrument other than flying acceleration outside the tolerance limits given in 5.6. 5.5 Steady acceleration or g-levels of the relation given below: where k = 1'12 x 10 -3 for r = radial distance centrifuge arm N = centrifuge arm metric calculations, from the centre of rotation in metres, and revolutions per minute. to the part of mounted instrument on on different relative to the instrument under test leads shall be subjected to a value of

parts of the instrument = krNL

may be calculated

on

the

basis

g-level

5.6 Acceleration Tolerance - If the linear dimensions of the instrument are less than 10 cm, the acceleration on all parts of the instrument ( excluding flying leads ) shall be within &lO percent of the specified steady acceleration. within In other cases, the acceleration on all parts of the instrument ( excluding the limits -10 percentto $30 percent of the specified steady acceleration. flying leads) shall be

Note-In some_cases, for example, large instruments, it may be difficult to comply with these requirements. In such cases, it may be permissible by mutual agreement between the manufacturer and the customers to move the instrument outwards along the radius of the centrifuge until the part of the instrument nearest to the centre of the centrifuge experiences an acceleration within the specified tolerance limits.

Adopted

15 April

1988

I
BUREAU
MANAK

Q September
OF
BHAVAN.

1988,

BIS

I
STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARf3

Gr 3

INDIAN

-I
_

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS:10236(Part17)-1988
5.7 The centrifuge shall have provision to supply electric to operate under the specified conditions. 5. Test Severities power to the instrument under test and also

6.1 The severity indicated by acceleration shall be as specified in the relevant instrument specification. The value may be selected from those given in Tables 1 and 2 depending upon the procedure of test. 6.1.1 The g-level to be applied to the instrument is dependent on two factors: (a) the direction of forward acceleration level A of the vehicle, and (b) the orientation of the instrument within the vehicle, where A is the highest possible known or unknown forward acceleration of a vehicle in which the instrument is to be mounted. A shall never be less th-an g-level. 6.1.2 The selection of test levels shall be from Table 1 for Procedure 2. The histructions for such selection are as follows: Forward Acceleration of Vehicle Known Orientation of Instrument Under Test in Vehicle Known Procedure Test Level 1 and from Table 2 for

Substitute known acceleration A in forward acceleration column of appropriate vehicle category and use given multiplying factors to obtain test levels for testing in the six indicated directions. For helicopters, the test levels given in relevant table shall apply. Select most probable value A from those given in forward acceleration column of appropriate vehicle category and use given multiplying factors to obtain test levels for testing in the six indicated directions. For helicopters, the test levels given in relevant table shall apply. Substitute known acceleration A in forward acceleration column of appropriate vehicle category and use largest given multiplying factor to obtain a highest test level. Use this level for testing in each of the six indicated directions. For helicopters, the highest test level given in the relevant table shall apply for testing in all the six directions. Select most probable value A from those given in forward acceleration column of appropriate vehicle category and use largest given multiplying factor to obtain a highest test level. Use this level for testing in each ofthe six indicated directions. For helicopters, the highest test level given in the relevant table shall apply for testing in all the six directions.

Unknown

Known

Known

Unknown

Unknown

Unknown

7. Test

Procedure

7.1 Mounting 7.1.1 Direction of forward acceleration is always considered to' be the direction of the vehicle acceleration and instrument shall be oriented accordingly using the normal mounting means. If isolators are used in its normal mounting of the instrument, these isolators shall also be used for mounting the instrument, unless otherwise specified by the relevant instrument specification. Any additional stays or straps shall be avoided, wherever possible. 7.1.2 The instrument under test shall be mounted on the acceleration machine directly or by means of suitable fixtures. These fixtures shall be such as to enable the instrument to be subjected to acceleration forces in the direction required by the relevant instrument specification. Any external connections necessary for measuring purposes shall add a minimum restraint and mass.
Note - For reasons of safety, mounting attachments are broken, test. care shall be taken to prevent instrument under test from being thrown off, if the but any safety devices used shall not introduce additional constraint during the

7.1.3 If cables, pipes, etc, are required to be connected to the instrument during test, as specified in relevant instrument specification, these shall be so arranged as to add similar restraint and mass as in the normal installation. 2

IS : 10236 (Part
7.1.4 When a centrifuge is used to attain the required shall be oriented as follows: Fore Aft Up Down Front or forward Reverse instrument Top of the instrument Reverse instrument end of instrument acceleration level, the

17) - 1988
under test

instrument

under test shall face towards

the centre of centrifuge;

180 degrees from the `Fore' position; shall face towards the centre of the centrifuge; and

180 degrees from the `Up' position;

Lateral -

Each side ( right~or left ), in turn, shall face towards

the cenIre of centrifuge.

7.2 If the attitude of the instrument is not fixed or nst known with regard to the vehicle, the relevant instrument specification shall prescribe one~level for Procedure 1 and other level for Procedure 2 that may be applied along each of the major axes and senses of the instrument. 7.3 The instrument shall be subjected to both the structural test ( Procedure 1 ) and the operational test ( Procedure 2 ), unless otherwise specified in the relevant instrument specification. The g-levels specified under these procedures shall satisfy the conditions given below: a) Structural or ultimate deformation. level A higher level of acceleration to check resistance to structural at this

b) Operational of proof /eve/ - Normally the specimen would be required to function level without degradation in performance within the stated specification limit.

7.4 In addition, if required by the relevant instrument specification, a still higher acceleration level may -be specified as a means of checking the ability of a specimen to remain firmly attached to its mounting (though it may be permanently damaged or deranged ) and not to break loose during emergency conditions, for instance, in a manner liable to create a hazard to personnel, either directly or byinterference with emergency exits, etc. 7.5 Procedure 7.5.1 I Structural test. on the centrifuge as given in 7.1. to the vehicle category at a speed necessary to

The instrument

under test shall be mounted

7.5.2 The instrument shall be subjected to the acceleration corresponding given in Table 1 ( see a/so 6.1.2, 7.2 and Fig. 1 ) by rotating the centrifuge produce the required level. IP U

LATERAL (LEFT)

LATERAL (RIGHT) AFT

DOWN FIG. 1 DIRECTION OF VEHICLE ACCELERATION 3

IS:10236(Part17)-1988
7.5.3 Unless otherwise stated in the relevant instrument specification, the g-level determined test shall be applied along both the senses of three mutually perpendicular axes, in turn. for the

7.5.4 The test time duration in each direction shall be 1 minute after attaining the centrifuge stabilization. However, the test time may be decreased up to 10 seconds or increased up to 2 minutes, if so required by the relevant instrument specification.
applies to centrifuge only. Note - The test time duration which shall be specified in the relevant instrument specification. Other test equipment may require a different duration

7.5.5 After the test, the instrument shall be removed examined and shall be electrically and mechanically checked specification. 7.6 Procedure 7.6.1 2 Operational undertest test. shall be mounted

from the centrifuge. It shall in accordance with the relevant

be visually instrument

The instrument

on the centrifuge

as given in 7.1.

7.6.2 The instrument shall be subjected to the acceleration given in Table 2 ( see a/so 6.1.2, 7.2 and Fig. 1 ) by rotating the produce the required level.

corresponding to the vehicle category centrifuge at a speed necessary to

7.6.3 Unless otherwise stated in the relevant instrument specification, the g-level determined test shall be applied along both the senses of three mutually perpendicular axes, in turn.

for the

7.6.4 The test time duration in each direction shall be 1 minute after attaining centrifuge stabilization. However, the test time may be decreased up to 10 seconds or increased up to 2 minutes, if so required by the relevant instrument specification.
applies to centrifuge only. Note - The test time duration which shall be specified in the relevant instrument specifkcation. Other test equipment may require a different duration

7.6.5 The test specimen instrument specification.

shall be operated during the test, unless otherwise

specified

by the

relevant

7.6.6 After the test instrument is removed from the centrifuge, it shall be visually electrically and mechanically cheked in accordance with relevant instrument specification. 8. Details to be Given in Instrument specification Specification shall state the following for carrying

examined,

and

8.1 The relevant instrument

out this test:

a) b) cl d) f) h) j)

Suitable Initial Vehicle Highest

test equipment

and duration

of test, if the test can not be done on a centrifuge.

observations/measurements. or vehicles possible where the instrument forward acceleration is used. if known. is fixed and known.

level of the vehicle, within the vehicle during

e) Whether 9) Whether

the orientation

of the instrument

The orientation

of the instrument

and directions

conditioning.

isolators

are to be used for mounting if both procedures

( if relevant ). are not required.

Procedure

to be adopted,

Test duration,

if other than 1 minute. to check that the instrument does not break 100%

k)

Higher acceleration level, if necessary, during emergency conditions.

m) Observations/measurements n) Any deviation

after each test.

from the normal procedure.

4

IS : 10236
TABLE 1 g-LEVELS FOR STRUCTURAL ( Clause 7.5.2 ) Vehicles Category Forward Acceleration ( See Note A Test Level TEST ( PROCEDURE

( Part 17 ) - 1988
1)

r-)

------m-p Direction

~----`-~ Fore

Aft

--------_-_Sy of Vehicle Acceleration ( see Fig. 1 ) *-----v Down Lateral ( two UP directions ) 6'75xA 10'5 2'25xA 2'25~ 4'5 0'75xA A 3'OxA 6'0 1'OxA

Aircrafts Helicopters Manned aerospace vehicles

2'0 See Note 6'0 to 12'0

1'5xA 4'0 1'5xA

4'5xA 4'0 0'5xA

Note-Levels given in column under forward acceleration shall be used when forward acceleration is unknown. When the forward acceleration of the vehicle is known, that level shall be used for A. For helicopters, forward acceleration is unrelated to acceleration in the other directions.

TABLE

2

g-LEVELS

FOR

OPERATIONAL

TEST

( PROCEDURE

2)

( Clause 7.6.2 ) Vehicles Category Forward Acceleration ( SeeANote ) Test Direction of Vechicle --h--Aft UP Level ---------Ye Acceleration

r----_,----_r----Fore

( see Fig. 1 ) ---------y Down Lateral (two dircetions ) 2.0xA 4'0 0'66XA

Aircrafts Helicopters Manned aerospace vehicles

2.0 See Note 6'0 to 12'0

I'OxA 2'0 1'OxA

3'0xA 2.0 0.33xA

4.5xA 7'0 1'5xA

1'5xA 3'0 0`5xA

Note - Levels given in column under forward acceleration shall be used when forward acceleration is unknown. When the forward acceleration of the vehicle is known, that level shall be used for A. For helicopters, forward acceleration is unrelated to acceleration in the other directions.

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

This Standard is one of a series of Indian Standards relating to procedure for basic climatic and durability tests for optical instruments. Fast development in the field of instruments had brought a significant change in their basic content and design. It has been felt over a years that IS : 2352-1963 `Procedure for basic climatic and durability tests for optical instruments' does not cater for the present day needs of the instruments and it is also not in line with the recent trends in climatic and environmental testing procedures to be adopted for meeting their quality and reliability. It has, therefore, become necessary to have uniform and more rational testing procedures as far as possible. This series of standards on climatic and durability tests ( IS : 10236 ) has been prepared with this objective. The other standards in this series are as follows: IS : 10236 ( Part 1 ) Procedure for basic Part I General IS : 10236 IS : 10236 ( Part 2 )-I 9~82 Dry heat test ( Part 3 )-l-982 Cold test Damp heat test Damp heat ( cyclic Salt mist test Mould growth test 5 ) test climatic and durability tests for optical instruments:

IS : 10236 ( Part 4 )-1982
IS : 10236 ( Part 5 )-1982 IS : 10236 ( Part 6 ) -1982 lS : 10236 (apart 7 ) - 1983

IS:10236-(Part17)

-1988
Thermal shock ( rapid change of temperature) ) test Bump test test Shock test Dust test Driving rain test test Drop test test

HIS : 10236 ( Part 8)-1983 IS : 10236 ( Part 10 )-I985 tS : 10236 (Part IS : 10236 IS : 10236 (Part 12)-1985 14)-1986

IS : 10236 ( Part 9 )-`I 983 Low air pressure ( altitude IS : 1~0236 ( Part 11 )~-I 985 Vibration ( Part 13)-1986

IS : 10236 ( Part 15 ) -1986

IS : 10236 ( Part 16 )-I 988 Solar radiation Sealing test IS : 10236 (Part 18) It is proposed to withdraw IS : 10236 are published. IS : 2352-1963

as soon as the

test

mentioned

in the

new

series

of

While preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the details supplied by the leading inspection authorities and manufacturers of this product as well as from draft DIN 58390 Teil 16 `Uniform acceleration, centrifugal, under dry heat or cold', issued by the Deutsches lnstitut fur Normung ( DIN-).

6 Printed at PrinGade, New Delhi, India

