IS : 2071( Part III) - 1876

Indian Standard
PART III ( MEASURING DEVICES

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

METHODS OF HIGH VOLTAGE TESTING

First Revision )
Y

Third Reprint MAY 1997

UDC 621.317.326

0 Coyyrigh

1976 STANDARDS

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

MANAK BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 4

August

1976

IS: 2071( Part III) - 1976

Indian Standard
METHODS OF HIGH VOLTAGE TESTING
PART III MEASURING DEVICES

(First Revision)
High Voltage Techniques Secti onal Committee,
Representing
Central Electricity

ETDC

19

Chairman
SHRI v.

R.

NARASIMH_4N

Authority,

Sew Delhi

Members
DEPCTY DIRECTOR ( CPRI )

Tamil Kadu Electricity Board, Madras SHRI N. S. S. AROKIASWAMY SHRI M. K. SUNoARAR_4JAX ( Alternate ) Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. BALASUBRAMANIAN SHRI K. P. H. SHARXA ( Alternate ) Siemens India Ltd, Bombay DR S. C. BHATIA

Shri V. R. Narasimhan

)

( Alternate to

DR D. P. SAHGAL ( Alternate )
SHRI B. N. BISW.4S SHRI V. B. DESAI SHRI P. SATYANARAYaN SHRI M. L. DONGRE

Bharat Heavy Electricals Tvoti Ltd. Vadodara Supply

Ltd, Hyderabad

( Alter&e ) Bombay Electric Bombay

Br Transport

Undertaking,

SHRI M. R. K. MENON ( Alternate ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal SHRI B. N. GHOSH SRRI S. D. PaLIWAL ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. K. MUKHERJEE Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd, Calcutta SHRI M. M. MUKHERJI DR K. S. Das G~PTA ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore PROF R. S. N. RAO DR B. I. GURURAJ ( Alternate ) Mysore State Electricity Board, Bangalore SHRI K. S. SIV.4PARKAS.4M Puniab State Electricitv Board. Patiala SHRI SOH~N SINCH SHRI A. K. CHOPRA ( Alternate ) W. S. Insulators of India Ltd, Madras SHRI V. SRINIVASAN SHRI KASTURI THIR~VENI~ADATHAN ( Alternate ) U. P. Government Pottery Development Centre, SHRI SURENDRA SIN~H Khurja SHRI KOMAL SINGH ( Alternate )

( Continued on page 2 )

@ CopyrfgJtt 1976
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
This publication is protected under the hdian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means eTcept with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

16 : 2071 ( Part III ) - 1976
( continz4edjrompage 1) Members SHRJ P. J.
SHRI ,%RI s. G. WADIA

Representing The
(

Tata Hydra-Electric Bombay

Power

Supply Co

Ltd,

K.

T~.slUln

Alternate )

P. SACHDEV,

Director

General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member )

Director

( Elec tech ) Secretary SRRI R. C. JAIN Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), ISI

IS : 2071( Part III) - 1976

Indian Standard
METHODS OF HIGH VOLTAGE TESTING
PART 111 MEASURING DEVICES

(First Revision 1
0. FOREWORD
(Part III) (First Revision) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 18 May 1976, after the draft finalized by the High Voltage Techniques Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 This standard is intended to provide uniform methods of high voltage testing of the electrical equipment. 0.3 This standard covers the various aspects of high voltage testing, such as definition of the terms, test procedures and requirements of the test objects and the approved measuring devices for dielectric tests with direct voltages, alternating voltages, impulse voltages and impulse currents. 0.4 The revision of IS : 2070-1962 and IS : 2071-1962 was undertaken in three parts to take into account the rapid advancements in high voltage technology. The Sectional Committee has decided to withdraw IS : 2070-1962 which covered impulse testing. 0.4.1 This standard, in addition, includes the procedures for carrying out switching impulse voltage test, artificial pollution test and the statistical method of evaluating the test results. 0.5 This part covers the requirements of the measuring other two parts of the standard are as follows: Part I Part II General definitions and test requirements Test procedures devices. The

0.1 This Indian Standard

0.6 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Document 42 ( Central Office ) 24 and 26 Draft High-voltage test Elecrrotechniques-Measuring devices, issued by the International technical Commission. 0.7 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rroisrd ) .

IS : 2071( Part Ill ) - 1976 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part III ) covers the requirements of measuring devices other than sphere gaps used for the measurement of voltage and currents during dielectric tests with direct voltage, alternating voltage, lightning and switching impulse voltages and for tests with high impulse current. 1.1.1 Voltage measurements 1961*. with sphere gaps are covered in IS : 1876-

NOTE - Specific guidance on measuring systems suitable for these measurements, and on methods for verifying their performance and accuracy are covered in ` Indian Standard application guide for approved measuring devices (under preparation ) `. 2.

TERMINOLOGY

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following definition in addition to thosg given in Part I of this standard shall apply. 2.1.1 Measuring Devices specified in this standard. 3. GENERAL Devices which satisfy the requirements

PRINCIPLES

3.0 It is generally not practicable to measure high voltages or high impulse currents directly, and the usual procedure is to convert the quantity to be measured to a low voltage or current which can be handled with conventional measuring instruments or oscilloscopes. Most of the measurements considered in this standard cannot be made with a high degree of accuracy and errors of the order of 3 percent or more shall be tolerated as indicated in the appropriate clauses. Some guidance for evaluating measuring errors is given in ` Indian Standard application guide for approved measuring devices (ynder preparation) `. high voltage Measuring System -A measuring system generally comprises:
3.1

or high

impulse

current

a) a converting device, for example, a voltage divider, a high voltage impedance or a shunt; b) the leads required for connecting this device to the test object or into the impulse current circuit; c) a measuring cable, together with any attenuating, terminating, and adapting impedances or networks ; and d) the indicating or recording instrument or instruments.
or

NOTE- Measuring systems which comprise only some of the above components which are based on different principles are also in use.
`Method for voltage measurement by means of sphere gaps ( one sphere earthed ).

4

IS t 2071( Part III ) - 1976 3.2 High Voltage or High Current Converting Devices -One of the following converting devices is generally used, depending on the type of voltage or current to be measured. 3.2.1 Voltage Divider - A voltage divider is a device which is intended to produce a suitable fraction of the test voltage for measurement. It usually has two impedances connected in series across which the voltage is One of them, the high voltage arm, takes the major fraction of applied. voltage. The voltage across the other, the low voltage arm, is used for The components of the two arms are usually resistors or measurement. capacitors or combinations of these and the device is described by the type and arrangement of the components. 3.2.2 Voltage Transformer - A voltage transformer is a step-down voltage transformer designed for the measurement of the amplitudes and shapes of high alternating voltages. 3.2.3 High Voltage Impedance - A high voltage impedance is a device which, when subjected to a voltage, passes a current which is intended to be proportional to the voltage when it is connected in series with a current measuring instrument. It consists of resistors or capacitors, or combinations of these but it should not be referred to as a voltage divider although the elements are similar. 3.2.4 Current Comparator-A current comparator is a three-winding magnetic core device of special design. The ratio of the current in two of the windings is to a very high degree of accuracy equal to the inverse of the turns ratio when zero voltage appears across the third Its use is restricted to the determination of the current winding. through a high impedance. 3.2.5 Shunt - A shunt is a resistor which is intended to provide a It is usually voltage proportional to the current to be measured. provided with two pairs of terminals, one pair being used to carry the current to be measured while the other is used for determining the voltage developed across the shunt. 3.3 Definition of General Terms Related to Measurements

3.3.1 Scale Factor of a Measuring S'stcm - The scale factor of a measuring system is the factor by which the output indication is multiplied to determine the measured value of the input quantity or function. It is in principle a constant but its validity may be restricted to a specific time and frequency range in which case the range for which it is valid shall be stated. 3.3.2 Voltage Rativ of a Voltage Divider - T,he voltage ratio of a voltage divider is the ratio by which the output voltage is multiplied to determine the measured value of the input voltage. It is dependent on the 5

IS : 2071 (Part

III ) - 1976

impedance to earth from the output terminal of the divider and the applicable impedance shall be stated. In principle, the ratio is a constant but its validity may be restricted to a specific time and frequency range in which case the range for which.it is valid shall be stated. 3.3.3 Resfionse G-The response G of a measuring system is the output as a function of time or frequency when an input is applied to the system. 3.3.4 Step Response G ( t ) - The step response G (t) of a measuring system is the response as a function of tixe t when the input is a voltage or current step. A convenient form is the unit step response g (t) in which the output amplitude is denoted as unity when that amplitude, multiplied by the scale factor, equals the input step. 3.3.5 Frequency Response G (f) -The frequency response G (f) of a measuring system is the ratio as a function of the frequency f of the output to the input of the system when the input is a sinusoid. A convenient form is ' the normalized frequency response g (f) ' in which the output amplitude is denoted as unity when that amplitude, multiplied by the scale factor of the system, equals the input. 3.3.6 Response Time T-The response time T of a measuring indicative of the errors encountered when measuring rapidly voltages or currents. It is defined as:
T ~

system is changing

ai - am
damldt

where
al = value of the input function

at some specific time; and

am = measured value of that quantity, with the provision that the rates of change of both the input function and.the measured value of that function are constant and equal.
NOTE - Particulars concerning the response time and related response parameters are given in ` Indian Standard application guide for approved measuring devices ( under $we~arufioa) `.

3.4 General Requirements of Measuring Systems - The measuring accuracy and other characteristics of a measuring system shall comply with the requirements given in 4, 5, 6 and 7 according to the type of voltage or current to be measured. 3.4.1 Instrument Characteristics - When instruments of standard types are employed, they should, where applicable, comply with IS : 1248-1968* Other instruments, such as oscilloand should be of class 0'5 or better. scopes and peak voltmeters should comply with the general requirements for measuring systems given in this standard. -*Specificationfor direct acting electrical indicating instruments( jbst retision ). 6

IS:2071 (Part III) - 1976 3.4.2 Performance Tests - Compliance with the requirements given in this standard shall be verified by performance tests such as those described in application guide for the appropriate clauses of ` Indian Standard approved measuring devices ( under #reparation ) `. The results and the inherent accuracy of these tests shall be stated in a `record of performance ' ( see 3.4.3 ), which record should be retained by the user. 3.4.2.1 The performance tests usually need be made once only, but if the system is modified in any significant respect ( or its performance is in doubt ), they should be repeated in part or in full. For some of the tests, it is sufficient that the test be made on a single proto-type device. The tests should determine in particular:

a) the scale factor and its stability; b) the response characteristics current to be measured ); ( relevant to the types of voltage or

c) the influence of neighbouring objects, either earthed or at high voltage, on the scale factor and the response. The minimum acceptable clearances to such objects shall thus be determined; d) the influence of the applied voltage or current amplitude and duration, and of atmospheric conditions and surface pollution, if any, on the measured characteristics; and e) the ability of the measuring maximum voltage or current. system to operate at its rated

Characteristics (a), (b) and (c) may be determined by tests at low voltage provided that non-linear effects, for example, due to corona, are not involved when the full voltage or current is applied. 3.4.2.2 In principle the characteristics specified in 3.4.2.1 should be determined for the complete measuring system. They may, however, be deduced from separate tests made on its individual components; when this is done the methods by which they are determined and the results of each of the individual measurements shall be stated in the record of performance. 3.4.2.3 As an alternative to separately determining the performance characteristics specified in 3.4.2.1 (a) to (e), it is permissible to evaluate the overall performance of a system by direct comparison with that of another system known to have adequate accuracy and response characteristics. This comparison shall be made by simultaneous measurements with both systems, using the type of voltage or current actually to be measured,

3

IS I 2071 (Part III)-1976 to the results of the tests 3.4.3 Record of Performance - In addition specified in 3.4.2, the record of performance shall include a general description of the system, its components, its principal dimensions and information on the other relevant parameters. More specifically, following items should be given when applicable: a) Details of the type of earth return to it used during the performance b) The length, diameter and position system and of the connections tests; of the high voltage cable; out the lead;

c) The type, length

and position

of the measuring

d) The characteristics of the instruments performance tests; and

used while carrying

e) The response to high frequency transient oscillations as a function of frequency and ( for impulse measuring systems ) the highest frequency fMas for which the system is suitable. Furthermore, variations of the measurement. the record of performance should state the allowable elements listed above for the application to a specific that with tests should a. particular be made test, to

3.4.4 Routine Check - It is recommended periodically, or on request in connection ensure:

a) that the scale factor of the measuring system has not changed from the value determined in accordance with 3.4.2, and b) that the disturbance 4. MEASURING level is sufficiently FOR DIRECT low. VOLTAGE

SYSTEMS

4.1 Qwntities to be Measured, Accuracies Required and Requirements of the Measuring System - The general requirements for direct voltage measurement are: a) to measure the arithmetic mean value error of not more than 3 percent; and* of the voltage with an

b) to measure the ripple amplitude with an error less than 10 percent of the actual ripple amplitude or less than 1 percent of the arithmetic `mean value of the direct voltage, whichever is the larger.
NATE I In certain cases, it may be necessary to detect and measure transient com~euts. No requirements for this are given here, but some guidance may be obtamed from the clause of ` Indian Standard application guide for approved measuring devices ( uadwpr+~a~t~~ ) ' dealing with impulse voltage measurements.

IS : 2071 ( Part III ) - 1976

4.2 These requirements will be met if the system meets the general requirements of 3.4 and the performance tests specified shbw the following: a) The voltage ratio of, the voltage divider or the value of the series impedance is stable and known with an error of less than 1 percent and the current dra.wn from the high voltage source is not less than 0.5 mA (see Note); and b) The frequency response of the system used for measuring ripple voltage is adequate and known to within 10 percent for frequencies from the fundamental of the ripple frequency up to five times this frequency. NOTE- In the case of high imocdance svstems involvinc either a voltage divider or series impedance, it maynot be possible' to comply wirh (a). In thir case, an error of up to 3 percent is permitted if a standard instrument according to 3.4.1 is used for the measurement of the arithmetic mean value, but this may result in the overall error slightly exceeding 3 percent which is still acceptable. 5. MEASURING
5.1 Quantities Requirements SYSTEMS FOR ALTERNATING VOLTAGES

for alternating

voltage measurement

to be Measured, Accuracies Required and of the Measuring System -The general requirements

are:

a) to measure the peak or rms value of the voltage with an error of not more than 3 percent; and b) to measure the amplitude of harmonics with an error less than 10 percent of the harmonic amplitude or less than 1 percent of the fundamental, whichever is the larger. NOTE - In certain cases, it may be necessary to measure voltage transients No requirements for this are given here, superimposed on an alternating voltage. guide for but some guidance may be obtained from ` Indian Standard application approved measuring devices ( under prefiaration ) ' dealing with impulse voltage measurements.
5.2 These

requirements will be met if the requirements of 3.4 and the performance following: The a>

system meets the general tests specified show the

voltage ratio of the voltage divider or voltage transformer, or the value of the series impedance is stable and known with an error of less than 1 percent; and

b)

The frequency response of the system used for measuring harmonics is adequate and known to within 5 percent for frequencies For most systems, from the fundamental to the nth harmonic. However, for systems depending on n may be taken as 7. 9

IS I 2071 ( Part III) - 1976 measurement of the charging current of a capacitor, values ( for example, n e 20 ) may have to be considered. higher

In the case of high impedance systems involving a voltage divider or a NOTE IIn this case, an error series impedance, it may not be possible to comply with (a). of up to 3 percent is permitted if a standard instrument according to 3.4.1 IS used for the measurement of the rms or peak value of the voltage, but this may result in the overall error slightly exceeding 3 percent which is still acceptable. NOTE 2 - When a wave analyzer is used for the measurement of individual harmonics, its measuring error should be less than 5 percent for harmonics up to the 7th and less than 10 percent for those up to the 27th.

6. MEASURING

SYSTEMS

FOR

IMPULSE

VOLTAGES

6.1 Quantities to be Measured and Accuracies Required Practical difficulties prevent the attainment of the same degree of accuracy of measurement for all types of impulse voltages. Consequently, the accuracy requirements for a measuring system are specified in terms of the type of impulse to be measured. 6.1.1 The general requirements the following: for impulse voltage measurement are

a) to measure the peak value of full impulses and impulses chopped in the vicinity bf the crest or on ihe tail with` an error- -not exceeding 3 percent.

b)

to measure the peak value of impulses chopped on the front with an error @, which is dependent on the time to chopping TC as follows: ifTc>2ps,AQ3percent If O-5 ps < Tc ( 2 ps, A < 5 percent

if 2-0 < 0'5 ps, A > 5 pert ent permissible ( the upper limit is not at present defined ).

4

No general guidelines are given to measure the time parameters which define the impulse shape, in case a measuring error not exceeding 10 percent is desired. For the time defining the duration of voltage collapse in a chopped impulse, no specification of accuracy is given because of the extreme difficulty in its measurement. Also, no general guideline8 are given to measure the oscillations on an impulse with sufficient accuracy to ensure that they do not ex.x.;d the permitted levels given in 4.22 of IS : 2071 ( Part II )*. teting: Part II 10
Teat

4

*Methods of high vohage

procedures.

IS : 2071( Part III) - 1976 6.2 Classification of Impulse Measuring Systems

6.2.1 Measuring systems for impulse voltages are classified according to the number of components in the high voltage part of the system. One, two and three component systems are in use but the two component system is the most common. The relevant components are: a) the voltage divider, b) the high voltage lead, and c) any damping resistor at the input end of the high voltage lead.
NOTE - If the damping resistor is used at the divider end of the high voltage lead, it is treated as part of the divider and the system is then a two component system.

6.2.2 The record of performance should state specifically the type of system, the length of high voltage lead and value of damping resistor ( if any ) used in determining the response characteristics. The following measuring system: additional components normally complete the

a) A coaxial cable for transmitting the low voltage output to a measuring instrument ( this cable usually forms a part of the low voltage arm of the divider ), b) An oscilloscope or a peak voltmeter or both, and c) An earth return system.
When testing with full standard lightning or switching impulses, if NOTE previous experience with the particular test equipment and test object has indicated that the shape of the impulse is satisfactory, a peak reading instrument designed specifically for impulse measurements may be used instead of the oscilloscope to measure the peak value. Such instruments should be recalibrated frequently. Alternatively, such impulses may be measured with a sphere gap ( see IS : 18761961. ).

6.3 Requirements of Measuring Systems - The requirements of 6.1 will be met if the system meets the requirements of 3.4 and the performance tests specified show that the requirements of 6.3.1 and 6.3.2 are satisfied. 6.3.1 Accuracy of the Scale Factor

6.3.1.1 The voltage ratio of the voltage divider should be stable and known with an error not exceeding l- percent.
type are connected to an NOTE - In general, when dividers of the capacitive oscilloscope or peak voltmeter, the divider ratio will not be constant for the whole duration of the impulse if that duration is very long. It is sufficient for the ratio to be constant to within 1 percent for the time required for the impulse being measured to reach its peak value, provided that it is also constant to within 5 percent up to the time to half value of the longest impulse to be measured. *Method for voltage measurement by means of sphere gaps ( one

sphereearthed ).

IS : 2071 (Part

III) - 1976

6.3.1.2 The voltage scale factor of the oscilloscope or peak voltmeter ( including attenuators or coupling devices ) should be stable and known with an error not exceeding 2 percent.
6.3.1.3 The time scale of the oscilloscope to within 2 percent. 6.3.2 Response Requirements systems depend 1.
VOLTAGE

should be stable and known

6.3.2.1 Theresponse time requirements for measuring on the impulse shapes to be recorded, as shown in Table
TABLE 1 RESPONSE REQUIREMENTS MEASUREMENT FOR IMPULSE

IMPULSE TO BE MEASURED (1) Full standard l-2/50 lightning lightning impulses chopped or tail impulse and on the crest impulses, impulses

REQUIREMENT (2)

I l- 1 < 0.2 LLS

Linearly rising chopped lightning rise time `TR Non-linearly rising chopped at TC All switching impulses lightning

111 <0'5TR and Q 0.2 ps

1 T 1 < 0.03 Tc and < 0.03 Tcr ( scc Note 3 )

NOTE 1 -

Definitions

of TR, TC and Tccr arc given in IS

: 2071 ( Part II )-1974*.

NOTE 2 -A non-linearly rising impulse is to be approximated by a number of closely Provided the chopping is rapid and the last straight line covers fitting straight lines. 10 percent or more of the front, the slope of this line St, together with the measured on 1 T 1 . No informatron crest value CJM~= is used to determine the requirement can be given relating to the error in the measurement of Tc. For impulses not fitting. into the above category,. some guidance is given in the impulse clause of ` edian Standard application guide for approved measuring devices ( under PreParation ) . NOTE 3 - For the measurement of partial discharges during switching the response time of the measuring system should be considerably better given above but no specifications can be given at present. *Methods of high voltage testing: Part II Test procedures. than that

impulses,

The above limits, if entirely utilized, may produce the maximum It is recognized permitted error without considering other types of errors. that under these conditions, the total error may exceed that specified in 6.1. 12

IS I 2071 ( Part III) - 1976 The response time T generally results in a systematic error, both in the measurement of the time parameters of an impulse and in the measurement of amplitudes of impulses chopped on the front. Since, however, there is also a random error in the determination of the value of I, this gives an additional random component of error in the measurement of the above parameters. 6.3.2.2 The response of a measuring system to transient oscillations superimposed on an impulse depends on the frequency of the oscillation and on the shape of the step response of the system. It is recognized that in general the transient oscillations cannot be recorded with great Therefore, corrections shall be made to the recorded accuracy. amplitudes when necessary and the corrected values of the oscillation amplitudes shall then be known to within *20 percent of the maximum permitted values. In order to ensure that the requirements of 6.1 for measurement of oscillations are met, it is necessary that the required correction factor for recorded oscillations shall not exceed 5 for any frequency up to fMaa ( see 6.4 )., One recognized method of determining the correction factor is given in `Indian Standard application guide for approved measuring devices ( under preparation ) `. 6.4 Maximum Frequency to be Recorded, f,am -The maximum frequency to be recorded is the highest oscillation frequency which may appear at the test object or at the high voltage input terminal of the measuring system, in a given test circuit, with sufficient amplitude to affect the shape of the impulse. A conservative value for this is given by:

f where

lkfaz==

4(Hgc+Hc) MHz
wave,

c = 300 m/Ps -

the velocity of an electromagnetic

Hg = the height in metres of the portion of the impulse generator being used, and HC = the height in metres of the front capacitor.
NOTE - In the case of impulse generating circuits emploving a very high series resistance as used when generating switching impulses, oscillations of the above frequency are unlikely to occur. In such cases, the maximum frequency may be taken as O-1 of the above value. This also applies when the switching impulses are generated by means of a transformer.

13

IS : 2071 ( Part III) - 1976 7. MEASURING SYSTEMS FOR IMPULSE CURRENTS

7.1 Quantities to be Measured, Accuracies Required and Requirements UP the Measuring System 7.1.1 The general requirements for impulse current current measurement impulses are: with an

a) to measure the peak value of standard error of not more than 3 percent,

b) to measure the time parameters of impulse of not more than 10 percent, and c) to permit impulse. the detection of oscillations

currents

with an error
on
a

superimposed

current

7.1.2 These requirements requirements of 3.4 and following:

will be met if the system meets the general the performance tests specified show the the ratio of the current inductor is stable and 1 percent; with the requirements

The resistance of the shunt or alternatively a> transformer or the value of the mutual known with an error of not more than

b) 4

The response time of the system set out in Table 2; and

complies

The time to half value of the response is considerably longer than the front time and time to half value of the current to be measured.

Shunts should preferably be of the tubular type described in ` Indian NOTElStandard application guide for approved measuring devices ( under preporation ) `. Shunts of other types may be used if they are shown to fulfil the above requirements. on methods for determining the response of shunts is given Standard application guide for approved measuring devices ( under of shunts does not in general pfe~arution ) `. The unit step response characteristics take the form of a damped oscillation. in ( Indian TABLE 2 RESPONSE REQUIREMENTS MEASUREMENTS FOR IMPULSE

NOTES-- Guidance

CURRENT

I~~PUL~ETOBEMEASURED
a/20 4110

REQUIREMENT
12-l <~+Ps 0.8 JLS

1 Z- I 6

14

BUREAU

OF INDIAN STANDARDS

Headquarters Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 3375,323 9402 Fax : 91 11 3234062,91 11 3239399, 91 11 3239382 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to ail Offices) Telephone Central Laboratory : Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010 Regional Offices: Central *Eastern 8-77 00 32

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 : l/14 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054
160022

3237617 337 86 62 60 38 43 23523 15

Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

twestern : Manakalaya, E9, Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East), MUMBAI 400093 Branch Offices:: `Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD $Peenya Industrial Area, 1 st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur BANGALORE 560058 Road, 380001

832 92 95

5501348 839 49 55 55 40 21 40 36 27 21 01 41 8-28 88 01 8-71 1996

Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR Kalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE Plot No. 43, Sector 18 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD Savftri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 781003 500001 751001 641037

121001

53/5 Ward No.29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 58-56C,

5411

37

L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD

201083 37 29 25 21 68 76

E-52, Chitaranjan Marg, C- Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 117/418 8, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, LUCKNOW 226001 Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road,

2389 23 52 51 71 26 23 05 32 36 35 621 17

NIT Building, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 Institution of Engineers (India) Building 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 T.C. No. 14/l 421, University P. 0. Palayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034

*Sales Cffice is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, CALCUTTA 700072 fSales Cffice is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 *Sales Dffice is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja Square, BANGALORE 560002

271085 309 65 28 222 39 71

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

