NAT HIAF IS 17453 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


CTE Mal A tagat — HiaS-19 H 
fasta dey A aerate nei 
Ranai h Shit Ter saara 
om far A afa 


Food Safety and Hygiene — Code of 
Practice for Food Businesses during 
Epidemic/Pandemic Situations with 
Specific Reference to COVID-19 


ICS 67.020 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2020 Price Group 8 


Food Hygiene, Safety Management and Other Systems Sectional Committee, FAD 15 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Food Hygiene, 
Safety Management and Other Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Divisional Council. 


The world is facing an unprecedented threat from the COVID-19 pandemic caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus 
(referred to as the COVID-19 virus). Since the beginning of the year 2020, the disease has rapidly spread to all 
parts of the globe and India is no exception. COVID-19 is a respiratory infection with symptoms ranging from 
common cold to Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS). 


While there is no evidence or any reported case of the disease being linked to transmission through food, it is 
important for food businesses to take adequate precautions to ensure that the operation of the food businesses 
does not facilitate spread of COVID-19 pandemic either through human to human transmission during food 
handling (from close contact with food handler or customer) or through droplet (from COVID-19 infected person) 
contamination of the surfaces/or through enclosed air in the food premises. 


Keeping all workers in the food production and supply chains healthy and safe is critical to surviving the current 
pandemic and this requires contribution of all stakeholders along the food chain. In this direction, BIS was asked 
by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution, Government of India, to formulate a guidance 
document for the food industry laying down the essential food safety practices, personnel hygiene and social 
distancing measures to protect the food handlers from contracting COVID-19 as well as to prevent transmission 
of the virus so as to ensure an uninterrupted food supply chain. 


In the formulation of this standard, guidelines published by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government 
of India and WHO among other organizations have been referred. The list of documents referred while preparing 
this standard are included in Bibliography in Annex D. 


It is expected that this guidance document would not only serve as a reference document for food businesses to 
safely produce food during the COVID-19 pandemic but would also be useful during other epidemics/pandemics 
with similar mode of transmission as COVID-19. 


While formulating this standard, due consideration has been given to the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and 
Regulations framed thereunder. However, this standard is subject to restrictions imposed under these wherever 
applicable. 


The list of Indian Standards on Personal Protective Equipment, disinfectants, thermal scanners and other related 
products relevant for food businesses during COVID-19 pandemic is given in Annex E for guidance. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of the standard is given in Annex F. 


IS 17453 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


FOOD SAFETY AND HYGIENE — CODE OF PRACTICE 
FOR FOOD BUSINESSES DURING EPIDEMIC/ 
PANDEMIC SITUATIONS WITH SPECIFIC 
REFERENCE TO COVID-19 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the essential food safety, 
respiratory hygiene, personnel hygiene and social 
distancing practices that should be followed by any food 
business operator during COVID-19 pandemic. These 
guidelines are in addition to the Schedule 4 of Food 
Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of 
Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011 and good hygiene 
practices outlined in general principles of food hygiene 
as outlined in IS 2491 to achieve the goal of ensuring 
that food is safe and suitable for human consumption 
and the operation of the food businesses does not 
facilitate transmission/spread of COVID-19 pandemic. 


1.2 This standard may also serve as a guidance document 
for a food business operator during other epidemics/ 
pandemics with similar mode of transmission as 
COVID-19. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards listed below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

2491 : 2013 Food hygiene — General principles 
— Code of practice (third revision) 

15000: 2013 Hazard analysis and critical control 
point (HACCP) — Requirements for 
any organization in the food chain 
(first revision) 

IS/ISO 22000 Food safety management systems — 

: 2018 Requirements for any organization 
in the food chain (first revision) 
3 DEFINITIONS 


3.1 COVID-19 — COVID-19 is the infectious 
disease caused by recently discovered strain of novel 
coronavirus known as SARS CoV-2. Corona viruses 


are a large family of viruses which may cause illness in 
humans and animals. In humans, several coronaviruses 
are known to cause respiratory infections ranging 
from the common cold to Severe Acute Respiratory 
Syndrome (SARS). COVID-19 causes acute respiratory 
tract illness and its transmission route (infection route) 
in humans occurs mainly through mouth and/or nose, 
when either in close contact or through inhalation of 
spit, respiratory droplet generated when an infected 
person coughs or sneezes. The infection can also occur 
indirectly through contact with contaminated surfaces 
containing spit or respiratory droplets. COVID-19 was 
declared a pandemic by the World Health Organisation 
on 12" March 2020. 


3.2 Epidemic — Epidemic refers to an increase, 
often sudden, in the number of cases of a disease above 
what is normally expected in that population in that 
area. 


3.3 Food Business — Food business means any 
undertaking, whether for profit or not and whether 
public or private, carrying out any of the activities 
related to any stage of manufacture, processing, 
packaging, storage, transportation, distribution of food, 
import and includes food services, catering services, 
sale of food or food ingredients. 


3.4 Food Business Operator — Food business 
operator in relation to food business means a person/ 
entity by whom the business is carried on or owned. 


3.5 Pandemic — A pandemic is defined as an epidemic 
occurring worldwide, or over a very wide area, crossing 
international boundaries and usually affecting a large 
number of people. 


3.6 Social Distancing — It refers to a set of 
interventions or measures taken to prevent the spread 
of a contagious disease by maintaining a physical 
distance between people and reducing the number 
of times people come into close contact with each 
other. It involves keeping the recommended distance* 
from others and avoiding gathering together in 
groups. 

*NOTE — As per national guidelines issued by Ministry of 

Health/Ministry of Home Affairs prevalent currently/notified 

from time to time. 


IS 17453 : 2020 


3.7 Quarantine — Quarantine is the separation and 
restriction of movement or activities of persons who 
are not ill but who are believed to have been exposed 
to infection, for the purpose of preventing transmission 
of diseases. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 All food businesses shall maintain robust hygienic 
practices in line with the regulatory requirements as 
prescribed in Schedule 4 of Food Safety and Standards 
(Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) 
Regulations, 2011 and general principles of food 
hygiene as outlined in IS 2491. Implementation of 
a Food Safety Management System (FSMS) in 
conformance to IS/ISO 22000 or Hazard Analysis and 
Critical Control Point (HACCP) in conformance to 
IS 15000 helps the food businesses in ensuring that the 
food is safe for human consumption. 


4.2 Whilst COVID-19 is not known to be food 
borne basis to date evidences, it is important for 
food businesses to be extra vigilant with all aspects 
of health and hygiene of their employees and 
to take adequate precautions to prevent droplet 
(from COVID-19 infected person or carrier) 
contamination of the surfaces/or through enclosed air 
in the food processing, packaging, storage, transport 
or service but not limited to courier/parcels or utility 
services that directly or indirectly comes in contact 
with the process or persons involved in the process. 


4.3 Responsibility of Food Business Owners/ 


Incharge 


4.3.1 Food business owners/incharge have particular 
responsibilities to ensure that employees are trained 
appropriately in good personal hygiene and social 
distancing practices and there is effective supervision 
of employees to ensure that employees are not ill and 
are fit to work. 


They shall ensure provision of adequate facilities for 
example, hand washing, sanitizers, toilets, to enable 
employees (including delivery persons, drivers, 
vendors, suppliers, etc.) to practice good hygiene. 
A health kit consisting of face covers/masks, 
sanitizers/alcohol-based wipes (70 percent alcohol- 
based), hand wash solution, paper towels, hair nets, 
disposable gloves, clean overalls/clean uniform, and 
slips reduction work shoe may also be provided to 
employees, especially if employees are involved in 
direct handling of foods/raw materials, cleaning and 
sanitization activities , sampling and sample collection. 
A similar hygiene kit shall also be prepared for cleaning 
and disinfection of food premises coming in contact 
with consumers. In case of an epidemic or pandemic, 
visitor entry shall not be allowed in the food premises. 


4.3.2 A local emergency response team should be 
established in large food businesses to deal with 
suspected epidemic/pandemic infections and one 
person should be designated as the epidemic/pandemic 
co-ordinator. Their contact details should be shared 
with all employees. 


The team should develop protocols/guidelines on the 
steps to be taken when handling suspected COVID-19 
infections and as a means of general preparedness, the 
following should be ensured: 


a) List of local authorized hospitals for COVID-19 
testing and treatment is frequently updated; 


b) Contact details of the professional disinfection 
company are kept handy; 


c) Adequate disinfectant for emergency use are 
available; 


d) Dedicated masks, gloves, face shields, safety 
glasses, face shields, protection suits for 
emergency use (personal protective equipment or 
PPE) are procured and stored as per government 
advisories, from time to time; 


e 


wm 


Isolation rooms (one for suspected cases, one for 
close contacts) are prepared with special trash bins 
or suspects are transferred to the nearby hospitals 
or health centres; and 


f) A process for record keeping is established 
wherein all the related information about 
suspected/confirmed cases should be recorded, 
including but not limited to: employee name, the 
whole process of the incident, conversations with 
local authorities, actions taken by the company. 


4.3.3 Also, the food business should ensure mental 
wellness of their employees and take adequate steps to 
allay their fears and anxiety by providing training in 
safety measures and guidance to contact the government 
helpline or a counsellor. 


4.4 In addition, measures mentioned below should be 
implemented by food businesses to prevent the impact 
and spread of COVID-19 in their businesses to ensure 
food safety and hygiene. 


5 PERSONAL AND RESPIRATORY HYGIENE 


5.1 Review the Health Status of all Employees (Food 
Handlers and Others) 


5.1.1 Food businesses must ensure that their employees 
understand what is COVID-19 infection, its sources 
and ways to prevent it including the importance of not 
working while sick. Arrangements shall be made for 
screening of all employees at gate/entry point with the 
help of non-contact type thermal scanners for checking 
their body temperature. In case any employee develops 
flu like symptoms or he/she comes in contact with such 


a person, he/she shall be immediately isolated and 
sent back home with an advice to remain in isolation 
and report to the local health authority if there is any 
severe manifestation of conditions like fever and 
breathlessness. If any employee had come in contact 
with a COVID-19 positive person or his primary 
contacts, the same to be reported to the local health 
authority. The food premise, toilet, work stations, 
equipment, packing materials, lockers and rooms 
that came in contact with the infected person should 
be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected (see 6.6). The 
health of such employees should be tracked until 
recovery. Employees working with or near the infected 
person should also isolate themselves and if required, 
undergo self-quarantine based on the advice of the 
local health authority. Suspected COVID-19 patients 
must be reported to health authorities and further action 
shall be taken as per their advice. Such employees 
shall be allowed to return to work only after they have 
completely recovered and have been issued a fitness 
certificate by a qualified medical practitioner. 


5.1.2 Employees should be encouraged and counselled 
not to hide any illness on account of any personal 
apprehensions and the fear of losing their job if 
subjected to quarantine. 


5.2 Reinforce Good Hand Hygiene 


5.2.1 Proper hand washing is one of the most effective 
tools in preventing the spread of COVID-19. Additional 
hand washing and sanitizing points (stations) shall be 
set up throughout the business including at non-food 
handling areas. If a business is unable to source liquid 
soap or hand sanitizer a cake or bar of soap and water are 
equally effective for good hand washing and hygiene. 
All employees shall be trained in personal hygiene 
and how to wash their hands properly. Posters shall be 
displayed prominently at hand washing stations in the 
language understood by employees. 


5.2.2 Hand washing protocols shall be strictly 
followed. Hands shall be washed for 40-60 s 
(as per current recommendations) using soap and water 
(hot water in winter) frequently preferably after every 
two hours. Use of hands-free taps (like elbow press, 
foot-operated, sensor-based tap etc) is preferable. In 
case of a manual tap, it should be sanitized after each 
use. Hands shall be dried using clean towel (disposable 
towels are preferred which should be disposed off in the 
foot-operated bins) or touch-free hand driers. This 
should be followed by sanitizing of hands for 20 s 
(as per current recommendations) (preferably with 70 
percent alcohol-based sanitizer). Workers shall ensure 
that their hands are washed: 


a) before starting work; 

b) after coughing, sneezing or blowing nose; 

c) after touching face or hair; 

d) before handling cooked or ready-to-eat food; 


IS 17453 : 2020 


e) after handling or preparing raw food; 


f) after handling corrugated boxes and other tertiary 
transportation boxes; 


g) after handling waste; 
h) after cleaning duties; 
j) after using the toilet; 
k) before and after eating, drinking or smoking; 


m) after handling money or paper (such as bill, indent, 
forms, etc)*; 


n) after touching surfaces, such as door knobs, walls, 
windows, doors, keyboards, etc.*; 


p) After using landline phones/intercoms*; and 


q) after removal of Personal Protective Equipments 
(PPE), such as gloves, face covers, etc. 
* In case hand washing with soap is not practically feasible, the 
workers shall sanitize their hands with suitable sanitizer (like 
70 percent alcohol-based sanitizer). 


5.2.3 Disposable gloves may be worn while handling 
prepared food or raw food. Ensure that no other 
surface, equipment, utensils (a part from food 
preparation surface, handling currency, etc.) is touched 
while wearing gloves. In such cases, the gloves 
shall be changed and suitably disposed off. Gloves 
must be changed after carrying out non-food related 
activities such as emptying bins and opening/closing 
doors with hands. Hands must be washed or sanitized 
between glove change and when gloves are removed. 
Employees shall be trained on correct method of using 
gloves and wearing gloves shall not be considered as a 
substitute for hand washing. Gloves shall be changed 
immediately when torn or worn out. 


5.2.4 Employees shall preferably use clean cloth-based 
face covering or face mask to cover nose and mouth. 
The face cover shall fit perfectly on face without leaving 
any gaps on mouth, nose and chin. The face covers 
shall be changed after every shift or earlier in case 
they are soiled, contaminated, wet/moist or damaged. 
Reusable face covers shall be cleaned and disinfected 
thoroughly as per manufacturers’ instructions. In case 
disposable face covers are used or reusable face cover 
is damaged or changes shape, it shall be disposed off 
in a closed bin. While removing the face cover, care 
shall be taken not to touch the outer surface of the face 
cover. Employees shall avoid touching their face, eyes, 
nose, etc after removal of face cover before washing 
their hands. 


5.2.5 Respiratory hygiene is important to prevent 
COVID-19 spread at the work place. Food handlers/ 
employees shall cover their mouth and nose with tissue 
or similar material while coughing or sneezing when 
not wearing a mask (during eating/drinking etc.). The 
tissue/material shall be disposed off in a closed bin and 
hands shall be thoroughly washed and sanitized, before 
handling food. 


IS 17453 : 2020 


5.3 Use of fingerprint or Biometric attendance or entry 
turnstile shall be discontinued during the pandemic 
period in order to minimise cross infection through 
this common contact point and may be replaced 
with facial recognition or manual system ensuring 
minimal physical contact. Use of each other’s phones, 
belongings, sharing of common stationery like pens, or 
other work tools and equipment, shall be discouraged. 


6 CLEANING AND SANITATION 


Food premise shall be always well maintained and 
cleaned thoroughly and sanitized daily. Cleaning 
programmes and procedures as per IS 2491 shall be 
followed. 


6. 1 Indoor Areas 


Indoor areas including but not limited to — office 
spaces, employees’ cafeteria, food preparation/ 
production area, packaging area, service area, etc. shall 
be cleaned with soap and water, it shall be followed 
by disinfection, such as using freshly prepared 
(use before 12 h) 0.1 percent sodium hypochlorite 
solution (for office spaces, service area etc.) and 
0.5 percent sodium hypochlorite solution (for 
employees’ cafeteria, food preparation/production 
area, packaging area) or any other appropriate 
disinfectant found to be effective against coronavirus*. 

*NOTE — The FSSAI document ‘Food hygiene and safety 

guidelines for food businesses during Coronavirus disease 


(COVID-19) Pandemic’ provides list of disinfectants 
recommended for use by food businesses. 


6.2 Outdoor Areas 


Outdoor areas including but not limited to weigh 
bridge platforms, parking areas, utilities, internal roads, 
vehicle loading/unloading bays etc. have less risk than 
indoor areas. Cleaning and disinfection efforts shall be 
targeted to frequently touched/contaminated surfaces 
as already detailed above. 


6.3 High Touch Points 


High touch points, such as elevator buttons, 
handrails/handles and call buttons, switches, knobs, 
escalator handrails, public counters, intercom systems, 
equipment like telephone, printers/scanners, and 
other office machines, table tops, chair handles, pens, 
diary, files, keyboards, mouse, mouse pad, tea/coffee 
dispensing machines, etc. shall be cleaned twice daily 
by mopping with a linen/absorbable cloth soaked in 
1 percent sodium hypochlorite. In case of metallic 
surfaces like door handles, security locks, handles 
of baskets/carts/trolleys, display racks where use 
of bleach is not suitable, 70 percent alcohol based 
disinfectants or any other disinfectant found to be 
effective against coronavirus* shall be used to wipe the 
surfaces. Hand sanitizing stations should be installed 
in food establishment (especially at the entry) and near 
high contact surfaces. 


NOTE — Care must be taken while using alcohol based hand 
sanitizers (ABHS), contains ethyl alcohol, which readily 
evaporates at room temperature into an ignitable vapor, and is 
considered a flammable liquid. Although the incidence of fires 
related to ABHS is very low, it is vital that ABHS is stored 
safely and that bulk dispensers are installed and maintained 
correctly. Sanitizers locations/placements shall be away from 
heat, sparks, hot areas/rooms, hot surfaces, near ovens etc. 


6.4 Toilets and Washrooms 


Toilets and washrooms shall be cleaned atleast once 
after every shift using water and detergent. This shall 
be followed with disinfection using 1 percent sodium 
hypochlorite solution or 70 percent alcohol wipes 
(for metallic surfaces, such as handles, showers, taps 
etc). The cleaning and disinfection procedure for toilets 
and washrooms is elaborated in Annex A. 


6.5 In case any food handler coughs or sneezes without 
following respiratory hygiene (see 5.2.4) or develops 
any flu like symptoms, an area of two meters around 
the person shall be immediately vacated, thoroughly 
cleaned and disinfected using freshly prepared 1 percent 
sodium hypochlorite solution or any other disinfectant 
found to be effective against novel coronavirus. The 
toilet, counters and equipment that came in contact 
with the infected person shall be thoroughly cleaned 
and disinfected using 1 percent sodium hypochlorite 
solution or 70 percent alcohol (in case of metallic 
surfaces). 


6.6 For sanitizing to ensure destruction of coronavirus, 
it is recommended to use hot water at a temperature 
above 60 °C (for example, dishwashers operating 
above 60 °C), or commercial sanitizers/disinfectants 
(For example, 1 percent sodium hypochlorite, hydrogen 
peroxide, 4.5-5.5 percent chloroxylenol, benzalkonium 
chloride and 70 percent alcohol), as appropriate, 
under conditions of usage as may be specified by the 
manufacturers. 


6.7 All cleaning equipment, cloth, mops, reusable 
protective gear such as boots, gloves etc. shall be 
thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after use and prior 
to use in other areas. 


6.8 If an employee tests positive for COVID-19, 
measures as provided in Annex B shall be taken for 
sanitation of the food premises. 


7 SOCIAL DISTANCING 


7.1 Social distancing aims, through a variety of means, 
to minimise physical contact between individuals and 
thereby to reduce the possibility for new infections. The 
recommended distance between two persons (see 3.6) 
shall be maintained at all points in a food establishment. 


7.2 Food businesses should review the shift 
arrangements and social interaction of their workforce. 
Limiting the number of people in contact on a 


production floor or a kitchen or a shop or by creating 
physical barriers so that people in smaller spaces 
[3-4 employees in three metre (10 ft) areas as an 
example] can have barriers without hindering work, 
wherever possible, will be effective in containing 
the spread of COVID-19 and reduce the impact on 
businesses that incidentally may have an employee s 
positive for COVID-19. Wherever feasible, increased 
time between shifts or scattering of break periods will 
help to minimise employee’s interaction and allow for 
increased cleaning. A time lag between two consecutive 
shifts will allow greater time for cleaning and sanitizing 
(for example, equipment, surfaces, common areas, 
such as lunch rooms, dining areas) to minimise the 
likelihood of spread of COVID-19 between employees. 


7.3 Spacing measures such as floor marking, separation 
of tables, use of barriers, etc. shall be adopted for 
consumers in seating area, waiting in queues and for 
food handlers waiting for pickup and delivery to ensure 
that the recommended distance (see 3.6) is maintained 
between two persons. 


7.4 Face-to-face meetings shall be restricted as much 
as possible. The management shall identify those 
employees who may be able to work from home or at 
a place away from other employees. Avoid employees 
congregating in car parks or other common areas after 
their shift. 


7.5 Food business shall ensure sharing of lockers by 
employees is avoided and a gap of recommended 
distance (see 3.6) is maintained by employees while 
using the lockers. Food handlers shall be denied access 
to common public spaces, such as smoking rooms, 
recreation centres, etc. 


8 UTILTIES AND VENTILATION CONTROL 


Food business shall ensure that the guidelines of 
CPWD are followed which inter alia emphasises that 
the temperature setting of all air conditioning devices 
should be in the range of 24-30 °C, relative humidity 
should be in the range of 40-70 percent, intake of fresh 
air should be as much as possible and cross ventilation 
should be adequate. 


9 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR 
FOOD SECTORS 


SPECIFIC 


9.1 Special Provisions for Food Retail Establishments 


Food retail establishments including supermarkets, 
kirana stores, etc. need to prevent crowding of 
customers and create adequate spacing between 
individuals. Effective measures to support this will 
vary by store and location but could include: 


a) monitoring the number of customers within store 
and limiting access to ensure social distancing; 


IS 17453 : 2020 


b) implementing queue management systems to 
limit crowds gathering at entrances, display area 
and billing counters. Maintain the recommended 
distance between customers (see 3.6); 


c 


wm 


Mandatory wearing of face masks by 
customers/employees and hand sanitizing before 
entering the store; 


d 


Ww 


monitoring of coughing/sneezing inside the store. 
If such a behaviour is observed, the affected 
items/surfaces shall be disinfected/sanitized; 


e) reminding customers to only buy what they need; 


f) pictorial _displays/messages over public 
announcement, video display system etc to 
educate customers to take adequate precautions; 
and 


g) disinfection of common touch points, such as door 
handles, racks, handles of trolley or basket after 
each use. 


9.2 Special Provisions for Food Service/Delivery/ 
Takeaway 


9.2.1 All food items shall be thoroughly washed. Fruits 
and vegetables (to be consumed raw) shall be washed 
in 50 ppm chlorine (or equivalent solution) and clean 
potable water before storage. In case of non-availability 
of chlorine solution, 3 to 4 percent salt solution shall be 
used to wash the vegetables and fruits. 


9.2.2 Food businesses shall encourage taking orders 
online or by telephone and have staggered collection 
times for customers to prevent crowding of customers 
outside their premises. Social distancing shall be 
followed by maintaining the recommended distance 
(see 3.6) between the employees or customers in seating 
area/waiting area/queues/food delivery/food pick up. 
Customers shall be discouraged from entering the 
premises until their order is ready. Similarly, customers 
arriving without having already placed an order should 
be encouraged to leave the premises to place their order 
by telephone or online, and to return at a designated 
time for collection. 


9.2.3 Food businesses shall avoid handling cash 
currency and encourage the use of contactless modes of 
payments if possible. If food workers must handle cash 
currency, it is important to wash hands with soap and 
water/sanitize afterwards (using 70 percent alcohol) 
and always before handling food. 


9.2.4 In case of mass gatherings and buffet system, 
social distancing shall be followed by ensuring the 
recommended gap/distance (see 3.6) between guests 
or consumers and food handlers. If possible, dedicated 
food handler(s) shall serve the food items to consumers 
instead of multiple customers touching using the 
serving spoons. 


IS 17453 : 2020 


9.2.5 It is important to ensure that the food handler 
working in the kitchen, serving food or delivering 
food is not unwell especially with flu like symptoms. 
He/she must maintain high standards of personal 
hygiene and sanitize hands before and after each 
delivery transaction. Social distancing should be 
followed during food preparation, service, food pickup 
and delivery. 


9.2.6 In case local authority permits social gathering, 
buffet, food display, it shall be ensured that all norms 
regarding personal hygiene, social distancing, cleaning 
and sanitation are adopted. Food establishments shall 
discourage self-service of ready-to-eat foods such 
as salad bars or buffets. High touch points, such as 
countertops, tongs, ladles, handles, etc. shall be cleaned 
and sanitized after every meal. 


9.2.7 Both inner and outer sides of the bags used for 
food parcels shall be sanitized. Food delivery person 
shall wash or sanitize hands before food pick up and 
after food delivery, touching of common touch points, 
such as food counters, doorbells, walls, gate, cash/coins 
etc. 


9.2.8 Employees shall be trained to identify symptoms 
of COVID-19 among themselves and consumers. 
All consumers shall be checked for symptoms of 
COVID-19 (high fever, dry cough, sore throat and 
difficulty in breathing), those exhibiting the COVID-19 
symptoms shall be prohibited from entering the 
premise. Customers and employees shall wear face 
masks while in the store/premises. 


9.3 Special Provisions for Food Transport, Delivery 
and Storage Establishments 


9.3.1 Food businesses involved in transportation, 
delivery and storage of raw materials or packaged/ 
prepared foods shall maintain hygienic controls in 
compliance to IS 2491 to ensure protection of food and 
food ingredients from contamination by pests, or by 
chemical, physical or microbiological contaminants or 
other objectionable substances. 


9.3.2 All drivers, loaders, un-loaders and other food 
handlers shall be trained on COVID-19 infections, its 
symptoms and prevention by following good hygiene 
practices including wearing of face covers/masks, social 
distancing, cleaning and sanitation. There should be a 
hand sanitizer fixed in the driver’s cabin where delivery 
personnel will have access to use. Cleaning schedules 
(where required sanitation) shall be implemented and 
inspection records shall be maintained. Drivers shall 
be discouraged from stopping in between for breaks. 
If the vehicle passes through any COVID-19 hotspot 
or containment area, the vehicle shall be thoroughly 
sanitized before unloading and cleaned and disinfected 
prior to handling the next consignment. 


9.3.3 Stores, warehouses, godowns, platforms/storage 
area of vehicles before loading of food items and 
receiving places shall be cleaned at a defined frequency 


and sanitized, where 
materials. 


required before receiving 


9.4 Special Provision for Food Packaging 


While food packaging is not known to present a 
specific risk from COVID-19 basis to date evidences, 
efforts shall be made to ensure it is cleaned and handled 
in line with usual food safety practices as outlined in 
IS 2491. Personnel involved in food packaging shall 
also be trained in maintaining personal hygiene, 
social distancing and follow hygiene practices. It is 
recommended that all incoming material is held under 
quarantine for a period of 72 h to allow for any virus 
contamination to be inactivated. 


9.5 Special Provisions for Food Handled by 
COVID-19 Infected Employee 


9.5.1 Primary Food Handled by Infected Employee 


Raw food, cooked and raw food preparation with small 
shelf life and intended for immediate consumption shall 
be discarded and safely disposed off. While raw food 
items, packaged food items with longer shelf life shall 
be quarantined for at least 72 h. If infected employee is 
involved in pre-preparation process (such as washing, 
cleaning, sieving, etc) of raw ingredients, which will be 
cooked at temperature of 75 °C or above, then the food 
product may be consumed. 


9.5.2 Secondary/Tertiary Food Packaging Handled by 
Infected Employee 


9.5.2.1 If a person who was involved in secondary 
packaging and later tested COVID-19 positive then 
food establishment shall quarantine the packages for at 
least 72 h before dispatch . 


9.5.2.2 In case, an infected person is handling/operating 
external control gears or switches or electric panels and 
not in any way having direct access to food product 
then the assessment must be done by internal quality 
parameters to identify risk, if found low - then the food 
may not be discarded. 


9.5.2.3 In case packaged food items with longer shelf 
life which have been dispatched for sale or already 
reached retail stores, then sale of product shall be 
withheld and the product be kept in quarantine till 
completion of a period of 72 h from packaging. 


10 DOCUMENTED INFORMATION 


10.1 The organization shall develop and maintain 
documented information, such as guidelines, standard 
operating procedures and records, as applicable. 


10.2 Food businesses should carry out regular self- 
assessment to verify the effectiveness of their systems 
and practices in preventing transmission of COVID-19 
in their premises and records of the same should be 
documented. In this regard, checklists for COVID-19 
prevention as applicable to different sectors of food 
businesses are enclosed at Annex C for guidance. 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 6.4 ) 


IS 17453 : 2020 


CLEANING PROCEDURE FOR TOILETS AND WASHROOM 


Area 


Cleaning Agents* and Cleaning 
Procedure 


Disinfectants and Disinfection 
Procedure 


Toilet pot/commode 


Cleaning agents: Detergent Soap powder, 
long handle angular brush and water 


Procedure: 
a) Inside of toilet pot/commode: Scrub 


with the recommended agents and the 
long handle angular brush. 


b) Outside: clean with recommended 
agents; use a scrubber 


c) Wash with water 


Disinfectant: Sodium hypochlorite 1 
percent or any disinfectant recommended 
for toilets/washrooms 


Procedure: Use the disinfectant in the 
commode, soak for 20 min 


Scrub with the long handle angular brush 


Flush and wash with water 


and scrubbing brush/nylon broom 


Procedure: Wet and scrub with soap 
powder/detergent using scrubbing 
brush/nylon broom 


Wash with water 


Lid/commode Cleaning agents: Nylon scrubber and soap | Disinfectant: Sodium hypochlorite 1 

powder/detergent percent or any disinfectant recommended 
for toilets/washrooms 

Procedure: Wet and scrub with soap|Procedure: Wipe with 1 percent 
powder and the nylon scrubber inside and | sodium hypochlorite or any disinfectant 
outside. recommended for toilets 
Wash with water wash with water 

Floor Cleaning agents: Soap powder /detergent | Disinfectant: Sodium hypochlorite 1 


percent or any disinfectant recommended 
for toilets/washrooms 


Procedure: Use the disinfectant on the 
floor, soak for 20 min 


Scrub with the brush/nylon broom 
Wash with water 


Sink/hand wash stations 


Cleaning agents: Soap powder /detergent 
and scrubbing brush/nylon brush 


Procedure: Wet and scrub with soap 
powder/detergent using scrubbing 
brush/nylon brush 


Wash with water 


Disinfectant: Sodium hypochlorite 1 
percent or any disinfectant recommended 
for toilets/washrooms 


Procedure: Use the disinfectant on the 
floor, soak for 20 min 


Scrub with the brush 
Wash with water 


Showers area/taps and 


Cleaning agents: Soap powder /detergent, 


Disinfectant: Sodium hypochlorite 1 


Procedure: Wet and scrub with soap 
powder/detergent using scrubbing brush/ 
nylon brush 


Wash with water 


fittings scrubbing brush/nylon brush and water percent or any disinfectant recommended 
for toilets/washrooms 

Procedure: Wet and scrub with soap| Procedure: Wipe over taps and fittings 

powder/detergent using scrubbing brush/) with a damp cloth and detergent. 

nylon brush a) Care should be taken to clean the 

Wash with water underside of taps and fittings. 

b) Wipe with 1 percent sodium 
hypochlorite/70 percent alcohol. 

Soap and sanitizer | Cleaning agents: Soap powder /detergent | Wipe with 1 percent sodium hypochlorite/ 
dispensers and scrubbing brush 70 percent alcohol. 


*An equivalent cleaning agent/disinfecting agent adopted for same purpose with validation or credible reference may be used. 


7 


IS 17453 : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 6.8 ) 


STEPS TO BE TAKEN FOR SANITATION OF FOOD PREMISES 
IN CASE AN EMPLOYEE TESTS COVID-19 POSITIVE 


a) Sanitize and disinfect the affected area/floor 


b 


c 


tt wa 


immediately where the patient was present and 
expressed symptoms. If positive, the affected 
areas/floor shall be shut down temporarily and 
reopened next day or later after a thorough 
disinfection and decontamination of the site is 
done as per the latest government protocol. 


Keep the patient’s locker/office closed. Clean and 
sanitize the outside of the patient’s locker. 


All waste that has been in contact with the patient, 
including used tissues, and masks if used, should 
be put in a plastic garbage bag and tied. The 
plastic bag should then be placed in a second bin 


d 


e 


wm 


wm 


bag and tied. It shall be put in a safe place and 
marked for storage until the result is available. If 
the individual tests negative, this can be put in the 
normal waste. Should the individual test positive, 
follow the instructions of public health authorities. 


Disinfect and decontaminate all areas before 
opening the plant, including the factory floor, 
machinery, furniture, canteens, toilets, etc. (Refer: 
COVID-19: Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare Guidelines on disinfection of common 
public places including office). 


Continue to maintain safety and health protocols 
for all employees resuming work. 


IS 17453 : 2020 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 10.2 ) 


CHECKLISTS FOR COVID-19 PREVENTION AT FOOD ESTABLISHMENT 


A) Large Retail Self Service Stores 


SI No. Observations 

l. Nominate an epidemic/pandemic co-ordinator/Suraksha Adhikari in the organisation to monitor tahe 
execution. 

2. All employees and customers are screened for symptoms (temperature using non-contact type 
thermometer and declaration of symptoms). Anyone with temperature more than 37.5°C (99.5°F) 
are not allowed to enter the stores or office. Mandatory hand sanitizing for everyone with 70 percent 
alcohol-based sanitizer. 

3. Stickers/chalk marking with the recommended distance (see 3.6) between waiting consumers outside 
the store. No. of customers entering store is restricted to maintain the social distancing inside the 
store. 

4. Social distancing as per norms (see 3.6) is maintained between the customers and employees in 
the store including change rooms/locker rooms and at the billing counter by limiting the number of 
customers in store. 

5. Employees including cashiers in the store wear masks/face covering and caps. Similarly, all customers 
are recommended to wear mask. 

6. Frequent sanitizing (at least two hourly) of hands of employees and cashiers using 70 percent alcohol- 
based hand sanitizers. 

Te Sanitization of the Stores is done for the entire floor area before starting store operations. 

8. Sanitization of commonly touched surfaces and objects such as door knobs, faucet handles, railings, 
storage racks, aisles tables, counter tops, credit card machine, key pads, shopping cart handles 
preferably once every 2 h. 

9. Employees are trained on maintaining high standard of personal hygiene (including hygienic use of 
masks and gloves) and provided necessary knowledge on COVID-19 prevention. 

10. Regular hygienic inspections are carried out by co-ordinator/Suraksha Adhikari to ensure adequate 
measures are in place to prevent COVID-19. 

11. Delivery, loading and unloading of personnel are made aware of importance of maintaining health 
and hygiene. The vehicles carrying goods are cleaned and sanitized before loading. 

12. Foot-operated waste bins with cover are kept outside the store for hygienic disposal of tissue/mask/ 
gloves and waste bins are emptied and cleaned at least once a day. 

13. Contactless payments (digital payments) from customers and for delivery of goods are encouraged 
as far as possible. 

14. Prominent display of Health Ministry guidelines on prevention of COVID-19 along with posters on 
social distancing /hand wash across the premises. 

15. In case COVID-19 infected or suspected individual enters the premise, he/she is isolated and local 
health authority is informed. Surfaces, toilets and items that came in contact with COVID-19 infected/ 
suspected person are cleaned and disinfected immediately. 

16. Biometric attendance (ifused) of employees is discontinued to prevent any kind of touch contamination 

ye Social distancing is ensured in office transport (if provided) and these vehicles are cleaned and 


sanitized after every trip. 


IS 17453 : 2020 


B) Kirana Store (Any Small Store Selling Food) 


SI No. Observations 

1. Stickers/chalk marking with recommended distance (see 3.6) between waiting consumers outside 
the store. Also, follow social distancing as per norms (see 3.6) inside the store if there are more than 
1 person inside the store. 

2. Social distancing as per norms (see 3.6) between the customers and employees is maintained by 
limiting the number of customers in store depending on the space available in the store. 

3. Monitoring of COVID-19 symptoms like fever, cough, sneezing etc. for employees. Employees 
showing symptoms are immediately isolated and sent for medical help with intimation to the health 
authorities and assistance in contact tracing 

4. All the employees in the store wear masks/face covering and caps. Customers are also advised to 
wear masks/face covering if not done. 

5: Frequent sanitizing (at least two hourly) of hands ofemployees and cashiers using 70 percent alcohol- 
based hand sanitizers. 

6. Mandatory hand sanitizing of customers with 70 percent alcohol-based sanitizer and enquiring about 
their health status before entering the store. 

7. Sanitization of commonly touched surfaces and objects, such as door knobs, counter tops, credit card 
machine preferably once every 2 h. 

8. Prominent display of Health Ministry guidelines on prevention of COVID-19 and a poster displaying 
this is a Suraksha Store to customers. 

9. Foot-operated waste bins with cover are kept outside the store for hygienic disposal of tissue/face 
covers/masks and waste bins are emptied and cleaned atleast once a day. 

10. Contactless payments (digital payments) to be encouraged as far as possible. 

11. The person who receives the supplies sanitizes his hands pre- and post- receiving. 

12. In case of home delivery, face cover is worn and minimum distance of 1 meter is maintained from 


others/contactless delivery is done. Hands are sanitized after delivery. 


C) Food Service/Takeaway/Delivery 


SI No. Observations 

l. Nominate an epidemic/pandemic coordinator/Suraksha Adhikari in the organisation. 

2. Employees and customers are regularly screened for COVID-19 symptoms (high fever- using 
non- contact type thermometer, dry cough, and difficulty in breathing). Mandatory hand wash and 
sanitizing of customers with 70 percent alcohol-based sanitizer. 

3: Fingerprint/biometric attendance of employees is discontinued to prevent any kind of touch 
contamination 

4. A minimum distance as per norms (see 3.6) is maintained between food handlers and customers 
while handling food/dining/billing counter/waiting in queue with use of stickers/floor marking or 
increasing gap between tables/stations. Visitor entry log is maintained. 

Se High standards of personal hygiene are maintained. Wear clean uniform (washed daily and provided 
separately), face covers/mask, caps, avoid sharing lockers and maintain minimum distance as per 
norms (see 3.6) from others in changing room. 

6. Hands are washed frequently with soap and water for atleast 40 s, sanitized using 70 percent alcohol 


afterwards. Hands are washed: 
a) Before 


Starting work, handling cooked or ready-to-eat food. 


10 


IS 17453 : 2020 


SI No. 


Observations 


b) After — Coughing, sneezing or blowing nose, touching face or hair, handling or preparing raw 
food, handling money or paper (such as bill, indent, forms, etc), handling waste, cleaning duties, 
using the toilet, using the toilet, eating, drinking or smoking, touching surfaces, such as door 
knobs, walls, windows, doors, keyboards, intercoms etc. and removal of Personal Protective 
Equipments (PPE) such as gloves, face covers, etc. 


Gloves are worn when necessary and employees do not touch self/surface (such as face, currency, 
walls, doors, etc.) while wearing gloves. 


Nose/mouth covered with tissue while sneezing/coughing. Dispose tissues in closed bins. Wash 
hands with soap and water for minimum 20 s. 


Well fitted face covering are worn to cover nose and face with clean hands. Face covers are changed 
after every shift or once it gets wet. Hands are washed after removing face cover/mask. 


Pre-ordering via online modes or on telephone is encouraged to reduce waiting time at the premise. 


Consumers are encouraged to use contact less payment modes (UPI, online wallets/e-payments 
mode). Card machines are sanitized with 70% alcohol after each use. 


Hands are sanitized before food pickup, after delivery and touching high touch points (door bell, 
handles, gate, etc). Maintain minimum distance as per norms (see 3.6) between consumer and self. 
Sanitize delivery bag thoroughly. 


13. 


Food premise, work stations, toilets, equipment, containers, etc. thoroughly cleaned with water & 
soap followed by disinfection. Disinfection of: 
a) food premise, toilets is done with bleaching agents such as sodium hypochlorite sol. or chlorine 
solution or a suitable equivalent disinfectant; and 
b) work surface and metal surfaces are done with 70 percent alcohol after thorough cleaning 


and — equipment, containers and utensils with 50 ppm chlorine sol. or 70 prcent alcohol or 
suitable equivalent. 


14. 


High touch points (such elevator buttons, handrails/handles and call buttons, escalator handrails, 
public counters, intercom systems, equipment like telephone, printers/scanners, and other office 
machines, table tops, chair handles, pens, diary files, keyboards, mouse, mouse pad, tea/coffee 
dispensing machines, etc) are cleaned and disinfected frequently. 


15. 


Waste bins are always kept in covered conditions. Separate collection waste bin is kept for used 
masks, gloves and other PPE measures. Disposal of mask is done carefully as per local guidelines. 


16. 


Employee with COVID-19 symptoms at the premise is isolated and local health authority is informed. 
Surfaces, toilet, equipment and items that came in contact with COVID-19 infected/suspected person 
are cleaned and disinfected immediately. Food handled by a COVID-19 infected/suspected individual 
is discarded and disposed off. 


D) Transport/Distribution 


SI No. Observations 

l. Any personnel entering in the premises/driving are screened for COVID-19 symptoms (high fever- 
using non-contact type thermometer, dry cough, and diffculty in breathing). Only those persons who 
are not showing above signs are allowed. 

2. Travel history of driver is recorded to check if the vehicle has travelled from government declared 
COVID hotspot areas. Vehicle is thoroughly cleaned and disinfected if it has passed through 
government declared hotspot area. 

3: Social distancing [minimum distance as per norms (see 3.6)] is maintained at all times (during 


loading/unloading, paper checks, distribution etc). 


IS 17453 : 2020 


SI No. 


Observations 


4. 


Hands are washed at least every 2 h (if possible) with soap and water for atleast 20 and sanitized 
using 70 percent alcohol afterwards. Hands are washed: 


a) Before — Starting work; and 


b) After — Material loading/unloading, coughing, sneezing or blowing nose, touching face or 
hair, handling or preparing raw food, handling money or paper (such as bill, indent, forms, etc), 
handling waste, cleaning duties, using the toilet, using the toilet, eating, drinking or smoking, 
touching surfaces such as door knobs, walls, windows, doors, etc. and removal of Personal 
Protective Equipment (PPE) such as gloves, face covers, etc. 


Gloves are worn when necessary and employees do not touch self/surface (such as face, currency, 
walls, doors, etc.) while wearing gloves. Gloves are not used as replacement of hand washing. 


Face covers/masks are worn at all times. Face covers are changed after every shift or when wet/moist. 


Vehicle platform/storage area before loading of food items and cabin surfaces and parts of the 
vehicles such as steering wheel, seating place, doors, handles, dashboard is cleaned and sanitized 
(with 0.1 percent chlorine spray or 70 percent alcohol or equivalent) before starting the journey and 
then once in 6 hours. Cleaning schedule is maintained for inspection. 


Empty Crates, pallets if collected from the market are sprayed with 0.1 percent chlorine solution or 
equivalent if the vehicle is not carrying other food items. 


Drivers refrain from stopping for breaks that is, tea/coffee at crowded places and using public toilets. 
If unavoidable, thorough washing and sanitizing of hands is done. 


10. 


If driver/support staff is suspected with COVID-19 symptoms then they are isolated and local 
health authority is informed. Vehicle, surface, etc. that came in contact with the infected person is 
thoroughly cleaned and disinfected. 


11. 


Drivers refrain from stopping for breaks that is, tea/coffee at crowded places and using public toilets. 
If unavoidable, thorough washing and sanitizing of hands is done. 


D) Warehouse 


SI No. Observations 

1. Nominate an epidemic/pandemic coordinator/Suraksha Adhikari in the team. 

2. Employee or entering in the premises/driving are screened for COVID-19 symptoms (high fever- 
using non-contact type thermometer, dry cough, and difficulty in breathing). Only those persons who 
are not showing above signs are allowed. 

3. Travel history of driver is recorded to check if the vehicle has travelled from government declared 
COVID hotspot areas. Vehicle is thoroughly cleaned and disinfected if it has passed through 
government declared hotspot area. 

4. Social distancing [minimum distance as per norms (see 3.6)] is maintained at all times (during 
loading/unloading, paper checks, stacking, etc.). 

5. High standards of personal hygiene are maintained. Clean clothes/uniform (washed daily and 
provided separately) are worn, locker sharing is avoided and recommended distance/gap (see 3.6) is 
maintained from others in changing room. 

6. Hands are washed at least every 2 h (if possible) with soap and water for atleast 20 s and sanitized 


using 70 percent alcohol afterwards. Hands are washed: 


a) Before — Starting work; and 


12 


IS 17453 : 2020 


SI No. 


Observations 


b) After — Material loading/unloading, coughing, sneezing or blowing nose, touching face or 
hair, handling or preparing raw food, handling money or paper (such as bill, indent, forms, etc), 
handling waste, cleaning duties, using the toilet, using the toilet, eating, drinking or smoking, 
touching surfaces such as door knobs, walls, windows, doors, etc. and removal of Personal 
Protective Equipment (PPE), such as gloves, face covers, etc. 


Gloves are worn when necessary and employees do not touch self/surface (such as face, currency, 
walls, doors, etc.) while wearing gloves. Gloves are not used as replacement of hand washing. 


8. Face covers/masks are worn at all times. Face covers are changed after every shift or when wet. 

9. Cleaning and sanitation program for premises, toilets, floors, windows, roofs, loading bays, ante- 
rooms, personnel eating areas, corridors, railings, door knobs, handles, vehicle etc is made. The 
sanitation frequency is at least once in a shift. 

10. Cleaning and sanitation program is made for racks, pallets, forklifts, drinking water facility, steering 
wheel, vehicle seats, etc and common touch points. The sanitation frequency is at least once in 4 h. 

11. The market returned material is unloaded and handled separately. This material is not mixed with 
other material. 

12. Minimum handling of documents is promoted. Hand are cleaned and sanitized after handling 
documents. 

13; Waste bins are always kept in covered conditions. Separate collection waste bin is kept for used 
masks, gloves and other PPE measures. Disposal of mask is done carefully as per guidelines issued 
by local health authorities. 

14. Employee with COVID-19 symptoms at the premise is isolated and local health authority is informed. 


Surfaces, toilet, equipment and items that came in contact with COVID-19 infected/suspected person 
shall be cleaned and disinfected immediately. 


(F) Manufacturing 


SI No. Observations 
General 

1. Nominate an epidemic/pandemic coordinator/Suraksha Adhikari in the team and make an emergency 
response team. 

2: Isolation room is designated in the facility as part of emergency preparedness or suspects are 
transferred to the nearby hospitals or health centres. 

3. If any employee falls ill with COVID symptoms during operations, employee is isolated, reported to 
local health authority. Progress of such employees is tracked. 

4. Social distancing as per norms (see 3.6) is maintained in manufacturing, workstations, offices, 
change rooms/lockers and entry/exit gates. 

Be Social distancing is ensured in office provided transport and these vehicles are cleaned and sanitized 


after every trip. 


Employees are trained on hygienic use of masks and gloves 


Designated closed dustbins are provided in all areas, to dispose used masks/face covers, gloves etc. 


Employee uniforms are washed daily with detergent and water. 


13 


IS 17453 : 2020 


SI No. Observations 


Gate Control 


9, Thermal scanning /body temperature check is carried out at entry point, and those with Temp 
> 99.5 °F/37.5 °C are not allowed into the facility for 7 days. Mandatory self-declaration of any flu 
symptoms and travel history is done for all employees, staff, contractual and drivers. 


10. Posters on awareness and instructions on precautions to be taken for COVID 19, are prominently 
displayed 
11. All entrants wear face-covers and sanitize their hands while entering. Facility to sanitize the 


employees (For example, air blowers, air showers etc) before entering the food premises exists. 


12. No visitors are allowed into the premises without written permission from management, subject to 
no history of travel to COVID 19 hotspots. 


13. Biometric attendance of employees/turnstile gates is discontinued. Attendance is marked by security 
representative to ensure that employees do not handle the register and pen. 


Admin Block and Canteen 


14. Office spaces, employees’ cafeteria, food preparation/production area, service area, etc. are cleaned 
daily with soap and water, and disinfection using freshly prepared 0.1 percent sodium hypochlorite 
solution or any other approved disinfectant such as 70 percent Alcohol (w/w) for office spaces, 
service area etc) and 0.5 percent sodium hypochlorite solution (for employees’ cafeteria,). 


15. Meeting rooms are used only if the recommended distance (see 3.6) can be maintained between 
participants. 
16. Self-service of foods is not allowed. Meal timings are staggered and managed to allow employee 


seating at cafeteria tables at the recommended distance (see 3.6). 


External Facilities 


17. High use areas (like change rooms, meeting rooms etc) are cleaned daily and sanitized with 0.5 
percent sodium hypochlorite. 


RM and PM Incoming and Storage 


18. Storage areas are cleaned regularly and sanitized as necessary. 


19. Incoming raw material are kept quarantined for a period of 24 h prior to use, excluding perishable 
commodities and products with short shelf life of 15 days or less. Packaging material are kept 
quarantined for 72 h. 


20. Employees who are involved in unloading wear face-covers/masks and thoroughly wash and sanitize 
hands after unloading material/goods to stores. 


Manufacturing and Packaging 


21. 70 percent alcohol-based sanitizers or other disinfectants found to be effective against coronavirus 
are provided at multiple points for easy access. 

22. Entry hygiene station hand washing, sanitation and PPE use are strictly enforced. Used mask is 
discarded in dedicated closed type dustbin and disposed off safely. 

23. Frequency of hand washing is increased to allow for mandatory hand wash with soap and water 
preferably every 2 h. 


14 


IS 17453 : 2020 


SI No. 
24. 


Observations 


Doors handles, packaging tables, lift buttons and working tables and other high touch points are 
sanitized with appropriate sanitizing /cleaning agents twice a day. 


25. 


Manufacturing area is cleaned and sanitized with approved sanitizers at start and end of each day or 
each shift. 


26. 


Supervisors monitor medical (cold, cough, fever etc.) issues and inform the co-ordinator/Suraksha 
Adhikari. Such employees are immediately isolated. 


21. 


28. 


Zone-wise manufacturing and manning demarcation schedules are prepared to minimize human 
interactions. 


Where feasible social distancing is practiced with the recommended distance (see 3.6) in shop floor, 
and packaging halls. 


Vehicle Dispatch Control 


29. 


Employees and truck drivers are encouraged to ensure minimum handling of documents. 


30. 


Delivery or transit through Govt declared hotspots is allowed only with formal approval, and 
additional hygiene measures in place. 


Handling COVID 19 positive cases reported 


31. 


For situations where employee is currently in the factory or has visited/worked in the factory in the 
last 7 days: 
a) All areas exposed to the affected person directly or indirectly (such as where ventilation systems 
are common) should be stopped /closed temporarily and entire affected area to be sanitized. 
b) All close contact employees to be self-quarantined as per the guidelines of the national or local 
government health authority. 


c) All product/raw material handled by the affected person is quarantined for as provided in 
the 9.5.1. 


32. 


For situations where employee has visited/worked in the factory between 7-14 days: 
a) Screening of employees and health monitoring of employees is improved. 
b) Inform employees about the incident and request all to be aware and report for any issue. 


c) Consultation with the local Govt. health authority for further actions. All employees in contact 
to be quarantined if employee tests positive. 


33. 


For situations where employee has not visited/worked in the factory for the last 14 days, no action 
is needed. 


15 


IS 17453 : 2020 


ANNEX D 
( Foreword ) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. COVID-19: Guidelines on disinfection of common public places including offices — 
https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/Guidelinesondisinfectionofcommonpublicplacesincludingoffices.pdf 
2. Guidelines for quarantine facilities COVID-19, MoHFW, GOI) — 
https://www.mohfw. gov.in/pdf/905426533 115845461 20quartineguidelines.pdf 


3. Food hygiene and safety guidelines for food businesses during Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) 
pandemic, FSSAI — 


https://fssai.gov.in/upload/uploadfiles/files/Guidance_Note_Food_ Hygiene Safety_07_06 2020 
Revised_10_ 06 _2020.pdf 


4. Getting your workplace ready for COVID-19, WHO — 
https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/getting-workplace-ready-for-covid-19.pdf 

5. Food Businesses and COVID-19 (Coronavirus), NSW Food Authority — 
https://www.foodauthority.nsw. gov.au/help/covid- 19-advice-for-businesses 

6. Guidance for food businesses on coronavirus (COVID-19), UK — 


https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/covid- 1 9-guidance-for-food-businesses/guidance-for- 
food-businesses-on-coronavirus-covid-19. 


16 


IS 17453 : 2020 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 


LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS ON PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT, DISINFECTANTS, 
THERMAL SCANNERS AND OTHER RELATED PRODUCTS RELEVANT FOR FOOD 
BUSINESSES DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC 


SI No. 


Product 


IS No. and Title 


Face shield (eye, nose and 
mouth protection) 


IS 8521 (Part 1) : 1977 
Specification for industrial safety face shields: Part 1 with plastics 
visor 


N95 Masks 


IS 9473 :2002 
Respiratory protective devices — Filtering half masks to protect 
against particles 


Reusable vinyl/rubber 
gloves 


Eye protection (visor/ 
goggles) 


IS 4148 : 1989 
Surgical rubber gloves 


IS 5983 : 1980 
Specification for eye — Protectors 


Disposable thermometers 


(No BIS Standard Available) ASTM E825-98 (2016) Standard 
Specification for Phase Change — Type Disposable Fever 
Thermometer for Intermittent Determination of Human Temperature 


Medical masks (surgical/ 
procedure) 


IS 16289 : 2014 
Medical textiles — Surgical face masks 


Detergent/disinfectant 


IS 1061 : 2017 
Disinfectant fluids — Phenolic type 


IS 14364 : 1996 
Quarternary ammonium compound based surface cleaner liquid — 
Specification 


IS 10758:1983 
Specification for de-odourizing - cum - disinfectant fluids 


Stretcher 


IS 4035 : 1967 
Trolleys, stretcher 


IS 4037 : 1967 Stretchers and stretcher carriers 


Infrared thermometer 


IS/ISO 80601 (Part 2/Sec 56) : 2017 

Medical electrical equipment: Part 2 Particular requirements 
for basic safety and essential performance, Section 56 Clinical 
thermometers for body temperature measurement 


Thermal scanners 


IS/TEC 80601-2-59 : 2017 Medical electrical equipment — 

Part 2-59: Particular requirements for the basic safety and essential 
performance of screening thermographs for human febrile 
temperature screening 


First aid 


IS 13115: 1991 
Portable first-aid kit for general use — Specification 


17 


IS 17453 : 2020 


ANNEX F 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Food Hygiene, Safety Management and other Systems Sectional Committee, FAD 15 


Organization 


ICMR-National Institute of Nutrition (NIN), 
Hyderabad 


3 M India Ltd., Bengaluru 


All India Food Processors’ Association (AIFPA), 
New Delhi 


Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export 
Development Authority (APEDA), New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Food Technological Research Institute, 
Mysore 


ICAR-Central Institute of Fisheries Technology 
(CIFT), Kochi 


Confederation of Indian Food Trade & Industry 
(CIFTI-FICCI), New Delhi 


CONCERT, Chennai 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CID, New Delhi 


Consumer Action and Network Society (CANS), 
Jaipur 


Consumer Unity and Trust Society (CUTS), Jaipur 
Defence Food Research Laboratory (DFRL), Mysore 


Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying 
(DAHD), New Delhi 


Directorate General of Supplies & Transport (DGST), 
Army HQ 


Export Inspection Council (EIC) of India, New Delhi 


Food Safety & Standards Authority of India (FSSAD, 
New Delhi 


ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI), 
Izzatnagar 


ITC Ltd, Bengaluru 


Marico Limited, Mumbai 


Marine Producers’ Export Development Authority 
(MPEDA), Cochin 


18 


Representative(s) 


Dr. P. UDAYKUMAR (Chairman) 


Mr KULVEEN SINGH BALI 
Ms KavitHA KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Dr K. L. GABA 
Dr Vusay Gaur (Alternate I) 
Mr SATANSH Kumar (Alternate ID) 


Mr DEVENDRA PRASAD 


Dr ALOK SRIVASTAVA 
Dr (Mrs) Asna Martin (Alternate) 


Dr. SATYEN KUMAR PANDA 
Dr B. Mapuusupana Rao (Alternate) 


MR KRISHNA KuMAR JOSHI 
Ms Priyanka Gupta (Alternate) 


MR S. MuTHAIYAN 
Mr M. R. KrisHNAN (Alternate) 


MR Sam THOMAS 
Dr KuursHip ALAM Kuan (Alternate) 


Dr ANANTH SHARMA 


Mr DEEPAK SAXENA 
Ms GeorcE CHERIYAN (Alternate) 


Mr T. ANAND 
Smt Tanu SHREE Maity(Alternate) 


JOINT SECRETARY 

SHRI GOUTAM Kumar Des (Alternate) 
CoL SURESH V. KALLAI 

Lrt Cot B. B. Sanu (Alternate) 


Mr Was! ASGHAR 
SHRI ANGSHUMAN SAHA (Alternate) 


Ms ANJU Kavi 


Dr PALLAB CHAUDHURI 
Dr. D. K. SINGH (Alternate) 


Mr. KRISHNA KUMAR JOSHI 
SHRI ANIL DINKAR RAO DHARMADHIKARI (Alternate) 


Dr PrABODH HALDE 
SHRI SHAILESH GHODEKAR (Alternate I) 
Ms Niput AGARWAL (Alternate II) 


Dr SREENATH P. G. 
Suri Vinop V. (Alternate) 


Organization 


National Accreditation Board for Certification Bodies, 
New Delhi 


National Dairy Development Board (NDDB), Anand 


National Dairy Research Institute (NDRI), Karnal 


National Institute of Food Technology, 
Entrepreneurship & Management, Kundli 


National Institute of Cholera & Enteric Disease, 
Kolkata 


ICMR-National Institute of Nutrition (NIN), 
Hyderabad 


Nutrition Division, DGHS, New Delhi 
Quality Care Services Private Limited, New Delhi 
The Federation of Hotel & Restaurant Association of 


India, New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 17453 : 2020 


Representative(s) 


Mr ANAND DEEP GUPTA 


Dr R. S. LAHANE 
Dr JITENDER SINGH (Alternate I) 
Mr NAVEEN Kumara A. C. (Alternate II) 


Dr RAVINDER KUMAR MALIK 
Dr NaresH Kumar Goyat (Alternate) 


Dr VIJENDRA MISHRA 


Dr SHANTA DUTTA 
Dr PRANAB CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


HEAD (Foop & DruG ToxIcoLocy) 
Dr R. NAVEEN Kumar (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DDG 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Mr SOHRAB 


MR Radu LALL 
Dr HimansHu TALwar (Alternate) 
Dr VENKAT Pasupatuy (Alternate) 


MRP. RasesH, HEAD (FAD) 
[ Representing Director General ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Ms SuneETI TOTEJA 
ScIENTIST ‘E’ (FAD), BIS 


Panel for the Formulation of the Standard, FAD 15/P1 


Organization 


Association of Food Scientists and Technologists of India, 


Mumbai 


Association of Food Scientists and Technologists of India, 


Mumbai 


Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, 
New Delhi 


Marico Limited, Mumbai 
Proctor & Gamble India Ltd., Mumbai 


The Federation of Hotel & Restaurant Association of India, 


New Delhi 
Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi 
Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi 
Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Ms Susua NISHTALA 
Ms CHINMAYEE DEULGAONKAR 
Dr HEENA YADAV 


Dr PRABODH HALDE 
Mr GOPALAKRISHNAN K. 


DR VENKAT PASUPATHY 


Mr U. S. P. Yapay, HEAD (MSCD) 
Mr P. Rases, HEAD (FAD) 
Ms Suneet! ToTesA, Scientist ‘E’ (FAD) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 15 (15559). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


