Waa Wah IS 516 (Part 4) : 2018 
Indian Standard 


gipa hhe — utter gf 
T 4 chale aR AA A, R SET R 
Ta ACA 


( Yer FRAT ) 


Hardened Concrete — Methods 
of Test 


Part 4 Sampling, Preparing and Testing of Concrete Cores 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.100.30 


© BIS 2018 


aR AA ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM TH, 9 aega VEL AM, ae feeet-110002 
Vesey” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2018 Price Group 7 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 02 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 4) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


Testing plays an important role in controlling the quality of cement concrete work. Systematic testing of raw 
materials, fresh concrete and hardened concrete, is an inseparable part of any quality control programme for 
concrete. This helps to achieve a higher efficiency of the materials used and greater assurance of the performance 
of the concrete, in regard to workability, strength and durability. The test methods used should be simple, direct 
and convenient to apply. This standard was formulated with this objective in view. 


This standard was first published in 1959. In this revision, it was decided to review and update the various existing 
test methods of concrete taking into consideration the latest international practices and developments in this field 
in the country, and also to introduce certain new test methods, wherever required. In the process, the various 
existing test methods covered in IS 516 : 1959 ‘Methods of tests for strength of concrete’ have been revised. The 
revision of the standard is being brought out taking into consideration primarily the corresponding ISO Standards 
while also examining the other best practices world over and in the country. In addition, test methods for 
determination of additional properties have been included in areas such as permeability, initial surface absorption, 
corrosion of reinforcement, carbonation of concrete (field test) and creep of concrete. Also, for better understanding 
and implementation, some of the other test methods which were spread over in number of other Indian Standards 
have been brought together under the fold of IS 516 as its various parts, such as the splitting tensile strength, 
ultrasonic pulse velocity test, rebound hammer test, bond in reinforced concrete, and determination of water 
soluble and acid soluble chlorides. This is with a view to making the standard complete in all respects, and 
rendering it a comprehensive source of provisions for testing of concrete and reference in other Indian Standards. 


In this revision, IS 516 has been split into twelve parts. The other parts in this series are: 
Part 1 Determination of strength of hardened concrete 
Part 2 Determination of properties of hardened concrete other than strength 
Part 3 Making, curing and determining compressive strength of accelerated cured concrete test specimens 
Part 5 Non-destructive testing of hardened concrete 
Part 6 Determination of drying shrinkage and moisture movement of concrete samples 
Part 7 Determination of creep of concrete cylinders in compression 
Part 8 Determination of modulus of elasticity in compression 
Part 9 Determination of wear resistance 
Part 10 Determination of bond in reinforced concrete 
Part 11 Determination of Portland cement content of hardened hydraulic-cement concrete 
Part 12 Determination of water soluble and acid soluble chlorides in hardened mortar and concrete 


This standard (Part 4) covers the method for taking cores from hardened concrete, their examination, preparation 
for testing and determination of compressive strength. 


These test methods shall be applicable as and when published, in place of the corresponding provisions given in 
IS 516 : 1959 and in IS 1199 : 1959 ‘Methods of sampling and analysis of concrete’. IS 516 : 1959 shall be 
superseded after the publication of all parts of the standard. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 516 (Part 4) : 2018 


Indian Standard 


HARDENED CONCRETE — METHODS OF TEST 
PART 4 SAMPLING, PREPARING AND TESTING OF CONCRETE CORES 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 4) specifies a method for taking 
cores from hardened concrete, their examination, 
preparation for testing and determination of 
compressive strength. 

NOTE — Extracting other types of specimens from structures 


and pavements, like beam specimens and slab removal are given 
in Annex A. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

460 (Part 1): 1985 Test sieves: Part 1 Wire cloth test 
sieves 

456 : 2000 Code of practice for plain and 
reinforced concrete (fourth 
revision) 

516 Hardened concrete — Methods of 
test: 


(Part 2/Sec 1): 
2018 


Properties of hardened concrete 
other than strength, Section 1 
Density of hardened concrete and 
depth of water penetration under 
pressure (first revision) 
Non-destructive testing of 
hardened concrete, Section 1 
Ultrasonic pulse velocity testing 
(first revision) 

4031 (Part 8) : 1988 Methods of physical tests for 
hydraulic cement: Part 8 
Determination of transverse and 
compressive strength of plastic 
mortar using prism 
Requirements for compression 
testing machine used for testing of 
concrete and mortar 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


(Part 5/Sec 1): 
2018 


14858 : 2000 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Concrete Core — Cylindrical specimen of 
hardened concrete obtained by drilling from hardened 
concrete. 


3.2 Corrected Compressive Strength of Core — 
Strength of core obtained by applying the correction 
factor for diameter to the measured compressive 
strength as per 8.4.1. 


3.3 Corrected Cylinder Strength of Core — 
Equivalent strength of cylinder having //d ratio of 2 as 
per 8.4.2. 


3.4 Equivalent Cube Strength — Cube strength of 
concrete obtained as per 8.4.2. 


3.5 Measured Compressive Strength of Core — 
Compressive strength obtained by dividing the 
maximum load applied by the cross-sectional area as 
per 8.4. 


4 APPARATUS 


4.1 Core Drill, shall be capable of extracting cores 
from the hardened concrete to the dimensions specified 
in 5.5 to 5.7 with the tolerances specified in 7.5. 


4.2 Compression Testing Machine (CTM), shall be 
conforming to IS 14858, of sufficient capacity for the 
tests and capable of applying the load at the rate 
specified in 8.2. The accuracy of the testing machine 
shall be as per IS 14858. The testing machine shall be 
equipped with two steel bearing platens with hardened 
faces. One of the platens (preferably the one that 
normally will bear on the upper surface of the core 
specimen) shall be fitted with a ball seating in the form 
of a portion of a sphere, the centre of which coincides 
with the central point of the face of the platen. The 
other compression platen shall be plain rigid bearing 
block. The bearing faces of both platens shall be at least 
as large as, and preferably larger, than the nominal size 
of the core specimen to which the load is applied. The 
bearing surface of the platens, when new, shall not 
depart from a plane by more than 0.01 mm at any point, 
and they shall be maintained with a permissible variation 
limit of 0.02 mm. The movable portion of the spherically 
seated compression platen shall be held on the spherical 
seat, but the design shall be such that the bearing face 
can be rotated freely and tilted through small angles in 
any direction. 


IS 516 (Part 4) : 2018 


4.3 Balance or Scale, shall be capable of determining 
the mass of the core, as tested, to an accuracy 
of 0.1 percent of the mass. 


4.4 Callipers and/or Ruler, shall be capable of 
measuring the dimensions of the core and the steel 
reinforcement to a tolerance of + 0.01mm. 


4.5 Gauge, shall be capable of establishing that the 
relevant flatness of the specimen is within the 
requirements as specified in 7.5. 


5 EXTRACTION OF CORES 


5.1 Age of Concrete 


Core to be tested for strength shall not be removed 
from the structure until the concrete has become hard 
enough to permit its removal without disturbing the 
bond between the mortar and the coarse aggregate. As 
a general guideline, for grades of concrete up to M25, 
the concrete shall be at least 14 days old before the 
cores are taken. For higher grades, cores may be taken 
at an earlier age. 


5.2 Location 


The location from where the core is extracted shall be 
specified by the Engineer-in-Charge on the basis of the 
purpose of the core extraction and the possible 
structural implications resulting from taking the core 
from the location. 


Cores shall preferably be taken at points not near or at 
the edges of the concrete joints and reinforcement shall 
be avoided as far as possible. 


Cores shall be taken preferably from the middle part of 
the member leaving top and bottom parts where 
variation can be more. While taking cores vertically from 
top, like from slab or from foundation top, the 
test length of core shall not contain concrete from top 
15 percent to 20 percent depth as top part of the core 
may not contain uniform distribution of aggregates 
(maximum up to 60 mm). In case of cores which are 
not across full depth of member, about 10 percent 
to 15 percent portion of the bottom side of core may be 
trimmed off as the portion near to the broken end may 
contain some micro cracks/fractures. 


Locations where there can be micro-cracks due to 
tension shall be avoided and cores shall preferably be 
taken from compression zone. 


5.3 Drilling 


Unless otherwise specified, the cores shall be drilled 
perpendicular to the surface in such a manner as not to 
damage the cores. The drilling of the core shall be 
carried out by an experienced operator using a diamond- 
impregnated bit attached to the core barrel. The drilling 


apparatus shall be rigidly anchored to the member to 
avoid bit wobble, which may result in a specimen with 
a variable cross-section. The drill bit shall be lubricated 
with water and shall be resurfaced periodically. Cores 
that show abnormal defects or that have been damaged 
in removal shall not be used. 


The cores may be extracted preferably from a location 
where there is no interference of reinforcement 
NOTE — In case of cores to be taken from the removed slab, a 
sufficiently large portion of the slab shall be removed so that the 
desired test specimens may be secured without the inclusion of 


any concrete which has been cracked, spalled, undercut, or 
otherwise damaged. 


5.4 Number of Cores 


The points from which cores are to be taken and the 
number of cores required shall be at the discretion of 
the Engineer-in-Charge and shall be representative of 
the whole of concrete concerned. In no case, however, 
shall fewer than three cores be tested. 


5.5 Diameter of Cores 


The diameter of the cores to be taken shall be specified, 
before testing. 


The ratio of diameter to the nominal maximum size of 
aggregate shall be greater than 3. The core diameter 
shall generally be 100 mm to 150 mm (+ 10 mm), with 
the preferred diameter being 100 mm for nominal 
maximum aggregate size up to 20 mm. 


Other smaller diameters (not less than 3 times the 
nominal maximum aggregate size), which may make 
drilling easier and reduce the damage to the element, 
may be used, if the effect of the diameter on the accuracy 
of the result is also considered, as per 8.4. 


5.6 Length of Cores 


The total length of core to be extracted and the length 
of the core sample to be used for testing, shall be 
specified by the Engineer-in-Charge. 


The length of the core sample shall be decided based 
on, 


a) the diameter of the core; and 

b) whether comparison will be made with cube 
strength or cylinder strength (see 5.7 for 
preferred length/diameter ratios). 


5.7 Length/Diameter (l/d) Ratio 


The preferred //d ratio shall be 2, however, //d values 
from | to 2 may also be permitted (the length includes 
the capping material also). 


In the case of using a specimen with a length-to- 
diameter ratio smaller than 2.0, the test value of the 
compressive strength should be corrected 


corresponding to a value of //d of 2.0, as per 8.4.2. 


5.8 Marking and Identification 


Immediately after drilling, mark each core clearly and 
indelibly. Record its location and orientation within the 
element from which it was drilled. If a core is 
subsequently cut to produce a number of specimens, 
mark each specimen to indicate its position and 
orientation within the original core. 


5.9 Reinforcement 


Drilling through reinforcement shall be avoided. The 
core shall not contain any reinforcement bars along or 
near its longitudinal axis. Cores containing cross 
reinforcement shall be trimmed off to obtain core free 
from reinforcement. The reinforcement detector (cover 
meter) can be used for selecting the drilling location 
free of reinforcement. 


6 EXAMINATION 


6.1 Visual Inspection 


Carry out visual examination of the cored specimen to 
identify abnormalities. 


6.2 Measurements and Calculations of Drilled Core 
Specimens 


Take the following measurements: 


a) Core diameter — Take three pairs of 
measurements at right angles, at the half and 
quarter points of the length of the core to an 
accuracy of +0.01 mm. Determine the average 
diameter (d,,). 

b) Core length — Measure the maximum and 
minimum lengths after completion of the 
end preparation in accordance with 7 
(excluding capping material) to an accuracy 
of + 0.01 mm. Determine the average length. 


c) Mass — Each specimen shall be weighed as 
received and/or saturated, as specified. The 
mass shall be recorded to the nearest 0.1 
percentage of the mass of the specimen. 

d) Density — The density of each specimen shall 
be determined as received and/or saturated, 
as specified, in accordance with IS 516 
(Part 2/Sec 1). 


7 PREPARATION OF CORES 


7.1 General 


The size of the specimen shall be adjusted, whenever 
necessary. The specimen shall be sawn perpendicular 
to its longitudinal axis. The intended load-bearing 
surfaces shall be prepared either by grinding or by 
capping to improve the contact with the loading 


IS 516 (Part 4) : 2018 


machine. Cutting and grinding shall be carried out in 
such a way that structural changes of the test specimen 
are avoided. Various preparation methods including 
capping materials suitable for different maximum 
compressive strengths are given in Table 1. 


Table 1 Suitable Methods of Preparation of Load 
Bearing Surfaces of Specimens 
(Clause 7.1) 


Sl Anticipated Strength of Preparation Method 


No. Concrete 
a) (2) (3) 
i) For any value of strength Grinding 
ii) Up to 50 MPa Capping with calcium 
aluminate cement mortar” 


Capping with sulphur mixture 


iii) Up to 100 MPa Capping with high strength 


sulphur mixture 


D Other cements may be used provided that, at the time of test, 
the mortar has a strength at least equal to the anticipated strength 
of the concrete. 


NOTE — Other capping materials may also be used provided 
that, at the time of testing, it has a strength at least equal to the 
anticipated strength of concrete. 


The details of the preparation methods for load bearing 
surfaces of specimens mentioned in Table 1 are given 
below. 


7.2 Grinding 


Specimens cured in water shall be removed from the 
water for grinding for not more than 1h at a time and 
re-immersed in water for at least 1 h before further 
grinding or testing. The ends of the specimen shall be 
ground to the tolerances as given in 7.5. 


7.3 Capping — Calcium Aluminate Cement Mortar 
7.3.1 General 


Before capping, ensure that the surface of the core 
specimen is in a wet condition, clean and free from all 
loose particles. The caps shall be as thin as possible 
and shall not, on average, be greater than 5 mm thick, 
small local deviations are permissible. 


7.3.2 Capping with Calcium Aluminate Cement 
Mortar 


The capping material shall consist of a mortar containing 
three parts by mass of calcium aluminate cement to one 
part by mass of fine sand in a saturated surface dry 
condition [most of which passes a 300um wire cloth 
sieve conforming to IS 460 Part (1)]. The water-cement 
ratio shall not exceed 0.35. 


The soaked core specimen shall be placed with one end 
on a horizontal metal plate. A steel collar of correct 
dimensions and having a machined upper edge shall be 
rigidly clamped to the upper end of the core specimen 


IS 516 (Part 4) : 2018 


to be capped in such a way that the upper edge is 
horizontal and just extends beyond the highest part of 
the concrete surface. 


The capping material shall be filled into the collar until 
it is the form of a convex surface above the edge of the 
collar. The glass capping plate, coated with a thin film 
of mould oil shall be pressed down on to the capping 
material with a rotary motion until it makes complete 
contact with the edge of the collar. The core specimen 
with collar and plate in position shall immediately be 
placed in moist air of at least 90 percent relative 
humidity and at a temperature of 27+ 2°C. The plate 
and collar shall be removed when the mortar is hard 
enough to resist handling damage. 


7.4 Capping — Sulphur Mixture Method (Normal 
and High Strength) 


7.4.1 General 


Before capping, ensure that the surface of the core 
specimen is ina dry condition, is clean and free from all 
loose particles. The caps shall be as thin as possible 
and should not, on average, be greater than 5 mm thick. 
Small local deviations are permissible. 


7.4.2 Capping Material 


Sulphur mixtures shall be of normal strength or of high 
strength, and as follows: 


a) Normal strength (for concrete up 
to 50 MPa) — The capping material shall 
comprise equal mass fractions of sulphur and 
fine siliceous sand (most of which passes a 
250 um wire cloth sieve conforming to IS 460 
(Part 1) and is retained on a 125 um wire cloth 
sieve). A small proportion, up to 2 percent, of 
carbon black may be added. The strength of 
the mixture tested in accordance with 7.4.4 
shall be as follows: 

Compressive strength: At least the anticipated 
compressive strength of the concrete. 

b) High strength (for concrete from 50 to 
100 MPa) — The capping material shall 
consist of a blend of sulphur and suitable 
additions passing a 0.5 mm sieve. The strength 
of the mixture tested in accordance with 7.4.4 
shall be as follows: 


1) Flexure strength : At least 6.5 MPa; and 


2) Compressive strength : At least the 
anticipated compressive strength of the 
concrete. 


7.4.3 Procedure 


Lower one end of the core specimen, which is held 
vertically, into a pool of molten sulphur mixture on a 
horizontal plate/mould. Allow specimen to harden 


before repeating the procedure for the other end. Use a 
capping frame that will ensure that both capped surfaces 
are parallel. Mineral oil shall be used as a release agent 
for plates/moulds. Where necessary, trim surplus 
capping material from the edges of the core specimen. 


The level of the mixture in the melting pot shall never 
be allowed to fall too low, as there will be an increased 
risk of the production of sulphur vapour, which could 
ignite. 

The core specimen shall be checked to ensure that the 
capping material has adhered to both ends of the core 
specimen. If a capping layer sounds hollow, it shall be 
removed and the capping operation repeated. The cap 
shall not fail or fracture before the concrete fails when 
the core specimen is tested. The compression test on the 
test core specimen shall not be carried out until at least 
30 min have elapsed since the last capping operation. 


NOTES 


1 Stir the mixture continuously to ensure its homogeneity and 
to avoid sediment forming at the bottom of the melting pot. 


2 If capping operations are carried out repeatedly, it is advisable 
to use two thermostatically controlled melting pots. 


3 A fume extraction system shall be operating during the whole 
melting process to ensure full extraction of the sulphur vapour, 
which is heavier than air. Care shall be taken to ensure that the 
temperature of the mixture is maintained within the specified 
range to reduce the risk of pollution. 


7.4.4 Material Test for High Strength Sulphur Mixture 
7.4.4.1 Principle 


It gives the methodology to be adopted for carrying 
out flexural strength and compressive strength tests to 
check the conformity of the capping material used for 
the high-strength sulphur mixture method. 


7.4.4.2 Apparatus 


a) Prism mould, with dimensions of 40 mm 
x 40 mm x 160 mm, complete with a filling 
frame. 

b) Melting pot, with a thermostat to control the 
temperature of the mixture to 130 + 10 °C. 


c) Ladle, with a capacity of at least 1/3 litre. 

d) Saw, capable of cutting the capping material 
when it is dry. 

e) Compression testing machine, capable of 
testing mortar prisms for flexural and 
compressive strength in accordance with 
IS 4031 (Part 8). 


7.4.4.3 Procedure 


The sulphur mixture shall be heated in the melting pot 
to 130 + 10°C, stirring with the ladle to make the 
mixture homogenous. The filling frame shall be fitted 
to the mould and both shall be lightly oiled using a 
normal mould-release oil. The liquid sulphur mixture 


shall be poured into the mould, overfilling each part in 
turn using the filling frame to produce three specimens. 
Thirty minutes after casting the last specimen, the filling 
frame shall be removed and the three specimens 
demoulded. They shall then be left at ambient 
temperature for a further 30 min. Approximately 1 h 
after casting, each test specimen shall be sawn to remove 
the excess height and to produce three specimens with 
dimensions of 40 + 1 mm x 40+ 1 mm x 160+ 1 mm. 
The actual dimensions shall be measured and recorded. 
Approximately 2 h after casting, the specimens shall be 
tested for flexural and compressive strength. 


7.4.4.4 Test result 


The flexural and the compressive strength of each beam 
specimen made shall be determined using the actual 
dimensions recorded, not the nominal dimensions. The 
test procedures are as described in IS 4031 (Part 8). 
The compressive strength of the sulphur mixture shall 
be taken as the mean of the results of the tests on the 
three specimens. 


7.5 Tolerances 


Prepare the core specimen as per methods mentioned 


$0.05 


IS 516 (Part 4) : 2018 


in 7 within the following tolerances: 
a) Flatness (see Fig. 1A) — The tolerance on 
flatness of the prepared end surfaces shall be 
+ 0.05 mm. 
Perpendicularity (see Fig. 1B) — The 
tolerance on perpendicularity of the prepared 
end, with respect to the axis of the specimen 
as datum, shall be + 0.03 mm. 


b) 


Parallelism (see Fig. 1C) — The tolerance on 
parallelism of the prepared top surface, with 
respect to the bottom surface of the specimen 
as datum, shall be + 0.6 mm. 


c) 


d) Straightness — The tolerance on straightness 
ofany surface parallel to the centre line of the 
core shall be + 3 percent of the average core 


diameter (d). 


The above tolerances values are for 100 mm diameter 
core. If the cores with diameter less than the values 
recommended in 5.5, the tolerances shall be reduced in 
proportion to the tolerances specified for 100 mm 
diameter core. 


7.6 Calipers, rulers, carpenters arm, etc, can also be 
used for measuring the tolerances. Flatness can also be 


}0.05 +0.05 


d 
ETET Fl 


1 A FLATNESS 


PAPERED SURFACE 
}0.03 


1B PERPENDICULARITY 


1C 


a+b 60.6 


PARALLELISM 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 1 PERMISSIBLE TOLERANCES FOR PREPARED CORE SPECIMENS 


5 


IS 516 (Part 4) : 2018 


checked by covering the surface with a thin carbon 
paper and an ordinary paper and checking the 
impression formed on the ordinary paper, while 
tightening the platen over the paper covered surface. 
The papers are to be removed before testing. 


8 COMPRESSION TEST 


8.1 Storage 


Cores may be tested generally in saturated condition 
except if specifically required to be tested in air dry 
condition. For the saturated condition, soak in water at 
27 + 3°C for a minimum of 40 h and maximum up to 
48h before testing. Core shall be removed from the 
water and tested while it is still wet but remove all excess 
surface grit and water by wiping off. If it is required to 
test the core specimen in air-dry conditions, store in 
laboratory air for a minimum of 40 h and maximum up 
to 48 h prior to testing, record the storage time, ambient 
temperature and relative humidity of the storage 
conditions during air-dry storage of the specimens. 


8.2 Placing and Testing of Core Specimen 


Before placing the core specimen in testing machine, 
weigh it and also determine its length. The bearing 
surfaces of the testing machine shall be wiped clean and 
any loose sand or other material removed from the 
surfaces of the core specimen which are to be in contact 
with the compression platens. The core specimen shall 
be placed in the machine in such a manner that the load 
shall be applied to the top and bottom prepared surfaces. 
The axis of the core specimen shall be carefully aligned 
with the centre of thrust of the spherically seated platen. 
As the spherically seated block is brought to bear on the 
core specimen, the movable portion shall be rotated gently 
by hand so that uniform seating may be obtained. The 
load shall be applied without shock and increased 


SOSOr 
I? 


VOR 
SILICO 


continuously at a rate of approximately 14 N/mm?/min 
until the the core specimen breaks down and no greater 
load can be sustained. The maximum load applied to the 
core specimen shall then be recorded and the appearance 
of the concrete and any unusual features in the type of 
failure shall be noted. 


8.3 Assessment of Type of Failure 


For core specimens, if the failure is satisfactory 
(see Fig. 2), this fact shall be recorded. If the failure 
pattern is unsatisfactory, this fact shall be recorded and 
the type of failure recorded using the pattern letter 
(a to m) as given in Fig. 3, closest to the observed 
failure. 


8.4 Calculation 


8.4.1 The measured compressive strength of the core 
specimen shall be calculated by dividing the maximum 
load applied to the specimen during the test by the cross- 
sectional area, calculated from the mean dimensions of 
the section and shall be expressed to the nearest N/mm’. 


The product of correction factor for core diameter 
(cores having diameter less than 100 mm) as given 
below, and the measured compressive strength shall be 
known as the corrected compressive strength: 


Diameter of Core Correction Factor 


(No. of Cores = 3) 


mm 
75 +5 1.03 
<70 1.06 


8.4.2 A correction factor according to the l/d ratio of 
core specimen after capping shall be obtained from the 
following equation: 


Fic. 2 SATISFACTORY FAILURE OF SPECIMEN 


6 


IS 516 (Part 4) : 2018 


m) 


Fic. 3 UNSATISFACTORY FAILURE OF SPECIMEN 


F=0.11N +0.78 

where 

F = correction factor, and 

N = length /diameter ratio. 
The product of this correction factor and the measured 
compressive strength or the corrected compressive 
strength for diameter as per 8.4.1, shall be known as 
the corrected cylinder strength, this being the equivalent 
strength of a cylinder having a height/diameter ratio of 
two. The equivalent cube strength of the concrete shall 
be determined by multiplying the corrected cylinder 
strength by 5/4. 


8.4.3 Report 
The following information shall be included in the 
report on each test specimen: 
a) Identification mark; 
b) Date of test; 
c) Age of specimen (if known/supplied); 
d) Maximum nominal size of aggregate 
(if known/supplied); 
e) Curing conditions, including date of 
manufacture of specimen in the field (if known/ 


supplied); 

f) Density of specimen (after end surface 
preparation) and dry density (prior to capping), 
the density of a core may be determined by 
weighing it and dividing it by the volume 
calculated from average diameter and length. 
Wet density to be reported, if specifically 
asked; 

g) Method used for preparation of specimen: 
cutting/grinding/capping; 

h) Dimensions of specimen (diameter and length 
(after preparation); 

j) Cross-sectional area; 

k) Maximum load; 

m) Measured compressive strength; 

n) Corrected compressive strength; 

p) Corrected cylinder strength; 

q) Equivalent cube strength; and 


r) Appearance of fractured faces of concrete 
(satisfactory/unsatisfactory) and, type of 
fracture, if these are unusual. 


Annex B, gives guidelines for interpretation of core test 
results based on various factors. 


IS 516 (Part 4) : 2018 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 1) 
SECURING AND PREPARING TEST SPECIMENS FROM HARDENED CONCRETE 


A-1 This annex specifies the procedure for securing 
and preparing test specimens from hardened concrete 
in structures and pavements. A specimen to be tested 
for strength shall not be removed from the structure 
until the concrete has become hard enough to permit 
its removal without disturbing the bond between the 
mortar and the coarse aggregate. Normally, the concrete 
shall be 14 days old before the specimens are removed. 
Specimens that show abnormal defects or that have been 
damaged in removal shall not be used. 


A-2 APPARATUS 


A-2.1 Saw — A saw shall be used for securing beam 
specimens from the structure or pavement for flexural 
strength tests. The saw shall have a diamond or silicon 
carbide cutting edge and shall have adjustments that 
permit cutting of specimens conforming to the 
dimensions specified in A-3.1. 


A-3 TEST SPECIMENS 


A-3.1 Beam Specimen 


The beam specimen for the determination of flexural 


strength shall normally have a cross-section of 
150 x 150 mm and shall be at least 700 mm in length. If 
the largest size of the aggregate does not exceed 20 mm, 
the beam specimen shall be 100 mm x 100 mm x 500 mm. 


NOTE — In many cases particularly with prisms cut from 
pavement slabs, the width is governed by the size of the coarse 
aggregate and the depth by the thickness of the slabs. 


A-4 PROCEDURE 


A-4.1 Slab Removal 


A sufficiently large slab shall be removed so that the 
desired test specimens may be secured without the 
inclusion of any concrete which has been cracked, 
spalled, undercut, or otherwise damaged. 


A-4.2 Beam Sawing 


The sawing operation shall be so performed that the 
concrete will not be weakened by shock or by heating. 
The sawn surfaces shall be smooth, plane, parallel and 
shall be free from steps, ridges and grooves. Care shall 
be taken in handling the sawn beam specimens to avoid 
chipping or cracking. 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 8.4.3) 
INTERPRETATION OF CORE TEST RESULTS (INFORMATIVE) 


B-1 FACTORS AFFECTING STRENGTH OF 
CORES 


The following are the factors that affect the strength of 
cores: 


a) Place of drilling the core — There can be 
variation within the member. For example, 
generally the in-place strength of concrete at 
the top of member as cast is less than the 
strength at the bottom. 

b) Micro-cracking — Micro-cracking present in 
the concrete may reduce the core strength. 
Micro-cracks can be present if the core is 


drilled from a region of the structure that has 
been subjected to stress resulting from applied 
load or restraint of imposed deformation. 
Rough handling of core sample may also cause 
micro cracking. 

c) Curing — Curing period and curing 
temperature both affect the strength. In mass 
concrete, differential moisture and temperature 
within the member can give variation in results 
of cores taken from outer face and inner mass. 
Inner mass can have lower compressive 
strength due to high initial temperature. 
Similarly, for non-continuous curing, the 


moisture gradient between surface and inner 
mass can result in different strengths in 
concrete, that is, lower strength in cores along 
face, due to less curing and higher strength 
within the inner mass due to availability of 
moisture for continuous curing. 

d) Compaction — Entrapped air in the concrete 
due to poor compaction or bleeding can reduce 
the strength. As the extent of poor compaction 
or bleeding can vary within the member, visual 
inspection of cores is essential to see if there 
is the presence of voids or honeycombs in the 
core samples. The extent of non-compaction 
and/or bleeding can be assessed by ultrasonic 
pulse velocity testing, as per IS 516 (Part 5/ 
Sec 1). 

e) Moisture content — Moisture condition of 
cores also affects the strength. Dried core 
samples give about 5 to 10 percent more 
strength than saturated samples. Therefore, for 
comparison with the cube test results, 
saturated sample testing is recommended in 
the test procedure of this code. 

f) The overall average effect of factors mentioned 
at (a) to (e) and other minor factors like coring 
direction, etc, is that, the core test is generally 
85 to 90 percent of corresponding cube 
strength and the same has been considered in 
the acceptance criteria for core given in IS 456. 
However, if cracks are observed in the core, 
the core should not be tested or if cracking is 
observed during testing from failure pattern 
or from load machine displacement curve, the 
core results can be discarded [see also note 
under B-2.5.2 (b)]. 

The effect of diameter is considered in the correction 
factors at 8.4. While there is consensus that difference 
between 100 mm and 150 mm diameter cores are 
negligible, there is less agreement concerning smaller 
diameter cores. The analysis of large number of cores 
by various investigators indicated that the strength of 
50 mm diameter cores was on an average 6 percent 
less than the strength of 100 mm diameter cores. In 
other tests, the average strength of 60 mm diameter 
cores was less by about 7 percent (for cores with 
average strength of 32 N/mm7?). As the strength 
increases, the difference reduces. The scatter in results 
of 60 mm diameter cores is also found to be more. 
Therefore, when core diameter is less than 100 mm, 
more number of cores will give better assessment. 


B-2 ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA OF CORE TEST 
RESULTS 


The acceptance criteria for the core test results shall be 
as given hereunder. 


IS 516 (Part 4) : 2018 


B-2.1 As the specified compressive strength is generally 
cube strength, the results of cores are also expressed in 
terms of equivalent cube strength. Accordingly the 
acceptance criteria of core test results should also be 
correlated to acceptance criteria of cube tests. 


B-2.2 Acceptance criteria of cube tests in the Indian 
Standards and other International Standards are based 
on statistical analysis technique. The confidence level 
considered in the Indian Standard is 95 percent (that is, 
95 percent probability that 95 percent of the results 
will be more than f, with minimum 30 samples). 


B-2.3 In the expression, f rean = Jox + ZO, for 95 percent 
confidence level, z is 1.65 and the same is considered 
in target strength calculation. Therefore in IS 456, for 
acceptance based on average of 4 consecutive samples 


(4 x 3 = 12 cubes). 

Frnin for avg of 4 samples = [(f ean ~A" 1-656) — 1.65 x s] 
where s = 0/4°° = 6/2. 

So fain = Jat 0.825 x ©, subject to fi, =/y+3 


B-2.4 For acceptance of concrete based on limited 
in-situ testing, little lower confidence level is acceptable. 
Generally 75 percent confidence level (75 percent 
probability of 95 percent results >, ) is considered. So 
mean core strength required is f’ nean > Fx, + 1.480) 
where o is the standard deviation. However, this is valid 
only if sufficient numbers of cores are tested. 


B-2.5 Acceptance of core test results is generally 
required for two purposes as mentioned below, 
particularly for new construction. For existing structures 
the requirement is generally to assess the grade or 
strength of concrete in place, 


a) acceptance for structural adequacy; and 


b) contractual acceptance for conformance to 
specification. 


(Deviations from specifications also affects durability 
besides strength.) 


B-2.5.1 Procedure as per IS 456 


If average of equivalent cube strength of minimum three 
cores is more than 0.85 times the specified cube strength 
(characteristic strength, f,,) and no individual core has 
equivalent cube strength less than 0.75 times specified 
cube strength (f), the core test results are considered 
satisfactory. 


The international approach for assessing the core 
strength is also similar. 


B-2.5.2 Recommended procedure for acceptance of 
core test results: 


a) The present procedure of IS 456 as mentioned 
before at B-2.5.1 is simple and can be used 


IS 516 (Part 4) : 2018 


b) 


for assessing strength of a particular member 
by taking three cores or in a case where one 
set of cube samples (set of 4 consecutive 
sample) has failed. The specified strength will 
be considered as characteristic strength. 


For overall assessment requirement or where 
large number of cube sets (each set consisting 
of 4 consecutive samples) have failed say 2 
consecutive sets or 3 scattered sets have failed 
(for the same grade/class of concrete) within 
a batch to be assessed, minimum 10 cores will 
be tested and the acceptance in such case will 
be as under: 


f' (avg) = 0.85 (fy, +3) 
f' (i) = 0.75 (fy) 


where f (avg) is average equivalent cube 
strength of all cores (minimum nine cores - 
after excluding outliers if any). 


Sf’ (i) is equivalent cube strength of individual 
core. 


NOTE — Detecting outliers in test results: Outlier can 
be detected by inspection of load-machine displacement 
curves or using statistical tests. For statistical test, values 
beyond ‘f(avg) + 2s’ may be treated as outliers as a 
guide. Out of every 10 cores tested, one core test result 
can be outlier. 


10 


c) Where the requirements of procedure B-2.5.2 
(a) and B-2.5.2 (b) as the case may be, have 
been met, the concrete can be said to be 
meeting requirements of specification of 
IS 456. But where, 10 or more than 10 cores 
are taken but the results do not meet the criteria 
of B-2.5.2 (b), but results of average of cores 
from all the individual members tested have 
strength more than 0.85f and no individual 
core has strength less than 0.75f, the concrete 
in the particular batch or member may be 
accepted for structural adequacy and 
contractual acceptance/ penalties/deduction 
may be decided as per contract provisions by 
the project authorities. 

NOTE — The procedure for assessment of strength of concrete 
by core test as given above is generally in line with international 


practice but modified to make it in line with present acceptance 
criteria given in IS 456 for acceptance of cube test results. 


B-2.5.2.1 Age factors for increase of strength with age 


Though there is normally a gain of strength beyond 
28 days, the quantum of increase depends upon the 
grade, type of cement, curing and environmental 
condition. Therefore, while assessing the strength of 
concrete based on cores extracted at a later age, no age 
factor is generally considered except where considered 
in design or included in the contract specifications (see 
also 6.2.1 of IS 456). 


IS 516 (Part 4) : 2018 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 02 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (144, Summer Breeze, Kuravankonam, 
Kowdiar, Thiruvananthapuram 695 003) 

ACC Ltd, Mumbai 

Ambuja Cements Limited, Ahmedabad 

Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 

Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 

Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 

Cement Manufacturers’ Association, Noida 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 

Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Conmat Technolgies Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 

Construction Chemical Manufacturers’ Association, Mumbai 

Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 

Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science 
and Technology, New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Construction Company Limited, Mumbai 


Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, New Delhi 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


11 


Representative(s) 


Suri Jose Kurian (Chairman) 


Suri S. A. KHADILKAR 
SHRI RAMAN SADANAND PARULEKAR (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. DESAI 
Dr BIBEKANANDA Monapatra (Alternate) 


Suri L. R. BisHNor 
Suri Sourav Acuarya (Alternate) 


SHRI SUSHANTA Kumar BAsu 
Suri D. R. Sekor (Alternate) 


Suri J. K. PRASAD 
Suri C. N. Jna (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH BHARGAVA 
Dr S. K. Hanpoo (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
Suri RasesH Khare (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. SINGH 
SHRI SUBHASH GuRRAM (Alternate) 


Suri J. B. SENGUPTA 
Suri Satish PANpEy (Alternate) 


Dr K. RAMANJANEYULU 
Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Suri N. Sıva Kumar (Alternate) 


Director (CMDD) (N&W) 
Deputy Director (CMDD) (NW&S) (Alternate) 


Dr A. K. CHATTERJEE 
SHRI SUBRATO CHOWDHURY (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR SURLAKER 
Suri NiLoTPOL Kar (Alternate) 


SHRI LAXMAN SINGH 
SHRI VUAY SHANKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDER MOHAN 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI ANURAG SINHA (Alternate) 


Suri V. N. HEGGADE 
Suri S. C. Upapuyay (Alternate) 


Suri SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
Dr CHETAN HAZAREE (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK BANSAL 


SHRI MAHESH TANDON 
Suri GANESH JUNEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEK NAIK 
SECRETARY GENERAL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


ProF Devpas MENON 
Dr Manu SANTHANAM (Alternate) 


IS 516 (Part 4) : 2018 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi 


Institute for Solid Waste Research and Ecological Balance, 
Visakhapatnam 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, 
Army HQ, New Delhi 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, New Delhi 
National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 
National Test House, Kolkata 

Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 

Nuvoco Vistas Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


OCL India Limited, New Delhi 
Public Works Department, Govt of Tamil Nadu, Chennai 


The India Cements Limited, Chennai 


The Indian Hume Pipe Company Limited, Mumbai 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 

The Ramco Cements Limited, Chennai 

Ultra Tech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer Education, 
New Delhi 


In personal capacity [B-806, Oberoi Exquisite, Oberoi Garden 
City, Goregaon (East), Mumbai] 


In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha Road, Nagpur) 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari Nagar, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (E-1, 402, White House Apartments, 
R. T. Nagar, Bengaluru) 


Representative(s) 
Pror V. K. Gupta 
Dr BHUPINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SECRETARY GENERAL 
Director (Alternate) 


Dr N. BHANUMATHIDAS 
Suri N. Katinas (Alternate) 


May Gen S. K. SRIVASTAV 
Suri Man Sincu (Alternate) 


Suri A. P. PATHAK 
Suri A. K. Panpey (Alternate) 


Suri V. V. ARORA 
Dr S. Harsu (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIR SINGH 
Surimati S. A. Kausuit (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri Racnurari Roy (Alternate) 


Suri Pranav DESAI 
SHRI RAVINDRA KHAMPARIA (Alternate) 


Dr S. C. AHLUWALIA 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 


Dr D. VENKATESWARAN 


Suri P. R. BHAT 
Suri S. J. Snan (Alternate) 


Dr H. C. VISVESVARAYA 
Suri S. H. Jam (Alternate) 


Suri Barası K. Moortuy 
Suri ANIL Kumar Pirai (Alternate) 


Suri SuRYA VALLURI 
Dr M. R. Kataat (Alternate) 


Suri M. A. U. KHAN 
Suri B. Mukuopapuyay (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. JAIN 


Suri L. K. JAN 
Suri R. C. WAsoN 


Suri S. A. REDDI 


BIS Directorate General Suri SANJAY Pant, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Surmati Divya S. 
Scientist ‘B’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


Concrete Sub-committee, CED 2:2 


Organization Representative(s) 


In Personal Capacity, (144, Summer Breeze, Kuravankonam, Suri Jose Kurian (Convener) 
Kowdiar, Thiruvananthapuram 695 003) 


ACC Limited, Mumbai Suri Avuit CHAUBEY (Alternate) 


Ambuja Cement Limited, Ahmedabad Suri J. P. DESAI 
Dr BIBEKANANDA Monapatra (Alternate) 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), Bengaluru Suri AviNAsH D. SHIRODE 
Suri K. K. MeGHasuyam (Alternate) 


12 


Organization 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Bureau of Design for Hydel and Irrigation Project, Bhopal 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Civil-Aid Technoclinic Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers Pvt Ltd, Ghaizabad 
CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

CSIR — Central Soil & Materials Research Station, New Delhi 

CSIR - Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 

Elkem South Asia Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science 
and Technology, New Delhi 

Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 

Hindustan Constrution Company Ltd, Mumbai 

Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 

Indian Institute of Structural Engineering, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Society of Structural Engineers, Mumbai 
Irrigation and Power Research Institute, Amritsar 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, ECC Division, Chennai 
Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, 
Army HQ, New Delhi 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 
National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, Haryana 


National Council for Cement & Building Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Institute of Technology, Warangal 


13 


IS 516 (Part 4) : 2018 


Representative(s) 
Suri L. R. BisHNor 
Suri Sourav Acuarya (Alternate) 


Suri J. K. PRASAD 
Suri Pankas Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. KHARE 
Suri Buacwati Prasan Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
Suri RasesH Khare (Alternate) 


SHRI M. S. SUDARSHAN 
Suri R. NAGENDRA (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


Dr Rajes DEOLIA 
Suri H. C. Arora (Alternate) 


Suri J. B. SENGUPTA 
Suri Satish PANDEY (Alternate) 


Suri RAJEEV KUMAR 
Sarı M. Rasa (Alternate) 


Dr B. H. BHARATH KUMAR 
Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


Suri BRAJESH MALVIYA 
SHRI SURENDRA SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI ANURAG SINHA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDER MOHAN 


SHRI MANISH MOKAL 
SHRI SUDEESH RAJENDRAN (Alternate) 


Dr CHETAN HAZARE 
Suri AvinasH Harpe (Alternate) 


Suri K. C. TAYADE 
SECRETARY GENERAL (Alternate) 


Suri D. S. Josui 
SHRI HEMANT VADALKAR (Alternate) 


Dr B. BHATTACHARJEE 
Dr SHASHANK BISHNO! (Alternate) 


Dr SUDHIR MISHRA 
Dr MANU SANTHANAM 
DR AsHoK KUMAR JAIN 


Suri D. S. Josui 
SHRI HEMANT VADALKAR (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (RESEARCH) 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Dr B. SIVARAM SARMA 
SHRI S. MANOHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. SRIVASTAV 
Suri Man Sincu (Alternate) 


Suri A. P. PATHAK 
Suri A. K. Panpey (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. YApav 
Suri Pawan Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI V. V. ARORA 
Suri S. SHARMA (Alternate) 


Dr C. B. KAMEswarA Rao 
Dr D. Rama Sesuu (Alternate) 


IS 516 (Part 4) : 2018 


Organization 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


Pidilite Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Ready Mixed Concrete Manufacturers’ Association, Mumbai 


Research, Design & Standards Organization (Ministry of Railways), 
Lucknow 


Shapoorji Pallonji and Company Private Limited, Mumbai 
Tandon Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 

Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 

Ultra Tech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 

Water Resource Department, Govt of Madhya Pradesh, Mumbai 


In personal capacity (452 Sector 14, Sonipat, Haryana) 
In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha Road, Nagpur) 


In personal capacity [B-806, Oberoi Exquisite, Oberoi Garden 
City, Goregaon (East), Mumbai] 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari Nagar, 
Delhi) 


In personal capacity (E-1, 402, White House Apartments, 
R.T. Nagar, Bengaluru) 


In personal capacity (M1 F1 VGN Minerva Apartments, 
Guruswamy Road, Nolambur, Chennai) 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri N. M. Rao (Alternate) 


Dr Suguna NAIK 


SHRI VIJAYKUMAR R. KULKARNI 
SHRI ANIL KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Joint Director (B&S)/CB-I 
Joint Director (B&S)/CB-II (Alternate) 


Suri GIRISH BONDE 
Suri D. N. VisHwanatu (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH TANDON 
Suri Vinay Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri S. N. DIWAKAR 
Suri Manos Kumar De (Alternate) 


Dr V. RAMACHANDRA 
Dr A. K. Sincu (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. KHARE 
Suri B. P. Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. JAN 
Suri L. K. JAN 
Suri A. K. JAIN 


Suri R. C. WAsoN 


Suri S. A. REDDI 


Dr C. RAJKUMAR 


Panel for Revision of Indian Standards on Test Methods for Concrete, CED 2:2/P7 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari Nagar, 
New Delhi 110064) 


ACC Limited, Mumbai 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 
Civil-Aid Technoclinic Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 


Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 


Hydraulic & Engineering Instrument, New Delhi 
Indian Concrete Institute, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


14 


Representative(s) 


Suri R. C. Wason (Convener) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Dr V. M. SHARMA 


SHRI AJAY PRAKASH MATHUR 
Suri RasesH Kuare (Alternate) 


Suri U. S. VIDYARTHI 


Dr R. NAGENDRA 
Suri SUNIL V. SONNAD (Alternate) 


Dr A. K. PANDEY 
Suri S. K. Sincu (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr P. SRINIVASAN 
Dr S. BHASKAR (Alternate) 


DR CHETAN HAZAREE 
Suri AvinasH HARDE (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR TIWARI 


Dr RADHAKRISHNA PILLAI 
Dr Ravinpra Gettu (Alternate) 


Dr SHASHANK BISHNOI 
Dr S. Gupta (Alternate) 


IS 516 (Part 4) : 2018 


Organization Representative(s) 


Larsen & Toubro Ltd, ECC Division, Chennai Suri B. StvAaRAMA SARMA 
Suri S. MANOHAR (Alternate) 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh Suri V. V. ARORA 

Suri S. C. SHARMA (Alternate) 
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 

Suri A. K. Lanaria (Alternate) 
RDC Concrete (India) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai Suri K. TAGORE 


Suri V. MEIKANDA Moortuy (Alternate) 


Ready Mixed Concrete Manufacturers’ Association, Mumbai SHRI VIJAYKUMAR R. KULKARNI 
SHRI JEAN PHILIPPE THIERRY (Alternate) 


In personal capacity (50 Mangla Apartments Kalkaji, New Delhi) Dr S. C. Martı 
In personal capacity (Type IV/17, Presidents Estate, New Delhi) Suri K. H. BABU 


15 


(Continued from second cover) 


This revision has been taken up to incorporate the modifications found necessary in the light of experience gained 
in its use and also to bring it in line with the latest development on the subject. Significant modifications in this 
revision include the following: 


a) 
b) 


c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 


h) 


Relevant provisions of IS 1199 for preparation of test specimens have been included in this part. 


100 mm diameter of core has been made as the preferred diameter for concrete with 20 mm nominal 
maximum size of aggregate. 

Length of core (in terms of //d ratio) has been specified keeping in view whether the initial cube strength 
or the cylinder strength of concrete is available for comparison. 


Detailed provisions have been given for the measurement, calculation and tolerances of drilled core 
specimens. 


More details have been given for the preparation of load bearing surfaces and more capping materials 
have been included. 


Correction for diameter of core has been included for core diameters less than the preferred 100 mm size. 
Formule for correction due to //d ratio variations has been mentioned. 


A detailed informative annexure has been included for interpretation of core test results under different 
situations. 


In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from ISO 1920-6 : 2004 ‘Testing of concrete — 
Part 6: Sampling, preparing and testing of concrete cores’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value observed or 
caluculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised)’. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 02 (10899). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


