ЗТГТҮ TNT 1 11315 (Раг 1) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


teh ATA A RI AT TAKAS (997 % 
atten 
TTT 1 తాం 


( TETI FRAT ) 


Methods for Quantitative Description 
of Discontinuities in Rock Masses 
Part 1 Orientation 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.060 


© BIS 2023 


da 9198 ఇల్లా 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR IA, 9 гета MTE зы XV, 48 (8 - 110002 
ა.ი МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 7 


Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


A series of Indian standard test methods for assessing the strength characteristics of rocks and rock masses are being 
developed/revised in view of recent advances in the field of rock mechanics. The majority of rock masses, in particular, 
those within a few hundred metres from the surface, behave as discontinuous, with the discontinuities largely 
determining the mechanical behaviour. It is, therefore, essential that structure of a rock mass and the nature of its 
discontinuities are carefully described and quantified to have a complete and unified descriptions of rock masses and 
discontinuities. Careful field descriptions will enhance the value of in-situ tests that are performed since the 
interpretation and extrapolation of results will be made more reliable. 


Discontinuity is the general term for any mechanical discontinuity in a rock mass, along which the rock mass has zero 
or low tensile strength. It is the collective term for most types of joints, weak bedding planes, weak schistosity planes, 
weakness zones, shear zones and faults. The ten parameters selected for rock mass survey to describe discontinuities 
are orientation, spacing, persistence, roughness, wall strength, aperture, filling, seepage, number of sets and block 
size. These parameters are also evaluated from the study of drill cores to obtain information on the discontinuities. 


It is essential that both the structures of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described for 
determining the mechanical behaviour. This Indian Standard, covering various parameters to describe discontinuities 
in rock masses. 


This standard (Part 1) covers the methods for quantitative description of discontinuities in rock masses for orientation. 
This standard (Part 1) was first formulated in 1987. This revision incorporates the latest advancement and 
modifications based on the experience gained in the use of this standard. The other parts formulated in the series are: 


Part2 Spacing 

Part3 Persistence 
Part4 Roughness 
Part5 Wall strength 
Part6 Aperture 

Part7 Filling 

Part8 Seepage 

Part9 Number of sets 
Part 10 Block size 

Part 11 Core recovery and rock quality designation 
Part 12 Drill core study 


Orientation describes the attitude of discontinuity in space, and described by the dip direction/azimuth (თ) and dip (8) 
of the line of steepest declination in the plane of the discontinuity. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, observed 
or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for 
rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value 
should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTION OF 


DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASSES 
PART 1 ORIENTATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) covers the method for the 
quantitative description of orientation of 
discontinuities in rock mass by compass and 
clinometer method, and photogrammetric method. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard given below contains provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitutes provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject 
to revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of this standard: 


IS No. Title 


IS 11358: 1987 Glossary of terms and symbols 


relating to rock mechanics 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions of 
terms given in IS 11358 shall apply. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 The orientation of discontinuities relative to an 
engineering structure largely controls the possibility of 
unstable conditions or excessive deformations/ 
movements. The importance of orientation increases 
when other conditions for deformation are present, such 
as low shear strength and sufficient number of 
discontinuities or (joints) sets for slip to occur. 


4.2 The mutual orientation of discontinuities will 
determine the shape of the individual blocks, beds or 
mosaics comprising the rock mass. 


4.3 The orientation of the discontinuity is described 
by the dip direction (@) measured clockwise from 
true north and by the dip (8), of the line of the 
steepest declination measured from horizontal, for 
example, dip direction/dip. 


5 COMPASS AND CLINOMETER METHOD 


5.1 In compass and clinometer method, the compass is 


to be levelled by means of a spherical bubble before 
taking a dip direction reading measured clockwise 
from true north. The clinometer device built in the 
compass is used to measure the dip angle along the 
maximum declination direction. 


NOTES 


1 Various types of clinometer compass are used in geological 
field surveys with spherical bubble and/or alidade devices for 
orienting or sighting the clinometer parallel to the 
discontinuity plane before taking dip reading. 


2 When estimating dip of the inaccessible discontinuity, it is 
convenient to use clinometer with an inclinable siting device 
in which reflected image of the horizontal bubble can also 
simultaneously be viewed. 


3 When the rock is strongly magnetic, a clino-rule and 
measuring tape is used or direct reading azimuth protractor can 
be used. 


5.2 The azimuth of the dip direction is measured in 
degrees counted clockwise from true north, and 
expressed as a three digit number, for example, 010°, 
115° (000° to 360°). 


5.3 The maximum declination (dip) of the mean plane 
of the discontinuity is measured with the clinometer 
and should be expressed in degrees as a two-digit 
number, for example, 05° or 45° (00° to 90°). 


5.4 The dip direction and dip should be recorded 
in that order, with the three digit and two digit 

numbers supported by a line, for example, 010°/25°. 
The pair of numbers represents the dip vector (Fig. 1). 


NOTES 


1 Magnetic deflection caused by iron pipes or rails, 
steel structures or anomalies due to magnetic оге 
bodies will sometimes cause compass readings to be 
unreliable. In such cases a 50 meter long tape should be 
stretched parallel to the rock face or rock excavation surface 
and oriented by means of plane-table and/or theodolite 
survey. The dip directions can then be measured relative to 
this tape using a theodolite or a clino-rule. A direct reading 
azimuth protractor can also be employed. The data should 
be corrected with reference to true north before analysis of 
the field measurement is undertaken. 


2 The dip of discontinuities considered critical for 
stability should be measured using a down-dip base length 
exceeding the wavelength of surface undulations. The local 
inclination of non-planer features relative to mean dip will be 
an important component in the shear strength of the surface 
in question. The estimated direction of potential movement 
may not coincide with the down-dip direction. 


IS 11315 (Part 1) : 2023 


3 It is desirable to measure a sufficient number of orientations 
to define the various joint sets of given domains. It is clear that 
the number to be recommended will vary with the area to be 
mapped, with the randomness of the orientations, and with the 
detail required in subsequent analysis. If orientations are 
consistent, careful sampling will reduce the amount of 
orientation data considerably. 


4 The vertical circle of many clinometers is also expressed in 
quadrants of 100 divisions instead of 90. The particular 
system utilized should be clearly stated when orientation data 
is reported. It is most convenient to have dip measurements 
measured in or converted to the older 0° to 90° system. 


5 The accuracy of compass and clinometer orientation 
measurements will depend on several factors of which the 
probably most important are accessibility of the plane of 
interest, areas extent of the exposed plane, degree of planarity 
and smoothness, occasional magnetic anomalies, human 
errors. Human errors can be reduced by using a clinometer to 
locate the direction of maximum dip before taking the 
compass reading. It is sufficient to read dip direction to the 
nearest 5°, and dip to the nearest even number of degrees. 
However, if poles are to be plotted, it may in the end be more 
convenient to read to the nearest degree to reduce the 
occurrence of coincidental plotted points. 


6 The mean orientation of major discontinuities can be 
obtained by the three-point method. The coordinates of three 
points lying in the plane of the discontinuity are all that is 
required. In the case of surface outcrops, the coordinates may 
be determined by accurate location on a contoured relief map. 
The orientation of major features may also be estimated from 
three boreholes that, intersect the plane. However, less 
persistent features may not be intersected by all the holes. 


7 The orientation of minor discontinuities can be estimated 
from a single borehole, provided that the core can be oriented 
or that the borehole walls can be viewed. Core can sometimes 
be orientated using structural features such as bedding or 
foliation, if these natural markers have consistent orientation. 
Alternatively, the orientation of minor discontinuities can be 
estimated by down-the-hole viewing techniques, such as 
borehole television cameras, photographic cameras 
and borehole periscopes or any advance equipment. Besides 
orientation, these methods азо provide invaluable 
information concerning spacing, the thickness of the 
discontinuity fillings and the level of seepage paths. 


8 A special core recovery method, known as the 
integral sampling method, is recommended for obtaining 
orientation data in heavily fractured rock masses. The 
method essentially consists of recovering a core sample 
which has previously been reinforced with a grouted bar 
whose azimuth is known from positioning rods. The 
reinforced bar is coaxially overcored with a larger 
diameter coring crown. 


6 PHOTOGRAMMETRIC METHOD 


6.1 Photogrammetric discontinuity mapping 
technique determines the coordinate of at least four 
points of each visible discontinuity plane, thereby 
defining the orientation of the given planes. Large 
planes can be mapped quite precisely, but the 
accuracy decreases as the area of the plane decreases. 
The method is usually economic only if the 
orientation of a large number of discontinuities is 
required. However, there are situations where 
photogrammetry is the only practical method of 
determining orientation, for example, if the rock is in 
the vicinity of the magnetic anomalies or if the rock is 
unstable and/or inaccessible. 


6.2 The equipment required in photogrammetric 
method consists of reconnaissance survey equipment, 
phototheodolite and tripod, control survey equipment, 
and stereoscopic plotting instrument ог 
stereocomparator with automatic recording 
equipment. 


NOTE — Any advanced equipment may also be used as per 
the agreement. 


6.2.1 Reconnaissance survey equipment required will 
consist of optical square, abney level, alidade and 
reconnaissance diagram mounted on a plane table. 


6.2.2 Photogrammetry require a phototheodolite 
which consists of a theodolite with a survey camera 
located between upper and lower circles. The survey 
camera incorporates fiducial marks and has a lens of 
negligible distortion characteristics. Six control targets 
are required for location of the rock face to be 
photographed. In order to be seen clearly in the 
stereoscopic model, their minimum dimension should 
be 1/400 of the distance to the rock face. Their colour 
should be chosen for the maximum contrast with the 
rock when viewed in blue and black photography. 
Photographic films, photographic plates, photographic 
development facility (on site, if possible, to check for 
poor exposures) and light meter are also required for 
use. 


6.2.3 Control survey equipment consists of tripod, 
tribrachs, targets, plumbing devices and substance 
bar. 


IS 11315 (Part 1) : 2023 


STRIKE = а” 
ОР = В 
DIP 


DIRECTION = а” + 90° 
= 0° 


DIP DIRECTION 


DIP 
DIRECTION = а°- 90° 
=" 


FIG. 1 DIAGRAM INDICATING THE STRIKE, DIP AND DIP DIRECTION OF THREE DIFFERENTLY ORIENTATED PLANES 


IS 11315 (Part 1) : 2023 


6.2.4 Stereoscopic plotting instrument ог 
stereocomparator with automatic recording 
equipment are normally operated by a trained 
photogrammetrist and the users must consult a 
specialist for their use. 


6.3 The procedure of determining orientation by 
photogrammetric method consists of reconnaissance 
survey, photography and control survey to obtain the 
survey information required for computations. 


6.3.1 The purpose ofreconnaissance survey is to 


determine suitable positions for both the camera 
stations over looking the face and for controlled 
targets on the face (Fig. 2 and Fig. 3). The height of 
the face photographed, the accuracy required, the 
vertical and horizontal field angles of the camera and 
the available camera tilt must be considered prior to 
photography. In many cases, there will be physical 
limitations imposed by the site itself as illustrated in 
Fig. 4. Much better use of the overlap area is possible 
if camera axes can be approximately normal to the 
face. 


HALF HORIZONTAL 
ANGLE OF CAMERA 


DIRECTION OF BASE 


FIG. 2 RECONNAISSANCE DIAGRAM MOUNTED ON PLANE TABLE 


CONTROL TARGET ON FACE 
x x 


x x 


CAMERA AXIS 


OVERLAP AREA 


DISTANCE 


CAMERA AXIS 


| BASE [E 


FIG. 3 FIELD SET-UP TO OBTAIN OVERLAPPING STEREO-PAIR 


CAMERA TILT 


CAMERA AXIS 


60m 


Fic. 4 Two ALTERNATIVE BASE LINE LOCATION AT A DIFFICULT SITE 


6.3.2 Phototheodolite is set up on one of the base line 
tripods, with an interchangeable target on the other. 
The instrument is then levelled, the camera tilted, 
exposure time and counter are set, апа the 
photographic plate or film is loaded. The camera is 
orientated at right angle to the theodolite and the 
telescope is sighted on the other station. With the 
camera axis thus normal to the base, the photograph is 
taken. The theodolite and target are then interchanged 
at the base line stations and the procedure is repeated. 


NOTE — It is helpful if the photographic plates or films are 
developed in nearby dark room so that, if the same are not up 
to the quality required for photogrammetric analysis, the 
photographs may be retaken before the camera station tripods 
and control target are removed. It is desirable to complete all 
the photography as soon as possible in order to avoid 
differences caused by shadow on corresponding photographs 
of a stereo-pair. 


6.3.3 After completion of the photography, a control 
survey has to be carried out in order to determine the 
coordinates of at least four targets within the overlap 
area. The theodolite is used for necessary angle 
measurements from each end of the base line and two 
rounds of horizontal and vertical angle are made to the 
control targets and at least three other stations whose 
coordinates are known. From these observations, the 
coordinates are determined by resection. 


6.3.4 The base line is measured by setting an 
interchangeable subtense bar on one station tribrach, 
and observing it from the other. The distance is 
calculated from the mean subtended angle. This 
procedure is performed from both ends of the base line 
as a check. 


NOTE — A minimum of one day should normally be allowed 
for the work associated with each stereo-pair. The base line 
may subsequently be extended to a series of consecutive 
camera stations if the overlap area obtained with one stereo- 
pair is insufficient to cover the whole rock face. 


6.3.5 The exact format of the survey information 
required depends on the programme being used to 
analyze the results. Generally, if the theodolite 
observations have been made from the same tribrach 
position as used for the photography, the survey 
information required consists of the theodolite 
coordinates in the ground system, and vertical and 
horizontal theodolite observations to the targets, 
reduced and meaned as appropriate. 


6.4 It is convenient to provide detailed instructions for 
the photogrammetrist to enable to work in a manner 
that the information can be analyzed by a computer. 
The work is best specified by making detailed notes 
and by making an enlarged photograph of the overlap 
area. The information requested may consist of (a) 
joint areas indicated on the enlarged photograph from 
which a specified number of orientations are required 
for statistical analysis like plotting on an equal area 
net; (b) particular discontinuity planes individually 
identified on an enlarged photograph for which the 
location, orientation and extent are required more 


precisely, like for use in stability analysis. Generally, 
up to ten points per plane are sufficient for defining 
these features. 


6.5 Usually the negative plates are observed directly 
but, if preferred by the operator, diapositives can be 
made. An operator unaccustomed with the technique 
of observing discontinuities requires a few hours 
observing practice. The coordinates of at least four 
points are required for each visible plane. The 
coordinates of at least four points are noted in an 
identical format and shall consist of an identifier 
followed by X, Y and Z coordinates of the point. All 
points referring to a particular discontinuity should 
have the same identifier. The operator thus proceeds 
from point to point, discontinuity to discontinuity and 
area to area. It is important that the operator makes a 
number of independent checks on the accuracy of his 
observations at field scale. This will give all concerned 
a feel of likely errors. 


66 The basic information required in 
photogrammetric method consist of control survey 
data (с) and the photogrammetric data (f), and the 
computer calculations comprise transformation of the 
target coordinates to the ground system and setting up 
the transformation matrix. The planes are fitted to the 
sets of points by the method of least square, and 
direction cosines are determined from a symmetrical 
coefficient matrix and subsequently transformed by 
the transformation matrix. The planes may then be 
described in terms of dip-direction and dip. The last 
part of the computational phase involves the 
calculations of proper errors. 


NOTES 


1 The summary of equipment and procedure described 
provide an introduction to the technique and it is desirable to 
obtain the services of a trained photogrammetrist for 
determination of orientation of the discontinuity planes by 
photogrammetric method. 


2 In any photogrammetric system, the sources of errors have 
to be considered relating to film, camera, plotting instrument, 
recording method, control survey, earth curvature, 
atmospheric refraction and instrument operator errors. 
Compared to the other sources of errors, the operating errors 
caused by the instrument operator are very significant. These 
are mainly due to the limitation in the operators 
stereoscopic perception and due to misinterpretation. The 
operator must make arbitrary decisions as to the positioning 
of the floating marks in the instrument if discontinuity 
images are poorly defined. These operating errors can 
usually be kept to tolerable errors by using large base/ 
distance ratios. 


3 In highly altered or weathered rock, it may be difficult 
to distinguish the geological features in photographs 
and discontinuities may be noted as rough surfaces. In such a 
case, the error may be significant. 


4 Considerable amount of useful information is obtained 
from the photogrammetric mapping techniques in 
addition to orientation of discontinuity planes, for example, 
roughness profiles of individual discontinuity, overall 
distribution of discontinuity spacing, discontinuity 
persistence and general condition of rock surface. In 
addition, stereo-pairs exposed at different stages during the 
life of a project (an open pit), provide a permanent 
visual record, which can be specially useful, when 
extrapolating major features. 


IS 11315 (Part 1) : 2023 


7 PRESENTATION OF RESULTS 
7.1 Strike and Dip Symbols 


The simplest methods of data presentation are the 
strike and dip symbols drawn in the correct location on 
the geological map of the area. For example: 


45° represents a discontinuity (joint) with a dip of 45° 
and strike as shown by the orientation of the line. The 
dip direction is indicated by the down-dip symbol. 


represents a horizontal discontinuity (joint). 


Ф 


represents а vertical discontinuity (joint) 
with a strike as shown by the orientation of 
the line. 


7.1.1 Further detail can be obtained by using different 
symbols to represent the various types of 
discontinuities. For example: 


Joints CN), bedding CS), foliation CX). 


7.1.2 The outcrop of major discontinuities should be 
drawn directly on geological maps. For example, thick 
continuous lines (—) can be used for major, persistent 


discontinuities that are visible, and thick broken lines 
(- - - -) for major discontinuities whose persistence is 
implied, but which are locally covered. 


7.2 Block Diagrams 


At an early stage in the assessment and 
communication of raw field data, it is helpful to 
present orientation measurements qualitatively using 
some visual technique. Perspective drawings such as 
that shown in Fig. 5A help to give an overall view of 
the relationship between the engineering structure and 
the rock mass structure. (If available, a stress ellipsoid 
giving the measured principal stress vectors might also 
be presented on such a diagram, to aid in the 
evaluation of the optimum orientation of the 
structure). 


7.2.1 On a more detailed scale block diagrams can be 
used, such as that illustrated in Fig. 5B. Many types of 
structures can be represented in this idealized manner, 
for example, tunnel portals, cross-sections through 
tunnels or large rock caverns, rock slopes, dam 
abutments, etc (depending upon the scale, the 
discontinuity spacing and persistence may be 
represented in addition to the orientation). 


7.2.2 Block diagrams showing ‘excavated’ corners as 
in Fig. 5С give a visual impression of the rock 
structure. They are also a useful substitute for 
photographs where foliage or soil cover partly 
obscure the exposure. 


7.2.3 In the examples shown in Fig. 5, it is helpful to 
number the joint sets, show the orientation relative to 
true N, and list the dip direction and dip at the site of 
the diagram (this is also helpful when presenting 
photographs of rock mass structures). 


7.3 Joints Rosettes 


A common method of plotting and presenting a large 
number of orientation measurements in a more 
quantitative manner than the above is by means of 
joint rosettes. 


7.3.1 In this instance, measurements are represented 
on a simplified compass rose, marked from 0° to 360° 
(or 08 to 4008) with radial lines at 
10° intervals.Observations are grouped in the nearest 
10° sectors. The number of observations аге 
represented along the radial axes, using numbered 
concentric circles representing 5, 10 and 15 
observations or as convenient. The resulting strike 
‘petals’ have mirror images about the centre of the 
rosette. The range of dip observations for each 
discontinuity set cannot be represented within the 
rosette and shall, therefore, be shown outside the 
circumference 


NOTE — Measurements of strike or dip direction of sub- 
horizontal discontinuities are inherently unreliable. Therefore, 
in general, such features cannot be represented satisfactorily 
using joint rosettes. It should be noted that, although the joint 
rosette is a widely used polar diagram, it misrepresents the data 
to some extent. Large concentrations are exaggerated and 
small concentrations are suppressed. This bias results from the 
fact that areas in each angle sector vary with the square of the 
radial coordinate, whereas in a true histogram, the area of each 
bar or sector should vary with the frequency, not with the 
square of the frequency. 


7.3.2 Figure 6 shows two methods of representing 
orientation data on a joint rosette. The observations 
grouped in the nearest 10” sectors can be represented 
either as solid radial sectors (left hand side) or their 


2. 230° / 85° 
3. 095° / 90° 
4. 180° / 86° 


1. 055° / 85° 
2. 285° /70° 
3. 030° /32° 


EN 
SIR 
Moy 


35° 
ჯა 
У 2227. ქი ТЭГ 
2. 130° / 15° 
3. 285° / 85° 


= 


Fic. 5 PERSPECTIVE VIEWS AND BLOCK DIAGRAMS PROVIDE A QUALITATIVE PICTURE OF JOINTING AND ITS 
RELATIONSHIP TO ENGINEERING STRUCTURES 


IS 11315 (Part 1) : 2023 


«У 


= 


FIG. 6 TWO METHODS OF REPRESENTING ORIENTATION DATA ON A JOINT ROSETTE 


strike values average resulting in sharp ‘petals’ (right 
hand side). The latter method reduces the bias referred 
to above, but may not be satisfactory if there is little 
dispersion of the data (the radius of the polar diagram 
can be used to good effect in plotting other parameters 
than the frequency of observation. A particularly 
useful parameter is the total observed length of 
discontinuities of given orientation). 


7.4 Spherical Projection 


Several projection methods are used to represent the 
orientation of geological planes. The geological text 
books give comprehensive discussions of the various 
techniques available. In this standard, only one 
projection is being mentioned, the equal area 
projection (in this method, the spatial distribution of 
data is accurately represented on a Schmidt or 
Lambert net. In the case of equal angle projection, the 
angular relationships between features are accurately 
represented by plotting data on a wulff net). 


7.4.1 A discontinuity plane (a/f) can be uniquely 
represented as a great circle or as a pole on a reference 
hemisphere, when the centre of the sphere lies in the 
plane of the discontinuity (Fig. 7A). For engineering 
purposes, the lower reference hemisphere is used. A 
two-dimensional representation is obtained by 
projecting this information onto an equal area net. 


7.4.2 In Fig. 7A, the pole P of the discontinuity K is 
the point of intersection of the normal to the plane 
with the lower hemisphere. To plot the pole on a polar 


equal area net (Fig. 7B), the dip is counted from the 
centre of the net at right angles to the strike towards 
the periphery. 


7.4.3 To plot the plane as a great circle on an equatorial 
equal area net (Fig. 7C), the strike (+ 90°) is counted 
from north clockwise on the periphery using a 
rotatable tracing or plastic overlay on which N has 
been marked. The dip is plotted at right angles to the 
strike, measured from the periphery towards the 
centre. The pole P can also be represented on the 
equatorial equal area net, both nets yielding the same 
geometrical distribution of poles. 


7.4.4 The polar equal area net is the most convenient 
for plotting poles as no rotation of overlay is 
necessary. The first step in obtaining mean orientation 
data for the different discontinuity sets requires that 
clusters of poles can be visually recognised. The 
Schmidt contouring method is used to determine the 
pole densities, an example of which is shown in 
Fig. 8. 


7.4.5 The contouring involves superimposing a square 
grid on the equal area net. A circle, shown in Fig. 8, 
which represents 1 percent of the total area of the 
equal area net, is placed with its centre at the grid 
intersections. 


The number of poles within the circle is counted and 
noted on each grid intersection. Pole densities can then 
be contoured, using up to six contour intervals. 


DISCONTINUITY ( K ) ~ N 


LOWER HEMISPHERE ~, 


(а) 


VV 270° 


FIG. 7 METHOD OF REPRESENTING A DISCONTINUITY K AS A POLE P AND AS A GREAT CIRCLE ON (A) POLAR 
EQUAL-AREA NET (B) AND ON AN EQUATORIAL EQUAL-AREA NET (C) USING THE LOWER REFERENCE HEMISPHERE. 
A ROTATABLE TRANSPARENT OVERLAY IS USED WITH THE EQUATORIAL EQUAL-AREA NET 


IS 11315 (Part 1): 2023 


7.4.6 The central value of the highest concentration of 
poles can be taken as representing the mean 
orientation of the given set of discontinuities. 
However, since there are variations from the 
mean,orientation is strictly a random variable with a 
certain dispersion associated with each mean value. 
Probability techniques are recommended for a more 
precise analysis (It should be noted that density 
contours obtained by the Schmidt method violate 
probability theory since poles are counted more than 


once). 


7.4.7 Figure 9 illustrates the use of equatorial equal 
area nets for plotting both poles and great circles to 
represent typical rock mechanics problems, such as 
31006 stability. Spherical projection methods of 
greatest value where stability depends on the relative 
three-dimensional orientation of discontinuities and 
free surfaces. 


UNIT AREA = 1 % OF 
AREA OF DIAGRAM 


2 : 80 
+ 
' 


М 
Хос 100౬ 


FIG. 8 SCHMIDT CONTOUR DIAGRAM REPRESENTING THE ORIENTATION OF THE THREE SETS OF JOINTS PLOTTED ON A 
POLAR EQUAL-AREA NET. THE MAIN SET 1 AND 2 ARE APPROXIMATELY NORMAL TO EACH OTHER AND THE MINOR 
SET 3 IS NEARLY HORIZONTAL 


10 


POLES OF INDIVIDUAL 
JOINT PLANES 


/ / A, CIRCULAR FAILURE IM 
HEAVILY JOINTED ROCK 
WITH NO IDENTIFIABLE 
STRUCTURAL PATTERN 


GREAT CIRCLE RELEVENT 
TO POLE CONCENTRATION 


/ POLE CONCENTRATION 


B, PLANE FAILURE IN HIGHLY 
ORDERED STRUCTURE SUCH 
AS SLATE 


C, WEDGE FAILURE ON TWO 
INTERSECTING SETS OF JOINTS 


D, TOPPLING FAILURE CAUSED 
BY STOOPLY DIPPING JOINT 


FIG. 9 REPRESENTATION OF STRUCTURAL DATA CONCERNING FOUR POSSIBLE SLOPE FAILURE MODES, PLOTTED ON 
EQUATORIAL EQUAL-AREA NETS AS POLES AND GREAT CIRCLES 


11 


IS 11315 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 


Amberg Technologies, Gurugram 


Border Roads Organisation, New Delhi 


Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 


Central Soil & Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Institute of Mining & Fuel Research, 


Dhanbad 


CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Technology-ISM, Dhanbad 


Indian Society for Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling 


Technology, New Delhi 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


12 


Representative(s) 
DR N. К SAMADHIYA (Chairperson) 
SHRI AKHIL RAJ 


SHRI KRIPAL CHOUDHARY 
SHRI RAKESH PANDITA (Alternate) 


LT COL ANIL RAJ 


DR G. P. PATEL 
SHRI UDAY CHANDER (Alternate) 


SHRI HARI DEV 
SHRI MAHABIR DIXIT (Alternate) 


SHRI RIZWAN ALI 
DR S. A. BURELE (Alternate) 


SHRI DARPAN TALWAR 
M. S. HARSHITHA (Alternate) 


DR SHANTANU SARKAR 
SHRI KOUSHIK PANDIT (Alternate) 


DR J. K. MOHNOT 
DR R. D. DWIVEDI (Alternate) 


DR РАМКА] GUPTA 
SHRI R. K. PANIGRAHI (Alternate) 


DR ALTAF USMANI 
SHRI SAIKAT PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR TRIPATHI 
SHRI D. P. DANGWAL (Alternate) 


PROF R. AYOTHIRAMAN 


PROF PRASHANTH V ANGLA (Alternate) 


DR MAHENDRA SINGH 
DR PRITI MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 


PROF A. K. MISHRA 
DR R. K. SINHA (Alternate) 


DR C. S. KHOKHAR 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA 


SHRI SHANKAR KUMAR SAHA (Alternate) 


Organization 
National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi 
National Highways & Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited, Delhi 
National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 
National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Limited, 
Faridabad 
National Institute of Rock Mechanics, Bengaluru 
NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Rail Vikas Nigam Limited, New Delhi 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 


THDC India Limited, Rishikesh 

In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 4123, Tower 4, 
ACE Golfshire, Sector-150, Noida) 

In Personal Capacity (Naimex House, A-8, Mohan 
Co-operative Industrial Estate, Mathura Road, 


New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity (Jal Vidyut Apts, Sector 21-C, 
Faridabad) 


In Personal Capacity (A-125. Prodhyagiki 
Apartment, Sector-3, Dwarka, New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity (C-1004, Park View City-2, 
Sector-49, Gurugram) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


JS (MITIGATION) 
DR RAVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV MALIK 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR JHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI RAJESH KUMAR 
SHRI AJAY KUMAR VERMA (Alternate I) 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR GARNAYAK (Alternate II) 


DR A. RAJAN BABU 
SHRI G. GOPINATH (Alternate) 


SHRIN. K. JAIN 
SHRI PRAKASH RAWAT (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT JAIN 
SHRI VIIAY DANGWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHISHEK SAMPATRAO BHOSALE 


SHRIMATI JYOTSNA DIXIT 
SHRI SANDEEP SINGH NIRMAL (Alternate) 


SHRIT. 5. ROUTELA 
SHRI SAMRAT MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRIR. K. GOEL 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 


SHRI IMRAN SAYEED 


DR RAJBAL SINGH 


DR MANOJ VERMAN 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
DR MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:CED 48 (19662). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


