IS 13041 : 2013 


(Reaffirmed 2018) 


IRRA HAF 
za ed agi oH fatet, 
mia a va-tara at farra 
(LATTA) 
( Veer FRAT ) 


Indian Standard 


RECOMMENDATIONS FOR INSPECTION, TESTING 
AND MAINTENANCE OF HYDRAULIC HOIST 
(AFTER ERECTION) 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


August 2013 Price Group 2 


Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee, WRD 12 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


The hoists of gates should be properly maintained through proper inspection to ensure smooth operation of gate 
leaves at all times, and to keep good maintenance. This standard is being formulated with a view to providing 
guidance for proper inspection, testing and maintenance of hydraulic hoists. 


This standard was first published in 1991; however, the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard 
decided to revise it based on the experience gained since then as well as considering technological development 
in this field. 


This standard may be read in conjunction with IS 10210 : 1993 ‘Criteria for design of hydraulic hoists for gates’ 
for better appreciation of various terms and definitions. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 13041 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


RECOMMENDATIONS FOR INSPECTION, TESTING 
AND MAINTENANCE OF HYDRAULIC HOIST 
(AFTER ERECTION) 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down the recommendations for 
inspections, testing and maintenance of hydraulic hoist. 


2 GENERAL 


The performance and life of hydraulic hoist is directly 
dependent on gate which is coupled to the hoist and as 
such the gates should be kept in good condition at all 


times. 


3 INSPECTION AND TESTING 


3.1 Points to be checked before putting hydraulic hoist 
into first operation: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


Before first fill of oil, check the cleanliness 
of the entire hydraulic oil pipe line circuit by 
blowing preferably with dry air. 


The entire hydraulic pipe line system should 
be tested at 1.5 times of the operating pressure 
with oil using a hand pump or an external 
motor driven hydraulic pump for 30 min 
(minimum). It should be inspected for leakage 
and rectify the same, if any. 

Flushing of pipes with oil/flushing fluid 
should be done after installation before 
connecting to hydraulic cylinder. Flushing 
fluid should be compatible with the hydraulic 
working fluid. 

Before putting on the drive motors, oil level 
in tank should be checked and to be filled-in 
or top up to be done up to adequate level. 
Pumps, valves, hydraulic cylinders, pipe and 
pipe fittings should be properly cleaned. 
Before first running, check that all valves are 
in normal position as represented in the 
hydraulic diagram. Ensure the setting of 
pressure relief valves/safety valves, pressure 
switches, temperature controllers and pressure 
unloading valves to the prescribed value. 
Check that all electrical connections in 
between electrical control panel to power 
pack, limit switches and position are in 


g) 


h) 


D 


k) 


m) 


accordance with electrical circuit diagram. 
Voltage of control circuit should be checked. 


In case shut off valve is provided between tank 
and pump suction line, it shall be ensured that 
it is kept fully open to prevent damage to the 
pump. 

Insulation resistance of the power pack motors 
should be checked before connecting to power 
source. Energize with electric power and the 
motor should be inched to check the direction 
of rotation of motor. The direction should be 
corrected, if necessary. 

When the motor is put on, raise the system 
pressure slowly to its working pressure. The 
relief valves, solenoid valves and directional 
valves should be adjusted for the working 
pressure. 


Actuate the directional valves to operate the 
hoist until one operation is completed. 


3.2 Periodical Inspection and Testing 


1. 


Periodical inspection of hydraulic hoist and 
power pack shall be carried out to detect 
leakage of oil, if any. It shall be done as and 
when necessary, but at least once a year prior 
to the onset of monsoon/high flood season. 
The hoists should be operated up and down 
several times to make sure that system is in 
order. 


The control panel should be energized and 
all the alarms, interlocks and trip logics 
provided by the power pack manufacturer 
should be tested. 

The strip heater provided inside the control 
panel should be checked and tested for its 
functioning. 

Functioning of limit switches/proximity probe, 
pressure switches and indication lamps should 
be checked for proper working. 


Pumps, valves, hydraulic cylinders, pipe and 
pipe fittings should be properly cleaned. 


Removing/bleeding the air from the hydraulic 


IS 13041 : 2013 


10. 


11. 


12. 


13: 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 


18. 


19. 


20. 


21. 


22. 


cylinder should be done through vent valve 
at the time of commissioning or re- 
commissioning of the hydraulic hoist. 

The hydraulic hoist system should be run for 
at least 5 to 6 cycles on load. Joints and fittings 
should be tightened in no load condition, 
where leakages appear at the time of 
commissioning/re-commissioning or during 
running. All the pipelines are to be checked 
for vibration-free condition, tightness of 
fittings and bolting and tight seat of pipe 
clamps. 

Operating temperature in the oil tank and 
bearing of the pump should be checked. 


The alignment of pump-motor set should be 
checked regularly. 

Breather screws should be checked. It should 
be loosened and after clear oil free from 
foaming and air comes out, it should be 
tightened. 

Hoist supporting structures should be checked 
particularly against deformation, crack and 
corrosion, etc, in every six months for outdoor 
installation and once in a year for indoor 
installation. This checking should also be done 
before commissioning/re-commissioning of 
the hoist system. 

Tightness of all the fasteners of hoist structure 
and hoist components should be checked at 
least once in a year. 

Gauges should be checked and re-calibrated, 
once in two years. 

The main oil and head tank should be checked 
against leakage, contamination or deposit of 
sludge. These should be kept absolutely 
cleaned and free from water. 

Hoses should be inspected once in six months 
and replaced, if required. 

All warning and safety indicators (alarm) 
should be checked once in a year. 

Hoist stem should be inspected once in a year 
for pitting or corrosion. 

All the pipe joints should be checked and 
tightened if found loose. 

The quality of oil should be checked twice a 
year. 

Condition and effectiveness of hand pump 
should be checked and should be attended, if 
required. 

Creep setting should be checked and if found 
necessary, should be adjusted suitably. 
Crack opening if any, should be checked and 
should be adjusted, if found necessary. 


23% 


24. 


25. 


Functioning of dampening/cushioning devises 
should be checked and should be adjusted, if 
found necessary. 

Besides normal closing, the emergency 
closings should also to be checked and 
ensured. 

The run out of the piston rod should be 
checked once in a year. 


NOTE — Checking of oil can be done by placing a drop of oil 
taken from the system on white filter paper. If the oil is good, 
a clear spot occurs whereas aged oil leaves dark spot which 
becomes larger and darker. The strainer and filter should be 
checked up against contamination. 


4 PERIODICAL MAINTENANCE 


4.1 The maintenance of hydraulic hoist mechanism 
should be done regularly. Reference should be made 
to manufacturer’s instructions for detailed maintenance 
and servicing of hoists. Proper record of inspection, 
testing and maintenance should be made by the project 
authority. 


4.2 The following maintenance works should be 
attended to: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Seals — Only ‘O’ rings, copper sealing, 
teflon tapes and the like are suitable for 
sealing. In no case hemp and puttey are to be 
used as sealing material. 

Oil — Viscosity and contamination of oil 
should be checked once in a year and the oil 
should be replenished, if necessary. Oil should 
be cleaned and dried at regular intervals by 
engaging centrifuge with drier or by any other 
suitable method. Independently from the 
simple inspection, a laboratory investigation 
should be done every 2 years. If oil change is 
necessary, the total hydraulic oil shall be 
drained. The oil tank shall be cleaned and 
pipelines shall be occasionally flushed. 

Pipe and pipe connections — Pipes should 
be thoroughly cleaned prior to installation by 
weak acid or by dry cleaning. Flushing of 
pipes with oil/flushing fluid should be done 
after installation and repair before connecting 
to hydraulic cylinder. Before commissioning/ 
re-commissioning, the entire hydraulic pipe 
line system should be tested at 1.5 times of 
the operating pressure with oil using a hand 
pump. It should be inspected for any leakage 
which shall be rectified. It should be ensured 
that the pipe connections shall be made with 
high pressure fittings or flanged joints with 
‘O’ rings or welded blocks. Special attention 
should be paid to the absolute tightness of 
fittings and boltings. At least every six months 
the hydraulic hose lines shall be checked. If 


d) 


e) 


the rubber seems to be brittle and shows 
cracks, the hose line shall be replaced 
immediately. 

Repairs and replacement of electrical relays, 
controls and solenoid valves, limit switches/ 
proximity switches should be attended to. 
Suspension devices of cylinder should be kept 
suitable greased. 


If there are unusual sounds in the stuffing box, 
cylinder stem should be lubricated. If the 
sound persists further investigation shall be 
made. 


IS 13041 : 2013 


g) One set of pump-motor should run alternatively 


to other set for certain period as programmed 
by the Project authority so as to keep all are in 
running/working condition. Smooth running of 
pumps should be observed. Excessive and 
abnormal development of noises means defect 
in bearings or other damages. The respective 
pump should be replaced/repaired. 


4.3 A typical inspection and maintenance schedule is 
given below: 


Suggestive Inspection and Maintenance Schedule for Hydraulic Hoist 


Item 


Hydraulic cylinder 


Cylinder bearings 
Pipe and flexible hose line 


Hydraulic equipment 
(valves, gauges) 


Pumps 
Moist air absorber 
Oil filter 


Oil inspection and oil 
change 


Maintenance Operation 


Visual inspection for leakage 

Visual inspection of scraper and piston 
Bleed out air 

Operation of the hoist 

Visual corrosion inspection 


Lubrication and visual corrosion inspection 


Visual inspection (check corrosion, tightness, fixing of the 
pipes and ageing of rubber parts) 


Visual inspection and cleaning 


Check smooth running 
Visual inspection 

Visual inspection 

Visual inspection 

Send oil sample to laboratory 


Maintenance 
Interval 


15 days 

3 months 
3 months 
6 months 
12 months 


12 months 
6 months 


Monthly 


Monthly 
Monthly 
3 months 
12 months 
24 months 


IS 13041 : 2013 


ANNEX A 


(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee, WRD 12 


Organization 
NHPC Ltd, Faridabad 
Bhakra BEAS Management Board, Punjab 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal 
Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 


Central Water & Power Research Station, Pune 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Himachal Pradesh Power Corporation Ltd, Sunder Nagar 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


Jaypee Ventures Pvt Limited, Noida 


Jessop & Co Ltd, Kolkata 


M/s Precision Infratech Ltd, Ahmedabad 


NHPC Ltd, Faridabad 


Orissa Construction Corporation Ltd, Bhubaneshwar 


P. E. S. Engineers (P) Ltd, Hyderabad 
R. M. Sinha & Co, Kolkatta 


Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam Limited, Kinnaur 
Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Chennai 
Texmaco Ltd, Kolkatta 


Water Resources Department, CDO, Nasik 


Water Resources Development & Management, Roorkee 


In personal capacity [N-2, Kalkaji (Ist Floor), New Delhi 110019] 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 103, SAI Raghava Towers, Plot No. 30, 
New Colony, Behind IBP Petrol Bunk, Miyapur, Bollaram, 'X' Roads, 


Hyderabad) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Suri V. K. Maini (Chairman) 


Deputy CHIEF ENGINEER 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 


Suri J. S. HANSPAL 


Suri R. K. Rustoci 
Suri M. K. KHANDELWAL (Alternate) 


Suri V. V. BHOSEKAR 
Dr R. G. Pati (Alternate) 


Director Gates (E&NE) 
Director (GATES-NW&S) (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. Kort 
Suri N. K. KAusHaL (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (DESIGN) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA SINGH 
Suri V. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR KUMAR GANGOPADHYAY 
SHRI RANA PRATAP KARMAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI NALIN VIBHAKAR 
SHRI Amit VIBHAKAR (Alternate) 


Suri Rats MIAN 
Suri SUBIR PANDEY (Alternate) 


Suri A. P. PATTANAIK 
Suri B. Deo (Alternate) 


Suri M. A. PARTHASARATHY 


SHRI SANJIT KUMAR SINHA 
Suri Deposit SINHA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIV PRASAD 
Suri THIRU K. SEKAR 


SHRI S. R. SINHA 
SHRI UDAYAN BANERIEE (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (GATES) 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (G.0.-4) (Alternate) 


ProF GopAL CHAUHAN 
Suri K. C. BAHETY 


Suri N. KANNAIAH NAIDU 


Suri J. C. Arora, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (WRD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Dr R. R. DasH 


Scientist ‘C? (WRD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 12 (0511). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


