RAT Alte IS 14458 (Part 6) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Ustet aa ch feu ofan 
fata — miei Arata 
art 6 Waren Ar stant cat Frater 


Retaining Wall For Hill 
Area — Guidelines 


Part 6 Construction of Gabion Walls 


ICS 93.020 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2020 Price Group 3 


Hill Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 56 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 6) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Hill Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


Retaining walls are structures, which support the backfill and maintain the difference in elevation of the two 
ground surfaces. They are generally located at the toe of cut slopes on the valley side of a hill road section or 
excavated platform. Retaining walls are effectively utilized to tackle the problems of landslide in hill areas by 
providing support to the hill slopes or cut slopes. 


If the retaining walls are not provided at the toe of hill excavations, the gradual slope degradation may often 
lead to progressive slope instability and environmental degradation resulting from unprotected excavation. This 
standard (Part 6) is therefore formulated to provide necessary guidelines for construction of gabion retaining wall 
for the protection of cut slopes in the hills. The other parts formulated in the series are: 


Part 1 : 1998 Selection of type of wall 

Part 2 : 1997 Design of retaining/breast walls 

Part 3 : 1998 Construction of dry stone walls 

Part 4 : 2018 Construction of banded dry stone masonry walls 


Part 5 : 2018 Construction of cement stone masonry walls 


Further parts being formulated are: 
a) Construction of RCC crib walls, 
b) Design of RCC cantilever walls/buttressed walls/L-type walls, and 
c) Design and construction of reinforced earth retaining walls. 


The choice of a particular type of retaining wall is dependent on the nature of ground including geology, budget 
and availability of construction materials in the vicinity. A gabion retaining wall is a gravity retaining structure, 
which retains soil with its weight and section. These are extensively used in hill infrastructures as a toe support 
for cut slopes and natural slopes. The high porosity and permeability of gabions prevent the pore-water pressure 
development behind the walls. Unlike walls made of rigid structures, such as cement stone masonry and RCC, 
gabion walls have the advantage of being able to withstand large deformations without cracking and are flexible. 
These walls, therefore, are suitable in various field conditions, particularly where the terrains are liable to become 
saturated and where the foundation is composed of relatively compressible materials like debris and other 
unconsolidated materials. 


Since low to medium height gabion walls are extensively constructed in hills for various purposes, this standard 
focuses on gabion walls up to 6 m height and provides guidelines to field engineers for the construction of such 
gabion retaining wall. If required, depending upon the site conditions, the engineer-in-charge may validate the 
design before construction. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 14458 (Part 6) : 2020 


Indian Standard 


RETAINING WALL FOR HILL AREA — GUIDELINES 
PART 6 CONSTRUCTION OF GABION WALLS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 6) deals with the construction 
aspects of gabion walls used for protecting cut slopes 
as well as natural slope at the toe of slope. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. 


432 (Part 2) : 
1982 


Title 


Specification for mild steel and 
medium tensile steel bars and 
hard drawn steel wire for concrete 
reinforcement: Part 2 Hard-drawn 
steel wire (third revision) 


14458 (Part 5) 
: 2016 


Retaining wall for hill areas — 
Guidelines: Part 5 Construction of 
cement stone masonry walls 


16013 : 2012 Welded wire gabions (metallic- 
coated or metallic-coated with 


PVC coating) — Specification 


Mechanically woven, double- 
twisted, hexagonal wire mesh 
gabions, revet attresses and rock 
fall netting (galvanized steel wire 
or galvanized steel Wire with PVC 
coating) — Specification 


16014 : 2012 


3 GENERAL 


Gabion is a wire fabric container, which is systematically 
partitioned with variable size units, interconnected 
with other similar containers and filled with suitable 
stones at the site of use to form flexible, permeable and 
monolithic structures and serve the purpose of retaining 
walls as well as other uses, like sea walls, channel 
lining, revetments and wires. 


A gabion retaining wall is a gravity retaining structure, 
and retains soil with its weight and section. These are 


extensively used in hill infrastructures as a toe support 
for cut slopes and natural slopes. The high porosity 
and permeability of gabions prevent the pore-water 
pressure development behind the walls, which is a 
major advantage here. Unlike walls made of rigid 
structures, such as cement stone masonry and RCC, 
gabion walls have the advantage of being able to 
withstand large deformations without cracking and are 
flexible. These structures blend with the surroundings 
and allow vegetation to take roots through the structure 
which enhances the life of the structure. 


The gabion walls are suitable in various field conditions, 
particularly where the terrains are liable to become 
saturated and where the foundation is composed of 
relatively compressible materials like debris and other 
unconsolidated materials. Hence, gabion walls are 
widely used in rugged hilly terrains. Gabion walls are 
relatively simple to construct. Where suitable rock 
blocks are readily available as fill material, the use of 
gabion walls is particularly attractive for reasons of 
economy and speed of construction. 


Keeping this in view, effective utilization of gabions 
has been adopted in many of the infrastructures like 
highways, railways, bridges, road structures, river front 
structures, bridge abutments, culvert protection works 
and in a number of other uses. This standard particularly 
deals with its utilization as a retaining wall at the toe of 
cut slopes and natural slopes. 


4 MAIN COMPONENTS 
RETAINING WALL 


OF GABION 


Gabion retaining wall is a gravity structure, made up 
of row upon row of orthogonal cages or baskets of 
varying sizes, which are filled with rock blocks and tied 
together. Gabion walls have three major components 
namely gabion box, stone for filling gabion and backfill. 


4.1 Gabion Box 


It is a rectangular box fabricated using heavily 
galvanized and double twisted steel woven wire mesh 
(see Fig. 1). Steel woven wire mesh is common for 
retaining wall purposes. The box is divided into cells by 
transverse diaphragms. For using the gabions in harsh 
and aggressive environments additional PVC coating 
is done over the heavily galvanized steel wire. Nylon, 
polypropylene and polyethylene materials may be used 
in specific conditions. 


IS 14458 (Part 6) : 2020 


Fic.1 View oF GABION Box SHOWING ITS 
COMPONENTS 


Gabions are manufactured with all components 
mechanically connected at the production facility. The 
external face and top lid are made from the same mesh. 
The ends, back, and diaphragm are connected to the 
base at the installation site by helical wires or other 
methods. All perimeter edges of the mesh forming 
the basket have selvedge with wires having diameter 
of about 1.5 times that of the wire-mesh to prevent 
unravelling. The gabion base, top and sides should be 
formed from a single piece of mesh. The completely 
woven wire mesh box can stretch or contract in two 
directions in its own plane and thus a rectangular wire- 
mesh basket filled with rock blocks can deform in any 
direction. Welded wire-mesh is also manufactured 
from steel wire electrically welded at each intersection. 
It does not have the ability to stretch and contract so 
that the baskets are less flexible as compared to woven 
wire-mesh gabions. Gabions are supplied to project site 
from factory with its components folded flat, collapsed 
and packed in bundles (see Fig. 2). 


Fic. 2 STACK OF FOLDED GABION BUNDLES 


A variety of cage sizes are used taking into account 
the availability of materials and to suit the terrain. 
However, the modules of 2 m x 1 m x 1 m with 2 m 
being parallel to the hill face is the commonly adopted 
gabions size in the hills. The above type of simple boxes 
are used for gabion walls up to 6 m height. However, 
if the walls are to be designed for more heights, strong 
boxes to withstand higher gravity loads are required. 
For that purpose, additional measures, such as bracing 
wire/stiffener as well as spenax fasteners/overlapping 
fasteners/steel rings can be provided in addition to other 
safety measures. Since low to medium height gabion 
walls are extensively constructed in hills for various 
purposes, this standard focuses on gabion walls up to 
6m. If more height of the wall is required, a horizontal 
or inclined (up to 30°) bench/platform shall be provided 
at 6 m height (see Fig. 3) having a bench width of 3 m. 
Further walls for more height can be planned safely by 
providing such benches. 


INCLINED 


GROUND 
SURFACE 


V, 


Fic.3 INCLINED (25° To 30°) BENCH AT 6 m HEIGHT OF 
GaABION WALL 


4.2 Gabion infill Material 


Rock blocks used for filling gabions should be fresh 
to fairly fresh, hard, angular to sub-rounded, durable, 
clean and well graded. Weathered rock bocks shall 
not be used as they tend to break under loading. Care 
should be taken to ensure good quality that they do not 
lose their integrity on exposure to atmosphere or water 
during the life of the structure. The maximum size of 
the rock block should not exceed two-thirds the depth 
of the gabion to be filled or 300 mm, whichever is less. 
The preferred size is 150 mm to 300 mm. The smallest 
dimension of the rock block should at least be twice the 
largest dimension of the mesh aperture. 


4.3 Backfill 


The hill cutting for Gabion wall construction is 
generally minimum particularly in case of low height 
walls (< 3 m). However, it may be considerable in case 
if the height of wall is more. If the width of the backfill 
is 0.5 m or more, the inverted filters as suggested in 
7 of IS 14458 (Part 5) is recommended here as back 
fill. If the width of the backfill is less than 0.5 m, free 


draining materials ranging from small boulders to 
coarse sand shall be dumped in the gap between the 
wall and hill cutting. In all cases of backfill, the top 
0.5 m thickness shall be filled tightly with natural 
soil or impervious clayey soil to prevent ingress of 
surface water into the backfill material. The growth of 
vegetation on the top soil and penetrating roots through 
the structure of gabion in short time will help to blend 
it with the surroundings, which enhances the life of the 
structure. 


5 DESIGN CONSIDERTIONS 


The Gabion retaining walls up to 6 m height can be 
designed as unreinforced gravity retaining walls with 
the following general design consideration, which is 
found to be adequate based on preliminary analysis: 


a) Top width — 0.75 m to 1.0 m, and 
b) Base width — 0.6 to 0.75 H (H = height of wall). 


The Gabion retaining wall is constructed by placing 
gabion boxes systematically one over the other 
covering the entire length of the slope to be protected. 
The placement of the boxes can be generally done in 
three patterns — front stepped wall, back stepped wall as 
well as front and back stepped wall (see Fig. 4). It may 
be better if the walls are provided with a back batter 
(that is, having dip towards valley) of about 6 : 1 to 
10 : 1. The base of the wall should be embedded to a 
depth of 0.5 m to 0.75 m into the soil with increased 
depth in case of compressible type of soil. The 
front stepped gabion retaining wall with a batter of 
6 : 1 is more preferred in hilly terrains in view of its 
high stability and ability to take more deformation. 


6 TECHNICAL SEPCIFICATIONS OF GABION 


The technical specifications of various materials used 
in gabion structures should meet the requirements as 
specified in IS 16013 and IS 16014. 


GROUND Poeg 


IS 14458 (Part 6) : 2020 


7 CONSTRUCTION PRACTICE 


7.1 Foundation Preparation 


The construction of gabions starts with foundation 
preparation. The foundation is excavated to the 
desired width and depth. Loose pockets if any, shall 
be excavated and filled back with suitable granular 
or backfill material. The place should be cleared of 
standing water to ensure proper placement of gabions. 
The entire surface should be compacted well so that the 
density of compacted formation should be greater than 
or equal to 95 percent of the modified Proctor value. 
Later the formation shall be levelled without ruts and 
undulations 


7.2 Installation of Gabion Box 


The gabion panels are unfolded and laid over an even, 
levelled and hard surface. The side panels of hexagonal 
woven mesh gabions should be stretched taut by 
properly straightening them. The gabion boxes should 
be correctly assembled by folding the side panels and 
wiring them together so that all four corners match and 
form an exact rectangular shape and size as designed 
(see Fig. 5). The edges are laced together, starting 
from top corner and in a continuous operation using 
alternate single and double loop at the spacing of one 
mesh length. The ends of the lacing wire are secured at 
each corner. Individual ties of lacing wire should not be 
used. Alternatively, steel rings as mentioned in IS16014 
can be used which are attached using a mechanical tool. 
It should be ensured that the boundaries of all panels 
are suitably woven using the thick selvedge wires. 
Wherever possible, the vertical joints between the units 
should be staggered in adjacent courses to prevent 
the formation of weak vertical shear planes through 
the gabion wall and to give a better and more integral 
appearance. 


GROUND p is GROUND 9g i. z 
sme oga so Pe e ERER 
RAA DA DA N CRA DA DRAA kA DA DA AADA DA A 
a) FRONT STEPPED b) BACK STEPPED c) FRONT AND BACK 
GABION WALL GABION WALL STEPPED GABION WALL 


Fic. 4 DIFFERENT PATTERNS OF GABION WALL 


IS 14458 (Part 6) : 2020 


dlaphragm 


projecting selvedge wire 


ie 
folding lines. 
ee 


Secure dlaphragms 
to front and back 


Secure ends to side 


Fic. 5 INSTALLATION OF GABION 


7.3 Filling of Gabions 


The gabions should be tightly filled to ensure minimum 
voids. For better finish, the stone fill of the front face 
is first selected and placed carefully to give the best 
appearance. When using quarried/crushed rock blocks, 
they shall be selected in such a way that at least one 
face is flat-shaped. Some overfilling is recommended 
to allow for subsequent settlement of the rock infill. 
Sharp particles in crushed rocks may cause damage 
to the wire-mesh of gabions or its protective coating. 
Therefore, strict supervision is required to ensure proper 
filling. After filling, the lids of the gabions are closed so 
that they meet the top edges of the sides and ends of the 
box without leaving any gap. The mesh lids should be 
tied down to the tops of diaphragms provided as well 
as to the tops of the sides and ends. Facia of adjoining 
units shall be securely joined together along the vertical 
facing and top edges of their contact surfaces. 


Other boxes in the rows above are also placed and 
packed in position following the same procedure to 
complete the wall. 


7.4 Porosity Check 


The average porosity of the gabion boxes can be found 
out by weighing the filled boxes. The weight of the box 
can be compared with calculated weight of box. 


Assume the density of the stone (r ) = 26 kN/m’. 


In general, porosity (n) of the filled gabion box shall be 
around 30 to 40 percent 

Density of gabion would be r, = r, x (1 — n) ignoring 
air voids 


Assuming 35 percent porosity the density of gabion = 
16.9 kKN/m?. 


Hence, weight of 1.5 m x 1 m x 1 m Gabion box = 
1.5 x 16.9 = 25.35 KN ~ 2.5 ton 


The weight of the filled gabion box should be 
approximately equal to the calculated weight. 


7.5 Back-filling Behind Gabions 


The inverted filter material as specified in IS14458 
(Part 5) shall be used as back-fill behind the gabion 
wall. This shall be achieved by placing materials of 
desired sizes and compacting them in layers of 200 mm 
to 300 mm up to the top. However, in order to prevent 
the seepage of surface water into the backfill material, 
the top 500 mm shall be packed with natural soil or 
impervious clayey soil. 


IS 14458 (Part 6) : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSTION 


Hill Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 56 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (H No-F FA, Block - 
G Priya Sudarsana Apts, Melur Road, 
Srirangam Tiruchirappalli 620006), 
Tami Nadu 


AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 
Border Roads Organization, New Delhi 


Building Materials & Technology 
Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, 
Shillong 

Central Soil & Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


CSIR-Central Institute of Mining & Fuel 
Research, Roorkee 

CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, 
New Delhi 

Defence Terrain Research Laboratory 
(DRDO), Delhi 


Department of Science & Technology, 
Ministry of Science & Technology, 
New Delhi 


G. B. Pant Institute of Himalayan 
Environment Development, Almora 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 


Himalayan Environmental Studies & 
Conservation Organization, Dehradun 


Housing & Urban Development 
Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 


Indian Army Corps of Engineers, YOL 
CANTT 


Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, 
Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
Roorkee 


Representative(s) 


Dr R. ANBALAGAN (Chairman) 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 
SHRI AMAN KHULLAR (Alternate) 


Bric A. K. Das 
Lt Cor PARIKSHIT MEnRa (Alternate) 


Dr SHAILESH KUMAR AGARWAL 


SHRI SHEO PRASAD SINGH 
SHRI PREM CHAND Martuvr (Alternate) 


Dr MANISH GUPTA 
Suri Hart Das (Alternate) 


Director HCD (NW&S)) 
DIRECTOR (SARDAR SAROVAR) (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR 
Suri AJAI CHAURASIA (Alternate) 


Dr R. K. GoEL 
SHRI ANIL Swarup (Alternate) 


DR KISHOR KUMAR 
Dr Pankaj Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr L. K. SINHA 


SHRI BHOOP SINGH 


SHRI KIREET KUMAR 
SHRI SOUKHIN TARAFDAR (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. BODAS 
Dr T. B. Gosuat (Alternate) 


DR ANIL JosHI 

CHAIRMAN & MANAGING DIRECTOR 
BRIG VIRENDER SINGH KATTARYA 
Dr P. K. Cuampati Ray 


Dr Ajanta Goswam (Alternate) 


Dr M. N. VILADKAR 
Dr MAHENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


IS 14458 (Part 6) : 2020 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
Mumbai 


Konkan Railway Corporation, Navi 
Mumbai 


Maccaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt 
Ltd, Gurugram 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer- 
in-chief’s Branch, Integrated HQ of 
Ministry of Defence (Army), 

New Delhi 


National Centre for Seismology, 
New Delhi 


National Highway Authority of India, 
New Delhi 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation 
Ltd, HEPALI 


National Institute of Disaster Management, 
New Delhi 


National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee 


Rail Vikas Nigam Limited, New Delhi 
SJVN Limited, Shimla 


Snow Avalanche Study and Establishment, 
Chandigarh 


THDC India Limited, Rishikesh 


Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, 
Dehradun 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI RAJESH AGARWAL 


SHRIMATI MINIMOL KORULLA 
Dr H. S. Manpat (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI Rivoo MAHENDRU 
Suri S. K. Misura (Alternate) 


Dr O. P. MISHRA 
Dr H. S. Manpat (Alternate) 


Dr Ram KUMAR 
Suri R. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MURUGAPPAN 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri R. D. SINGH 
Dr Supuir Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT JAIN 
Suri A. K. CHADHA 


Cot P. MATHUR 


Suri T. S. ROUTELA 
Suri AJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr S. K. BARTARYA 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (Crvit ENGINEERING) (CED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Dr Manoj KUMAR RAJAK 


ScIENTIST ‘D’ (CrviL ENGINEERING) (CED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 56 (15021). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


