IMA Ah IS 11315 (Part 7) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


TA ATS A RR a ATA fa Ur ch 
REI 
ATT 7 ARE 


(TECH TARO) 


Methods for Quantitative Description 
of Discontinuities in Rock Masses 
Part 7 Filling 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.060 


O BIS 2023 


ARA AAA Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR A, 9 SEL IE SAM, Ag Reet - 110002 
e MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 6 


Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 7) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


A series of Indian Standard on test methods for assessing the strength characteristics of rocks and rock masses are 
being developed/revised in view of recent advances in the field of rock mechanics. The majority of rock 
masses, in particular, those within a few hundred metres from the surface, behave as discontinuous, with the 
discontinuities largely determining the mechanical behaviour. It is, therefore, essential that structure of a rock mass 
and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described and quantified to have a complete and unified descriptions 
of rock masses and discontinuities. Careful field descriptions will enhance the value of in-situ tests that are 
performed since the interpretation and extrapolation of results will be made more reliable. 


Discontinuity is the general term for any mechanical discontinuity in a rock mass, along which the rock mass has zero 
or low tensile strength. It is the collective term for most types of joints, weak bedding planes, weak schistosity planes, 
weakness zones, shear zones and faults. The ten parameters selected for rock mass survey to describe discontinuities 
are orientation, spacing, persistence, roughness, wall strength, aperture, filling, seepage, number of sets and block 
size. These parameters are also evaluated from the study of drill cores to obtain information on the discontinuities. 


It is essential that both the structures of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described for 
determining the mechanical behaviour. This Indian Standard, covering various parameters to describe discontinuities 
in rock masses. 


This standard (Part 7) covers the methods for quantitative description of discontinuities in rock masses for filling. 
This standard (Part 7) was first formulated in 1987. This revision incorporates the latest advancement and 
modifications based on the experience gained in the use of this standard. The other parts formulated in the series are: 


Part 1 Orientation 
Part 2 Spacing 

Part 3 Persistence 
Part 4 Roughness 

Part 5 Wall strength 
Part 6 Aperture 

Part 8 Seepage 

Part 9 Number of sets 
Part 10 Block size 

Part 11 Core recovery and rock quality designation 
Part 12 Drill core study 


Filling describe the material that separates the adjacent rock walls of a discontinuity, which is usually weaker than 
the parent rock. Typical filling materials are sand, silt, clay, breccia, gouge, mylonite. Also include thin mineral 
coatings and healed discontinuities, for example, quartz veins. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 11315 (Part 7) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTION OF 
DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASSES 
PART 7 FILLING 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 7) covers the method for the 
quantitative description of filling in the discontinuities 
in the rock mass. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which though reference in the text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the edition indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent edition of 
these standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions of 
terms given in IS 11358 shall apply. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 Filling is the term for material separating the 
adjacent rock walls of discontinuities, for example, 
calcite, chlorite, clay, silt, fault gouge, breccia, etc. 
The perpendicular distance between the adjacent rock 
walls is termed the width of the filled discontinuity, as 
opposed to the aperture of a gapped or open feature. 


4.2 Due to the enormous variety of occurrences, filled 
discontinuities display a wide range of physical 
behaviour, in particular as regards their shear 
strength, deformability and permeability. Short-term 
and long-term behaviour may be quite different such 
that it is easy to be misled by favourable short-term 
conditions. 


4.3 The wide range of physical behaviour depends on 
many factors of which the following are probably the 
most important: 


a) mineralogy of filling material; 

b) grading or particle size; 

c) over-consolidation ratio; 

d) water content and permeability; 

e) previous shear displacement; 

f) wall roughness; 

g) width; and 

h) fracturing or crushing of wall rock. 


4.4 Every attempt should be made to record the above 
factors, using quantitative descriptions, where 
possible, together with sketches and/or colour 


photographs of the most important occurrences. 
Certain index tests are suggested for a closer 
investigation of major discontinuities considered to be 
threat to stability. In special cases, the result of these 
field descriptions may warrant the recommendation 
for large scale in-situ testing, at least in the case of dam 
foundations or major slopes. 


5 PROCEDURE 


5.1 The minimum and maximum widths of simple 
filled discontinuities (for example, clay filled joints) 
should be measured to the nearest 10 percent and an 
estimate made of the most common (modal) width. 
Marked differences between the minimum and 
maximum widths may indicate that shear 
displacement has occurred if the walls are essentially 
unaltered or unweathered. 


5.1.1 In cases where fillings are thin it may be helpful 
to try to measure the mean amplitude of wall 
roughness using the straight edge, and compare this 
with the mean width of the filling as illustrated in 
Fig. 1. This will be especially valuable when 
assessing shear strength and deformation 
characteristics in detailed studies. 


5.1.2 The principal dimensions of complex filled 
discontinuities (for example, shear zones, crushed 
zones, faults, fault zones, dykes and lithological 
contacts) should be estimated, or measured to the 
nearest 10 percent, when possible. In the case of 
important occurrences, it is helpful to make field 
sketches such that the condition of the wall rock (that 
is, degree of associated fracturing and/or alternation) 
is also communicated (see examples in Fig. 2). 


5.2 Filled discontinuities that have originated as a 
result of preferential weathering along discontinuities 
may have fillings composed of decomposed rock, or 
disintegrated rock. The relevant type should be 
recorded: 


a) Decomposed — The rock is weathered to the 
condition of a soil in which the original 
material fabric is still intact, but some or all 
of the mineral grains are decomposed; and 


b) Disintegrated — The rock is weathered to the 
condition of a soil, in which the original 
material fabric is still intact. The rock is 
friable, but the mineral grains are not 
decomposed. 


IS 11315 (Part 7) : 2023 


ROUGHNESS AMPLITUDE 


FIG. 1 IN THE CASE OF SIMPLE FILLED DISCONTINUITIES, THE AMPLITUDE OF THE WALL AND THICKNESS OF THE 
FILLING CAN HELP TO INDICATE THE AMOUNT OF SHEAR DISPLACEMENT REQUIRED FOR ROCK CONTACT 
(STIFFENING) TO OCCUR (ZERO VOLUME CHANGE ASSUMED DURING SHEAR) 


IS 11315 (Part 7) : 2023 


FIG. 2 EXAMPLE OF FIELD SKETCHES OF COMPLEX FILLED DISCONTINUITIES 


IS 11315 (Part 7) : 2023 


5.3 For all types of filled discontinuities the finest 
fraction of the filling or gouge is of most interest since 
this usually controls the long-term shear strength. The 
mineralogical composition of the finer filling material 
should, therefore, be determined, especially in cases 
where active clays or swelling clays are suspected. 
Samples should be taken when in doubt concerning the 
mineralogy. 


NOTE — Hydrothermal alternation of gouge material and/or 
the deposition of hydrothermal products will complicate the 
mineralogical identification of fillings since products not 
associated with the petrography of the crushed rock or the wall 
rock may be present. 


5.3.1 In cases where swelling clay such as 
montmorillonite is identified or suspected, and where 
this condition might be critical for stability, samples 
should be taken for free swelling and swelling pressure 
tests. (It is of advantage of record the in-situ water 
content of these samples, where possible. Such 
samples should, therefore, be sealed). 


5.4 The method of describing the grading or particle 
size will depend on the type of occurrence. A rough 
quantitative description of the grading of discontinuity 
fillings can be given by estimating the percentages of 


clay, silt, sand and rock particles (+ 10 percent). 
Several kilos of filling material may need to be 
extracted and fingered before making these estimates. 


5.4.1 Particle size can be classified as under according 
to IS 1498: 


a) Boulders; 

b) Cobbles; 

c) Coarse gravel; 
d) Medium, gravel; 
e) Fine gravel; 

f) Coarse sand; 

g) Medium sand; 
h) Fine sand; and 
j) Silt, clay. 


5.4.2 If a detailed soil mechanics investigation is 
warranted, the first fraction can be analyzed in the 
laboratory to determine clay fraction liquid limit and 
plasticity index, according to relevant method given 
in relevant part of IS 2720. 


5.5 Filling material, in particular the finer fraction 
which is usually weakest, can be assessed by means of 
the manual index tests given in Table 1. 


Table 1 Manual Index 


(Clause 5.5) 
SI No. Grade Description Field Identification Approximate Range 
of Uniaxial Compressive 
Strength Mpa 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) S1 Very soft clay Easily penetrated several inches < 0.025 
by fist 
ii) S2 Soft clay Easily penterated several inches 0.025 to 0.05 
by thumb 
iii) S3 Firm clay Can be penetrated several inches 0.05 to 0.10 
by thumb with moderate effort 
iv) S4 Stiff clay Readily indented by thumb but 0.10 to 0.25 
penetrated only with great effort 
v) S5 Very stiff clay Readily indented by thumbnail 0.25 to 0.50 
vi) S6 Hard clay Indented with difficulty by > 0.50 


thumbnail 


NOTE — Grades S1 to S6 apply to cohesive soils, for example clays, silty clays, and combinations of silts and clays with sand, 
generally allow draining. Discontinuity wall strength will generally be characterized by grades RO-R6 (rock) (see Part 6) while S1 to 


S6 (clay) will generally apply to filled discontinuities. 


IS 11315 (Part 7) : 2023 


5.5.1 The undrained shear strengths of the soils 
represented in grades S1 to S6 are equal to one half of 
the given uniaxial compressive strengths (care should 
be taken in applying these estimates to fissured clays). 


NOTE — The manual index tests for determining grades S1 
to S6 can be replaced by more accurate assessments using a 
standard soil mechanics penetrometer. This contains a stylus 
which is pressed into the sample at a constant rate. The 
maximum resistance can be read off a scale which is calibrated 
to show the maximum compressive strength of the sample. 
[This value is equal to twice the undrained shear strength 


= = (0, — 03)1. 


5.5.2 If a detailed soil mechanics investigation is 
warranted (as in drained shear strength determination) 
due to critical natures of an individual filled 
discontinuity, then undisturbed samples of the filling 
material may be required. Various tube samples are 
available for this sampling operation. 


5.6 Care should be taken to determine whether a given 
filled discontinuity has suffered previous shear 
displacement or not (Slickensides, shears, displaced 
cross joints, etc). This should be recorded in 
conjunction with an estimate of the approximate over- 
consolidation ratio (OCR) of any clay filling. 


NOTE — Tf previous displacement has occurred through the 
potential weakest layers of a filled discontinuity, that is, 
through the clay filling or clay gouge, as evidenced by slicken 
sides and shears, then the over-consolidation ratio (OCR) of 
the clay will not be important since the discontinuity will be 
close to residual strength. However, if previous displacement 
through these weak layers is not suspected, then the 
over-consolidation ratio will be important since the peak 
drained shear strength of the intact clay may be much higher 
than the residual strength. Short-term stability will be 
deceptively high, especially in the case of unloading, due to 
the reduced or negative pore pressures. However, in time 
swelling and softening may occur due to increased pore 
pressure and water content and possibly also due to strain 
softening caused by engineering loading, for example, by 
excavation of an overlying rock slope. This potential for 
reduction in strength with time should not be underestimated 
during field assessment. 


5.7 The water content and permeability of the filled 
discontinuity as a whole and of the clay filling, in 
particular, should be described as below. The decision 
to make actual measurements of these properties will 
depend on the importance of the occurrence to the 
project: 


W, The filling materials are heavily 
consolidated and dry, significant flow 


appears unlikely due to very low 
permeability. 


W, The filling materials are damp, but no free 
water is present. 


W, The filling materials are wet, occasional 
drops of water. 


W, The filling materials show of outwash, 
continuous flow of water (estimate litres/ 
minute). 


W; The filling materials are washed out locally, 
considerable water flow along-out wash 
channels (estimate  litres/minute and 
describe pressure, that is, low, medium 
high). 


We The filling materials are washed out 
completely, very high water pressures 
experienced, especially on first exposure 
(estimate  litres/minute and describe 
pressure). 


NOTE — Faults frequently contain highly permeable 
brecciated gouge adjacent to highly impermeable clay gouge. 
The water conducting capacity will therefore be strongly 
anisotropic, and may even be confined to flow parallel to the 
plane of the fault. It may be premature to describe a fault zone 
as dry or impermeable, if the tunnel or exploratory adit has not 
completely penetrated the feature. 


6 PRESENTATION OF RESULTS 


The detail of presentation will be dependent on the 
importance of the individual filled discontinuity (or 
set) to the project as a whole. In general, the 
description should be arranged as below, so as to 
include a description of those factors of particular 
relevance to project in hand: 


a) Geometry — Width wall roughness field 
sketch; 

b) Filling type — Mineralogy particle size 
weathering grade soil index parameters 
swelling potential; 


c) Filling strength — Manual index (S1 to S6) 
shear strength over-consolidation ratio 
displaced/undisplaced; and 


d) Seepage — Water content rating as (W, - W2) 
permeability quantitative data. 


IS 11315 (Part 7) : 2023 


IS No. 


IS 1498 : 1970 


IS 2720 


(Part 1): 


(Part 2): 


(Part 3) 


(Sec 1) : 1980 


(Sec 2) : 1980 


(Part 4) : 


(Part 5): 


(Part 6): 


(Part 7): 


(Part 8): 


(Part 9): 


(Part 10) : 1991 


(Part 11) : 1993 


1983 


1973 


1985 


1985 


1972 


1980 


1983 


1992 


ANNEX A 


(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFFERED STANDARDS 


Title 


Classification and identification 
of soils for general engineering 
purposes (first revision) 


Methods of test for soils: 
Preparation of dry soil samples 
for various tests (second 


revision) 


Determination of water content 
(second revision) 


Determination of 
gravity, 


specific 


Fine grained soils (first revision) 


Fine, medium and coarse grained 
soils (first revision) 


Grain size 
revision) 


analysis (second 


Determination of liquid and 
plastic limit (second revision) 


Determination of 
factors (first revision) 


shrinkage 


Determination of water content- 
dry density relation using light 
compaction (second revision) 


Determination of water content- 
dry density relation using heavy 
compaction (second revision) 


Determination of dry density- 
moisture content relation by 
constant mass of soil method 
(first revision) 


Determination of unconfined 
compressive strength (second 
revision) 


Determination of the shear 


strength parameters of a 
specimen tested in 
unconsolidated undrained 


triaxial compression without the 
measurement of pore water 
pressure (first revision) 


IS No. 
(Part 12) : 


(Part 13) : 


(Part 14) : 


(Part 15) : 


(Part 16) : 


(Part 17) : 


(Part 18) : 


(Part 19) : 


(Part 20) : 


(Part 21) : 


(Part 22) : 


(Part 23) : 


(Part 24) : 


(Part 25) : 


(Part 26) : 


(Part 27) : 


1981 


1986 


1983 


1965 


1987 


1986 


1992 


1992 


1992 


1977 


1972 


1976 


1976 


1982 


1987 


1977 


Title 


Determination of shear strength 
parameters of soil from 
consolidated undrained triaxial 
compression test with 
measurement of pore water 
pressure (first revision) 

Direct shear test 
revision) 


(second 


Determination of density index 
(relative density) of cohesionless 
soils (first revision) 


Determination of consolidation 
properties (first revision) 


Laboratory determination of 
CBR (second revision) 


Laboratory determination of 
permeability (first revision) 


Determination of field moisture 
equivalent (first revision) 


Determination of centrifuge 
moisture equivalent (first 
revision) 

Determination of linear 


shrinkage (first revision) 


Determination of total soluble 
solids (first revision) 


Determination of organic matter 
(first revision) 
Determination of calcium 
carbonate (first revision) 


Determination of cation 
exchange capacity (first 
revision) 


Determination silica sesquioxide 
ratio (first revision) 
Determination of pH value 
(second revision) 

Determination of total soluble 
sulphates (first revision) 


IS No. 
(Part 28) : 


(Part 29) : 


(Part 30) : 


(Part 31): 


(Part 33) : 


(Part 34) : 


(Part 35) : 


1974 


1975 


1980 


1990 


1971 


1972 


1974 


Title 


Determination of dry density of 
soils, in-place, by the sand 
replacement method (first 
revision) 


Determination of dry density of 
soils in-place by the core — 
Cutter method (first revision) 


Laboratory vane shear test (first 
revision) 


Field determination of california 
bearing ratio (first revision) 


Determination of the density 
in-place by the ring and water 
replacement method 


Determination of density of soil 
in-place by  rubber-balloon 
method 


Measurement of negative pore 
water pressure 


IS No. 
(Part 36) : 1987 


(Part 37) : 1976 


(Part 38) : 1976 


(Part 39) 


(Sec 1) : 1977 
(Sec 2) : 1979 


(Part 40) : 1977 


(Part 41) : 1977 


IS 11358 : 1987 


IS 11315 (Part 7) : 2023 


Title 


Laboratory determination of 
permeability of granular soils 
(constant head) (first revision) 


Determination of sand 
equivalent values of soils and 
fine aggregates 


Compaction control test (Hilf 
method) 


Direct shear test for soils 


containing gravel, 
Laboratory test 


In-situ shear test 


Determination of free swell 


index of soils 


Measurement of 
pressure of soils 


swelling 


Glossary of terms and symbols 
relating to rock mechanics 


IS 11315 (Part 7) : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 


Amberg Technologies, Gurugram 


Border Roads Organisation, New Delhi 


Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 


Central Soil & Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Institute of Mining & Fuel Research, Dhanbad 


CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Technology - ISM, Dhanbad 


Indian Society for Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling 


Technology, New Delhi 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
DRN. K SAMADHIYA (Chairperson) 
SHRI AKHIL RAJ 


SHRI KRIPAL CHOUDHARY 
SHRI RAKESH PANDITA (Alternate) 


LT COL ANIL RAJ 


SHRIG. P. PATEL 
SHRI UDAY CHANDER (Alternate) 


SHRI HARI DEV 
SHRI MAHABIR DIXIT (Alternate) 


SHRI RIZWAN ALI 
DR S. A. BURELE (Alternate) 


SHRI DARPAN TALWAR 
M. S. HARSHITHA (Alternate) 


DR SHANTANU SARKAR 
SHRI KOUSHIK PANDIT (Alternate) 


DR J. K. MOHNOT 
DRR. D. DWIVEDI (Alternate) 


DR PANKAJ GUPTA 
SHRIR. K. PANIGRAHI (Alternate) 


DR ALTAF USMANI 
SHRI SAIKAT PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR TRIPATHI 
SHRI D. P. DANGWAL (Alternate) 


PROF R. AYOTHIRAMAN 


PROF PRASHANTH VANGLA (Alternate) 


DR MAHENDRA SINGH 
DR PRITI MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 


PROF A. K. MISHRA 
DRR. K. SINHA (Alternate) 


DR C. S. KHOKHAR 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA 


SHRI SHANKAR KUMAR SAHA (Alternate) 


J. S. (MITIGATION) 
DR RAVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


Organization 


National Highways & Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited, Delhi 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, Faridabad 


National Institute of Rock Mechanics, Bengaluru 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd, New Delhi 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


RITES Ltd, Gurugram 


THDC India Limited, Rishikesh 

In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 4123, Tower 4, ACE 
Golfshire, Sector-150, Noida - 201310) 

In Personal Capacity (Naimex House, A-8, Mohan 


Co-operative Industrial Estate, Mathura Road, 
New Delhi - 110044) 


In Personal Capacity (Jal Vidyut Apts, Sector 21- C, 
Faridabad - 121001) 


In Personal Capacity (A-125. Prodhyagiki Apartment, 
Sector-3, Dwarka, New Delhi - 110059) 


In Personal Capacity (C-1004, Park View City - 2, 
Sector - 49, Gurugram - 122018) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 11315 (Part 7) : 2023 
Representative(s) 


SHRI SANJEEV MALIK 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR JHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI RAJESH KUMAR 
SHRI AJAY KUMAR VERMA (Alternate I) 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR GARNAYAK (Alternate II) 


DR A. RAJAN BABU 
SHRI G. GOPINATH (Alternate) 


SHRIN. K. JAIN 
SHRI PRAKASH RAWAT (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT J AIN 
SHRI VIJAY DANGWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHISHEK SAMPATRAO BHOSALE 


SHRIMATI JYOTSNA DIXIT 
SHRI SANDEEP SINGH NIRMAL (Alternate) 


SHRI T. S. ROUTELA 
SHRI SAMRAT MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 
SHRIR. K. GOEL 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 


SHRI IMRAN SAYEED 


DR RAJBAL SINGH 


DR MANOJ VERMAN 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
DR MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 48 (19670). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. ! RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


