RAT Alte IS 15798 (Part 2) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


aar — Aaf ve METER 
at aaa — fats 
UM 2 Has, afar va Alla we 
(saat ARTE) 
( TET JATT ) 


Textiles — Requirements for 
Labelling and 
Marking — Specification 


Part 2 Fabrics, Apparels and Made-up Items 
(Consumer Textiles) 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 59.080.30; 61.020 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2021 Price Group 7 


Man-Made Fibres, Cotton and Their Products Sectional Committee, TXD 31 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
Man-Made Fibres, Cotton and Their Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division 
Council. 


The consumers everywhere are interested in the information pertaining to various requirements of textiles such 
as blend composition, length, width, mass (g/m), colour fastness, fire resistance, shrinkage and care labelling 
instructions for their subsequent use so that they can make optimum use of the textile and get the full value of the 
price paid by them. It is, therefore, very important that information pertaining to these as well as other essential 
requirements are labelled and marked on the consumer textiles so that the interests of the consumers are fully 
safeguarded. This will also help in curbing the malpractice in the textile trade regarding spurious markings which 
mislead the consumers, In addition, certain safety and environment friendly requirements of textiles are essential 
to provide safety to the user and prevent environmental pollution after their final disposal. Keeping in view the 
health and safety of the consumers of textiles, many countries of the world have brought out regulation which will 
also help a long way in minimizing of dumping and import of cheap and hazardous textiles in India. 


This standard was first published in 2007 and has been revised now to make it more comprehensive and to bring 
in more clarity on various issues. This standard is published in the following three parts: 


Part 1 Textile fibres, filaments and yarns. 
Part 3 Industrial and technical textiles. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex G. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15798 (Part 2) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


TEXTILES — REQUIREMENTS FOR LABELLING 
AND MARKING — SPECIFICATION 


PART 2 FABRICS, APPARELS AND MADE-UP ITEMS 
(CONSUMER TEXTILES) 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 2) specifies requirements 
for labelling and marking of fabrics, apparels and 
made-up items (consumer textiles) meant for 
non-industrial applications. This standard is applicable 
to woven and knitted fabrics, ready-made garments 
(both inner and outer wears) and includes home textiles, 
sportswear and sports apparels. 


1.2 This standard does not apply to: 


a) Textile products which are manufactured by 
persons working in their own homes; 


b) Textile products which are manufactured by 
persons that carry out work from materials 
supplied without the property; 


c) Customised textile products made 


self-employed tailors; and 


up by 


d) Fabrics and made-up items meant for industrial 
applications and technical textiles, the 
requirements of which are covered in Part 3 of this 
standard. 


1.3 Ifrequirements for textile products that this standard 
applies to are fully or partially defined by other special 
regulations, those special regulations shall then apply 
to those requirements. 


1.4 These labelling requirements are not applicable to 
items listed in Annex B. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions, in addition to those given in other 


published Indian Standards as listed in Annex C, shall 
apply: 


3.1 Apparel — Any textile product used for dressing 
or body covering. 


3.2 Consumer Textiles — Textile fibre, yarn or fabric, 
or any product made in whole or in part from a textile 
fibre, yarn or fabric that is in the form in which it is to 
be sold to any person for consumption or use. This term 
does not include textile fibre products which are to be 
used in the manufacturing, processing or finishing of 
any product for sale. 


3.3 Disposable Product — A textile product designed 
to be used only once for a limited period of time, and 
it is not intended for subsequent use for the same or a 
similar purpose. 


3.4 Extraneous Fibres — Fibres other than those 
stated on the label or marking of a textile product. 


3.6 Inclusive Labelling — The use of a single 
label which contains all the information about the 
composition of several textile products of the same kind 
or components included in the inclusive packaging. 


3.7 Industrial Textiles — Technical textiles (see 3.12) 
used for industrial applications. 


3.8 Labelling — Affixing the required information to 
the textile product by way of attaching/affixing a label 
containing that information. 


3.9 Lining — A separate component used in making 
up garments and other textile products, consisting of a 
single layer or multiple layers of textile material held in 
place along one or more of the edges. 


3.10 Marking — Indicating the required information 
directly on the textile product by way of embossing, 
sewing, embroidering, printing or any other technology 
of application. 


3.11 Pure (100 Percent or All) Textile Products — 
Textile products exclusively composed of the same 
fibre. A textile product containing not more than 


IS 15798 (Part 2) : 2021 


2 percent by mass of extraneous fibres may also be 
treated as exclusively composed of the same fibre, 
provided this quantity is justified as being technically 
unavoidable in good manufacturing practice. 


3.12 Technical Textiles — Textile materials and 
products used primarily for their technical performance 
and functional properties rather than their aesthetic or 
decorative characteristics. Other terms used for defining 
technical textiles include industrial textiles, functional 
textiles, performance textiles, engineering textiles and 
hi-tech textiles. 
NOTE — Technical textiles are used individually or as a 
component/part of another product to enhance its functional 
properties. The examples of technical textiles used individually 
to satisfy specific functions are fire retardant fabric for 
uniforms of firemen, coated fabric as awnings, airbags, carpets 
etc. The examples of technical textiles as a component or part 
of another product are tyre cord fabrics in tyres, interlining 
in shirt collars, webbings in seat belts etc. Technical textiles 
are also used as accessories in processes to manufacture other 
products like filter fabric in food industry or paper maker felt 
in paper mills. 


3.13 Textile — Any filament, fibre, or yarn that can be 
made into fabric or cloth, and the resulting material itself. 
The term is derived from the Latin word textilis and the 
French texere, meaning “to weave”, and it originally 
referred only to woven fabrics. It has, however, come 
to include fabrics produced by other methods. Thus, 
threads, cords, ropes, braids, lace, embroidery, nets, and 
fabrics made by weaving, knitting, bonding, felting, or 
tufting are textiles. Some definitions of the term textile 
would also include those products obtained by the 
papermaking principle that have many of the properties 
associated with conventional fabrics. 


3.14 Textile Component — A part of a textile product 
with identifiable fibre content. 


3.15 Textile Product — Any raw, semi-manufactured 
or manufactured product, either factory or handmade, 
which is exclusively composed of textile fibres, 
regardless of the manufacturing process employed. 


4 LABELLING AND MARKING ON TEXTILES 


4.1 The labelling and marking of textile products shall 
be durable, easily legible, visible and accessible and, in 
the case of a label, securely attached at a conspicuous 
position underside of the garment. The label shall be 
permanent and non-detachable such that colour from 
the label does not bleed into the fabric or ready-made 
garment. The fibre composition of textile products 
sold by the metre may be shown on every metre of the 
length or roll made available on the market. Labels 
or markings may be supplemented by accompanying 
commercial documents when the products are being 
supplied to economic operators within the supply 
chain, or when they are delivered in accordance with 
regulations arranging public procurements. In that 


case, the textile fibre names and descriptions of fibre 
compositions referred in this standard shall be clearly 
indicated in the accompanying commercial documents. 


4.2 Abbreviations for textile fibre names and for 
descriptions of fibre composition shall not be used, 
except in the case of indicating the composition 
of textile products in accompanying commercial 
documents referred to in this standard, provided that 
the abbreviations are explained in the same commercial 
document. The textile fibre names listed in IS 667 or 
IS 6239/ISO 2076 shall be used for marking. 


4.3 Other information about textile products, such as 
the information about the country of origin, special 
characteristic of products and alike, is always displayed 
separately on the same marking or label or on a separate 
marking or label. 


4.4 Exceptionally, if textile products are imported or 
intended for export, the information referred to in this 
standard may also be displayed in a foreign language. 


4.5 In the case of bobbins, reels, skeins or other small 
quantities of thread, the information referred to in this 
standard shall be displayed only if it applies to inclusive 
labelling of packaging of those products. 


5 REQUIREMENTS FOR MARKING ON 
FABRICS 


The markings for the fabrics shall be as specified in 
5.1 to 5.4 as applicable. The marking shall be done 
in accordance with 4.1 to 4.5 as applicable and shall 
contain the following information: 


5.1 Markings on Fabrics 


a) Name of the material and its blend composition 
(see 5.2); 


b) Length and width (see 5.1.1 and 5.1.2); 
c) Mass in g/m2 (see 5.1.3); 
d) Fast colour, if applicable (see 5.1.4); 


e) Care labelling instructions using symbols (in case 
of finished fabrics only) (see 5.1.5); 


f) Shrinkage percentage, maximum or ‘Preshrunk’ 
or ‘Shrink resistant’, if applicable (see 5.1.6); 


g) Fire resistant, if applicable (see 5.1.7); 
h) Ecomark, if applicable (see 5.3); 
j) Month and year of manufacture; 
k) Country of origin; and 
m) Any other information required by law in force. 
NOTE — The above requirements shall also be applicable to 
various types of waddings. 
5.1.1 Length — The length of fabric when measured as 
per method given in IS 1954 shall be as declared by the 
manufacturer subject to a tolerance of = percent. 


5.1.2 Width — The width of fabric when measured 
as per method given in IS 1954 shall be as declared 
by the manufacturer. However, this shall be subject to 
following tolerances: 


a) Woven fabrics: = cm. 


b) Knitted fabrics:+2 cm. 


5.1.3 Mass per Unit Area — The mass per unit area of 
the fabric when measured as per Method B of IS 1964 
shall be as declared by the manufacturer. However, a 


tolerance of = percent shall be permitted on the 


declared value. For cotton denim the tolerance on mass 
shall be+5 percent. 


5.1.4 Fast Colour — The fabric may be marked ‘FAST 
COLOUR’ if it conforms to colour fastness ratings to 
all the agencies as specified in Table 1 of IS 12646. 


5.1.5 Care Labelling — The textile fabrics shall also 
be marked with care labelling symbols as per IS 14452 
depicting instructions for subsequent use in washing, 
bleaching, dry-cleaning, drying and ironing. 


5.1.6 Shrink Resistance — The dimensional changes 
in both directions on washing of woven fabrics shall 
not exceed 2 percent except for cotton denim for which 
it shall not exceed 3 percent. For knitted fabrics, the 
dimensional changes on washing shall not exceed 
5 percent. The dimensional change shall be tested by 
the method prescribed in IS 9 for woven and knitted 
cotton textiles, 1S 1299 for woven fabrics made from 
rayon and synthetic fibres, IS 1313 for knitted fabrics 
and garments containing wool, IS 3561 for woven silk 
fabrics, and IS 4419 for dimensional stability of knitted 
fabrics made of synthetic fibres. However, if the textile 
fabric is declared as Shrink resistant (or Pre-shrunk), it 
should have dimensional stability of + | percent except 
for cotton denim for which the tolerance shall be +3 
percent in warp way and weft way when tested as per 
methods specified in above mentioned Indian standards. 


5.1.7 Fire Resistance — If required by the buyer, 
the textile material shall also be marked ‘FIRE 
RESISTANT’ and shall comply with the relevant 
requirements as specified in IS 15741 for curtain and 
drapes, and IS 15742 (limited flame spread index 
2, minimum, after five washes) for clothing made of 
limited flame spread materials affording protection 
against heat and flame, for example, ladies’ wears and 
children wear. However, for curtains and drapes and 
upholstered furniture materials to be used in public 
buildings/places, the textile material shall conform to 
the requirements specified in IS 15741 and IS 15768 
respectively. 


5.2 The fibre composition of the fabric with tolerance 
shall be declared by the manufacturer/supplier and shall 
be determined as per method given in Indian Standards 
given in Annex D. 


IS 15798 (Part 2) : 2021 


5.2.1 Silk Textile Fabrics — Textile materials containing 
silk shall be marked as given below on the basis of 
content of silk in base ground fabric only when tested 
as per the method given in Annex E. 


5.2.1.1 Pure silk — A textile material shall be marked 
‘PURE SILK’ if the material comprises of silk only 
subject to manufacturing tolerance up to 5 percent 
of foreign matter including metallic and weighting 
materials. 


5.2.1.2 Blended silk — The textile material shall be 
marked ‘BLENDED SILK’ if it contains not less than 
50 percent of silk fibers. However, a tolerance of +3 
percent units shall be permitted on the declared silk 
content in the textile material. 


5.2.1.3 Part silk — The textile material shall be marked 
‘PART SILK’ if it contains not less than 20 percent of 
silk. However, a tolerance of +3 percent units shall 
be permitted on the declared silk content in the textile 
material. 


NOTES 

1 All reference to percentage contents mean percentages by 
mass calculated from the mass of materials when in standard 
condition, namely, their oven dry mass plus the appropriate 
regain. 


2 In all cases the more detailed description or the contents of 
the material shall be given by indicating the percentages of silk 
and other fibers in descending order used in the manufacture 
of textile material. However, such a description should not be 
misleading. 


5.2.1.4 Pure zari silk — The requirements already 
covered in 5.2.1 shall apply to basic silk fabrics 
only. However, for pure zari used in silk materials 
as ornamentation as an extra warp and/or extra weft, 
the percentages of pure silver shall not be less than 
50 percent by mass in the Zari materials when 
determined by the assay method as specified in IS 2113. 
In case silver is coated with gold, its content shall not be 
less than 0.5 percent of zari material when determined 
by the assay method as specified in IS 1418. 


5.2.2 Woollen/Worsted Fabrics — Textile fabrics shall 
be marked as given below on the basis of content of 
wool fibres when tested by the method given in IS 1793: 


5.2.2.1 All wool — A textile fabric shall be marked 
‘ALL WOOL’, if the material comprises of pure new 
wool fibres only subject to the tolerances given below: 


a) Manufacturing tolerance upto 3 percent of 
inadvertent impurities, and 


b) An additional allowance up to 5 percent of material 
other than wool fibres used to provide a decorative 
or ornamentation effect. 


5.2.2.2 Blended wool — The textile fabric shall be 
marked ‘BLENDED WOOL’, if it contains not less than 
50 percent of wool fibres. However, a manufacturing 
tolerance up to+3 percent units on wool contents shall 
be permitted. 


IS 15798 (Part 2) : 2021 


5.2.2.3 Part wool — The textile material shall be 
marked ‘PART WOOL’, if it contains not less than 
20 percent wool fibres. However, a manufacturing 
tolerance up to +3 percent units on wool contents shall 
be permitted. 


NOTES 


1 All reference to the percentage contents mean percentages by 
mass calculated from the mass of materials when in standard 
calculated, namely, their oven dry mass plus the appropriate 
regain. 


2 In all cases the more detailed description of the contents 
of the material shall be given by indicating the percentages 
of the wool and other fibres in descending order used in 
the manufacture of the textile material. However, such a 
description should not be misleading. 

3 The above classification pertains to the use of pure new wool 
fibres only. In case the used wool/shoddy wool fibres are used 
for manufacture of fabrics, the material shall also be clearly 
marked as ‘made from shoddy/reused wool’ in addition to 
above markings. 


5.2.3 Textile Fabrics Other Than Wool and Silk 
Fabrics — Textile fabrics other than wool and silk 
fabrics, shall satisfy the blend composition as declared 
by the manufacturer with a tolerance of+3 percent 
units when tested by methods specified in relevant 
Indian Standards given in Annex C. 


5.3 ECO Mark 


A scheme for labelling environment friendly products 
known as ECO Mark has been introduced at the 
instance of the Ministry of Environment and Forests 
(MEF), Government of India. The ECO-Mark would 
be administered by The Bureau of Indian Standards 
(BIS) under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016. 
For a product to be eligible for ECO Marking, it shall 
also carry the Standard Mark of BIS besides meeting 
the additional environment friendly requirements 
as applicable. However, these requirements shall be 
optional and manufacturing units shall be free to opt 
for Standard Mark alone also. 


5.4 The details of marking of multifiber textile products 
and special provisions for the marking and labelling 
of certain textile products have been explained in 
clauses 7 and 8. 


6 REQUIREMENTS FOR MARKING ON 
READY-MADE GARMENTS AND MADE-UP 
ITEMS 


The markings on the ready-made garments and 
made-up items shall be as specified in clause 6.1. The 
marking shall be done in accordance with 4.1 to 4.5 as 
applicable and shall contain the following information: 


6.1 Markings on Ready-made Garments and 
Made-up Items 


a) Name of the material and its blend composition 
(see 5.2, 7 and 8); 


b) Fast colour (see 5.1.4); 


c) Care labelling instructions 


(see 5.1.5); 


d) Shrinkage percentage, maximum or ‘Preshrunk’ 
or ‘Shrink resistant’, if applicable (see 5.1.6); 


e) Fire resistant, if applicable (see 5.1.7); 


using symbols 


f) Ecomark, if applicable (see 5.3); 

g) Month and year of manufacture; 

h) Country of origin; and 

j) Any other information required by law in force. 


6.1.1 The details of marking of multifiber textile 
products and special provisions for the marking and 
labelling of certain textile products have been explained 
in clauses 7 and 8. 


7 MARKING OF MULTI FIBRE TEXTILE 
PRODUCTS 


7.1 When only one fibre is contained in the article or 
part thereof, including where ornamentation and elastic 
or reinforcement yarns are present in amounts of less 
than 5 percent and the fibre content is shown exclusive 
of such ornamentation, elastic or reinforcement, 
the words “all” or “pure” may be used in lieu of 
100 percent. 


7.2 A textile product which contains several types of 
textile fibres shall be marked or labelled by stating 
names ofall constituent textile fibres in a textile product 
in descending order. A fibre which accounts for up to 
5 percent of the total mass of the textile product, or 
fibres which collectively account for up to 15 percent 
of the total mass of the textile product, may, where 
percentage of that (those) other fibres cannot easily be 
stated at the time of the manufacture, be designated by 
the term ‘other fibres’. Total percentage of those fibres 
by mass shall be stated accompanied with the term 
‘other fibres’. 


NOTES 


1 Products having a pure cotton warp and a pure flax 
weft, in which the percentage of flax accounts for at least 
40 percent of the total mass of the unsized fabric may be given 
the name ‘cotton linen union’ which must be accompanied 
by the composition specification ‘pure cotton warp-pure flax 
(or linen) weft’. 

2 For textile products the composition of which is hard to state 
at the time of their manufacture, the term ‘mixed fibres’ or the 
term ‘unspecified textile composition’ may be used on the label 
or marking. 


7.2.1 Marking of Decorative Fibres and Fibres with 
Antistatic Effect 


Visible, isolable fibres which are purely decorative 
and do not exceed 7 percent of the mass of the finished 
textile product do not have to be taken into account in 
the fibre compositions provided for in this standard. 
Metallic fibres and other fibres which are incorporated 
in order to obtain an antistatic effect and which do not 
exceed 2 percent of the weight of the finished product 


do not have to be taken into account in the fibre 
compositions provided for in this standard. In the case 
of textile products, the composition of which is hard to 
state at the time of their manufacture, the percentages 
shall be calculated on the mass of the warp and that of 
the weft separately. 


7.2.2 Marking of Multi-component Textile Products 


Any textile product containing two or more textile 
components which have different textile fibre contents 
shall bear a label or marking stating the textile fibre 
content of each textile component. The labelling 
or marking referred to in this standard shall not be 
compulsory for textile components when the following 
two conditions are fulfilled: 


a) Those textile components are not main linings, 
and 

b) Those textile components represent less than 
15 percent of the total mass of the textile product. 


NOTE — Where two or more textile products have the same 
fibre content and normally form a single unit, they may bear 
only one label or marking. 


7.2.3 Marking of Textile Products 
Non-Textile Parts of Animal Origin 


Containing 


The presence of non-textile parts of animal origin in 
textile products shall be indicated by using the phrase 
‘contains non-textile parts of animal origin’ on the 
labelling or marking of products containing such 
non-textile parts. The labelling or marking of the 
composition of textile products shall not be misleading 
and shall be carried out in such a way that the consumer 
can easily understand. 


7.3 Marking of Textile Articles Consisting of 
Different Parts or Sections 

Where a consumer textile article consists of different 
parts or sections, and when the fibre content of one 
section is different from that of any or all others, then 
separate disclosures must be made for each section. For 
example, a sweatshirt with a knit body consisting of a 
65 percent polyester/35 percent cotton blend and woven 
sleeves of a 50 percent polyester/50 percent cotton 
blend, the fibre content of the body must be disclosed 
separately from the fibre content of the sleeves as: 
Body: 

65 percent polyester 

35 percent cotton/coton 

Sleeves: 

50 percent polyester 


50 percent cotton/coton 


7.3.1 Linings, Interlinings, Paddings or Fillings 


The fibre content of linings, interlinings, paddings 
or fillings added for warmth as well as, laminated or 
bonded linings and some textile fillings (as in bed 


IS 15798 (Part 2) : 2021 


pillows), must be disclosed separately from, and 
following other sections. 


7.3.2 Pile, Coated and Impregnated Fabrics 


Consumer textile articles made up from a pile, 
coated or impregnated fabric that has a pile, coating 
or impregnator that differs in fibre content from the 
backing or base fabric, may be labelled in either of the 
following two ways: 


a) sectionally, to indicate the individual composition 
of both components separately, or 


b) as a composite, with the components indicated as 
percentages by mass of the total fibre mass, in this 
case, the total fibre mass of the face, coating or 
impregnator and the back or support fabric. 


7.3.3 Carpets 


Where the consumer textile article is a floor covering 
with a backing that differs in textile fibre content from 
the outer surface, face or pile, the textile fibre content 
may be identified in either of the following ways: 


a) The fibre content of the pile, face or outer surface 
exclusive of the backing, provided it is clear from 
the disclosure that the backing is excluded, or 


b) the fibre content of the pile shown first, followed 
immediately by the fibre content of the backing, 
with a clear indication that it is the backing. 


7.3.4 Films and Foams 


Foams are usually made from rubber, polyvinyl chloride 
or polyurethane, and must be labelled sectionally when 
backed or supported with fabric. When used strictly 
as an adhesive or when sold without a fabric support, 
foams such as cushion forms, bags of chipped foam 
and foam slabs, do not require labelling. Films, which 
are non-fibrous materials with no support or backing 
(frequently used for rain bonnets and coats, umbrellas, 
bibs, ground sheets, etc), also do not require labelling. 


7.4 Other Variations 


7.4.1 Other Fibre(s) 


Normally a fibre present in an amount of less than 
5 percent by mass must be stated by generic name or as 
“other fibre”. When more than one fibre is present in an 
amount of less than 5 percent, they may be identified as 
“other fibres” accompanied by the percentage by mass 
of the aggregate. 


7.4.2 Elastic Yarns 


An elastic yarn is an elastomer which may or may not 
be covered with a wrap. Elastic yarns may be found in 
stretch denim and corduroy fabrics, as well as swimsuit 
fabrics. It should be noted, however, that elastic yarns 
added to a limited area in socks serve a functional 
purpose and are therefore considered as findings. An 
elastic yarn that is present in an amount of less than 


IS 15798 (Part 2) : 2021 


5 percent of the total fibre mass may be disclosed by 
generic name as an integral part of the fabric or as 
“other fibre”. Alternatively, an elastic yarn present in 
an amount of less than 5 percent may be disclosed as 
“Exclusive of elastic”, provided that the total of the 
other fibre(s) disclosed equals 100 percent. An elastic 
yarn that is present in an amount of 5 percent or more 
of the total fibre mass must be disclosed as an integral 
part of the fabric. 


7.4.3 Reinforcement Yarns 


A reinforcement yarn is a portion of a complex yarn 
that is either present as a core or wrap for the purpose of 
increasing the strength of the yarn. Binder yarns which 
are used in novelty-type yarns, such as bouclé yarns, 
to hold the loops, or in fancy/effect yarns to the core 
or base, are also considered as a reinforcement yarn. A 
reinforcement yarn that is present in an amount of less 
than 5 percent of the total fibre mass may be disclosed 
by generic name as an integral part of the fabric or yarn, 
or as “other fibre”. As an alternative, a reinforcement 
yarn present in an amount of less than 5 percent, may 
be disclosed as “exclusive of reinforcement”, provided 
that the total of the other fibre(s) disclosed equals 
100 percent. A reinforcement yarn that is present in 
an amount of 5 percent or more of the total fibre mass 
must be disclosed as an integral part of the fabric. 


7.4.4 Ornamentation Textiles 


Ornamentation is a textile fibre product that is present 
as an integral part of the article for a decorative 
purpose, that imparts a visibly discernable overall 
pattern or design and that differs in fibre content from 
the remainder of the article. Ornamentation that is 
present in an amount of less than 5 percent may not 
be disclosed, provided the label bears the statement 
“exclusive of ornamentation” and the total of the 
fibre(s) disclosed equals 100 percent. Ornamentation 
present in an amount of 5 percent or more must be 
disclosed as an integral part of the fabric. 


7.4.5 Trimming 


7.4.5.1 Trimming is any textile fibre product that 
has been added to a consumer textile article for a 
decorative purpose and differs in textile fibre content 
from the article to which it has been added, including 
embroidery, appliqué, braid, lace, ribbon, smocking 
threads, patch pockets, ruffles, piping, belts, rick rack, 
collars and cuffs. Trimming must be disclosed if it is 
present in an amount greater than 15 percent of the total 
outer surface area of the article. If present in an amount 
of 15 percent or less, it does not require disclosure, 
provided it is clear that the fibre content is disclosed 
“exclusive of trimming”. 


7.4.5.2 Trimming also includes decorative patterns or 
designs that are an integral part of the article but do not 
create an all-over pattern or design. This would include 


stripes knitted into the leg of a sock or an abstract 
design knitted into the front of a sweater. Where an 
article has several different trimmings, each present 
in amounts of less than or equal to 15 percent of the 
outer surface area, but which together comprise over 
15percent of the outer surface area, the trimmings may 
be labelled collectively. 


8SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR THE MARKING 
AND LABELLING OF CERTAIN TEXTILE 
PRODUCTS 


8.1 Corsetry Products 


The fibre composition shall be indicated on the label 
or marking by stating the composition of the whole 
product or, either inclusively or separately, that of 
the components listed respectively as given in 8.1.1 
to 8.1.3. Such labelling shall not be compulsory for 
components representing less than 10 percent of the 
total weight of the product 


8.1.1 Brassieres 
a) The outside and the inside fabric of the surface of 
the cups; and 
b) Back. 


8.1.2 Corsets and Girdles 
a) The front, the rear. 
b) Side panels. 


8.1.3 Corselets 


a) The outside and inside fabric of the surface of 
cups, 

b) The front and rear stiffening panels, and 

c) The side panels. 


8.2 Etch-Printed Textiles 


The fibre composition shall be given for the product as 
a whole and may be indicated by stating, separately, the 
composition of the base fabric and that of the etched 
parts. Those components shall be mentioned by name. 


8.3 Embroidered Textiles 


The fibre composition shall be given for the product 
as a whole and may be indicated by stating, separately, 
the composition of the base fabric and that of the 
embroidery yarn. Those components shall be mentioned 
by name. Such labelling or marking is compulsory only 
for the embroidered parts which amount to at least 
10 percent of the surface area of the product. 


8.4 Yarns Consisting of a Core and a Cover Made up 
of Different Fibres 


The fibre composition shall be given for the product as a 
whole and may be indicated by stating the composition 
of the core and the cover separately. Those components 
shall be mentioned by name. 


8.5 Velvet and Plush Textiles, or Textiles Resembling 
Velvet or Plush 


The fibre composition shall be given for the whole 
product and, where the product comprises a distinct 
backing and a use-surface composed of different fibres, 
may be stated separately for those components. Those 
components shall be mentioned by name. 


8.6 Floor Coverings and Carpets of Which the 
Backing and the Use-Surface are Composed of 
Different Fibres 


The fibre composition may be stated for the use-surface 
alone. The use-surface must be mentioned by name. 


8.7 Derogations for Marking or Labelling 


The indication of textile fibre names or fibre composition 
on the labels and markings of textile products listed in 
Annex F is not required. 


9 BIS CERTIFICATION MARKING 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the product(s) 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


10 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY FOR FABRIC AND 
READYMADE GARMENTS 


10.1 Lot for Fabric/Ready Made Garment 


All rolls/pieces of the same type and composition of 
fabric or ready-made garment delivered to a buyer 
against one despatch note shall constitute a lot. 


IS 15798 (Part 2) : 2021 


10.2 The number of bales/rolls/packages/pieces shall 
be selected at random in accordance with Column 2 and 
3 of Table 1. To ensure the randomness of selection, 
IS 4905 : 2015/ISO 24153 : 2009 may be followed. 


Table 1 Sample Size 
( Clauses 10.2 and 10.3 ) 


SI Lot Size Sample Permissible Number of 
No. Size Non-Conforming Pieces 
a) (2) 3) (4) 

i) up to 50 5 0 
ii) 51-150 8 0 
iii) 151-300 13 1 
iv) 301-500 20 1 
v) 501-1000 48 3 
vi) 1001 and above 50 3 


10.3 Number of Tests and Criteria for Conformity 


The samples selected from the lot shall be tested for 
all applicable requirements as specified in respective 
marking clause. The sample selected shall be declared 
non-conforming, ifit does not meet any of the applicable 
requirement specified. The lot shall be declared 
conforming to the requirements of this standard if the 
total number of defective pieces does not exceed the 
value given in Column 4 of Table 1. 


IS 15798 (Part 2) : 2021 


IS No. 


9 : 2019/ 


ISO 675 : 2014 


667 : 1981 


1299 : 


1313: 


1418 


1745 : 
1793: 


1954 : 


1964 : 


Hi A A 


1984 


1984 


: 2009 


1978 
1973 


1990 


2001 


Tea cosy covers. 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Textiles — Woven fabrics — 
Determination of dimensional 
change on commercial 
laundering near the boiling 
point (third revision) 

Methods for identification of 
textile fibres (with supplement) 


Method for determination 
of dimensional changes on 
washing of fabrics woven from 
rayon and synthetic fibres 


Method for determination 
of dimensional changes on 
washing of knitted goods 
containing wool 


Determination of gold in 
gold bullion, gold alloys and 
gold jewellery/artefacts — 
Cupellation (Fire  assey) 
method 


Petroleum hydrocarbon solvent 


Guide for marking 
materials made of wool 


textile 


Determination of length 
and width of woven fabrics 
(second revision) 


Textiles — Methods for 
determination of mass per unit 
length and mass per area of 
fabrics (second revision) 


IS No. 


2113 : 2002 


3561 : 1989 


4419 : 1967 


4905 : 2015/ 
ISO 24153 : 2009 


6239 : 2014/ 
ISO 2076 : 2010 


12646 : 1991 

14452 : 2014/ 
ISO 3758 : 2012 

15741 : 2007 


15742 : 2007 


15768 : 2008 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 1.4 ) 


Sleeve-supporting armbands. 

Watch straps of textile materials. 
Labels and badges. 

Stuffed pan-holders of textile materials. 
Coffee cosy covers. 


7. Sleeve protectors. 


Title 


Asseying silver in silver and 
silver alloys 


Silk fabrics — Dimensional 
changes on washing — 
Method for determination 


(first revision) 


Method for determination of 
dimensional stability of knitted 
fabrics made of synthetic fibres 


Random sampling and 
randomization procedures 
(first revision) 

Textiles — Man-made 
fibres — Generic names 
(second revision) 

Textiles — Colour fastness 


rating 


Textiles — Care labelling code 
using symbols 


Textiles — Resistance to 
ignition of curtains and drapes 


Textiles — Requirements for 
clothing made of limited flame 
spread materials and material 
assemblies affording protection 
against heat and flame 


Textiles — Resistance to 
ignition of upholstered 
composites used for 


non-domestic furniture 


TEXTILE PRODUCTS ON WHICH THIS STANDARD IS NOT APPLICABLE 


8. Muffs other than in plush fabric. 


9. Artificial flowers. 
10. Pin cushions. 
11. Painted canvas. 


12. Textile products for base and underlying fabrics 


and stiffenings. 


37. 


.Old made-up textile products, where explicitly 


stated to be such. 


. Gaiters. 

. Packaging, not new and sold as such. 

. Fancy goods and saddlery, of textile materials. 

. Travel goods of textile materials. 

. Hand embroidered tapestries, finished or unfinished, 


and materials for their production, including 
embroidery yarns sold separately from the canvas 
and specially presented for use in such tapestries. 


. Slide fasteners. 

. Buttons and buckles covered with textile materials. 
. Book covers of textile materials. 

. Toys. 

. Textile parts of footwear. 


. Table mats having several components and a surface 


area of not more than 500 cm’. 


. Oven gloves and cloths. 

. Egg cosy covers. 

. Make-up cases. 

. Tobacco pouches of textile fabric. 

. Spectacle, cigarette and cigar, lighter and comb 


cases of textile fabric. 


. Covers for mobile telephones and portable media 


players with a surface of not more than 160 cm?. 


. Protective requisites for sports with the exception 


of gloves. 


. Toilet cases. 

. Shoe-cleaning cases. 

. Funeral products. 

. Disposable products, with the exception of wadding. 
. Textile products which are subject to the rules that 


refer to medical products and which are covered by 
a reference to those rules, non-disposable bandages 
for medical and orthopaedic use and orthopaedic 
textile products in general. 


Textile products including cordage, ropes and 

string, normally intended: 

a) for use as equipment components in the 
manufacture and processing of goods, or 

b) for incorporation in machines, installations 
(for example, for heating, air conditioning 


3 


oo 


39. 


40. 


4 


E 


5 


a 


56. 
57. 


5 


00 


62. 


IS 15798 (Part 2) : 2021 


or lighting), domestic and other appliances, 
vehicles and other means of transport, or for 
their operation, maintenance or equipment, 
other than tarpaulin covers and textile motor 
vehicle accessories sold separately from the 


vehicle. 
. Textile products for protection and safety 
purposes such as safety belts, parachutes, 


life-jackets, emergency chutes, fire-fighting devices, 
bulletproof waistcoats and special protective 
garments (for example, protection against fire, 
chemical substances or other safety hazards). 


Air-supported structures (for example, sports halls, 
exhibition stands or storage facilities), provided 
that details of the performances and technical 
specifications of these products are supplied. 


Sails. 


. Animal clothing. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
. Ribbons. 
52. 
33. 
54. 
55. 


Flags and banners. 
Floor clothes. 

Cleaning clothes. 
Edgings and trimmings. 
Passementerie. 

Belts. 

Braces. 

Suspenders and garters. 
Shoe and boot laces. 


Elastic. 
New packaging sold as such. 
Packing string and agricultural twine. 


String, cordage and ropes used in hiking and water 
sports. 


Table mats. 
Handkerchiefs. 


. Bun nets and hair nets. 
59. 
60. 
61. 


Ties and bow ties for children. 
Bibs, wash gloves and face flannels. 


Sewing, mending and embroidery yarns presented 
for retail sale in small quantities with a net weight 
of 1 gram or less. 


Tape for curtains and blinds and shutters. 


IS 15798 (Part 2) : 2021 


IS No. 


232 : 1985 


1324 : 1966 


2364 : 1987 


3596 : 1967 


4402 : 2019/ 


ISO 1107 : 2017 


5476 : 1986 


IS No. 


1889 (Part 1) 
: 1976 


1889 (Part 2) 
: 1976 


1889 (Part 3) 
: 1979 


1889 (Part 4) 
: 1979 


2005 : 1988 


ANNEX C 
( Clauses 3 and 5.2.3 ) 
LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS ON GLOSSARY OF TEXTILE TERMS 


Title 


Glossary of textile terms — 
Natural fibres 


Glossary of textile terms relating 
to man-made fibre and fabric 
industry 


Glossary of textile terms — 
Woven fabrics 


Glossary of terms relating to 


IS No. 


6239 : 2014/ 


ISO 2076 : 2010 


11205 : 2011/ 


ISO 2424 : 2007 


11206 : 1984 


13321 (Part 1): 


hosiery 1992 
Textiles — Fishing nets — 
Netting — Basic terms and 14281 : 2004 
definitions (first revision) 
Glossary of term relating to jute 

ANNEX D 


( Clause 5.2 ) 
LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS ON TEST METHODS FOR BLEND COMPOSITION 


Title 


Method for quantitative chemical 
analysis of binary mixtures of 
regenerated cellulose fibre and 
cotton: Part 1 Sodium zincate method 


Method for quantitative chemical 
analysis of binary mixtures of 
regenerated Cellulose fibres and 
cotton: Part 2 Cadoxen solvent 
method 


Method for quantitative chemical 
analysis of binary mixtures of 
regenerated cellulose fibres and 
cotton: Part 3 Formic acid-zinc 
chloride 


Method for quantitative chemical 
analysis of binary mixtures of 
regenerated cellulose fibres and 
cotton: Part 4 Sulphuric acid method 


Methods for quantitative chemical 
analysis of binary mixtures of nylon 
6 or nylon 6, 6 fibres and certain other 
fibres 


10 


IS No. 


2006 : 1988 


2176 : 1988 


2177 : 1988 


2727 : 1964 


3416 : 1988 


Title 


Textiles — Man-made fibres — 
Generic names 


Textile floor 
Vocabulary 


coverings 


Glossary of textile terms — 
Wool and other animal fibres 
their processing and products 


Glossary of terms for geo- 
synthetics: Part 1 Terms used in 
materials and properties 


Textiles — Glossary of terms 
relating to made-up textile items 
and ready-made garments 


Title 


Method for quantitative chemical 
analysis of binary mixtures of protein 
fibres with certain other non-protein 
fibres 


Textiles Binary mixtures of 
cellulose acetate and certain other 
fibres — Methods for quantitative 
chemical analysis 


Textiles Binary mixtures of 
cellulose triacetate and secondary 
cellulose acetate fibres — Methods 
for quantitative chemical analysis 


Method for quantitative chemical 
analysis of binary mixtures of manila 
and sisal fibres 


Method for quantitative chemical 
analysis of mixtures of polyester 
fibres with cotton or regenerated 
cellulose 


IS 15798 (Part 2) : 2021 


IS No. Title IS No. Title 
3421: 1988 Textiles — Binary mixtures of acrylic 8476 : 1977 Method for determination of wool 
certain modacrylics and certain other content in woollen textile materials 
fibres — Methods for quantitative 9068 : 1979 Recommended methods for the 
chemical analysis removal ofnon-fibrous matter prior to 
6503 : 1988 Method for quantitative chemical quantitative analysis of fibre mixtures 
analysis of ternary mixtures of protein 9889: 1988 Method for quantitative chemical 
fibres nylon 6 or nylon 6 6 and certain analysis of binary mixtures of silk 
other fibres and wool or hair 
6504: 1979 Method for quantitative chemical 9896:1981 Methods for quantitative chemical 
analysis of ternary mixtures of analysis of mixtures of polyolefin 
viscose rayon cotton and protein fibres and other fibres 
fibres 
o . 11870: 1986 Method for quantitative chemical 
6570: 1972 Method for quantitative chemical analysis of binary mixtures of 
analysis of binary mixtures of jute polypropylene and polyethylene 
and animal fibres ; : ; i 
17269 : 2019 Identification, labelling and marking 
of Pashmina products 
ANNEX E 


( Clause 5.2.1 ) 
DETERMINATION OF SILK CONTENT OF TEXTILE MATERIALS 


E-1 TEXTILE MATERIALS CONTAINING 
NON-PROTEIN FIBRES 


E-1.1 Identify the presence of protein fibers other 
than silk in the textile material by the preliminary and 
staining tests as specified in IS 667. If protein fibers 
are not present then follow the procedure specified in 
E-1.1.1 to E-1.1.7. 


E-1.1.1 Take about 10 to 15 g of the material and 
extract it in a Soxhlet apparatus with light petroleum 
hydrocarbon solvent (see IS 1745) for 1 hat a 
minimum rate of 6 cycles/h. Allow the light petroleum 
hydrocarbon solvent to evaporate and then extinct in a 
soxhlet apparatus with water for 2 h at a minimum rate 
of 6 cycles/h. 


E-1.1.2 Take a representative sample weighing about 5 
g from the pretreated sample and place it in a suitable 
container. Place the container in the drying oven 
maintained at a temperature of 105 +3 °C and dries 
the specimen to a constant mass. The mass shall be 
taken as constant when the difference between the two 
successive weighings made at intervals of 20 min is 
less than 0.05 percent. 


E-1.1.3 Determine the mass of the sample without 
removing it from the oven. In case the drying oven is 
not provided with the weighing balance, remove the 


specimen from the oven and transfer it to a weighing 
container of known mass provided with a light lid. The 
transfer of the specimen should be done in as less a 
time as possible. Cool the specimen and the container 
in a desiccator to room temperature before weighing. 
Weigh the container and then find the mass (M,) of the 
sample to an accuracy of 10 mg. 


E-1.1.4 Transfer the remaining sample in a beaker 
together with at least 100 times its mass of 5 percent 
solution of sodium or potassium hydroxide and boil 
slowly until the silk fibers are completely dissolved. 
After a period of 10 min of boiling, filter through a 
Gooch crucible and wash the residue first with warm 
water, then with 3 percent solution of glacial acetic 
acid and finally with hot water. Dry the residue at 
105 +3 °C, 


E-1.1.5 Examine carefully the residue and the pores of 
the crucible for non-fibrous matter, for example, burrs, 
seeds, finishing materials, dyestuff residues, as well as 
for incompletely dissolved. If any such contaminant is 
present, it shall be dissolved or otherwise removed. For 
example, un- dissolved silk protein shall be removed 
by treatment with fresh boiling 5 percent sodium 
hydroxide or potassium hydroxide; and bum and seeds 
shall be lifted out with forceps. Rinse and dry the 
residue to constant mass at 105 +3 °C. Determine the 
mass of the residue to an accuracy of 10 mg (M,). 


IS 15798 (Part 2) : 2021 


E-1.1.6 Determine the percentages of non-silk fibrous 
matter and other foreign matter including metallic and 
weighting material present by the following formulae: 
Percentage of non-silk 


M,x 100 
Fibrous matter and other = a 


1 
Foreign matter present 


E-1.1.7 Similarly, determine the percentages in the 
remaining specimens and calculate the average. 


E-1.1.8 From the value obtained in E-1.1.6, calculate 
the average percentage of silk in the material by 
subtracting it from 100. 


E-2 TEXTILE MATERIALS CONTAINING 
PROTEIN FIBRES 


Follow the procedure specified in E-1.1.1 to E-1.1.7 
except that dissolve the silk in 80 percent (m/v) 
sulphuric acid solution instead of 5 percent sodium 
hydroxide solution as specified in E-1.1.4. 


ANNEX F 
( Clause 8.7 ) 


PARTS OF TEXTILE PRODUCTS NOT TO BE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT 
FOR DETERMINATION OF FIBRE COMPOSITION 


F-1 ALL TEXTILE PRODUCTS 


F-1.1 Non-textile parts, selvedges, labels and badges, 
edgings and trimmings not forming an integral part of 
the product, buttons and buckles covered with textile 
materials, accessories, decorations, non-elastic ribbons, 
elastic threads and bands added at specific and limited 
points of the product and visible, isolable fibres which 
are purely decorative and fibres with antistatic effect. 


F-1.2 Fatty substances, binders, weightings, sizings and 
dressings, impregnating products, additional dyeing 
and printing products and other textile processing 
products. 


F-2 FLOOR COVERINGS AND CARPETS 


All components other than the use-surface. 


F-3 UPHOLSTERY FABRICS 


Binding and filling warps and wefts which do not form 
part of the use-surface. 


F-4 HANGINGS AND CURTAINS 


Binding and filling warps and wefts which do not form 
part of the right side of the fabric. 


12 


F-5 SOCKS 


Additional elastic yarns used in the cuff and the 
stiffening and reinforcement. 


F-6 TIGHTS 


Additional elastic yarns used in the cuff and the 
stiffening and reinforcement. 


F-7 TEXTILE PRODUCTS OTHER THAN 
THOSE UNDER F-1 TO F-6 


F-7.1 Base or underlying fabrics, stiffenings and 
reinforcements, inter-linings and canvas backings, 
stitching and assembly threads unless they replace the 
warp and/or weft of the fabric, fillings not having an 
insulating function and linings. 


F-7.1.1 The base or underlying material of textile 
products which serve as a backing for the use-surface, 
in particular in blankets and double fabrics, and the 
backings of velvet or plush fabrics and kindred products 
shall not be regarded as backings to be removed. 


F-7.1.2 “Stiffenings and reinforcements’ mean the 
yarns or materials added at specific and limited places. 


IS 15798 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEXG 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Man-Made Fibres, Cotton and their Products Sectional Committee, TXD 31 


Organization 


ICAR-Central Institute for Research on Cotton 
Technology, Mumbai 


Ahmedabad Textile Industry’s Research Association, 
Ahmedabad 


Association of Synthetic Fibre Industries New Delhi 
Bidhata Industries Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Confederation of Indian Textile Industry, New Delhi 
Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 


Cotton Association of India, Mumbai 


Defence Materials and Stores Research and 
Development Establishment, Kanpur 


Grasim Industries Limited, Vadodara 


In Personal Capacity 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 
Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 

Textiles Committee, Mumbai 

The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 
The Cotton Corporation of India Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


The Cotton Textile Export Promotion Council, 
Mumbai 


The Southern India Mills’ Association, Coimbatore 


The Synthetic and Rayon Textile Export Promotion 
Council, Mumbai 


The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research 
Association, Mumbai 


Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai 


BIS Director General 


Representative(s) 


Dr P. K. MANDHYAN (Chairman) 
Dr A. ARPUTHARAJ (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI DEEPALI PLAWAT 
SHRI JIGAR DAVE (Alternate) 


SHRI M. S. VERMA 


SHRI R. K. PACHERIWALA 
SHRI ROHIT PACHERIWALA (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. NAIR 
SHRI SHAJU MANGALAM (Alternate) 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
DRM. S. KAMATH (Alternate) 


SECRETARY 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR YADAV 
SHRI Biswa RANJAN Das (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY SARDANA 
DR ROHITASVA KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. SATHEESAN 


SHRI SOURABH KULKARNI 
SHRI PRANAV PARASHER (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY GUPTA 
SHRI KESHAV PAAREEK (Alternate) 


Suri J. D. BARMAN 
SHRI P. N. S. SIVAKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI R. A. SHAIKH 
SHRIMATI PRAGATI KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. PILLEWAR 
SHRI V. K. SINHA (Alternate) 


SHRI SIDDARTHA RAJGOPAL 


SHRI D. SURESH ANAND KUMAR 
SHRI S. K. KHANDELIA 
SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR S. SADH (Alternate) 
DR MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI A. SUDAM (Alternate) 
DR (SHRIMATI) SURANJANA GANGOPADHYAY 
SHRI S. P. BORKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. BERA SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Suri A. K. BERA 
SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TEXTILES), BIS 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 31 (15622). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


