( Reaffirmed 2012 )

IS :6840 -1972

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE OF AGRICULTURAL WHEELED TRACTOR
Farm Implements and Machinery Sectional Committee, AFDC 20
Chairman SERI D. N. KIIERDEEAR Members
SERI S. C. BHATNAQAR

Representing Ministry of Agriculture ( Department of Agriculture ) Department of Agriculture, Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow Punjab Tractors Ltd, Chandigarh Directorate of Military Farms, Quartermaster General's Branch, . Armv Headauarters Government of

SHRI C. M. SHAH I Alternate ) ' C H A N D R A MOEA; SHRI G. S. RIRAL (Alternate) BRIM R. C. D A T T A
S HRI

S HRI SHAHID ALI (Alternate ) SRRI N. c. DP: C O N T R O L L E R , Q UALITY SOEEME ( Alternate )

Directorate of Industries, Government of West Bengal, Calcutta MARKING

D IRECTOR

S ENIOR T EST D IRECTOR

Tractor Training & Testing Station ( Ministry of Agriculture ), Bundi ENGINEER ( Alternate) Trac;;sTFining Centre ( Ministry of Agriculture ),

A G R I C U L T U R A L IMPLE~~ZENTS S PECIALIST ( Alternate ) Kirloskar Brothers Limited, Kirloskarwadi SHRI P. D. GU~E SHRI S. K. DEO ( Alternate) &RI R. K. GUPTA State Farms Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI M. R. S HARMA ( Alternate ) H R A D O F THE AQRICULTURAL Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Allahabad ENRINEERIN~ DEPARTMENT SHRI G. T. FURUP ( Alternate ) SHRI V. P. S. KA S H Y A P Department of Agriculture, Government of Haryana, Chandigarh ( Continued on page 2 )

@) Copyright 1973 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION
This publication is protected under the Indian CoPyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be dremed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

Is:6840 -1972
( Continued from page 1 ) Rsprssenting Members S HRI S. K. KEMPAIAH The Mysore Implements Factory, Hassan S HRI N. S. VENKATESHA ( Alternate ) S HRI P. ME H T A The Tata Iron and Steel Company Limited, Jamshedpur S HRI A. D. SURIE ( Alternate) International Tractor Company of India Limited, S HRI H. M. MUTTA Bombav S HRI R. NARAYANAIWAMY Tractors and Farm Equipment Limited, Madras S HRI J. VINEATARAMAN ( Alternate) D R T. P. O J H A Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur S HRI N. D. PADQILWAR Padgilwar Industries, Nagpur S HRI C. B. PAD~ILWAR ( Alternate ) S HRI P. N. PANQOTRA Department of Agriculture, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh The National Engineering Company, Ambala City SERI ANAR NATE PARBHAKAR S HRI R AM PARKASH PAEBHAKAR (Alternate ) D R B. S. PA T H A K Puniab Aericultural Universitv. , I Ludhiana S HRI S. R. VERMA (Alternate) L SHRI E. C. P E T E R Martin Burn Ltd, Calcutta S HRI 0. N. TRIVEDI ( Ah-mate) DR JAQJIT SINGH PUNJRATH National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal S HRI V. P. ANEJA ( Alternate \ Scale SERI S. RA~HVIAH Commissioner ( Small Development Industries ) ( Ministry of Industrial Development, and.Science and Technology ) S HRI S. BANDOPA~HYAY ( Alternate ) SERI RAJINDER RAIKEY R. Raikhy Enterprises, Ludhiana SHRI S. R. RO Y Ministry of Labour & Rehabilitation (Department of Rehabilitation ) SERI M. P. SA R A T R I Raiasthan State Agro Industries Corporation ( P ) Ltd, Jaipur SHRI R. N. SIN~H Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi Department of Agriculture, Government of Bihar, D R `M. P. SINHA Patna S HRI H ARESHWAR PRASAD ( Alternate ) Indian Anricultural Research Institute. New Delhi D R B. S. S IROHI S HRI T. H. NIRIWXAL ( Alternate ) SERI C. S. SRIDEARAN Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi Agriculture ( Department of SERI M. L. TA N E J A Ministry of Aericulture ) Nation>1 Seeds C!orporation Limited, New Delhi SERI S. S. VIRDI S HRI V. P. SINWI ( Alternate ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-oficio Member ) D R H ARI BHA~WAN, Director ( Agri & Food ) Secretary S HRI R. N. SHARMA Assistant Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1 ( Continued on page 15 )

2

IS t 6840 - 1972

I n d i a n Standbd
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE OF AGRICULTURAL WHEELED TRACTOR
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on6 November 1972, after the draft finalized, by the Farm Implements and Machinery Sectional Committee had.been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Agricultural wheeled tractor is now well recognized as farmer's asset due to its suitability for performing a large number of farming operations conveniently and economically. In order to get maximum benefit out of tractor, proper periodical maintenance is of utmost importance. This code is intended to help the users in proper upkeep and maintenance of the tractor to get maximum benefit with low cost of operation.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers detailed procedure for preventive maintenance of agricultural wheeled tractor. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 2.1 Agricultural Tractor -A self-propelled vehicle having wheels or tracks, designed primarily to operate trailed or mounted agricultural implements and machines, including trailers, and to supply power to operate them with the vehicle itself in motion or remaining stationary. 2.2 Agricultural Wheeled Tractor - An agricultural tractor in which wheels are the driving members. 2.3 Preventive Maintenance - Systematic series of inspections and operations performed periodically to maintain or improve the efficiency land performance of the tractor. 3

IS : 6840 5 1972 3. INSTALLATiON 3.1 The user should ascertain that the tractor has been installed in accordance with IS : 6847-1972*. 4. CLEANING 4.1 The tractor should be cleaned thoroughly and regularly. 4.1.1 The spilt fuel and oil should be wiped off. 4.1.2 The accumulated dirt and-mud should be removed by pressure of water or air, taking care that the vital parts are properly covered to prevent ingress of water under pressure. 5. LUBRICATION 5.0 Lubrication of different assemblies reduces friction between the moving parts, assists in cooling the engine, seals gases within the combustion chamber and helps in keeping the inner assemblies clean. It is, therefore, essential to lubricate the tractor periodically. . 5.1 The lubrication schedule for different assemblies as specified by the manufacturer in the owner's maintenance manual shall be followed. A recommended lubrication schedule is given in Table 1 for guidance. 5.2 The grades of grease and oil as recommended by the manufacturer shall be used. 5.3 Only clean lubricants shall be used. 5.4 The device by means of which lubricant is applied should be clean. 5.5 The quantities of lubricant in different assemblies as specified by the manufacturer shall be maintained. 5.6 All openings through which oil is poured should be thoroughly cleaned and dust covers restored. 6. PERIODICAL MAINTENANCE 6.1 Periodical maintenance should be performed systematically at intervals of 8 to 10, 50 to 60, 100 to 120, 200 to 250, 480 to 500 and 960 to I 000 engine working hours. The manufacturer's recommendations regarding periodical maintenance shall be followed. 6.2 Different operations which should be performed at different intervals (, are given in Appendix A for guidance. .*Code of practice for installation of agricultural wheeled tractor. 4 . \

IS:6840-1972
TABLE 1 LUBRJCATION SCHEDULE ( Clause 5.1 )

R 8 SL No. (1) i) ii) iii) iv)
IN

0
BR
COLOUR

INTERVAL ENQINE WORKING (2) hours St0 1 0 50 to 60 100 to 120 200 to 250

IDENTIRICATION (3) Red (R) Yellow (Y) Green (G) Blue (B)

OPERATIONSTORE P ERFORMED\ (4) /

L UBRICANT

(5)
Oil Oil and grease Oil Oil and grease

v) vi)

4.80 to 500 960 to 1 000

Orange (0) Brown (BR)

Change oil in-air cleaner Check oil level in water pump bearing and fuel pump Lubricate hydraulic system, clutch release bearing and steering mechanism Lubricate front wheel bearing and transmission system Change oil in crankcase, fuel pump and governor housing Lubricate dynamo, self starter and belt-pulley housing, hydraulic lift joints, brake and clutch pedals and lever joints, power take-off joints Change oil in front wheel and generator bearing bearing Change oil in transmission system, steering mechanism, hydraulic system and water pump bearing

Oil Oil

iS t 6840 - 1972 ~7. PRECAUTIONS 7.1 While performing different operations it is necessary that full precautions should be taken. For guidance, some precautions which should be observed are given in Appendix B. 8. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS 8.1 For Operator .8&l The person driving the tractor should have a valid driving licence from appropriate authority. 8.1.2 The operator should be familiar with all the symbols for different controls as specified in IS : 6283-1971*. 8.1.3 Unnecessary racing of the tractor should be avoided. 8.1.4 The operator should know the operations to be performed before starting, during working and at the time of stopping the tractor. 8.2 For Owner 8.2.1 The owner should keep a log-book for daily record of the working hours of the tractor, the quantities of fuel and oil filled in it and the type and output of work performed by it, All the services performed should also be recorded. A pro forma for the log-book and servicing record is given in Appendix C. 8.2.2 In case of any trouble, the owner should consult the supplier or this representative for the area. 8.2.3 Implements and machines recommended for that make of the tractor by the manufacturer should be used. 8.2.4 In case the owner himself is operating the tractor, he should also -observe the instructions given in 8.1; 9. STORAGE 9.0 While placing the tractor in storage for more than 30 days the instructions given below should be followed. 9.t Store in a dry, well-protected place. If under-cover storage is not available, use a tarpaulin to cover the tractor. 9.2 Wash and clean the tractor thoroughly. `Symbols for operator controls on agricultural tractors and farm machinery.

6

fs : 6840 - 1972
9.3 Clean all unpainted parts and where rust prevention is necessary cover with multi-purpose grease. 9.4 Lubricate the chassis thoroughly, Use rust-preventive engine oil in all oil cups and oil holes in place of engine oil. 9.5 Drain lubricant from the crankcase while the engine is warm. Flush with crankcase cleaning oil. Refill fresh lubricant of the grade recommended by the manufacturer with 5 to 10 percent rust-preventive engine oil. Run the tractor for a period sufficient to splash the lubricant in all parts. 9.6 Remove the storage battery from the tractor and store in accordance with manufacturer's recommendation. 9.7 Drain the cooling system in the case of liquid-cooled engines. 9.8 Place blocks`under the axles to take weight of the tyres and to prevent them from touching the ground. If water is filled in tyres, drain the same. 9.9 Plug the crankcase breather pipe and exhaust pipe, if covers are not provided. 10. -REMOVAL FROM STORAGE 10.0 While removing the tractor from storage the following procedure should be followed. 10.1 After inflating the tyres, remove the blocks placed under the'axles. 10.2 Check the electrolyte of the battery. Get the battery charged fully and fit it to the tractor. 10.3 Clean the tractor thoroughly. 10.4 Remove the plugs from the crankcase breather pipe and exhaust pipe, if placed (see 9.9 ). X0.5 Lubricate the chassis. 10.6 Check oil level in air cleaner. In case of diesel engine, check oil level in fuel pump also. 10.7 Drain the transmission case and final drive and refill with lubricant of the grade recommended by the manufacturer. 10.8 Close all drain cocks on the cooling system and refill the system with clean water. 10.9 Close drain cocks on the fuel system. Drain sediment bowl. Fill the tank with clean fuel; in case of diesel engine, bleed the air from the fuel system. 10.10 Take off the valve cover and flush the valve operating mechanism with engine oil. Press down each valve with a hand tool to make sure that it is operating freely. 7

,

fS : 6840 - 1972 10.11 Pour or spray small amount of engine oil into each cylinder. Crank up the engine several times, so that the oil may loosen the piston rings and may take out any partially oxidized oil from the valves and pistons.
NOTE - Where there is no provision to crank up the engine from front, this could be done by turning the power take-off.

10.12 Drain the crankcase, flush it with flushing oil and refill it with oil of the grade recommended by the manufacturer up to the level prescribed by him. 10.13 Start the engine and allow it to run slowly for several minutes in order to get the fresh oil distributed throughout the engine before putting load.

+PPENDIX ( Clause 6.2 )

4

PERIODICAL MAINTENANCE A-l. AT 8 TO 10 ENGINE WORKING HOURS A-l.1 Clean the tractor and implements. A-l.2 Check oil level in different assemblies with the tractor on a horizontal surface. Top up, if necessary, when the engine is cold. A-l.3 Remove sediments from the air-precleaner bowl. Clean the oil-bath of the air cleaner if the tractor operates in dusty and tropical surroundings. A-l.4 Top up the fuel tank, if necessary, preferably in the evening, after day's work to avoid condensation. A-l.5 Clean the radiator. Remove dust and dirt accumulated in the core and top up the cooling system, using clean water. A-l.6 Make sure that the tension of the V-belts driving the dynamo and the fan is in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. A-1.7 Check the tightness of the fuel, oil and water pipes and hoses, cleaners, fillers and drain plugs to avoid leakage. A-1.8 Make sure that the inflation of the front and rear tyres is in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. A-1.9 Check the electrical units. Make sure that the ends of the cables are properly connected to the terminals. 8

IS:6840-1972
A-l.10 Check the level and specific gravity of the electrolyte in the storage battery. A-l.11 Lubricate the tractor in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. Lubricate the front wheel hub bearing after puddling operation. A-1.12 Check all ball joints of the steering linkage. Make sure that the bolts and screws of the front axle, wheel hubs, wheel discs and wheel weights are tight. A-1.13 Check all the fastening bolts and screws, and make sure that they are tight. A-1.14 Start the engine and ensure that: a) the engine runs smoothly without knocking and abnormal noise; b) the oil pressure gauge is registering sufficient pressure; c) the warning lights, if provided, are functioning properly; d) the dynamo is generating proper current; and e) the voltage regulator is functioning properly. A-1.15 Engage thehydraulic lift and check the movement of the lifting arms and three-point linkage. A-2. AT 50 TO 60 ENGINE WORKING HOURS A-2.1 Carry out the operation given in A-I. A-2.2 Clean the oil filters. A-2.3 Check the clearance between the clutch thrust bearing and disengaging levers and the movement of the clutch pedal free travel, and adjust if necessary. A-2.4 Make sure that the brakes are in good working condition. A-3. AT 100 TO 120 ENGINE WORKING HOURS A-3.2 Carry out the operations given in A-2. A-3.2 Disconnect the cables of the electrical equipment from terminals, apply grease or petroleum jelly to the terminals and reconnect. A-3.3 Inspect the water pump. Make sure that there are no leaking points. A-3.4 Lubricate the dynamo putting 8 to 10 drops of light engine oil in each of the oil caps. 9

ti3:'6$40- 1972
A-4. AT 200 TO 250 ENGINE WORKlNG HOURS A-4.1 Carry out the operations given in A-3. A-4.2 Drain oil from oil sump and flush with the flushing oil. Refill with oil of grade and up to the level recommended by the manufacturer. A-4.3 Lubricate the joints of the throttle control linkage and other ball joints. A-4.4 Check the `clearance of the front wheel hub bearing. A-4.5 Check the toe-in. A-5. AT 480 TO 500 ENGINE WORKING HOURS A-5.1 Carry out the operations given in A-4. A-5.2 Add rust-removing compound to radiator, start the engine and flush the cooling system. A-5.3 Interchange the tyres wearing. A-5.4 Flush the fuel tank. A-5.5 Test and clean the self starter, dynamo and switching contacts of the starter relay. A-5.6 Clean the magnetic drain plug. A-5.7 Check the injector and adjust, if necessary. A-6. AT 960 TO 1000 ENGINE WORKING HOURS A-6.1 Carry out the operations given in A-5. A-6.2 Change the oil in the gear-box, steering housing, power take-off case and hydraulic system, the grade and level of the oil being as recommended by the manufacturer. A-6.3 Inspect the brake lining. Clean and adjust the brakes. A-6.4 Get the compression pressure of engine checked and get the engine overhauled if necessary. of the front wheels to secure uniform

10

IS : 6840 - 1972

,APPENDIX ( Clause 7.1 )
PRECAUTIONS B-l. COOLING SYSTEM B-l.1 Never run the tractor without water.

B

B-l.2 Always maintain the level of water as recommended by the facturer. B-I.3 Never fill water when the engine is hot. Use clean water.

manu-

B-I.4 Never remove the radiator cap abruptly when the engine is hot. B-l.5 Never attempt to lubricate the fan bearing when the engine is running. ~B-2. LUBRICATION SYSTEM B-2.1 Use clean oil of the proper grade. B-2,2 Use crankcase flushing oil or same grade of lubricant for flushing the crankcase. B-2.3 Drain the crankcase only when the engine is hot and the oil is well agitated. B-2.4 Never check the oil level while the engine is running. B-2.5 Never use cotton waste for cleaning the components. B-2.6 Metal type oil filter element should be cleaned with bristle brush and any solvents such as petrol and diesel oil. B-3. AIR CLEANER SYSTEM B-3.1 Never try to remove the oil cup when the engine is running. B-3.2 Refill only clean oil of the proper grade. B-3.3 Never use petrol or other highly volatile fuel for cleaning the filter element. Always clean with a jet of compressed air. B-3.4 Never use a cracked rubber hose. 11

IS : 6840 - 1972 B-4. FUEL SYSTEM B-4.1 Use only clean fuel of proper grade. B-4.2 Handle the fuel filter very carefully, as the mesh is extremely fine. B-5. -TRANSMISSION AND WHEEL SYSTEM B-5.1 Avoid riding eve! the clutch pedal. B-5.2 Never overload the engine. `B-5.3 Never overlubricate the bearings. B-5.4 Release the clutch slowly to avoid jerks. B-5.5 Drain the transmission case only when the engine is warm. B-5.6 Always keep recommended inflation of the tyres. B-6. HYDRAULIC SYSTEM B-6.1 Use only clean hydraulic fluid of the proper'grade. B-6.2 Maintain the oil level as prescribed by the manufacturer; B-7. ELECTRICAL SYSTEM B-7.1 Never touch concentrated electrolyte. B-7.2 Never add concentrated electrolyte in the battery. B-7.3 Never let the terminals of the battery to corrode. B-7.4 Never drive the tractor if the dynamo is not functioning. B-7.5 Never touch bare wirings.

'

B-8. BEFORE, DURING AND AFTER OPERATION B-8.1 Before starting the tractor make sure that there is no leakage of the oil and fuel and the tyres are properly inflated. B-8.2 After starting the tractor make sure that all the instruments fitted in the panel are functioning properly. B-8.3 Do not get on and off the tractor while it is operating. B-8.4 While attaching a mounted implement to the tractor be careful not to get between the lower links of the hydraulic lift. 1 12

IS : 6840. - 1972
B-8.5 While adjusting the hydraulic lift and cleaning the parts do not stay on the implement. B-8.6 Before raising or lowering the mounted implements precautions should be taken to avoid accidents. B-8.7 Do not smoke or keep flame, near the fuel tank. B-S.8 Always engage the clutch gently. B-S.9 When making an emergency stop on highways or on way to or from fields, make sure that both the wheels are braked simultaneously. B-8.10 Never ride or allow anybody to ride on the drawbar or the implement during operation.

B-8.11 Always keep the tractor in gear when going down steep slopes. B-8.12 Always drive the tractor at a speed slow enough to ensure safety,
especially on rough ground or near ditches. B-8.13 Be careful when working on hillside. Watch out for holes and ditches into which a wheel may drop and cause the tractor to overturn. B-8.14 Reduce the speed before making a turn or applying the brakes. B-8.15 During night operation keep the front lights on B-8.16 When the tractor is overloaded and the engine speed slows down, do not regulate the speed by repeated release of the clutch. In such cases, shift the gear to lower range or reduce the load by reducing the working d e p t h . B_8.1'~ Never toe another tractor by attaching a chain to the rear axle housing on top link or its mounting on the tractor. B-8.18 After stopping the tractor, see that all the controls are on neutral or off position. Shut off the fuel tank valve and take out the contact key.

13

1s : 6840 - 1972

APPENDIX ( Clause 8.2.1 )

C

PRO FORMA FOR LOG-BOOK AND SERVICING RECORD I 1. LOG-BOOK a) Daily record
Date Odometer/Hour Actual Idling Total Opera- Area Fuel Engine Other Signa' ReRecorder Work- Walk- Engine tions Covered Consu- Oil Lubri- ture of marks ing med in Consu- cants the i fig Work- PerReading Litres med in Consu- Opera,--A--- Hours Hours ing formed Litres med in tar Hours On off Litres

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

6

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

b) Fuel in the fuel tank on start of the month in litres c) Fuel in the fuel tank on close of the month in litres d) Total fuel issued during the month in litres e) Total fuel consumed during the month in litres f) Total engine working hours during the month g) Average fuel consumption in litres/hour 2. SERVICING RECORD

a>

b) c) 4 e) f>

9)

Name of the service station Date of servicing Odometer or hour recorder reading at the time of servicing Expected date for next service Total kilometres or engine working hours since the last service Nature of job performed during servicing Charges paid
Signature of the owner of the service station z&h seal

Signature of the owner of the tractor

14

IS:6840 - 1972
( Continuedfrom page 2 )

Tractor, Power Tiller and Tractor-Driven Implements Subcommittee AFDC 20 : 15
Convsncr
S HRI

Representing Tractor Training Centre (Ministry of Agriculture ), Hissar Directorate of Military Farms, Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquarters

K. S. Y A D A V

Members B~ra R. C. D ATTA

SERI SHAHID ALI ( Alternate ) VST Tillers Tractors Limited, Bangalore SHRI M. K. GOPALAERISRNA SHRI V. P. M AHENDRA ( Alfernate) Tractor Training & Testing Station ( Ministry of SHRX 0. S. GUPTA Agriculture ), Budni Agromec, Meerut SHRI B. S. J AIN Tractors and Farm Equipment Limited, Madras SERI R. NA R A Y A N A S W A M Y Krishi Engines Limited, Hyderabad SHRI V. R. RE D D Y SHRI P. V. RAQHAV RAO ( Alternate ) Escorts Limited, Faridabad SERI RIPDAMAN SIN~H Inte;.&ti;;l Tractor Company of India Limited, S HRI S. SA N Y A L SHRI M. P. SARATHL SHRI B. M. SEN
SHRI L. SUNDARAM ( Alternate ) SHRI R. N. SINQH

Rajasthan State Agro Industries Corporation (k) Ltd, Jaipur Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ), Durgapur

Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi Ghaziabad Engineering Company Private Ltd, C DRE R. C. VENXATRAM ( R ETD ) New Delhi COI, K. C. J OHN ( RETD ) ( Alternate )

15

INDIAN ON

STAND'ARDS

AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS

IS:
4468-1967 Dimensions for three-point linkage of agricultural wheeled tractors / 4931-1968 Power take-off shafts of agricultural tractors 5994-1970 Test code for agricultural tractors 6283-1971 Symbols for operator controls on agricultural tractors and farm machinery 6460 ( Part I )-1972 Ball and socket assembly for three-point linkage: Part I Ball 6483-1972 Linch pin assembly 6840-1972 Code of practice for preventive maintenance of agricultural wheeled tractor 6847-1972 Code of practice-for installation of agricultural wheeled tractor

