( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard

HYDRAULICFLUIDPOWERSYSTEMCOMMISSIONTNGANDMAINTENANCEOF COMPLETEHYDRAULICSYSTEMSRECOMMENDATIONS
UDC 621-22-005

@I BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR NEW DELH[

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG 110002

BHAVAN,

May 1991

Price Groap 8

Hydraulic

Fluid Power Systems Sectional

Committee,

PE 15

FOREWORD

.

This Indian Standard was adopt Led by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hvdraulic Fluid Power Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Production Engineering Division Council. A complete hydraulic system may have various components like pumps, valves, cylinders, motors, accumulators, intensifiers, etc. The purpose of this document is to provide general recommendations to be followed in order to get the best of a complete hydraulic system. It is not intended to give the details of performance of the hydraulic system or its components. This standard is useful to the system manufacturers to form basis for their own service documents and to the users in the absence of manufacturer's documents. It is also recommended that the manufacturer's instructions for installation, ance be followed to ensure trouble free operation of hydraulic systems. operation and maintenH-1973

In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from CETOPRll `Complete hydraulic systems', issued by European Oil Hydraulic and Pneumatic Committee.

Is 13053`: 1991

" .

Indian Standard

.

`, I `.:

... ,

HYDRAULICFLUID POWERSYSTEMCOMMISSIONING AND MAINTENANCEOF COMPLETEHYDRAULTCSYSTEMSRECOMMENDATIONS
1 SCOPE
1.1 This standard covers recommendations regarding commissioning and maintenance of complete hydraulic systems.

2.3.3.1 On completion of filling operation, the level of the hydraulic fluid shall be within the specified minimum and maximum levels. 2.4 Initial Starting 2.4.1 Before starting the system, ensure that: a) the alignment of pump and motors is correct; b) direction of rotation is correct; the elements for transferring the power are as per the manufacturer's specifications; 4 all the electrical equipment are rechecked; 4 the primemover would deliver sufficient power, as required. 5y the complete hydraulic circuit operation; f ) all the measuring equipments are of right type and as per relevant specification; valves are closed or g) the appropriate opened as may be necessary for starting; and h) all connections, closures and fixing bolts are correctly tightened.

1.2 Installation of complete hydraulic systems shall be according to IS 10481 : 1983 `Guide for applications and installation of oil hydraulic systems'. 2 COMMISSIONING 2.1 General Requirement 2-1.1 All the components of the hydraulic system should conform to the hydraulic circuit diagram. 2.1.2 The e!ectrical equipment for the power supply available. shall be suitable

c>

2.2 Before Commissioning a) All piping of the hydraulic circuit must be thoroughly cleaned from both inside and outside; and b) The reservoir should be cleaned from inside. 2.3 Filling the System 2.3.1 Before filling the system it should be confirmed that the hydraulic fluid is according to manufacturer's recommendations. 2.3.2 It should be ensured that: filling a> shall be carried out in accordance with the manufacturers' instructions; b) the appropriate valve or valves shall be opened or closed as the case may be, for adequate filling; cl the hydraulic fluid shall be free of water or any other form of contaminations; and 4 all lines and fluid spaces are free of trapped air.

2.3.3 Filling of accumulators in the .hydraulic system and pressurized reservoirs, if any, shall be carried out in accordance with manufaci . Iturer?. instructions. `, , L

2.4.2 During initial running, check the following: 4 The system is thoroughly bled at all appropriate points of the circuit; Extra attention shall be given to check b) any leakage at any point in the complete system. If the leakage is detected, it should be rectified before further operation; cl Extra attention shall be given to detect undue vibration and noise in the system. If these faults are- observed, the system shall be shut down and faults rectified before further operations are done; 4 Attention shall be given to check for any malfunctioning of the components resulting from possible errors in system design. If in doubt about the performance of the comp.onents, manufacturer's data and operating instructions may be consulted; e) Pressure and flow settings should be cartied. out as per ~the circuit requirements. Wherever possible, seal or lock

IS 13053: 1991

f) g)

the adjustments to avoid uoauthorised or accidental readjustments. Check all mounting bolts and flanges to be sure that they are tight and properly aligned. If the pump is installed with a positive head on the inlet, priming will be instantaneous ._ upon start up. When _ it _ is not possible to provide positive head at the pump inlet or the installation is such thata suction lift results, the following procedure is recommended: -

d) Examine strainers, filters and magnetic separators. Clean or replace, if necessary; e) Restart generally in accordance with 2.4; f ) Check for external leaks; and g) Check functioning of the complete system. 3 INSPECTION 3.1 Periodic inspection of the complete hydraulic system and its proper record in the form of a log book is strongly recommended for all types of hydraulic systems. 3 2 Daily Checks
.

~i;;ually
.

fill the

pump housing with

Start rotation in jogging manner until a prime is picked-up. Bleed off air that may become trapped in the pump.

TO prevent possible damage to the internal parts, the pump should never be started dry or without internal lubrication. 2.4.3 Starting of initial running shall be always done by jogging ( frequent on/off ). 2.4.4 After initial starting, filters must be cleaned at intervals as required. 2.4.4.1 Gauges or pressure drop Indicators are useful for determining when filters need cleaning. 2.4.4.2 Use of fine filters for initial running may be necessary in certain systems. 2.4.5 Following included: additional information may be

For the hydraulic systems used daily and those used in criticai applications, the following shall be monitored every day, while the system is
operating:

a) Visible external leakages in the whole system; b) Upper and lower limits of hydraulic oil temperature where required; and c) Functioning of safety devices. 3.3 Checks at Regular Short Intervals The following shall be checked at regular intervals of every fifteen days or after every 200 hours of operation: operation of the system-work a) Overall output; b) Cooling system; 4 Reservoir fluid level; d) Fluidpressures - at appropriate points in the system; e) Output speeds; f-1 Protective guards; g) Fixing and mounting of units; h) Noise level; and jl Lubrication. 3.4 The following shall be checked at an interval of every three months or after every 1 500 hours of operation: a) Condition of the hydraulic fluid; L\ Condition of strainers, filters and magne"I tic separators; ,_) Accuracy of pressure gauges; of individual units in the d) Functioning system; of accumulators to local e, Conformation regulations; and f) Detailed inspection of safety devices. 2

the actuators should be `After starting, operated slowly for a few cycles without load.' 2.4.6 After an extended operating period under normal working conditions, check that the recommended system temperature range is not exceeded. Also, check the reservoir level. Take the necessary steps if the level is found to be out of the specified range. 2.5 Restarting of Shut-Down Unit When restarting the system after a long period of inactivity, process as follows:

a) Remove contaminant and preservatives; b) Take a sample of fluid and examine it.

4

Remove any water that has entered and any sludge deposits, or change the fill if necessary; Check the fluid level and replenish with the same hydraulic fluid up to the required height;

ls130332199l
4

MAINTENANCE

4.2 Maintenance

f= Shut-b

4.1 Routine Maintenance As with inspection, the use of a log book and planned maintenance at fixed intervals is strongly recommended. In most cases this work shall be done whe'n the machine is not in operation. Following operations shall be carried out at regular intervals:

For short shut-down, leave the hydraulic fluid in the system. When the hydraulic fluid is kept in the system it may be useful to run the system from time to time to wet the interior as a protection against corrosion. 5 DETECTION 5.1 General An hydraulic system which has been carefully planned to suit the conditions of operation and which has been correctly installed will give many years of trouble-free operation. However, when defects occur, it is essential to find their cause to take corrective action as soon as possible. The following text will serve as a guide for the detection and analysis of faults: a) Faults in an hydraulic system are generally indicated by: or torque - this i) insufficient effort fault is normally linked to insufficient pressure; ii) insufficient speed - this fault is normally linked to insufficient flow; iii) temperature which is out .of the operational limits; iv) noise and vibration; v) external leaks; and faults and especially vi) miscellaneous faults in the auxiliary power supplies ( mechanical, electrical, pneumatic ), or faults in the machine driven by the hydraulic system. b) The observed fault might be, i) system will not start, ii) one or more actuators will not operate, iii) incorrect operation of actuator(s), and iv) a combination of several of the abovementioned faults. 5.1.1 It is important: a) to observe the faults separately in combination; b) to determine the characteristics faults in particular whether they tinuous, occasional, momentary, c) to try to deduce the cause location. 5.2 Incorrect Force or Torque 5.2.1 This fault is generally caused by lack or excess of pressure which may be either local or general. When pressure gauge are not permanently installed, their temporary installation at and/or of these are conetc; and and its OF FAULTS

of the system. Pay particular attention to air cooling passageways in auxiliary equipment; b) Clean strainers, filters and magnetic separators or, if necessary, replace them, as per manufacturer's recommendations; Check. whether the paint on surfaces c) coming into contact with the fluid are intact and in good condition. If not, remove the paint completely and repaint in accordance with the recommendations of the equipment manufacturer and fluid supplier; 4 If the fluid is contaminated or have deteriorated seriously it must be changed at once. Ascertain and eliminate the cause of this occurrence, for example: i) Paint hoses and seals not sufficiently resistant to the fluid, ii) Fluid contaminated by water, and iii) If wax becomes apparent during normal operation the fluid is not suitable and must be completely changed for one of superior quality; and e) Replenish reservoir with the same brand of fluid as is currently used. Use new, clean fluid only and fill reservoir in accordance with 2.5. 4.1.1 After the fluid has been in use for a period recommended by the fluid manufacturer or as dictated by experience, it shall be drained off and replaced with fresh, clean fluid. When this is done the system is to be thorougly cleaned by a fluid recommended by the equipment manufacturer. Alkaline solutions, water or petroleum are not suitable for flushing. All contaminants to be removed and, where necessary, all fluid passages be carefully cleaned. Do not use cleansing materials that can deposit other particles in the system. 4.1.2 If the fluid contains abraded ( contaminated ) particles, the origin shall be established. Units which are damaged or do not operate properly may only be repaired according to the manufacturer's instructions and in an emergency replacement units shall be installed. When installing replacement or repaired units make sure that they are properly aligned and fixed and operate correctly. 3

a) Clean the outside

IS'13053 :19!n
carefully selected places:is an aid to troubleshooting. The analysis will be made easier by comparing the measured pressure with the designed pressure, shown on the circuit diagram, under specified conditions and on particular parts of the system.
.

5.2.2 The following faults:

shall help

in locating the

b) presence of air or other'- gases& .the, fluid which increases its ,compressibility; excessive fluid velocity in piping or comc) ponents; d) excessive decompression rate of fluid trapped under pressure; e) internally generated vibrations or oscillations in pumps, valves or actuator parts; and
I

Incorrect Insufficient difference actuator Annex A)

Force or Torque from Actuator

I

pressure across ( see

Excessive pressure. difference across ( see actuator Annex B )
I

I

Fluctuating difference actuator
I

pressure across

Erratic pressure difference across ( see actuator Annex C )

Oscillating pressure difference 10:; closed systems ( see 5.4.3 )

I

5.3 Incorrect Speed 5.3.1 The speed of cylinders, motors and other actuators are functions of the fluid flow, therefore any speed loss or gain will be generally associated with the problems of pumps, flow regulators and other valves. These faults may be caused by eith.er variations of the main flow or of the flow in certain parts of the system. 5.3.2 The analysis will be made easier by measuring pump and motor speeds by a tachometer and the speeds of cylinders and oscillating motors by a stop watch. These speeds should be compared with the designed speeds shown in the circuit diagram for specified conditions. 5.3.3 The faults: following shall help to locate the

f) vibration of parts external to the hydraulic system, for example, drive shaft of prime mover, actuator support or piping, etc. 5.4.2 Analysis of system noise may be made easier by locating the noise source in `the system. 5.4.2.1 If possible each unit or part of the system shall be operated separately to determine the origin of the noise. A stathoscope shall be useful in tracing the noise source. The nature of the noise whether it is of low-or high pitch, might aid the search for its origin. Generally, low pitched noises are usually from mechanical origin, whereas high pitched noises frequently originate from high velocity and fluid flow.

Incorrect Insufficient of actuator Annex D )
I I

Speed of Actuator Fluctuating
I

speed (see

Excessive speed of actuator ( see Annex E >

speed Oscillatin speed in closed loop systems ( see 5.4.3 )

Erratic speed of actuator ( open loop systems ) ( see Annex F ) 5.4 Noise and Vibrations 5.4.1 All systems noise in a hydraulic system may be caused by: a) vibrations transmitted to the fluid by the pumps ( flow and pressure pulsations );
4

I

5.4.3 Closed Loop Systems If, after a satisfactory operation closed loop system becomes unstable, possible causes are. a) variation of natural frequency of actuatar/load by changes in load, or

Is 13053 : 1991 b) variation in the closed loop gain temi) hydraulic : abnormal pressure, perature, or fluid viscosity ii) mechanical : variation of feedback lever iii) electrical : variation of electronic amplifier c) mechanical backlash in feedback ( mechanical feedback'or transducer ), or backlash in couplings between body and actuator and/or actuator and load: d) electrical noise; and e) worn or damaged parts ( transducer, amplifier, serve valve, actuator, etc ). 5.4.3.1 If any of these faults are suspected, it may be helpful to consult a control engineer to assist in correcting the system. 5.4.3.2 Refer Annex'G of excessive noise. for causes and locations on the circuit diagram for defined operating conditions, with a view to corrective action being taken. 5.5.5 Refer Annex H for cause of excessive temperatures. 5.6 External Leakage External leaks may occur at any point in the system; they might be the beginning of more serious defects. These defects should be eliminated without'delay. 5.6.1 It should be noted that some seals, especially in dynamic application, rely on' a very small leakage for their satisfactory operation. If in doubt about the amount of leakage at a given point, the advice of the equipment manufacturer shall be sought. 5.6.2 Refer leaks. Annex J for causes of external

5.7 Other Faults 5.7.1 This list of faults that may occur in a hydraulic system may not be complete. However, typical faults may be: seals; fluid deterioration caused by chemical b) reactions contamination and pollution by other fluids, such as air, water and other less common fluid for example, hydraulic oil shall not be contaminated by fire `resistant fluids, nor should any one type of fire resistant fluid be contaminated by another; fault caused `by' a chemically corrosive 4 atmosphere or an atmosphere laden with abrasive particles; fault in the prime mover ( mechanica! 4 drive, engine or electrical motor ); fault in the .control system ( mechanical, electrical, electronic or pneumatic); fault in the machine element driven by ) the hydraulic system; g) abnormal load conditions; hj faulty drivezouplings; and j) abnormal frictional resistance or damage to the machine elements.

5.5 Abnormal Temperature 5.5.1 The reasons for limiting the operating temperature range are because temperature modifies the fluid properties, particularly its viscosity and also it affects the performance of units. It is, therefore, useful to note: a) the ambient temperature as a basic reference; b) the fluid temperature in the reservoir; and c) the fluid temperature of significant parts of the system. 5.5.2 to: a) b) c) The fluid temperature will vary according

a) fluid compatibility with metallic parts and

frequency of the operating cycle, ambient tempera&r e,`and elapsed time from start-up.

5.5.3 It is worth noting that a very high local temperature might cause deterioration of the fluid and local parts of the system. 5.5.4 For analysing temperature problems, ther-mometers, thermocouples and other temperature indicators are valuable aids. Temperature measured shall be compared with those specified

e> f

3s 13053 :. 19a

ANNEX A ( Clause 5.2.2 )
TROUBLE SHOOTING FOR INSUFFICIENT PRESSURE DIFFERENCE ACROSS ACTUATOR Fault
*

Possible Location of Cause a) Prime mover pump drive or

Cause

Remedies

Insufficient force/ torqe from actuator Insufficient presdifference sure across actuator

Clutch or belt slip Fault:7 prime mover Faulty power supply to prime mover

Check for damaged pump drive, replace and realign Correct Check against circuit gram and rectify

dia-

b) Pump or intensifier -Meter . bleed off lo::tion -Meter out location c) Variable capacity motor or transmission

d) Fixed motor der

capacity or cylin-

e) Accumulator

control f) Flow valves i) Bleed of location g) Directional control valves

Pressure setting too low in meter in location from feed lines Pressure setting too high in meter out location Insufficient capacity resulting from incorrect setting of stroke control Worn or damaged parts or contaminant causing excessive internal leakage Worn out or damaged parts or containant causing excessive internal leakage Worn or damaged parts or contaminant causing excessive internal leakage Precharge pressure too low Valves open too wide

Check and set the feed line pressure at the meter-in Check and set the meter out line nressure to the recommended pressure Overhaul or replace

Overhaul or replace dirty clean clogged inlet filters, .. . . line, clean reservoir breather vent Overhaul or replace the damaged parts. Check for dirt, gunny deposits. Check for contamination of oil Overhaul the damaged parts and replace bladder Check and recharge sary or reset Adjust if neces-

Valves not fully actuated

Check electrical supply for over/under voltage or solenoid burnout Check source of pilot pressure Overhaul and clean spool and bore

h) Pressure control valves i) Meter-in bleed Pressure setting too low off location Pressure setting too ii) Meter-out high location .6

Set sure Set sure

the recommended at meter-in point the recommended at meter-out point

prespres-

ANNEX ( Clause 5.2.2

B
)

TROUBLE SHOOTING FOR EXCESSIVE PRESSURE DIFFF,RENCE ACROSS ACTUATOR Fault
*

Possible Location of Cause a) Variable capacity motor or transmission

Cause

Remedies

Excessive force torque from actuator Excessive pressure differential across actuator

Excessive capacity resulting from incorrect setting of stroke control

Set the motor proper angle

control

to

b) Pressure control valves or i) Meter-in off bleed location from feed line ii) Meter-out location Pressure high setting too Set the recommended at meter-in point pressure

Pressure setting too low Worn or damaged parts or contaminant causing excessive internal leakage of oil

Set the recommended at meter-out point

pressure

Overhaul or replace damaged parts. Check for dirt or gunny deposit. Check for contamination

c) Restrictor ves

valValve insufficiently open Install pressure gauge and adjust to correct pressure

Bleed off locations from feed line

ANNEX

C

( Clause 5.2.2 )
TROUBLE SHOOTING Fault FOR ERRATIC PRESSURE DIFFERENCE ACROSS ACTUATOR Cause Remedies

Possible Location of Cause

Erratic force torque from actuator pressure Erratic difference across actuate r

a) Prime mover pump drive

of

Faulty units or power causing erratic supply output power

Change the prime mover or use suitable governors on prime movers Check the electrical supply voltage to the prime mover Check for the direction of pump drive and if found wrong, change the direction of rotation

T_s13053:1991

ANNEX
Fault Posgible Location Cause b) Pump or intensifier of
L

C - Contd
Cause Remedies

Cavitation or aeration input lines: Low pressure. suction line

in

in pump

Check the suitability filter and strainer

of pipe,

Low lever of oil in reservoir Restricted ner
*

Maintain oil level in reservoir well above bottom of suction line at all times Clean filter or strainer Use only recommended of oil Check Replace Review correct grade

filter ur straifluid causing

Incorrect foaming

Leakage at oil seal and suction line joints Pump drain or return line too close to pump suction c) Flow valves control conFlow control set too low

for the leakages. damaged seals the design and

Adjust the valve

flow through the

d) Pressure trol valve

Pump pressure too low Main low Vent low valve relief setting setting too too

Check relief or compensator Adjust Adjust vent relief Overhaul, replace damaged parts, flush system Overhaul, parts replace damaged

e) Hydraulic motors, transmission .or cylinders

Worn or danaged parts or contamination causing erratic operation Worn or damaged parts or incorrectly set cushioning device in cyliaders

f, Directional ' trol valves

con-

Reversing fast

action

too

Check the flow and adjust Checking the packings

g) Accumulator ( Piston type ) h) Machine ments ele-

Varying frictional resis( stick slip ) of tance piston Varying frictional resistance ( stick slip ) in machine movements 8

replace Overhaul, and linkages

bearings

IS I3053 .:~1!?!2I,

ANNEX D ( Czaust? 5.3.3 )
TROUBLE SHOOTING FOR INSUFFICIENT SPEED OF ACTUATOR Fault Possible Location of Cause speed a) Pipes Cause Remedies
'

Insufficient of actuator

Line restrictions

If lines are crimped, replace, if partially plugged for any reason remove obstruction and Clean strainers filter element and replace

Clogged filters b) Fluid

strainers

Air or gas entraiument

Tightens leaky inlet connections. Fill reservoir to proper level with rare exception. All return lines should be below fluid level in the reservoir. Bleed air from the system. Replace pump shaft seal (and shaft, if worn at seal journal ). Provide reservoir with baffles. Check for reservoir design violations Use oil recommended grade the of

Viscosity outside acceptable limits
c) Servo valves

Incorrect Incorrect

control control

signal signal

Check and set input and output

signal

d) Directional control valves

Solenoid inoperative

Check electrical supply for over/under voltage or solenoid burn out Check sure source of pilot pres-

Blocked pilot drain Worn spring mechanism e) Flow valves control Incorrect Maximum obtainable centring

Check and replace Check and repair

Worn out control linkage control signal flow not

Clean valve, check torque motor coils and input current. Realign properly Clean valve and flush system. Polish hydrostat and metering spool. Replace defective seals Check and set the signal input and output Check and adjust accordingly Overhaul and replace damaged parts

Feed rate variation pressure compensator inoperative f) Pressure control valves g) Pump or intensifier Incorrect control signal

Incorrect control setting Defective boost unit

9

ANNEX
Fault
.

D -

Contd
Remedies

Possible Location of Cause

Cause

Incorrect control setting actuating device yoke ( variable inoperative displacement pumps ) Cavitation Clogged strainer or suction pipeline Strainer cient capacity insuffi-

Overhaul or replace

Low level of oil in the reservoir h) Accumulator Incorrect control setting: according to Gas precharge not suffi- Precharge manufacturers' instructions cient and check for gas leak, if any Unloading valve or pump Reset pressure switch pressure set too low j) Prime mover Worn or damaged com- Overhaul, replace the damaged components and check ponelit of contaminant the level of contamination. Flush the system entirely Check the speed of prime Inactuate speed clutch mover and correct or belt slit ele- Excessive load and/or k) Machine Reduce excessive load by redesigning the assembly frictional resistance ments

strainer or suction Clean pipeline. Remove foreign matter Replace with strainer whose capacity is more than twice the maximum flow rate Add recommended oil as per indicator line

ANNEX E ( Clause 5.3.3 )
TROUBLE SHOOTING FOR EXCESSIVE SPEED OF ACTUATOR Fault Possible Location of Cause speed of a) Servo valves Cause Remedies

Excessive actuator

Incorrect control signal damaged component or contaminant

Check and set the signal input and output Overhaul and replace damaged parts

b) Directional trol valves

con-

Incorrect Solenoid

control

signal Check electrical supply for over/under votage or solenoid burnout

inoperative

10

Isl3053:19!w ANNEX
Fault
.

E - Cod
Cause Remedies

Possible Location of Cause

Blocked pilot drain Worn spring centering mechanism Worn out control leakage mechanism c) Flow valves control Incorrect Maximum tainable setting flow not ob-

Check source of pilot sure Check and replace

pres-

contamination Check the level flush and use new oil

Feed rate variation pressure compensator inoperative d) Pressure control valves Incorrect Incorrect damaged Component nation e) Variable placement dispump Incorrect setting control signal

Clean motor realign Clean Polish spool.

valves, check torque coils and input current, properly valve and flush system. hydrostat and metering Replace defective seals

Check and set the signal input and output Check and adjust accordingly. Overhaul and replace damaged components

or contamisetting Set adjusting screw to obtain desired minimum operating pressure Check the pump controls and of pilot pressure. source Overhaul and replace. Check for .contaminants and clean Check the supply voltage to the primemover, and correct

Incorrect control signal damaged component or contaminant f) Prime mover Excessive speed

ANNEX F ( Clause5.3.3 )
TROUBLE SHOOTING FOR ERRATIC SPEED OF ACTUATOR Fault Possible Location of Cause of a) Hydraulic fluid Cause Remedies

Erratic actuator

speed

Air entrainment

in fluid

Tighten tions

leaky

inlet

connec-

Fill reservoir to proper level exception all ( with rare return lines should be below fluid level in reservoir )

11

IS ao53:1991 ANNEX
Fault Possible Location of Cause

F ---Contd
Cause Remedies

Bleed air from system. Replace pump shaft seal ( and shaft if worn at seal journal ), b) Directional control valve Excessive input flow resulting in spool fluctuations: Flow control set too high Toke actuating device inoperative (variable displacement pumps ) RPM of pump derive motor incorrect Improper size pump used for replacement

Adjust the flow Overhaul or replace

Replace

with correct

unit unit

Replace with correct

c) Flow valves

contra 1 Damaged components Contaminant Incorrect adjustment Causing erratic function

Overhaul and replace damaged components Flush and replace with new oil Adjust flow Check the supply voltage to prime mover and correct Overhaul and replace damaged components Replace broken coupling, key or belt Overhaul, and replace damaged components Flush, and replace with clean oil Adjust correctly Check and replace Work with clean oil according to Precharge manufacturers' instructions and. check for gas leaks, if any

d) Prime movers

Fluctuating power supply to electricially controlled units Damaged components adjustment Incorrect causing erratic function

e) Pressure control valves

Damaged

component

Contaminant adjustment Incorrect causing erratic function f) Accumulators Damaged components Contaminant Incorrect adjustments

g) Pumps or intensifiers

Cavitation Strainer sufficient

in inlet lines capacity inReplace with strainer whose capacity is more than twice the maximum flow rate Tighten the joints. Replace damaged shaft seal

Air leak at pumps suction piping joints or from shaft packing of pump

ANNE2
i

$f .L Contd
Cause .Remedies

Fault

Possible Location of Cause

Too small size of suction piping Fluctuating to variable units power supply displacement

Design suction pipe to match the flow Check the supply the prime mover voltage to

Misaligned drive or too tight belt drive, if any Damaged components, contaminant or incorrect adjustment causing erratic function Overhaul, replace components damaged

Install adequate filter replace oil more often Check maximum relief valves h) Hydraulic motors or transmissions Fluctuating power supply to electrically controlled units Fluctuating to variable units power supply displacement setting

or of

Check the supply voltage to the motor controls and solenoid. Correct it Check the supply voltage to controls and solenoids Overhaul, parts, instal replace oil maximum valves replace damaged adequate filter or more often, check setting or relief

components, Damaged contaminant or incorrect adjustment causing erratic function

Varying frictional resis- Replace the items tance ( stick slip ) in machine elements errors of Alignment machine elements and/or actuators j ) Cylinders Damaged contaminant Varying tance component resisCorrect the misalignment drive system of

Overhaul, replace damaged seals, pistons, etc. Flush system Replace defective or poor quality of packings, piston bearing. Check smoothness of cylinder wall surface, if excessively worn out and replace Replace damaged joints, etc bearings,

frictional

k) Machine ments

ele-

Varying tance

frictional

resis-

,13

Ia 13053 : 1991

ANNEX

G

( Clause 5.4 3.2 )
TROUBLE SHOOTING FOR EXCESSIVE NOISE IN THE SYSTEM
.

Fault

Possible Location of Cause a) Pressure and flow control valves Inadequate ing

Cause

Remedies

Excessive noise in the system

or no damp-

Supress noise by adopting suitable dampening methods Replace worn parts with new. if oractical or reDlace entire valve unit. Remove metal particles in suspension. Drain entire system. Flush piping and clean all components Install pressure gauge and adjust to correct pressure

Worn or damaged parts or contaminant causing erratic operation

Dynamic braking pressure valve set to low cavitation in causing feedline to actuator b) Hydraulic motors and cylinders do

do

Worn or damaged parts or contaminant causing erratic operation c) Prime movers Worn or damaged parts causing excessive noise

Align unit and check condition of seals, bearings and couplings. If damaged, replace them Replace damaged bearings of electric motor. Reduce open gap in the rotor. Check for mis-alignment, secure motors properly with dampeners

d) Pumps or Intensifier

Cavitation or aeration inlet lines

in Tighten the joints. damaged shaft seal Replace

Air leak at pump suction piping joints or from shaft packing of pump Too small size of suction piping Worn or damaged parts or contamination causing excessive noise e) Piping Loose or inadequate ings Flow surge turbulence f) Any unit and fixripple fix-

Design suction pipe to match the flow 0 venhaul, parts replace damaged

Insert hose in sharp bend areas and at pump secure pipings with suitable clamps at regular intervals to dampen vibration absorbent with Stabilize mounts at frequent intervals

Loose or inadequate ing 14

Is13053:1991

ANNEX H ( Czuwe 5.5.5 )
TROUBLE SHOOTING FOR ABNORMAL TEMPERATURES IN THE SYSTEMROSS ACTUATOR
.

Fault

Possible Location of C3lIl.W. a) Flow control valves ( bleed off location ) Flow wide

Cause

Remedies

Excessive temperaE;iio,' units and/

control

open

too

Adjust the flow

Worn or damaged ponents Abnormally low actuator speed Contaminant causing cessive leakage

com-

Replace worn partswith new, if practical or replace entire valve unit Remove metal particles in suspension. Drain entire system. Flush piping, clean all components, refill with new oil do

ex-

b) Pressure control valve ( bleed off location )

Worn or damaged components Contaminant causing excessive leakage Pressure setting too low permitting unnecessary leakage

Set the pressure according to recommendation Eliminate breather all air through air

c) Hydraulic

fluid

Excessive entrainment of air or other gas in the fluid

Fluid viscosity too low causing bleed off flow control to pass excessive flow Abnormally high casing temperature d) Pumps or iatensifiers Worn or damaged parts Contamination causing abnormal internal leakage

Check to be certain that return lines are below oil level and well separated from suction line Use recommended grade of oil

Overhaul or damaged parts

replace

the

Remove metal particles in suspension. Drain entire system. Flush piping, clean all components, refill with new oil

e) Cooling system

Inadequate flow or excessive temperature of cooling medium Improper functioning oil cooler or supply cooling water cutoff of of Check and repair

Reservoir too small to provide adequate cooling

Replace with larger reservoir or install cooler

IS 130532 5991

ANNEX
Fault Possible Location Cause of

H - Contd
Cause Remedies

f) Pressure trols

con-

Pressure setting too high causing excessive power wastage when relieving

Reset relief valve slightly above maximum pressure required for work stroke. Follow manufacturers recommendations for maximum pressure setting

ANNEX J ( Clause 5.6.2 )
TROUBLE SHOOTING FOR EXTERNAL LEAKAGE IN THE SYSTEM Remedies

Fault

Cause

Leakage pipe

in

the

a) Below hole in the weld joint b) Crack in the bent portion pipe or at

a)

i) Clean the surface and weld ii) Use corrrect we!d rod b) i) Material defect. Use correct material tube ii) Use correct die while bending

of

Leakage through flared end of tube

a) Vibration b) Use of the thin tube walled of nut of nut

a) Clamppipes at regular intervals and suppress vibration using dampening media b) i) Flared joint breaks while flaring ii) Use recommended thicker walled tubes c) Use appropriate tightening torques for nut a) Replace o-ring lubricating with petroleum jelly or grease or fluid to be sealed. Use thimble to protect ring. Inspect for burrs. b) Inspect roughness of port sealing surfaces. Repair or replace if finish exceed 100 micrelubricate o-ring before assembly. c) Repair if possible otherwise replace

4 Undertightening
Leakage through straight thread fitting

or overtightening

a) O-ring cut b) O-ring pinched on assembly into port

4 Sealing surface of port of
fitting are gauged scratched or

d) Sealing surfaces of port
or fitting are dirty Port e> small spot face is too nut or washer up on spotface

d) Clean parts

and

lubricate

before

reassembly

of

e) Enlarge spot face so that fitting may seat properly, or replace faulty port

f)
Leakage through taper thread fitting

a) ;.:

hangs shoulder O-ring edges nippled because pressure is lifting the fitting Fitting is under torqued

f) Check pressure relief valve setting increasing seating torque as fitting a) Tighten using general thumb rule

IS 13053 : 1991

ANNEX
Fault
l

J - Contd
Remedies

Cause b) Female part from heat c) Vibration fitting d) Hydraulic has shock in port expanded loosened b) Retighten

while hot is not cracked. Use dampers for support

c) Retighten if fitting clamps with vibration d) Retighten e) Inspect. Replace f) Inspect. g) Inspect,

fitting if not cracked if over size
,

e) Female threads are over size f) Male threads size on pipe

are under-

Replace if under size. replace with tapered thread fitting

g) Straight male thread put into tapered thread port h) Threads galled, dirty or damaged before assembly cracked from i) Port over torqued pipe through Leakage flange fitting a) Undertightening of bolts or over tightening

h) Rework if possible, with dies or replace faulty parts

sharp taps and

i) Check for cracks. Replace damagedparts. a) i) Tighten using general thumb rule

ii) Unevenly tightened split flange bolts may cause flange to tip up and damage o-ring b) Vibration c) Surface finish of mounting surface b) Use clamps with vibration supports dampers for pipe

c) Examine all the sealing surface. The seal will leak with gauged scratched surfaces. The seal will extrude if the surfaces are not flat-all points d) i) When bolts are tightened on one end, the flanges tend to tip up. The o-ring may get pinched ii) Use a new o-ring of correct size to match flange and of correct material to match the fluid. iii) Be sure all surfaces are clean and apply a light grease to the o-ring before assembly to hold it in place.

d) O-ring cut

f

17

I 1 Standard

Mark

I I

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards
`7.'

._

BIS is a s@tlrfdry institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote l&@onious .&velopment of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods ai&at&nding to connected matters in the country.

.

Copyright . BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No without the prior permission in writing of BIS. implementing the standard, of necessary details, Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the latest amendments or edition. following reference: Dot : No. PED 15 (4946) part of these publications may be reproduced in any form This does not preclude the free use, in the course of such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. the Director ( Publications ), BIS.

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters :

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY-400993 Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. HYDERABAD. 160036 600113

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75 87 86 62

53 38 43 2 35 02 16 6 32 92 95

Marol, Andheri ( East ) BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

BANGALORE. FARIDABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR.

Printed at New India Printing

Preaa, KhIUb. India

