**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 326-15 (1984): Methods of sampling and test for natural 
and synthetic perfumery materials (Part 15) Detection of 
petroleum and mineral oils [PCD 18: Natural and Synthetic 
Fragrance Materials] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i img*<m&a rsi>frgamsBP 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 665*572/'574 : 543 : 547'912/'913 IS '. 326 ( Part 15 ) - 1984 




Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 

METHODS OF SAMPLING AND TEST FOR 
NATURAL AND SYNTHETIC PERFUMERY MATERIALS 

PART 15 DETECTION OF PETROLEUM AND MINERAL OILS 

( Second Revision ) 



1. Scope — Prescribes the method for detection of petroleum and mineral oils in natural and synthetic 
perfumery materials. 

2. Detection of Petroleum and Mineral Oils 

2.1 General — The saturated paraffinic hydrocarbons, found in the petroleum oils, are chemically very 
inert; they are not destroyed by fuming sulphuric acid. Other compounds are attacked, giving rise to 
reaction products which are soluble in sulphuric acid. The material has to be added to the fuming 
sulphuric acid very cautiously since too rapid an addition of perfumery materials is apt to cause the 
liberated sulphur dioxide to carry part of the acid and material out of the flask. Since petroleum 
fractions often contain aromatic and unsaturated compounds as well as paraffins, the separation of 
the paraffinic portion described above does not usually represent the total amount of added petroleum. 
In general the portion thus separated is usually a small percentage of the adulterant. The test may 
be rendered more sensitive by preliminary fractionation of the material. 

The addition of petroleum fractions to a material causes a lowering of the specific gravity, 
refractive index and optical rotation. The solubility of the material usually is also affected. 

2.2 Apparatus 
2.2.1 Cassia Flask 

2.3 Reagents 

2.3.1 Fuming Sulphuric Acid — 15; percent oleum [see IS : 1089-1973 'Specification for oleum, 
technical ( first revision )']. 

2.3.2 Concentrated Sulphuric Acid— [see IS: 266-1977 'Specification for sulphuric acid 
( second revision ) '] . 

2.4 Procedure — Place 20 ml of fuming sulphuric acid (15 percent oleum in a dry Cassia flask of 
approximately 150 ml capacity, and cool thoroughly in an ice-salt mixture. Cautiously add 5 ml of 
the material from a small burette, drop by drop, with frequent shaking and cooling in the ice-salt 
mixture. After the material has been added, again shake the flask and allow it to stand at room 
temperature for 10 minutes. Warm on a steam-bath for 5 minutes with frequent agitation, cool to 
room temperature, then fill to the mark with concentrated sulphuric acid and allow the flask to stand 
overnight, when the mineral oil will rise into the neck and separate as a colourless or straw-coloured 
liquid. To confirm the presence of mineral oil, remove a small amount of the separated mineral oil 
from the Cassia flask, using a glass tube drawn out to a small tip, and determine its refractive index. 
For petroleum products and mineral oils, the refractive index is expected to be less than 1"440 0. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard was first published in 1952 entitled as 'Methods of test for essential oils' and 
subsequently revised in 1968 as 'Methods of sampling and test for natural and synthetic perfumery 
materials'. Taking cognizance of the need of to incorporate instrumental methods of analysis now in 
vogue and to facilitate inclusion of additional test methods or changes in the existing test methods 
and also to align these test methods with the corresponding ISO standards, the concerned Committee 
decided to revise and split the standard and publish individual test methods as separate parts of the 
original standard. 

In order to facilitate proper reference to method of test given in this revised part of IS : 326, 
Amendment No. 3 is being issued separately to the relevant clause of IS : 326-1968 'Methods of 
sampling and test for natural and synthetic perfumery materials (first revision )' which would no 
longer be in force with the publication of this revision. Ths test method as given in this revised 
part will supersede the test method as given under 16.2 of IS : 326-1968. 

Petroleum and mineral oils are often present as impurities and/or sepecially adulterated in the 
perfumery materials. Apart from detecting these through the changes in the physical properties of 
the material, the Committee considered it necessary to have a separate test mathod for the detection 
of petroleum and mineral oils. 



Adopted 15 February 1984 



©May 1984, (SI 



Gr 1 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



