( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Isr1885(Partln/secr)~l966

Indian
PART III Section 4

Standard
VOCABULARY
Acoustics ETDC I ACOUSTICS

ELECTROTECHNICAL

Sonics, Ultrasonics and Underwater S,tandards Sectional Committee,
Represmting

Electrotechnical
Cbaimtan
S~su T. V. BALAX~IER~AIJ Mmbns

Heavy

Ekctricals

( India)

Limited,

Bhopal

Sa-m S. K. BHATIA ( Altemateto Shri T. V. Balakrishnan ) Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs ( DepartADDITIONAL CHIEF ENMNEEB menl of Communications ) DIBECTOB or TXLE~BAPHS (L) ( AlternaLc) Association. Indian Electrical M anufac turera' SHBI V.W. CHEMBWEAB Calcutta SEBI Y. P. KAUEHIK ( rilkrnnte ) Electronics and Radar Development Establishment. DIBECTOB Ministry of Dcfcncc, Bangalore Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore DB H. V. GOPALAKBISEIJA Primary Cells and Batteries Sectional Committee. SHBI G. D. JOOLEPAB ETDC 10, ISI; and Secondary Cells and Battcrin Sectional Committee, ETDC 11, ISI National Test House, Calcutta SRBI S. N. MUKERJI General Nomenclature and Symbols Subcommitter. PBOP R.C. NABAYANA~' ETDC 1 : 3, ISI Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHBI A. R. NABAYAXA RAO Central Water & Power Commission ( Power \Ving : SERI H. V. NABAYANA RAO &IBIS. N. \-INZC (~hmfe) Transformers Sectional Committee, ETDC 16, IS1 SHBI U. K. PATWABDHAN Institute Central Elcctro-Chemical Research Saar R. RAVEAKRISHNAN ( CSIR ), Karaikudi
SHRI H.N.\'ENKOBAUAO (dkn&)

SEBI V. V. RAO SIXBI U. S. SAVAKOOB SHBXA. S. NA~ABKA~I (

Wireless Planning and Co-ordinaiion \Ving ( Dcparrmcnt of Communications ) Inspection Wing, Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Ministry of Supply & Technical Development )

?kBI A. P. SE=LpATEY
SEBI R. K. TANDAW

Alternate )

Switchgear and Controlgear Sectional Committee, ETDC 17, ISI; Md Power Frequency and Voltages Subcommittee, ETDC I : 1. IS1 National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), Kew Delhi ( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN h&WAK

ST-ANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 i;EW BAHADUR DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH I IOOO? ZAFAR MARC

IS:lSSS(PartlII/Sec4)-1966
( Continued from pap Members Sam S. TEIBUVENKATACEAR~ Sltat V. VENUOOPA.AN
SHEI J. S. ZAVEBI

1) Reples#lliia~ Electronic RTDC24Equiunent sectional committee,

SHEAY. S. VENXA~E~WABAX, Director ( Elec tech ) ( Scnclap)

Insulators and Accessories SectionaI Committee, ETDC 3, IS1 Rotating Machinery Sectional Ckmunittec,ETDC 15, ISI Director General, ISI ( &s$icio &t&r)

AcousticsSectional Committee,
Chairman Da hl. PANGHOLy Members SEEI A. N. AHUJA S~sr I. S. AEUJA (Alfemale) SHRI G. S. BOLXNA Saax H. JO~A RAO

ETDC

27

National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi Ahuja Radios, New Delhi

G. W. Balkar & Co, Jullundur State Broadcasting Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh Ali India Radio Merchants' Association, Bombay Sam J. S. MONQA .%ar V. J. BEATT ( Altim& 1 ( Bombay ) SHRI D. N. CF~AUDIIU~U ( .&fernatc) ( Crdcutta ) SHBI L. S. V. EASWAE ( A!femefc) ( Madras) National Test House, Calcutta SERI S. N. MUKEXJI SHBI B. P. GHOEH( Al&mate ) Directorate General of Defence Research & Develop saar hf. S. NABAYAXAI-T ment, Ministry of Defence Electronics Limited, Far&bad SEP.X A. V. PAI Sanr H. SIN~IX I Aitemate) Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore Da B. S. RA~~AKBISENA Directorate General of Ail India Radio ( Ministry of RESEARCH ENQtNEEu Information & Broadcasting) Da ( .QXT ) C. K. KEEAVAN (Alternate ) Inspection Wing. Directorate General of Supplies & S~BIRI. SANHU~LINGAM Disposals (hiinistry of Supply & Technical kvclopment ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) SBRI M. V. SliAXlCAB Central Elcetronics Engineering Rcxarch Institute DR D. L. SUBRAH~UNYAM ( CSIR ), Piiani Saar K. D. PAVATE ( A!terneP) Posts 8r Tekgraphs Board ( Department of CommuniSHEIT.S. SUBRAMAN'IAN cations ). New Delhi Directorate General of Inspection ( h4inistryof Defence) LT-COL D. SviAROOP MAJ M. S. NA~ABAJ( Alfemcllr) The Radio Electronic &`Television Manufacturers' SH~I S. VENKATABAXAX? Association, Calcum SHEI S. C. ISBANI ( Al&ma~) Director General, I SI ( &-o&&r &mber ) SHRI Y. S. VENKATESWABAN, Director ( Elec tech ) Sure@ S~sctN. SBINWMAN Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), ISI (Contiffwda~lo)

2-

rs:1885(Partm@c4)-1966

Indian Standard
ELECTROTECHNICAL
PART III

VOCABULARY

ACOUSTICS

Section 4 Sonics, Ultrasonics and Underwater Acoustics

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part III/Set 4 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 19 December 1966, after the draft finalized by the Electrotechnical Standards Sectional Committee, in consultation with the Acoustics Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 This Indian Standard has been prepared in view of the frequent need for definitions to be included in the different documents on amplifiers, loudspeaker and other related acoustic equipment, and with a view to bringing together the terms used in the field of acoustics. It has been decided to prepare this terminology in a number of sections, each dealing with a particular aspect of acoustics. 0.2.1 This section covers terms relating to sonics, ultrasonics and underwater acoustics. 0.2.2 The Section Section Section following other sections have so far been prepared: 1 Physical acoustics 2 Acoustical and electro-acoustical transmission system 5 Speech and hearing

0.2.3 The following sections are under preparation: Sect&n 3 Sound recording and reproduction Section 6 Acoustical instruments 0.3 The electrotechnical vocabulary each having one or more sections. is being prepared in several parts,

0.4 While preparing this standard attempt has been made to follow, as far as possible, the definitions proposed by the International Electrotechnical Commission in sheir Pub !jO( 08 ) ( 1968 ) Electra-acoustics. 0.4.1 Assistance has also been derived from the following: B.S. 661: 1965 Glossary of acoustical terms. British- Standards Institution ASA S 1 : l-1968 Acoustical terminology ( including mechanical shock and vibration). American Standards Association. 3

lS:lSS5(PartIII/Sec4)-1966 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part III/Set 4 ) covers terms relating ultrasonics and underwater acoustics. to

sonics,

2. SONICS
2.1 So&s 1 The technology of sound in processing and analysis in any non-communication process.
is an adjective derived frond the term NOTE - The term sonic ( distinct from so&s) sound and wed to refer to the speed of sound in air ( see 2.6 of Section 1 ). 2.2

Mkcrosonics
NOTE -

-

linear approximations
Processing

The technology of sound at amplitudes so large that are not valid.
techniques usually involve macrosonia.

2.3 Sonic Flaw Detection - `The process of locating imperfections in solid materials by observing internal reflections or variations in transmission through the materials as a function of sound-path location.
- The union of small particles suspended in a 2.4 Sonic Agglomeration Huid medium into larger aggregates by the action of sound waves.

2.5 Sonic Cleaning ( Degreasing ) - The cleaning of contaminated materials by the action of intense sound in the liquid in which the material is immersed, usually involving cavitation. 2.6 Sonic, Drilling - The process of cutting or shaping materials with an abrasive slurry driven by a reciprocating tool attached to an electromechanical transducer. 2.7 Sonic Soldering - The method of joining metals by metallic bonding alloys through the use of mechanical vibrations to break up the surface oxides. 2.8 Sonic Surgery - The use of focussed ultrasound to produce precisely circumscribed alterations at predetermined sites within the living tissue.
2.9 Sonic Cavitation -The formation, growth and collapse of gaseous and vapour bubbles in a liquid due to the action of intense sound waves. Noise -

2.16 Cavitation

The noise produced in a liquid by cavitation.

2.11 Oseen Force-A steady force exerted on a suspended particle by second-order velocity effects resulting from second harmonic content in a sound wave. 2.12 Sonoluminescence by sonic energy. -The luminescence 4 produced in some liquid

2.13 Sonic Viscometry - Determination of the coefficients of viscosity of liquids or slurries by the measurement of acoustic properties of a transmitted wave or by the reaction of such a medium on a transducer. ization of energy among the degrees 2.14 Molecular Ralaxation - Eq ua1 of freedom of a molecule following a disturbance that produces deviations from the equilibrium disebution. characteristic time interval required for 2.15 Relaxation Time -The regaining equilibrium after the removal of a perturbation. 2.16 Pressure-Gain Factor-The ratio of the peak pressure amplitude of a focusing transducer at the focus to that at the radiating surface. 2.17 Sonic Applicator, Medical2 An electromGchanica1transducer with its associated equipment designed for local application of sound energy f'or therapeutic purposes. 2.18 Hydrodynamic Oscillator - A transducer for generating SW nd waves in fluids, in which a continuous flow through an ordice is modulated by a reciprocating valve system controlled by acoustic feedback. fluid dynamic transducer, involving 2.19 Jet-Edge Sonic Generator -A vertex formation, in which stabilization is achieved by hydrodynamic feedback between a jet and an edge. 3. ULTRASONICS 3.1 Ultrasonics -The above the audio tinge. science and technology of sound at frequencies
of frequency hearing. of fm&ency hearing. too bigh to be capable too low to be capable of exciting of the

iVOTE - Uffruranic : Disturbances sensation of frJraconit : Disturbances sensation of

excitingthe

3.2 Ultrasonic Generator ( Ultrasonic the production of ultrasonic energy.

Transmitter

)`-

A device for

3.3 Ultrasonic Detector ( Ultrasonic Receiver ) tion and measurement of ultrasonic energy.

A device for detec-

3.4 Ultrasonic Stroboscope -An interrupter of light whose action is based on the modulation of a light beam by an ultrasonic field. 3.5 Ultrasonic Light Difkaction -The formation of optical diffraction spectrum when a beam of light traverses a field of longitudinal sound waves. DifG-action results from the periodic variation of the index of refraction. 5

IS:lSSS(PartIII/Sec4)-1966 3.6 Ultrasonic Grating - A grating formed due to periodic variations in density, and hence in refractive index, caused by ultrasonic waves in a medium. A periodic spatial variation of the 3.7 Ultrasonic Space Gratingindex of refraction caused by the presence of acoustic waves within a medium. 3.8 Ultrasonic Grating Constant ( Space Grating Constant ) - The distance between adjacent diffracting centres in an ultrasonic grating ( space grating ). 3.9 Ultrasonic Mode Changer-A device which causes vibrations of a particular mode (for example, longitudinal ) on one body to produce vibrations of another mode ( for example, shear ) in another body. 3.19 Ultrasonic Image Converter-A configurations optically visible. 4. UNDERWATER ACOUSTICS An electro-acoustic transducer used that transforms waterdevice for making acoustic field

4.1 Underwater Sound Projector to produce sound in water.

4.2 Hydrophone -An electro-acoustic transducer borne acoustic signals into electrical form. 4.3 Hydrophone or Underwater Projector hydrophones or underwater projectors suitably desired directivity pattern.

AmyAn array of arranged to provide a

A method of controlling the directional response pattern 4.4 Shadiagof a transducer through the control of distribution of phase and amplitude of the transducer action over its active face. method or equipment used for determining 4.5 Sonar -A location or both of the objects under water by sound. the presence or

word SONAR is an acronym &rived from the expression ` Sound NOTE -The Navigation and Ranging' and ia also known by the term ASDIC which is an acronym derived from the expression `Anti Submarine Devices Investigation Committee'.

4.6 Active Sonar ( Echo-Ranging Sonar ) - A method or equipment by which information about an object under water is obtained by evaluating the echo of sound generated by the equipment received on reflection from the object. 4.7 Passive Sonar ( Listening Sonar) - A method or equipment by which information concerning an object under water is obtained by the evaluation of sound generated by the object. 6

ISrMS!i(PartIU/Sec4)-1966 4.8 Sonar Background Noise - The total noise that interfetes with the It is that noise which is presented to the reception of the desired signal. final receiving element, such as a recorder or the ear of a listener. 4.9 Sonar Self-Noise-That part of the sonar background noise which is produced by the equipment carrying the hydrophone and by the motion of water relative to the hydrophone and its associated equipment. part of the sonar background 4.10 Underwater Ambient Noise -That noise which is due to disturbances in the medium ( water ). This includes noise produced by marine' life, terrestrial noise, sea noise, ra$~ noise and man-made noise. 4.11 Sea Noise - Part of the underwater. terrestrial noise, precipitation and man-made by marine lii. ambient noise, excluding noise and that contributed

4.12 Underwater Reverberation -The received sound due to scattering from the surface ( swfaereverbmhn ), the bottom ( boffom murberution ) and the body of the sea ( volume reverberation. ). 4.13 Reverberation Limited Condition -A condition in which detection is limited by the reverberation part of the sonar background noise. This condition ordinarily occurs only with active sonar. 4.14 Noise Limited ConditionA condition in which detection is limited by sonar background noise other than underwater reverberation. 4.15 Transmission Loss Between Two Points of an Underwater decrease in intensity expressed in decibels. Transmission System -The In underwater sound one of the points is usually taken one metre from the effective acoustic centre of the source of sound. 4.16 Sonar Dome sound projector. -A sound-transparent enclosure for the underwater

4.17 Sonar Dome Insertion Loss -The increase in transmission 10s~ caused by the addition of a sonar dome between the electrical terminals of a specified transducer and an external field point at which transmission or reception of sound OCCW.
direction of

NOTE-The

traasmislan.

dome insertion Iom b uslially expressed in decibels for a a&&d

4.18 Sonar Dome Loss Pattern -A description., often presented in a graphical form, of the dome insertion loss as a functron of the direction of sound transmission relative to the reference axis of the dome. 4.19 Shadow Zone -Region, formed under certain conditions of thermal stratifkation of the sea, not penetrated by the sound beam from a sonar. 7

rSrl88!b(PartqSec4)-I966 Strength -Tiie ratio of the mean square sound pressure scattered by the object referred to uuit distance (one metre ) in a specified direction to the mean square sound pressure of the incident plane wave. When referring to ` Back-Scattering ' as is usually the case, the specified direction is that from which the incident sound has come. Target strength is sometimes referred to as the ` Scattering Differential `. 4.20 Target
terms `TargctStrcngth'and`Scattcring Difkcntial' are also used NOTE 1 -The when the scattered mean square sound prcsurc is averaged over all directiona and not only that in a specified direction. NATE 2 -The target strength of a sphere of radius `a' mctrc expressed in decibels i 20 log a/2. . A sphere of 2-m&c mdins has a target strength of zero decibel, thus providing a reference target level. NOTB 3 - Actual measurements shall be made at such a distance that the sound appears to be scattering from a single point caUcd the acoustic ccntrc.

4.21 Flow-Excited Noise -Noise other than cavitation noise resulting from the motion of a body through the water. This noise is often enhanced by the vibration of the body. 4.22 Singing in Underwater Sound -A special form of flow-excited noise in which a body ( often a propeller ) is excited and maintained in oscillation at discrete frequencies. 4.23 Standard Sea-Water Conditions Under consideration.

4.24 Scattering Cross4edon - An area numerically equal to 4x times the target strength and measured in units equal to the square of the unit radius. The scattering cross-se&on per unit solid angle is thus the target strength. NOTE-The term `Scattering CrosAaztionh alsousa when tbe scattered mean
square pressure is averaged over all directions.

4.25 Scattering Strength (R ammberation Strength) of a S&ace Volume - The target strength per unit area or unit volume.

or

4.26 Scattering Coefficient2r and 4~ times the scattering strength for a surface and a volume respectively. 4.27 Transmission Anomaly-The transmissionloss after allowing for geometrical spreading, commonly sphericalspreading. 4.28 Spreading Loss - The loss directly associated with spreading, that is, with the increasing area over which the sound energy ( otherwiseof constant intensity ) is distributed. Common forms of sprkadingare: _ _ion l& increases by 20 4 spherical spreading, where the transsmss decibels per ten-fold increase in range ( approximately 6 decibels with a doubling of range ); cylindrical spreading, where the t m ion loss increases by b) 10 decibels per ten-fold increase iu range ( approximately 3 decibels per doubliug of range ); and 8

PrlSS!i(PartIlI/Sec4)-1966 c) dipole spreading, where, in special circumstances, for example, near the surface of the sea, and due to total internal reflection the loss may be 40 decibels per ten-fold increase in range ( approximately 12 decibels per doubling of range ). 4.23 Underwater Sound Attenuation - The whole of the transmission It includes scattering, absorption loss other than that due to spreading. and boundary losses. 4.30 Sound-Velocity Gradient - The maximum space rate of change sound velocity due to a change of temperature, salinity and density. of

underwater region where the depth is very 4.31 Shallow Water -An much less thand/;A, r being the range at which sound intensity is to be determined, and A the wavelength of the sound wave used. underwater region where the depth is very much 4.32 Deep Water -An greater than da, r being the range at which sound intensity is to be determined, and A the wave length of the sound wave used. 4.33 Underwater Sound Channel - A channel sound velocity or depth profile shows a minimum. shallow .or surf&e sound channel.
NOTE 1 -The an acronym for
homogeneous

which occurs when It may be a deep,
channel, the word being a

` Sound Fixing and Ranging `.

main channel

is also known as the SOFAR

NOTE2 -The

surface sound channel is usually due to wind mixing and produces layer, and is, therefore, sometimes referred to as a mixrd layer.

4.34 Convergence Zone - A region, where focussing of the rays occurs as a result of refraction, first downwards and then upwards.
NOTE 1 Such raya arc sometimes Usually, called deep refracted rays.

NOTE2 -

such a region occurs at a distance

of 25 to 55 km from the source.

4.35 Multi-Path Effects - Effects due to a multiplicity arriving along different ray paths or in different modes. horizontal 4.36 Layering - The approximate properties of the sea, such as temperature, velocity. 4.37 Scattering Layer - A layer in which of biological origin ) are concentrated. 4.38 ThermoeIine is large.
depth.

of sound

waves

stratification of many of the salinity, density and sound scattering elements ( usually with depth
decreases with

-

A region

where variation
generally

of temperature
the temperature

NOTE-In

the region

of thermodine,

4.33 HaIoeIine

-A

region

where variation 9

of salinity

with depth

is large.

IS:1885(PartIII/Sec4)-1966 4.40 Critical Ray-A for total reflection. ray incident on the bottom at the critical angle by successive deep

4.41 RSR Propagation -The mode of propagation refractions (R) and surface reflections ( SR ).

ray which forms part of the boundary of the 4.42 Limiting Ray -A shadow zone. Other parts of the boundary may be marked by a caustic line or focussing of rays. 4.43 Split-Beam Ray - A horizontal ray that is refracted upwards and downwards at a depth where there exists a maximum velocity gradient, leaving a shadow zone in between.

Panel for Acoustical Terminology,
Ccnumrr C)R hf. PAHCHOLY Members DR B. S. RALMAKRISIWA RESEABCE ENOINEEB DB D.I.. SVBRAEMANYAM National Physical

ETDC 27/P3
Repesmting ( CSIR), New Delhi

Laboratory

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore Directorate General of All India Radio ( Ministry of Informalion & Broadcasting ) Central E!ectronics Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ), Pilani

10

INDEX
NOTI~ - This index has been prepared numbers are clause numbers. A Active sonar 4.6 Agglomeration, Sonic 2.4 Anomaly, Transmission 4.27 Applicator, Sonic medical 2.17 Array, Underwater projector 4.3 Attenuation, Underwater sound 4.29 B Background noise, Sonar 4.8 Halodbm438

H

:-e

- e&BatsN 4-3 I

2.18

Imrsccclmumr,M rlKa&llaq!3marsbma

4.17

3.10

C
Cavitation noise 2.10 Sonic 2.9 Changer, Ultrasonic mode 3.9 Channel. Underwater sound 4.33 Cleaning, Sonic 2.5 Coefficient, Scattering 4.26 Constant Space grating 3.8 Ultrasonic grating 3.8 Convergance zone 4.34 Converter, Ultrasonic image 3.10 Critical ray 4.48 Cross-section, Scattering 4.24 D Deep water 4.32 Degreasing 2.5 Detection, Sonic flaw 2.3 Detector, Uitrasonic .3.3 Diffraction, Ultrasonic light 3.5 Dome, Sonar 4.16 Drilling, Sonic 2.6 E Echo-ranging sonar 4.6 Efftcts, Mu1 ti-path 4.35 F Factor, Pressure-gain 2.16 Flaw detection, Sonic 2.3 Force, Oseen 2.11 G Gain factor, Pressure 2.16 Gradient, Sound velocity 4.36 Grating constant, Ultrasonic 3.8 Ultrasonic 3.6 Ultrasonic space 3.7 *Rules for makii~bahetical indexes.

&-4s+ Layaing 4.36

`J ganuaar 2.19 L

.

Laya, Scats=+ 4-37 Ligbt 8i&a&q UP - 35 Limiting ray 4.42 Listcningsonu 4.7 Len pattan,Sona.rdow Cl8 .Sooardmnc imaiion Cl7 SprGoRug 4.28 H Medkk Sonic applicator 2.17 Mode cbaoger, Ultd 39 Mdecukr8 2.14 Ntslti-path &cts 4.35 w Noise CaviWial 210 Fhnv acital 4-21 limited amditiosl Cl4 Sea 4.11 Sonarscu49 Sonar backgrmmd 48 underwater adGaIt 4.10 0. zFor2yy=mic P Passivcxmar _BSR 4.7 tactor 2.16 4.41 R RW, critical 4.48 Limitinlc 4.42 Split km 4.43 2~8

Receiver, Ultrasonic Relaxation, ;ft;u;a; 2.14

3.3

Reverberation limited conditions 4.13 strength of a surface or volume Underwater 4.12 RSR propagation 4.41 S

Split-beam my 4.43 Spreading loss 4.28 Standard sea-water conditions Strength, Target 4.20 Stroboscope, Ultrasonic 3.4 4.25 T Target strength 4.20 Thermocline 4.38 Time, Relaxation 2.15 Tmnsmisrion anomaly 4.27 loss bctwccn two pointa of underwater 4.15 Transmitter, Ultrasonic 3.2 U Ultrasonic detector 3.3 generator 3.2 grating 3.6 image converter 3.10 light diffraction 3.5 mode changer 3.9 receiver 3.3 space grating 3.7 stroboscope 3.4 transmitter 3.2 Ultrasonics 3.1 Underwater ambient noise 4.10 reverberation 4.12 projecting array 4.3 Sound attenuation 4.29 channel 4.33 projector 4.1 singing in 4.22 V Viscometry,~ sonic 2.13 W Water Deep 4.32 Shallow 4.31 z Zone . Convergence 4.34 Shadow 4.19

4.23

8~

Scattering aoasaection 4.24 co&cient 4.26 strength of a surlhce or volume 4.25 layer 4.37 sea noise 4.11 Shading 4.4 Shadow zone 4.19 Shallow water 4.31 t3;gg4% underwater sound 4.22 Active 4.6 background noise 4.8 dome 4.16 insertion loss 4.17 loss pattern 4.18 passive 4.7 Self-noise 4.9 Sonic agglomeration 2.4 applicator, medical 2.17 cavitation 2.9 cleaning 2.5 drilling 2.6 tlaw detection 2.3 enerator, Jet-cdge 2.19 8 oldering 2.7 surgery 2.8 viscometry 2.13 Sonicr 2.1 Sound attenuation, Underwater 4.29 channel, Underwater 4.33 projector, Underwater 4.1 velocity gradient 4.30 Sonolumincscencc 2.12 L. Space grating, Ultrasonic 3.7

12

