WRAL ura IS 14572 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


FART — Aran eifedr 


( TECH FTE ) 


Chloroform — Code of Safety 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 71.080, 13.300 


© BIS 2022 


UR AAG sq 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS Uda, 9 JETS Wes TH AMT, Ag faci! - 110002 
MA) MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2022 Price Group 7 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on recommendation of the 
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee and approval ofthe Chemical Division Council’. 


Chloroform is widely used in the manufacture of chlorofluorocarbon refrigerants and propellants. It is used as 
solvent for waxes, fats, oils, resins, in the extraction and purification of penicillin and other pharmaceuticals, in 
the manufacture of artificial silk, plastics, floor polishes and in sterilization of catgut. It is also used in analytical 
chemistry as a reagent/solvent. 


The major hazard of chloroform arises in repeated exposure to low atmospheric concentrations which may 
result in damage to liver, kidneys and heart. In high concentrations, it is sterilization of catgut. In high 
concentrations, it is narcotic and effective anesthetic. It’s contact with skin and mucous membranes may 
produce local irritation. 


The properties of chloroform listed in Clause 4 have been taken from literature and have been included for 
information only. Moreover, these properties pertain to pure chloroform. BIS has published a separate standard 
IS 5296 : 1995 on the requirements and the methods of sampling and test for chloroform intended for industrial 
purposes. 


This standard was first published in 1998. In this first revision general properties have been incorporated 
and modifications have been made to update safety measures for controlling hazards and essential 
information on symptoms of asphyxiation, first-aid, medical treatment, storage, handling, labelling and 
employee safety based on the currently available data and last two decades experience. 


The various clauses of the standard have been aligned with the format being applied for all Indian Standards 
on Code of safety of chemicals. 


There is no 1SO Standard on this subject. In the preparation of this Standard, considerable assistance has 
been derived from the following publications: 

a) IPCS-International Program on Chemical Safety, 2004 edition 

b) International Chemical Safety Cards (ICSCs) ICSC: 0027, 2000 Prepared by ILO and WHO 2021 

c) J. Med. Toxicol. (2010) 6:143-146 DOI 10.1007/s13181-010-0071-0 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


IS 14572 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
CHLOROFORM — CODE OF SAFETY 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This code describes the properties of 
chloroform; the nature of hazards associated 
with it; personal protective equipment; storage, 
handling, labelling and transportation; 
spillage/leakage and waste disposal; fire 
prevention and firefighting; training and health 
monitoring; and first aid. 


This code does not deal with specifications of 
chloroform or for design of building or plants, 
storage vessels and equipments for operational 
control. 


2REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed below contain 
provisions which through reference in this text, 
constitute provisions of this Indian Standard. At 
the time of publication, the editions indicated 
were valid. All standards are subject to revision, 
and parties to agreements based on this Indian 
Standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions 
of the Indian Standard s listed below: 


IS No. Title 


154155: 1966 Glossary of terms relating to 
chemical and radiation hazards and 
hazardous chemicals 


IS 4167:2020 Glossary of terms relating to 
air pollution (second revision) 


IS 8519: 1977 Guide for selection of 
industrial safety equipment for 
body protection. 


IS 8520: 1977 Guide for selection of 
industrial safety equipment for 
eye, face and ear protection. 


IS 8807: 1978 Guide for selection of 
industrial safety equipment 
for protection of arms and 
hands. 


IS 10667: 1983 Guide for selection of 
industrial safety equipment for 
protection of foot and leg. 


3TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this code, the definitionsgiven 
in IS 4155 and IS 4167 shall apply. 


4 PROPERTIES 
4.1 General Information 


Chloroform is clear colorless liquid that quickly 
evaporates into gas. It is nonflammable and emit 
toxic fumes of phosgene gas on decomposition. 
The product can be toxic if inhaled or 
swallowed. Exposure of the product harm the 
eyes, skin, liver, kidneys, and nervous system 
and may also cause cancer. The product is 
released from pulp and paper mills, chlorinated 
water, hazardous waste sites and certain 
landfills. 


4.1.1 Chemical Name — Trichloromethane, 
methyl trichloride, formyl trichloride. 


4.1.2 Common Name &Synonyms — Chloroform. 
4.1.3 Uses 


Chloroform is an organic solvent that dissolves 
other organic compounds such as lacquers, floor 
polishes, resins, adhesives, fats, oils, alkaloids 
and rubber. Also, it is used in the building, 
paper, and board industries, as a fumigant in fire 
extinguishers, as a dry-cleaning spot remover 
and in pesticide and film production. 
Chloroform is used in making fluorocarbon 22, a 
refrigerant, solvents, and chemical 
manufacturing. 


4.2 Identification 

4.2.1 Formula —CHCls. 

4.2.2 CAS Number — 67-66-3. 

4.2.3 UN Number —1 888. 

4.2.4 UN Class — 6.1, UN Pack Group III. 


4.2.5 Hazchem Code — 22. 


IS 14572 : 2022 


4.3 Physical Properties 

4.3.1 General 

Chloroform has pleasant and a non-irritant 
ethereal odor and a sweet taste. It is a colorless 
liquid at ambient temperature and pressure. It is 
very volatile and may dissolve some plastics and 
rubber. It is soluble in water and with volatile 
alcohols. 

4.3.2 Molecular Mass — 119.38. 

4.3.3 Physical State — volatile liquid. 

4.3.4 Color — Colorless. 


4.3.5 Odor — Pleasant, sweetish, ethereal odor, 
non-irritant. 


4.3.6 Boiling Point— 612°C. 

4.3.7 Freezing Point — -63.5 °C. 

4.3.8 Vapor Density (Air=1) — 4.12. 

4.3.9 Specific Gravity —1.49 at 15 °C (Liquid). 
4.3.10 Viscosity at 30 °C — Not available. 
4.3.11 Vapor Pressure at 0 °C — 61 mm Hg, 
20 °C — 160 mm Hg, 25.9 °C — 200 mm Hg, 50 °C 
— 526 mm Hg. 

4.3.12 Heat of Combustion — Not available. 


4.3.13 Refractive Index at 25 °C — Not 
available. 


4.3.14 Ionization Potential — 11.42 eV. 


4.3.14 Solubility in Water — Almost 
insoluble in water, 0.8 g/100 ml at 20 °C. 


4.3.15 Solubility in other Solvents 


Soluble in alcohol, ether, benzene, solvent naphtha 
and carbon tetrachloride. Octanol/water partition 
coefficient as log Pow: 1.97. 


4.3.16 Light Sensitivity 


Decomposes at ordinary temperature, in sunlight in 
the absence of air and in the dark in the presence 
of air. Phosgene is one of the oxidative 
decomposition products. 


4.4 Chemical Properties 
4.4.1 Reactivity 


In presence of excess moisture, strong alkalis, 
strong oxidizers, chemically active metals such 
as aluminum or magnesium powder, sodium & 
potassium, sunlight and high temperatures 
chloroform decomposes to highly toxic phosgene 
and corrosive hydrochloricacid and chlorine. 


The dangerouschemical reactions are possible with 
certain chemicals as follows: 


a) Acetone — Violent reaction in the 
presence of potassium hydroxide; 

b) Aluminum (powder) — Possible 
explosion; 

c) Dinitrogen tetraoxide — Explosion by 
impact; 


d) Fluorine — Violent reaction; 


e) Sodium hydroxide — Explosive reaction; 
and 


f) Methanol — Also violently react with 
bisilane, lithium, magnesium, potassium, 
perchloric acid, phosphorus pentoxide, 
sodium, sodium methylate and potasstum 
tertiary butoxide. 


4.4.1.1 It is Hygroscopic. 
4.4.2 Polymerization — Not applicable. 
4.4.3 Allotrope Formation — Not applicable. 


4.4.4 Corrosion Properties 


Chloroform is more susceptible to oxidation. The 
material of construction for the tank and process 
equipment requires special consideration. The 
ethanol inhibited grade of chloroform is not 
compatible with mild steel. Amylene inhibited 
chloroform can be handled in mild steel equipment 
if adequate care is taken to prevent contact with 
water or moist air. 


4.5 Fire and Explosion Hazards Properties 


Chloroform is non-flammable and non-explosive in 
air. It does not support combustion but decomposes to 
liberate phosgene when involved in a fire. Its hot 
vapor in admixture with vaporized alcohol bums with a 
green-tinged flame. 


4.5.1 Ignition Temperature — Not applicable. 
4.5.2 Auto Ignition Temperature — 537 ?C. 
4.5.3 Flash Point — Not applicable. 

4.5.5 Upper Explosive Limit — Not applicable. 
4.5.5 Lower Explosive Limit — Not applicable. 
4.5.6 Fire Risk 


It is not combustible. While exposed to a little 
amount of flammable substance or increase in 
oxygen content of the air, hot metal surface can 
lead to combustion. It emits toxic fumes 
(phosgene gas). 


5 HEALTH HAZARDS AND TOXICITY 
INFORMATION 


5.1 General Information 


Repeated exposure to low atmospheric 
concentration may result in damage to liver, kidney 
and heart. Contact with skin and mucous membranes 
may produce local irritation. It is a suspected human 
carcinogen. Regular medical examination for 
persons engage d in handling of chloroform is 
advisable. 


5.2 Routes of Entry 


The toxicologically important routes of entry 
are inhalation, ingestion and skin and/or eye 
contact. 


5.2.1 Skin 


Sustained contact of chloroform with skin may 
produce dermatitis at the site of contact and 
burns if left in contact with the material. 


5.2.2 Eyes 


Chloroform causes irritation of the conjunctivitis. 
On inhalation it causes dilation of the pupils 
with reduced reaction to light as well as reduced 
intra-ocular pressure. 


5.2.3 Ingestion 


Toxic if swallowed. When swallowed can lead 
to aspiration hazard that enters lungs and can 
cause damage to lungs. 


IS 14572 : 2022 


5.2.4 Inhalation 


Toxic by inhalation. Irritating to respiratory 
system. Exposure to decomposition products 
may cause a health hazard. Serious effects may 
be delayed following exposure. 


5.2.5 Long Term Effects 


It has been widely used as an anaesthetic. 
However, due to its toxic effects, this use is 
being abandoned. Prolonged administration as 
an anaesthetic may lead to such serious effects 
as profound toxemia and damage to the liver, 
kidneys, heart which leads to paralysis by 
cardiac respiratory failure and finally death. No 
cases of chronic poisoning due to chloroform 
have been reported. 


5.3 Toxicity information 


5.3.1 Threshold Limit Value (TLV) [Time 
Weighted Average (TWA)] — 10 ppm 
(50 mg/ m?) over each 8 h of a 40 h work week. 


5.3.2 Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health 
(IDLH) — 500 ppm (2 241.3 mg/m?). 


5.3.3 Lethal Dose 50 percent (LDso) (rat), Oral 
— 695 mg/Kg. 


5.3.4 Lethal Dose Low (LDı.) (human) Oral — 
25 000 mg/kg in 5 min, 1.375 mg/Kg. 


5.3.5 Lethal Concentration (LC) Inhalation 
(Rat)— 9 612 mg/m?/4 h 1 924 mg/m. 


5.3 Antidote 


Acute chloroform ingestion successfully treated 
with intravenously administered 
N-acetylcysteine. 


5.5 Health Effects 


5.5.1 Signs and Symptoms 


In many respects, the toxic action of chloroform 
resembles that of carbon tetrachloride. The 
expected effects of various atmospheric 
concentrations are specified in Table 1. The use 
of chloroform as a surgical anaesthetic 
abandoned because exposure to narcotic 
concentration was often followed either by 
sudden death through its effects on the heart and 
circulation or by severe injury to the liver. 


IS 14572 : 2022 


Table 1 Effectsof Various Atmospheric Concentrations of Chloroform 
(Clause 5.5.1) 


SINo. Concentration Response 
mg/m? ppm 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
1) 70 000 - 80 000 14 336 - 16 384 Narcotic limiting concentration 
ii) 20 000 4 096 Vomiting, sensation of fainting 
iii) 7 200 1475 Dizziness and salivation after a few minutes 
exposure 
iv 5 000 1004 De, intracranial pressure, and nausea 
after 7 min 
Definite aftereffects: fatigue and 
headache still felt hours later. 
v) 4 900 1 000 IDLH 
vi) 1900 389 Endured for 30 min without complaint 
vii) 1 000 - 1 5000 205 - 307 Lowest amount that can be detected by odor 
viii) 100 - 350 20-70 Slight subjective complaints may occur 
5.5.2 Acute Toxicity 
5.5.2.1 Systemic effects of demonstrable evidence of injury. The injury to the 


Ingestion of chloroform is followed immediately by 
severe burning in the mouth and throat, pain in the 
chest and abdomen and vomiting. Depending upon 
the amount swallowed loss of consciousness and 
liver injury may follow. The tendency of chloroform 
to produce liver injury is significantly greater and 
faster in alcoholics and in persons with nutritional 
deficiencies. 


5.5.2.2 Local effects 


When splashed into eye, chloroform causes local pain 
and irritation, but serious injury would not be expected. 
Skin contact for single, brief exposures ordinarily cause 
little or no local irritation. 


5.5.3 Chronic Toxicity 
5.5.3.1 Systemic effects 


Chloroform is a suspected human carcinogen. 
Chloroform is a confirmed animal carcinogen. 
Repeated exposure to well below the threshold 
value, may cause injury to the liver and kidneys. 
Industrial experience has shown that daily exposure 
to concentrations below 100 ppm (490 mg/m?) may 
result in a variety of symptoms referable to the 
nervous system and alimentary tract, in the absence 


liver is like that caused by carbon tetrachloride but 
tends to be somewhat less severe than the latter. 
Injury to the kidney was usually less severe than 
liver injury. It may cause birth defects. 


5.5.3.2 Local effects 


Repeated or prolonged contact with the skin, may 
result in local irritation and inflammation. 


6 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 
6.1 Availability and Use 


While personal protective equipment is not an 
adequate substitute for good, safe working 
conditions, adequate ventilation, and intelligent 
conduct on the part of employees working with 
chloroform, it is, in many instances, the only 
practical means of protecting the worker, 
particularly in emergency situations. One should 
keep firmly in mind that personal protective 
equipment protects only the worker wearing it, and 
other unprotected workers in the area maybe 
exposed to danger. 

The correct usage of personal protective equipment 
requires the education of the workers in proper 
employment of the equipment available to him. 
Under conditions which are sufficiently hazardous 
to require personal protective equipment, its use 
should be supervised, and the type of protective 


equipment selected should be capable of control 
over any potential hazards. 


6.2 Non-Respiratory Equipment 
6.2.1 Eye and Face Protection 


Chemical splash protection as per IS 8520 category 
H-4. Use of goggles along with full face shield is 
recommended. Face shield should be of sufficient 
length to cover the neck portion. In absence of face 
shield a suitable airline mask should be used. 
Maintain eyewash and drench shower equipment in 
work area. 


6.2.2 Head Protection 


Protective Class C hard hats should be worn where 
there is danger of falling objects. If hard hats are not 
considered necessary, soft-brimmed hats or caps 
may be worn to give protection against liquid leaks 
and splashes. 


6.2.3 Foot and Leg Protection 


Workers should use appropriate foot guards, safety 
shoes, or Rubber boots for protection of feet and 
legs. Shoes should be thoroughly cleaned and 
ventilated after contamination (see IS 10667). 


6.2.4 Body, Skin and Hand Protection 


Clothing made from rubber, vinyl or PVC, leather, 
asbestos, rubber or other impervious materials may 
be worn while handling chloroform that protect the 
body against the splashes. Leather or rubber gloves 
should be worn for hand protection. Employees 
should wear standard work clothing with the neck 
and wrist closed while dealing impervious 
equipment. Contaminated clothing should be 
removed and discarded or laundered. Fireproof 
overalls should be worn when operations involving 
fire hazards are encountered (see IS 8519 and IS 
8807). 


6.3 Respiratory Equipment 
6.3.1 Respirator selection (upper limit devices). 


6.3.2 For exposure range > 50 ppm to < 500 ppm 
respiratory equipment should be of supplied air, 
constant flow pressure demand, full face type and 
for exposure range of 500 ppm and above self- 
contained breathing apparatus, pressure demand, 
full face type respiratory equipment should be used. 


IS 14572 : 2022 


7 STORAGE, HANDLING, LABELLING AND 
TRANSPORT 


7.1 General 


Chloroform should be stored away from direct 
sunlight as it could slowly decomposes to phosgene. 
Chloroform vapor is heavier than air and spreads 
along the ground. All personal handling chloroform 
should use proper personal protective equipment. 
Appropriate firefighting equipment should be 
available in the vicinity while handling chloroform. 
Persons handling chloroform should have adequate 
training in use of firefighting equipment. 


7.2 Storage 


7.2.1 The storage containers shall be labelled or marked 
to identify as follows: 


(a) Contents of the container; 


(b) Name and address of the manufacturer or importer of 
the hazardous chemical; and 


(c) Physical, chemical and toxicological data as per the 
criteria given in the relevant Schedule of the 
Manufacture, Storage and Import of Hazardous 
Chemicals Rules 1989. While referring to the statutes, 
the stipulations given in the subsequent amendments of 
those statutes shall be taken into account. 


7.2.2 Chloroform is susceptible to oxidation. 


7.2.3 'The material of construction for the tank and 
process equipment requires special consideration. The 
ethanol-inhibited grade of chloroform are not compatible 
with mild steel storage and handling equipment. The use 
of stainless steel — lined mild steel, nickel clad steel, or 
stainless steel of the 300 series, for this is suggested. 
Amylene inhibited chloroform can be handled in 
mild steel equipment if adequate care is taken to prevent 
contact with water of moist air. Aluminum is not 
recommended as  chloromethanes, under certain 
conditions, can react with aluminum to form explosive 
mixtures. Strict maintenance of the drying columns 
in atmospheric breathing storage tanks should be 
employed. 


72.4 The storage tank capacity should be sized for 
about 10 percent greater volume than the maximum 
quantity of chloroform it will contain, to allow for liquid 
expansion with increasing temperature. The tank may be 
fabricated of all welded mild carbon steel designed for a 
liquid density of 1.34. If it is to be used in a closed system, 
it should be designed to withstand full vacuum and an 
internal pressure. Tanis should be protected against 
over-pressure by means of safety rupture disc. 


IS 14572 : 2022 


7.2.5 Precautionary measures should be taken to ensure 
that moisture does not contaminate the solvent. To 
minimize evaporation losses, a completely sealed 
storage tank is recommended. 


7.2.6 Used tanks may require manual cleaning. Iron 
scrapper and wire brush may be used to remove any 
hardened sediment and oxide coating which may be in 
evidence. Scrubbing the interior with solution of 
commercial detergent, followed by a thorough water 
rinse, will remove most of the contaminants. The tank 
must be absolutely dry before itis charged with 
product. 


7.3 Handling 
7.3.1 Piping 


Piping may be of steel or black iron, preferably with 
welded or flanged joints. Lubricant for threaded 
joints must be of a type of resistant to chloroform, 
such as white lead, graphite and glycerin pastes or 
fluorocarbon tape. Compressed or screwed asbestos 
gaskets are recommended for flanged joints. 
Grounding connectors should be installed around 
such joints. 


7.3.2 Flanged or screwed iron gate or globe valves 
may be used. Stainless steel trim is recommended to 
protect against corrosion where the liquid may be 
exposed to the atmosphere. 


7.3.3 Metallic hose of Monel, stainless steel or mild 
steel may be used for flexible connections. Mild 
steel hose, if disconnected between periods of use as 
in unloading cars or trucks, should be cleaned, and 
dried or protected from exposure by blanking off the 
open ends until needed again. All natural and 
synthetic rubber and PVC are to be avoided. 


7.3.4 Pump 


Positive displacement rotary pumps are 
recommended for chloroform service. Submerged 
centrifugal pumps may be used in storage tanks 
designed for atmospheric service. Externally 
mounted flooded suction centrifugal pumps may be 
used if care is taken to provide adequate suction 
head. 


It is recommended that some type of line filter be 
installed between storage and process to remove any 
particulate contamination. 


7.4 Labelling 


7.4.1 Follow code symbols and other precautionary 
measures listed in the U N Recommendations and 
Government Regulations. 


7.5 Transport 


751 Transport as per United Nations 
Recommendations for Transport of Dangerous 


Goods, Chloroform is classified under Class 6.1 — 
Poisonous (Toxic) substances and UN Number is 
1888. 


7.5.2 Unloading Trucks 


Trucks are usually equipped with pumps driven by a 
power take-off. They are essentially self-unloading with 
operations performed by the truck driver. It is customary to 
unload cars by means of rotary or centrifugal pump 
connected to the bottom outlet of the car by means of a 
flexible connection. Since the liquid is volatile, it is 
necessary to ensure adequate net positive suction head for 
the pump to prevent flashing the pump intake and loss of 
capacity. 

7.5.3 Unloading Drums 


Ensure that all fittings are tight. Loosen plug in 
bung opening. Transfer to bulk storage vessels 
from drums is not recommended as moisture in the 
air could contaminate the solvent. While 
transferring the solvent ensure adequate 
ventilation required to prevent spills and solvent 
contamination 


7.5.4 Driver 


Only driver trained in chloroform transportation 
should be employed. Driver should carry TREM 
card when vehicle is on road. 


NOTE — If transport of the hazardous chemical is involved 
it shall be carried out in accordance with the Central Motor 
Vehicles Rules, 1989. While referring to the statutes, the 
stipulations given in the subsequent amendments of those 


statutes shall be taken into account. 


8 SPILLAGE, LEAKAGE AND WASTE 
DISPOSAL 


8.1 General 


All personal attending to spill/leak should use 
proper personal protective equipment including 
breathing apparatus and firefighting equipment 
while handling chloroform leak. 


8.2 Spillage 


8.2.1 Genera/Information 


The most important danger of chloroform arises from 
the fact that repeated exposure to low atmosphere 
concentrations may result in damage to liver and 
kidneys. In high concentrations, chloroform has narcotic 


properties. Contact with skin and mucous membrane may 
produce local irritation. Wear respiratory protection 
while approaching heavy leakages. 


8.2.2 Land Spill (Spill on land) 


In case of spill or leak of small quantity, absorb the 
material by pouring sand or earth. However, in case 
of major (large) quantity spill or leak, dispose off the 
materials by atomizing in a combustion chamber. 


8.2.2.1 Containment 

Isolate immediately at least 50 m around the spillage 
area of chloroform. Do not enter to spillage area 
without wearing breathing apparatus and protective 
clothing. The container can be moved away from the 
fire area and operate at maximum distance to fight 
with fire. Avoid spreading of the spill to the 
environment and try to extinguish the fire with dry 
chemicals carbon dioxide, water spray, fog or foam. 


8.2.2.2 Consequence 


Avoid accumulation in the working rooms and 
recirculation at breathing zones. 


8.2.2.3 Mitigation 

Wear respiratory protection while approaching heavy 
leakages. Prevent contact with skin, eyes. All local and 
state regulations concerning was disposal to streams, 


municipal treatment plants, or to the ground shall be 
determined and complied with inert absorbent 


8.2.3 Water Spill (Spill in Water) 


In case of spillage of water absorb it by pouring the 
sand or earth. 


8.2.3.1 Containment 

As chloroform is soluble in water it leads to the 
contamination of water. Discard the contaminant 
water and avoid mixing into drainage and drinking 
connections. 

8.2.3.2 Mitigation 

Use of contaminated water should be avoided. 

8.3 Leakages 


8.3.1 General Information 


In case of a spill or leak, stop the leak as soon as 
possible. 


IS 14572 : 2022 


8.3.2 Leak from the Truck 


The leaking tanker should be emptied out to another 
empty tanker or to a storage tank. 


CAUTION — Persons handling leaking Chloroform 
Tankers should wear proper personal protective 
equipment. 


8.4 Waste Disposal 


8.4.1 AII local and state regulations concerning was 
disposal to streams, municipal treatment plants, or 
to the ground shall be determined and complied wit 


8.4.2 Small quantities of chloroform can be disposed of 
by pouring on dry sand or earth or other non- 
combustible absorbent. Large quantities of waste 
mixture can be disposed of by atomizing in a 
combustion chamber. 


8.4.3 Dissolve in combustible fuel such as kerosene 
and incinerate with care. 


9 FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE FIGHTING 
9.1 General 


Chloroform is noncombustible but turns 
combustible with increase in oxygen content in air 
or flammable substance. It gives irritating fumes on 
a fire. 


9.2 Prevention- Prevent exposure of leaking 
chloroform to air and flammable substances. 


9.2.1 Fires are controlled by using water spray, dry 
chemical and carbon dioxide extinguishers. In case 
of fire in the surroundings, extinguish fire using 
appropriate extinguishing media suitable for type of 
surrounding fire. 


9.3 Fire fighting 


Use water spray, alcohol-resistant foam, dry 
chemical or carbon dioxide. Wear appropriate 
breathing apparatus for firefighting. 


10 TRAINING 


10.1 Safety in handling chloroform depends upon 
the effectiveness of employee education, training, 
and supervision. Safe Operating procedure should 
be in place. The education and training of employees 
to work safely and to use the personal protective 
equipment and other safeguards provided for them 


IS 14572 : 2022 


is a responsibility of supervision. Employee 
education and training should emphasize the need of 
handling chloroform according to the methods 
outlined in the safe operating procedure, to avoid 
spilling, leaks, inhalation of the vapor, or ingestion. 


10.1.1 Unauthorized and untrained employees 
should not be permitted in areas where chloroform 
is being handled. 


10.2 All new employees before being placed on the 
job, should be trained thoroughly in the proper 
handling of chloroform. Periodic refresher training 
program on chloroform safety should be in place. 


10.3 Each employee should know the location, 
purpose and maintenance of personal protective 
equipment (PPEs) and be thoroughly trained when 
and how to use it. Each employee should know the 
location of safety showers, fountains for flushing the 
eyes, and hose lines. 


10.4 Only reliable, dependable and properly trained 
employees should be given the responsibility of all 
operations involving storage, handling, transport 
and emergency management involving chloroform. 


10.5 Employee should be instructed to report the 
proper authority for all suspected leaks or equipment 
failure. 


10.6 They should also be instructed to inform the 
supervisors for any signs of illness or breathing 
related problems. 


10.7 Employees should be trained on emergency 
response system, first-aid measures so that they 
should realize the necessity for the prompt 
application of first aid in case of contact with 
chloroform or exposure to the vapors of the toxic 
fumes. 


11 HEALTH MANAGEMENT, FIRST AID 
AND MEDICAL TREATMENT 


11.1 Health Monitoring 
11.1.1 Personal Hygiene 


Wash hands, forearms and face thoroughly after 
handling chemical products, before eating, smoking 
and using the lavatory and at the end of the working 
period. Appropriate techniques should be used to 
remove potentially contaminated clothing. Wash 
contaminated clothing before reusing. Ensure that 
eyewash stations and safety showers are close to the 
workstation location. 


11.1.2 Physical Examination 
11.1.2.1 Pre-placement physical examinations 


All employee should be physically examined before 
employment and the records should be maintained. 


11.1.2.2 Periodic examination 


Employees should be periodically examined for 
kidney and liver diseases since chloroform exposure 
is affecting liver and kidney functioning. 


11.1.2.3 Medical examination 


Obtain blood glucose, urinalysis, liver function 
tests, chest X-ray, and monitor cardiac function and 
fluid/electrolyte status. Tests may show increased 
bilirubin, ketosis, lowered blood prothombin, and 
fibrogen. 


11.1.2.4 Dental examination— Not applicable 
11.2 First Aid 
11.2.1 General Principles 


Contaminated clothes need to removed and fresh air, 
rest. Breathing related issue provide artificial 
respiration. Get medical attention immediately. 


11.2.2 Contact with Skin 


Immediately flush skin with plenty of water for at 
least 15 min while removing contaminated clothing 
and shoes. Get medical attention immediately. Wash 
clothing before reuse. Thoroughly clean shoes 
before reuse. 


CAUTION —Avoid contact with skin. 
11.2.3 Contact with Eyes 


Immediately flush eyes with plenty of water for at 
least 15 min, lifting lower and upper eyelids 
occasionally. Get medical attention immediately. 


11.2.4 Ingestion 


If swallowed, DO NOT INDUCE VOMITING. 
Give large quantities of water. Never give anything 
by mouth to an unconscious person. Get medical 
attention immediately 


11.2.5 Inhalation 


Remove to fresh air. If not breathing, give artificial 
respiration. If breathing is difficult, give oxygen. 
Get medical attention. 


11.2.6 First-Aid Kit 
First-aid kit containing the following item should 


be kept handy: 


a) Self-contained breathing apparatus or full- 
face type breathing apparatus; and 


b) N-acetylcysteine 
11.3 Medical treatment 


11.3.1 When chloroform has been ingested or there 
has been great overexposure, N-acetylcysteine 
should be used as an antidote to prevent chloroform 
induced hepatotoxicity. 


IS 14572 : 2022 


11.3.2 In case of patients with alcoholic beverages 
special attention should be paid due to toxic effects 
of chloroform. 


11.3.3 Because kidney and liver effects may be 
delayed, keep victim under observation for 24 to 48 
h. Administration of fluids may help to prevent 
kidney failure. Monitor liver and kidney function for 4 
to 5 days after exposure. Disulfiram, it's metabolites, 
and a high carbohydrate diet appear to protect somewhat 
against chloroform exposure. Do not give adrenalin. 


12 ADDITIONAL INORMATION 


Additional information essential for equipmet used 
for handling of chloroform, Security measures to be 
taken while handling of chloroform etc as essential 
for controling hazards may be collected and 
applied. 


IS 14572 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity 


Alkali Manufacturers Association of India, Mumbai 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Centre for Fire, Explosives and Environmental Science, 
Gol, Min Of Def 


Crop Care Federation of India, New Delhi 


Defence Research and Establishment, (DRDO), Gwalior 


Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers, GoI 


Department of Space(ISRO), Bengaluru 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour 
Institutes, Mumbai 


Gas Industries Association 


Hindustan Unilever Limited, Mumbai 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Representative(s) 


SHRIK. S. RAMPRASAD (Chairperson) 


SHRIK. SRINIVASAN 
SHRIH. S. DAS (Alternate) 


MISS GARIMA SINGH 
SHRI NISHITH GOSH (Alternate) 


DR DANDAMUDI USHARANI 
DR PRASANNA VASU (Alternate) 


DR M. SURIYANARAYANAN 


SHRI S. P. DOBHALDR AARTI BHATT (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. KARLEKAR 
DR J. C. MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


DR PRABHAT GARG 
DR VIRENDRA VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


DR VISHAL CHOUDHARY 


SHRI MURALEEKRISHNAN R. 
Miss LAKSHMI V. W. (Alternate) 


SHRI H. M. BHANDARI 
SHRI P. G. SATPUTE (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KHER 
SHRI ANOOP TANDON (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY HARLAKA 
SHRI RAKESH WADALKAR (Alternate) 


DR K. K. SATPATHY 


DR C. NANDI 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR BANKUPALLI SATYAVATHI 
DR SRIPADI PRABHAKARC (Alternate) 


DR NEERAJ ATRAY 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR KANUJIA (Alternate) 


DR SACHIN GUNTE 
PROF SANDIP ROY 


DR D. K. PATEL 


DR SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


Ministry of Environment and Forest, New Delhi 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 


National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad 


National Institute of Technology, Thrichi 


National Safety Council, Navi Mumbai 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate (Min of Petand 
Natural Gas), Delhi 


Pesticides Manufacturer and Formulators Association 
of India 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation, Nagpur 


Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


Tata Chemicals Limited, Mithapur, Distt, Jamnagar 


In personal capacity (/-4/2/6, Parijat C.H.S., Spaghetti, 
Sector-15, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, 410210) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 14572 : 2022 


PROF (DR) G. D. YADAV 
DR B. M. BHANAGE (Alternate) 


SHRI VED PRAKASH MISHRA 
DR DINESH RUNIWAL (Alternate) 


DR VIJAY V. BOKADE 
DR M. MUTHUKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR B. RAVICHANDRAN 


PROFS. P. SIVAPIRAKASAM 

SHRI D. SREEJITH MOHAN (Alternate) 
SHRI A. Y. SUNDKAR 

SHRI K. D. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDAR M. MAHAJAN 


DR ARCHANA KUMARI 
DR SANDIP SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. JHALA 
DR YOGESH KHARE (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAMMAD 
SHRI DEVANG MEHTA (Alternate) 
DR JAGDISH KUMAR 
DR DEEP SHANKAR CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI SNEHASHISH A. CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI D. K. THAKUR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SOUNDARARAJAN 


SHRI AJAY K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
MS SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT ), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 07 (19576). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


