**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 5030-1 (1982): Metal Cutting Bandsaw Blades, Part 1: 
Definitions and Terminology [PGD 32: Cutting tools] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 62re35'023 : [669 ] : 001-4 



IS: 5030 (Part I)- 1982 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 




SPECIFICATION FOR 
METAL CUTTING BANDSAW BLADES 

PART I DEFINITIONS AND TERAflNOLOGY 

(First Revision ) 



1. Scope — Covers definitions and terminology relating to metal cutting handsaw blades. 

1-1 The guidelines for selection of tooth shape and type of set for a particular metal cutting band- 
saw blade shall be as given in Appendix A, 

2. Definitions and Terminology 

2,0 Bandsaw Blade— It is an endless blade manufactured of a continuous strip of steel having one 
toothed edge ( see Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 below ). 



REFERENCE PLANE 

BACK EDGE 



BODY 




THICKNESS 



TOOTHED EDGE 



FIG.1 




WIDTH 



FiG. 2 

2.1 Elements of the Blade — ( see Fig. 1 and Fig. 2). 

2.1.1 Body — The part of the blade between the bottom of the gullet and the back edge. 

2.1.2 Teeth — The serrations formed across the thickness of the blade to provide cutting edges. 

2.1.3 Toothed Edge — The longitudinal edge along which 1he teeth have been formed. 

2.1.4 Back Edge — The longitudinal edge parallel to the toothed edge. 



Adopted 30 March 1982 



July 1982, 131 



Price Rs 7-00 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 5030 (Part I) -1982 

2.1.5 Side — The flat surface between the toothed edge and the back edge. 

2.1.6 Width — The overall distance between the point of the tooth and the back edge. 
^.1.7 Thickness — The distance between two sides of the body. 

2-2 Characteristics of the Teeth — ( see Fig. 1, 3, 4 and 5 ). 

2.2.1 Pitch — The distance between the apices of adjacent teeth. 

2.2.2 Teeth per Unit Length — The number of complete teeth per 25 mm. 
Note — Pitch and teeth per unit length are mutual reciprocals. 

2.2.3 Cutting Edge — lhe edge of the face which Is intended to perform cutting. It is formed 
by the intersection of flank and face. 

2.2.4 Depth — The distance from the point of tooth to the deepest portion of the gullet. 

2.2.5 Face — The surface of the tooth over wWch the chip flows. 

2.2.6 f /an /c — The surface over which the surfaces produced on the workpiece pass. It ex- 
tends to the root radius. 





NEGATIVE RAKE 



REFERENCE PLANE 



FIG. 3 



FIG. 4 



2.2.7 Gullet — The space bounded by the face, root radius and flank of a tooth which permits chip 
removal. 

2.2.8 Root Radius — The radius connecting the face of one tooth and the flank of the preceding 
one. 

2.2.9 Wedge Angle — The included angle between the face and the non-set tooth, 

2.2.10 Reference Plane — The plane through the selected point on the cutting edge chosen so as 
to be perpendicular to the blade back edge. 

2.2.11 Rake — The angle between the face and the reference plane of the assumed non-set tooth. 
2.3 Tooth Set and Overall Set — ( see Fig. 5 ). 

2.3.1 Tooth Set — The projection of the teeth from the side of the blade to provide cutting clearance. 

2.3.2 Overall Sef — The total thickness of the blade between two opposite teeth taking into 
account the set on either side of the blade which determines the overall width of cut. 



IS: 5030 (Part I)- 1982 



OVERALL SET 



SIDE 



<X^ 



SET ^ ^ 



L 



SIDE 



THICKNESS 



SET 



FIG. 5 
2.3,3 Non-Set Tooth — The tooth which are not off-set. 
3. Tooth Shapos 

3.0 The basic tooth shapes are given below, 

3.1 Regular or Standard Tooth — A tooth having zero degree ral^e angle and full round gullets 
( see Fig. 6 ). This type of tooth may be furnished in alternate, raker and wavy set only ( see 4.3 ), 




FIG. 6 



3.2 Skip or Butttess Tooth — A tooth of basically regular tooth shape, every alternate tooth being 
removed. A large pitch is thus obtained, giving a longer gullet without making the tooth too great 
at the expense of blade strength (see Fig. 7). 



d 



J 



J^ 



FIG. 7 



3.3 Hook Tooth — A tooth similar to a skip tooth except that the rake of the tooth is positive ( see 
Fig, 8 ). This type of tooth is to be furnished in raker set only. 




FIG. 8 

3 



IS: 5030 (Part I) -1982 

4. Type of Set ( Tooth Offset ) 

4.1 Alternate Set — The transverse setting of individual teeth are naliernately set to the right and to 
the left (see Fig, 9). 




FIG. 9 
Note — For metal ( ferrous ) working saw blades, this type of set is not recommended. 

4.2 Raker Set — The individual teeth are one set to the right, one set to the left and one unset or 
vice-versa (see Fig, 10 ). 





FIG. 10 

4.3 Wavy Set — The transverse setting of groups of teeth are set to the right and to the left, with set 
regularly varying ( see Fig. 11 ). 



^^^c=^ 



FIG. 11 



EXPL A NATO RY NOTE 

This standard was first published in 1959. The present revision is necessitated to fall In line 
with the woric done at ISO level. While revising, this standard has been split up into the following 
three parts: 

Part I Definitions and Terminolgy 

Part II Tolerances 

Part III Dimensions and Requirements. 

This part is based on ISO 4875/M978 'Metal cutting handsaw blades — Part 1 : Definitions 
and terminology' issued by International Orgaaization for Standardization. 



IS: 5030 (Part I)- 1982 

APPENDIX A 

{Clause 1.1 ) 

GUIDELINES FOR SELECTION OF TOOTH SHAPE AND TYPE OF SET 

A-1. Guidelines for selection of tooth shape and type of set for a particular metal cutting bandsaw 
blade shall be as given below: 



Tooth Shape 


Type of Set 


Applications 


Regular 


Raker 


General purpose sawing. i;onventional sawing, friction 
sawing. For cutting on a long run production basis, pro- 
fiie/contour cutting of materials, such as mild steel, 
carbon steel, alloy steel, tool steel, stainless steel, cast 
iron steel castings, non-ferrous base alloys, asbestos, 
plastics, wood, etc. 


Regular 


Wavy 


General purpose sawing, material wUh varying thicknes- 
ses, very thin sections, such as pipes and tubes of mild 
steel, alloy steel, tool steel, etc. 


Skip or Buttress 


Raker 


Machining non-ferrous alloys like aluminium, magnesium, 
soft brass, wood, plastics, and thick sections and ferrous 
metals. 


Skip or Buttress 


Alternate 


Non-ferrous alloys, hardwood, hard plastics, asbestos, 
graphite, etc. 


Hook 


Raker 


For free cutting rates, longer blade life, rough cutting, 
harder non-ferrous metals, wood, plastics, large easily 
machined ferrous sections, fibre, bakelite. 



Printed at Neelkamal Printers, New Delhi, India 



