( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 11731( Part 2 ) - 1986

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TEST FOR DETERMINATION OF FLAMMABILITY OF SOLID ELECTRICAL INSULATING MATERIALS WHEN EXPOSED TO AN IGNITING SOURCE
PART
Solid Electrical Chairman
SRRI A. S.
~A~SII~ANAN

2

VERTICAL

SPECIMEN
Sectional

METHOD
Committee,
Ltd. Bangalore

Insulating

Materials

ETDC

63

Rcpwscnting Senapathy Whiteley

Membrrs Sam B. A. GOVINDARAJ (Alternateto Shri A. S. Lakshmanan ) Dr Beck & Co ( India ) Ltd, Pune SHRI S. B. BAPAT SIXRI R. S. LAAII ( Ahnate ) Fibre-Glass Pilkington Ltd, Bombay SERIS.M. DASTUR SHRI R. K. A~ARWAL ( Altrrnntc ) Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara SRRI V. B. DESAI SERI B. G. SHARMA ( Allsrnatc ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi DIRECTOR ( HTD-VIII ) DIREOTOR ( TED ) ( Alternate ) Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore DIRECTOR GENERAL SHRI K. S. AKVNACHALA SASTRY ( Alternate) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-COL J. G. GOQATE MA.T J. SEBASTIAN ( Alternate ) Kirloskar Electric Co Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. N. HIRIYANNAIAIX SHRI G. UMES~ ( Altwnats ) STANDARDS Research, Designs and Standards Organization JOINT DIRECTOR ( Mmistrv of Railways ), Lucknow I?L&CTRICAL/Q DIRWTOR ADDITIONAL ELESTRICAL/B~ (Alternate) National Test IIouse, Calcutta Smr B. MUKHOPADHYAYA SHRI P. C. PRADHAN ( Alternate ) Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay DR M. S. PADRTDRI DR P. SATYANARAYANA ( Altrrnatr ) NGEF Ltd, Bangalore S~IRI R. P. PATIL SH~I ASWATHANARAYANA( Alternate)

( Co&wed on pagd 2 )
@ Copyright 1987 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indtan CO~_W@ Adl i XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole nr in part hy an.y means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an mfringement of copyright render the said .ict_

IS : 11731 ( Part

2 ) - 1986

( Continued from page I )
Members SHKI S. W. P.4TW.4liulIAN Representrng

Formica India Division Bombay Burmah Trading Corporation Ltd. Pune SHRI V. RANUANATEAN ( Altcmats ) Indian Electrical hlanufacturers' Association, DR G. M. PHAUKU Bombav SHILI K;. K. GOSAIN ( /,h'fld ) DR T. S. RAMIT Indian Institute of Science ( CSIR ), Bangalore PlxoF \`. Ph \HH4SHANKER ( Altertlute j SHRI L). si. $AHNEY Sahne; Kirkwood Pvt Ltd, Pune SIIKI K. S. Kaeoo~c ( Al!emate) S>TI~IC. c. SAKARDA Permali Wallace Ltd, Bhopal Da L. G. .-\~AND ( Alternate ) SARI CHAR~~NJIT SINOII Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad SHKI P. N. SKIVASTAV.~ SHRI 1%.S~nlR5.4N ( Alternate 1 ) SHRI 1'. v. BIiAT ( .Iltemate II ) ,Jhaveri Thanawala Corporation, Bombay SHRI Ii. T. `I'H.~~,~\vALA SH~I KIUUAL THANAWALA ( Athwznte ) Directorare General of Technical Development. SHRI-_1. M. Unr~ New Delhi Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay Dn .J. Varn DH. L. RAMAKRIF-HXA ( .4hmate ) Lakshmanan Isola Ltd, Ramanagaram SHRIY. 5. VXNKATES~+H.~W Director General, ISI ( Ex-oJicicio Member ) SRR1 S. P. SAoHT7EV, Director ( Elec tech ) Secretary Deputy SHRT V. DEWAN Director ( Elec tech ), IS1

2

IS : lli31 ( Part 2 ) - 1986

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TEST FOR DETERMINATION OF FLAhdhhiBILITY OF SOLlD ELECTRICAL INSULATING MATERIALS WHEN EXPOSED TO AN IGNITING SOURCE
PART i VERTICAL SPECIMhl METHOD

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Jndian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution finalized by the Solid Electrical on 30 June 1986, after the draft Insulating Materials Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 This standard ( Part 2 ) is being brought out as method determination of flammability of solid electrical insulating when exposed to an igniting source. 0.3 This method of test refers to solid electrical is intended to serve as a preliminary indication exposed IO an igniting source. of test for materials

insulating materials and of their behaviour when

The results make it possible to check the consistency of characteristics of a material and provide an indication of the progress in the development of insulating materials and a relative comparison and classification of various materials. These methods are designed for quality control and product These are not valid for determining the fire behaviaur and evaluation. the fire hazards of complete items of equipment, since the dimensions of the insulating systems, the design and heat transfer to adjacent metallic parts, etc, greatly influence the flammability of the electrical insulating materials used therein. 0.4 This standard is brought out in two parts; Part 1 suggests BH and FH horizontal specimen method for determination of flammability of solid electrical insulating materials when exposed to an igniting source. The igniting source in this case is a laboratory burner with specified height of flame and dimensions of burner, making use of technical grade methane gas with a suitable regulator and meter to produce a uniform gas flow.

IS : 11731( Part 2 ) - 1986 0.5 The significant features of these methods of test are the arrangement of the test specimens in either horizontal or vertical position. These testing arrangements make it possible to distinguish between different degrees of flammability of materials. The vertical position of the test specimen ( method IV) is particularly suitabIe for evaluating the extent of burning after extinction of the flame whereas the horizontal position of the test specimen ( methods BH and FH ) is particularly suitable for evaluating the extent of burning and/or velocity of the flame propagation, that is the burning rate covered by Part 1 of this standard. 0.6 In the preparation IEC Pub 707 ( 1981 flammability of solid igniting source ' , issued ( IEC ). of this standard, assistance has been derived from ) `Methods of test for the determination of the electrical insulating materials when exposed to an by the International Electrotechnical Commission

0.7 Classification and methods of test applicable to non-ignitable self-extinguishing properties of solid electrical insulating materials covered by IS : 4249-1967*.

and are

0.8 In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960t.

1. SCOPE 1.1 The rnethod FVflame vertical specimen, is carried out on test specimens of fixed dimensions and under definite assessment criteria the extent of burning with a specified igniting source, for evaluating after extinction of the flame. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For addition the purpose of this standard, the following to those given in IS : 4249-1967*, shall apply. It is the ability of a material source definitions, in

2.1 Flammability with a flame.

or a product consisting

to burn of silicon

2.2 Incandescent Bar - It is an igniting carbide with metallized contact ends. *Classification and methods of properties of solid electrical insulating tRules for rounding off numerical

tests for non-ignitable materials. values ( wised ). 4

and

self-extinguishing

1s : 11731 ( Part 3. PREPARATION OF SPECIMENS

2 ) - 1986

3.1 The tests are carried out on test specimens of fixed dimensions under definite assessment criteria with a specified igniting source. dimensions of test specimens are given as under: FV Method Length Width Thickness 125'00 -& 5.00 mm 13.00 & 0.30 mm 3.00 _C 0'20 mm

and The

3.2 The test specimens shall be manufactured by compression moulding, transfer moulding, injection moulding, casting, or be machined from sheets, tubes, rods or insulating parts. All edges and faces shall have a smooth finish. Sets of five test specimens shall be tested.

The flammability will usually vary depending on the thickness of Therefore, in addition to the thickness specified, it may the material. be helpful to obtain results for thicknesses of the order of 0'8 mm, 1% mm and 6 mm which are commonly encountered in practice. 4. APPARATUS 4. Igniting Source - A blue flame, "0 * `-I mm high, produced from a laboratory burner ( Bunsen or Tirril burner ) having a tube with a length of 100 mm and an inside diameter of 9'3 & 0'5 mm. The tube shall not be ecluipped Lvith end attachments, such as stabilizers. A supply of technical grade and meter to produce a uniform methane gas with gas flow. a suitable regulator
should

NOTI.: - If natural gas is used as an alternative to methane, its heat content he approximately 37 MJ/mJ which has been found to provide'similar results.

with adjustable clamps 4.2 Test Unit ( see Fig. 1 ) - A ring stand Each specimen is to be held for vertical positioning of the specimen. with the longitudinal by clamping the upper 6 mm of the specimen axis vertical, so that the lower end of the specimen is 10 mm above the top of the burner tube and 300 mm above a horizontal layer of dry to a maximum absorbent surgical cotton ( 50 x 50 mm swab thinned uncompressed thickness of 6 mm ). movable holder to maintain the burner tube 4.3 An adjustable, If necessary, centrally under the lower end of the test specimen. the burner is to be tilted to an angle of 45' and the 10 mm distance between the bottom of the specimen and the top of the burner is to be maintained during the flame application. 5

iii : 1ii31 ( l&t

2 ) ; 19d6

ttsr

SPECIMEN

Y

=

Yellow flame
in millimetres.

B = Blueflame All dimensions

Fro. 1

VERTICALSpEcrnrEN TEST UNIT

5. PROCEDURE 5.1 Each specimen is to be fixed vertically by the clamp on thy fing The burner is kept at a place remote from the specimen, lgmted stand. position to produce a blue flame, and adjusted in the vertical The flame is obtained by adjusting the gas supply 20 * 2 mm high. and the air ports of the burner until a 20 f 2 mm yellow-tipped blue 6

IS : 11731 ( Part 2 ) - 1986
flame is produced and tip disappears. The corrected, if necessary. 5.2 The specimen withdrawn specimen immediately is again noted. then the air supply is increased until height of the flame is measured the yellow again and

burner is placed centrally under the lower end of the test is then and is allowed to remain there for 10 S. The burner at least 150 mm away and the duration of flaming of the When flaming of the specimen ceases, the burner is noted. After IO s, the burner placed again under the specimen. withdrawn and the duration of flaming and glowing is

5.3 If the specimen drips nlolten or flaming material during either of the flame applications, the burner may be tilted to an angle up to 45" and also slightly withdrawn away from one of the 13 mm sides of the specimen during the flame application, to avoid material dripping into the tube of the burner. 5.4 If the specimen drips molten or flaming material or is consumed during the test, the brll,ner is to be hand-held, and the 10 mm distance between the bottom of the specimen and the top of the burner tube is to be maintained during the flame application. Any molten Strings of the material are ignored and the flame is applied to the major portion of the specimen. 5.5 Evaluation belong to one specimen: of Results of the following It is determined whether the specimens three categories of FL', flame vertical CATEGORIES
r-----h_--_-_7

FVO
Flaming combustion time after each application of the test flame for each test specimen Total flaming combustion time 10 flame applications for each of 5 specimens Glowing second for set < 10s ( see Note below ) < 50 s

FV 1
< 30s ( bee Note below ) < 250 s

FV2
< 30 s (see Note below ) < 250 s

combustion time after the removal of the test flame up

< 30 s No

< NO

60 s

< 60 s No

Flaming or glo\ving combustion to the holding clamp

Dripping flaming particles that NO NO Yes ignite the dry absorbent surgical cotton located 300 mm below the test specimen No.rr.: - For one flame npplicarion, only a flaminq combustion exceeding 10 s or 30 s is tolerated if th<xtotal fl,tming combustmn time for 10 flame applications for each set of five specimrn~ does not exceed 50 s or 250 s, as appropriate. 7

IS : 11731( Part 2 ) - 1986 5.6 If only one specimen from a set of five specimens fails to comply with the requirements, another set of five specimens shall be tested. All specimens from this second set shall comply with the appropriate requirements. If any one specimen of this second set does not comply with the appropriate requirements, the category with the highest number should be reported as the classification for this material. 6. TEST REPORT

6.1 The test report shall include the following information: a) Test method IV and reference to this standard; b) Complete identification and manufacturer; c) Description specimens; d) Thickness of of the tested for the materials, preparation including of the type test

the method

of the specimens; of the test specimens; with 5.5. The individual results shall form burning

e) Pre-conditioning

f) Category in accordance be stated;

g) Whether the specimens melt without burning, droplets or show any unusual behaviour; h) Whether glowing source; j) Description
SUPPlY.

continues

after

the

removal

of the igniting

of the smoke developed; and conditions,
for example, gas

k) Any deviation from the specified

