IS 15446 (Part 2): 2004

wP12mmwibmh

Indian Standard
GUIDE TO PRODUCTION
PART 2 PRODUCTION

CONTROL

PROGRAMMING

Ics 03.100.50

(3 BIS 2004 BUREAU OF MANAK BHAVAN, INDIAN STANDARDS 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002 MARG

Augusf 2004

Price Group 4

Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 4

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Management and Productivity Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division Council. The prime objective of production control is to help a company become more competitive and profitable. An effective production control function endeavors to fulfil this objective by keeping a balance between satisfying sales demand, achieving high plant utilization and maintaining low investment in stocks and work in progress. An optimum balance between these often conflicting objectives will only be achieved by a production control system designed to meet the specific needs of the company and run by well trained and dedicated staff. This standard deals with the creation and maintenance of production programmed and their relationship to other plans in the business and to the resources required to implement them. Realistic production programmed are essential to ensure achievement of the organization's manufacturing objectives. For the different stages of production control see Fig. 1. While formulating this standard, considerable assistance has been taken from BS 5192 (Part 2) :1993 `Guide to production control -- Production programming'. Reference has been made to following British Standards for which Indian Standards do exist. The corresponding Indian Standards, which are to be substituted in their place, are listed below with their degree of equivalence:
BS No. 3375 (Part 2) :1986 Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence

IS 13407 (Part 1) : 1992 Techniques of work study: Part 1 Method study IS 13407 (Part 2) : 1995 Techniques of work study: Part 2 Work measurement IS 7337 : 1985 Glossary of terms used in project network analysis @st revision) IS 14580 (Part 1) : 1998 Use of network analysis for project management: Part 1 Management, planning, review, reporting and termination procedures IS 14580 (Part 2) Use of network analysis for project management: Part 2 Use of graphical techniques
(under preparation)

Not equivalent do do do

3375 (Part 3) : 1985 4335:1987 6046 Part 1) :1984

6046 Part 2) :1992

do

In addition, reference has also been made to following British Standards for which'kere are no Indian Standards:
BS No. 3138:1992 Title

5191:1975

Glossary of terms used in management services Glossary of production planning and control terms

The concerned committee has reviewed the provisions of these British Standards and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. This standard is published in six parts and gives comprehensive guidance in those areas that are considered essential for effective production control. The other parts of the standard are as follows: (Part 1): 2004 Introduction
(Continued on third cover)

IS 15446 (Part 2) :2004

Indian Standard
GUIDE TO PRODUCTION
PART 2
1 SCOPE

CONTROL
or product groups, depending on the nature of the product and how much information is available about future demand. Master production schedule (MPS), is the programme that drives the business in the short-term. It is a statement, not a forecast, of the products to be made, and when and in what quantities they are to be made. The time span of a master production schedule depends on the lead time of the products and should be at least as long as the lead time of any item in the schedule. Typically, the master production schedule covers a 6 month to 12 month rolling period with monthly or weekly reviews. There is a two-way link between the master production schedule and sales and financial plans in order to obtain a consensus about what constitutes a realistic and achievable plan. The master production schedule is also the input to systems for planning and ordering purchased and manufactured parts, for example, material requirements planning (MRP).

PRODUCTION

PROGRAMMING

This standard (Part 2) gives guidance on production programming and its relationship to corporate and business programmed and planning techniques such as master production schedules and capacity planning. 2 REFERENCES The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in the text, constitute provisions of this standard. IS No. 1S 15446 (Part 1): 2004 (Part 3): 2004 (Part 4): 2004 (Part 5): 2004 (Part 6): 2004 3 DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS 15446 (Part 1) shall apply. 4 PRODUCTION
PROGRAMMING Programmed Title

d)

Guide to production control: Introduction Ordering methods Dispatching (shop-floor control) The relationship between control and other management functions Computer aided production control

4.1 Relationship Between Production and Other Plans

4.1.1 In most businesses there is a hierarchy of plans, the following being typical examples:

a)

b)

c)

Corporate plan, sets out the strategic direction of the business over a period of 2 years to 5 or more years. Business plan, covers a shorter timescale, usually 1 to 2 years, and lays down in more detail budgets for each of the operating functions of the business together with nonfinancial objectives. Production plan, is a statement of the products to be made and the plant and manpower required to make them in order to achieve the manufacturing objectives contained in the corporate and business plans. It usually covers a similar timescale to the business plan, though the timescale may be considerably longer if major developments in plant are planned. The planned production may be stated in broad terms of value, mass, volume

Each level of planning is dependent on the one above, and decisions made at higher levels will limit the flexibility of plans at lower levels. The degree of flexibility will depend upon the nature of the manufacturing process. For example, the output of an assembly shop employing simple tools and semi-skilled labour will not be constrained to the same extent as that of a process plant which uses unique equipment requiring several years to commission. 4.2 Other Planning Techniques In addition to, or in conjunction with, master production scheduling, a number of other techniques are employed to plan manufacture. Their application depends upon the nature of the manufacturing process: a) Assembly schedules, are used to instruct an assembly shops what products are to be assembled daily or weekly (see 5.5). in factories that b) Machine programmed, manufacture products from high cost plant, such as, large presses or moulding machines, programmed are in many instances maintained for individual machines or groups of machines. 1

1S 15446 (Part 2) :2004 c) Linear programming, is a mathematical technique used in some process industries to plan the optimum mix of products through the plant, for example, steel rolling mills. Project networking techniques, are suitable for managing projects, that is planned undertakings that have definable starts and definable completions. The technique is usually applied to large complex projects involving multidisciplinary teams, for example, the design, planning and setting-up activities needed for the first-off of a new product or the development and manufacture of a large item of capital equipment. Terms such as programme evaluation and review technique (PERT), critical path analysis (CPA), critical path method (CPM), precedence method and several others refer to versions of project networking techniques, but the terms are not synonymous. Bar charts, are a well-known method for controlling planned activities, but their drawback, especially at the planning stage, of not showing explicitly the links between activities limits their usefulness. This can be overcome by the use of time-based networks (linked bar charts); see IS 14580 (Part 1).

d)

achievement at increased cost. On the other hand, a plan should not be fi-ozen or firmed up sooner than necessary, since the shorter the time between plan and execution, the more accurate the plan is likely to be. 5 MASTER PRODUCTION 5.1 Operation
The master production schedule is the build plan of

SCHEDULE (MPS)

e)

products or groups of products required to meet market demand, constrained within the limits of production resources. The master production schedule is derived from the sales plan but the two may not necessarily be identical. Seasonal sales or the need to smooth underor over-capacity may result in differences between the MPS and the sales plan. Although a master production schedule may be based on a forecast it is not a forecast but a statement of what is to be produced over a certain period of time. The schedule provides the input to other systems for planning material provisioning, internal manufacture and short-term capacity requirements. 5.2 Relationship
with Other Functions

4.3 Criteria for Successful Planning
4.3.1 Successful planning depends on following number of criteria:

a)

Clear and rapid communication is essential through all levels of the planning process. This means communicating instructions downwards and reporting back results upwards in a closed loop (see Fig. 2). Feedback of information is essential if the plan is not to lose contact with reality. b) Plans should be realistic and capable of being achieved in the time and with the resources available. A plan that is not realistic and has no chance of being achieved should be revised, otherwise the planning process loses credibility. c) A plan should have clearly defined cut-off points after which it should become firm. Changes reached after a cut-off point should as far as possible be avoided as they will either result in non-achievement of the plan or achievement at increased cost. d) The time span or planning horizon should be not less than the longest lead time of any item in the plan. A planning horizon that is too short will result in non-achievement or 2

The master production schedule is a rolling programme that is updated at regular intervals, usually monthly, and agreed by the various functions of the business, for example, production, sales, engineering, distribution and finance. To ensure its acceptance by all parties, it should be signed off by the chief executive. The master production schedule drives the business in the sense that it determines what will be available for sale, what is to be manufactured and purchased, and the resultant cash flow projections. 5.3 Input to the MPS
5.3.1 General

In order to prepare a master production schedule, the scheduler needs to have information about the following: a) Sales demand, dther in the form of a forecast, or, if the business makes to customers' orders, actual orders received; and b) Lead time to procure material manufacture the products; c) Available major plant and other resource cap"acity including the capacity of any associated activities, such as, design customization and laboratory testing that may be relevant; and d) Major products and bills of material. 5.3.2 Sales Demand
5.3.2.1 Sales demand may be expressed in many forms,

IS 15446 (Part 2): 2004

Business

plonning

-

?

I Rough- CU Copaclty planning
\

Production

planning

, t

1` Master production scheduling A ,, planning 4

f Material requirements

! I Capocity requirements plonnirag f

No

Internol

orders

Purchase orders

I Execute plons

!I

FIG. 2 CLOSEDLooP SYSTEM

for example, as individual products, families or groups of products, modules or part completed items, or in terms of mass, size or value. 5.3.2.2 A sales department often has difficulty in forecasting sales of individual products, especially in industries in which there are a large number of end products, such as, pharmaceuticals. In these circumstances it is sometime possible to forecast sales 3

of product families and to create a bill of material for the family. The master production schedule will then comprise planned manufacture of the product families, and only at the final build stage with individual products be scheduled. 5.3.2.3 In industries with a large range of customer options, such as, the motor industry, the sales forecast is pitched at a level below the end product, for example,

1S 15446 (Part 2) :2004

Period 1 Final assembly tI I Sub-assemblies I 1 Components , 2 3 k 56 78 9 10 11 12 13 ~L 15 16

Raw materials

Insufficient

horizon 12 periods D

Minimum horizon

16umiotls

FIG.

3 MASTERPRODUCTION SCHEDULE HORIZON all be displayed on a VDU and there should be a routine within the computer system to select data to be used based on priority rules (for example, customer forecast supersedes market forecasts), summarizing at different levels, that is product code, product group, etc. 5.3.2.8 It is important also that when items are dispatched or cancelled, there is a procedure within the sales order processing system for reducing commitment and for handling overdue commitments so that when the MI% is reviewed, the most relevant and up-to-date requirement information is available. 5.3.3 Lead Time Figure 3 shows an example of a purchase and manufacturing lead time for a product. A master production schedule that covers a time span less than the minimum lead time will mean either that the schedule is non-viable or that panic measures have to be taken to achieve the plan. Such measures often increase cost, for example air freighting components, splitting batches. In industries in which the products are made from common materials it is sometimes possible to firm up the MPS in stages, for example, Stage 1 material supply, Stage 2 component manufacture, Stage 3 final assembly. 4

engines of a particular size or number of automatic and m~nual transmissions, etc. The product is designed in the form of modules which can be assembled to provide a wide variety of options, each module having its own bill of material. The content of the master production schedule consists of plans for manufacturing the modules. 5.3.2.4 In some industries, forecast by mass or volume is used as the input to the master production schedule. In such case's the main purpose of the master production schedule may be to plan forward capacity requirements, rather than material requirements. 5.3.2.5 In industries that have a spares and service demand or produce by-products at lower levels in the manufacturing process, forecasts will be required for these items. The items should be planned as independent demand at the level in the bill of material where they occur so that they are provisioned along with dependent requirements from higher levels. 5.3.2.6 In practice it is likely that the quality of information will vary according to the customer and hence the MPS will be based on a mixture of customer firm orders, customer forecasts and in-company forecasts derived from past performance. 5.3.2.7 To aid the master scheduler these will ideally

IS 15446 (Part 2) :2004

5.3.4 Capuci@
5.3.4.1 In preparing the master production schedule, account should be taken of the available capacity. In factories that are engaged purely on assembly or on a single process this may be a fairly simple matter of calculating the daily output from the line or process.

businesses making simple commodities, such as, electric plugs, paints and so forth, come within this category. The master production schedule has therefore to be based on a forecast of demand. An example of a master production schedule in a make-to-stock situation is shown in Fig. 4. 5.4.3 Make-to-Order
5.4.3.1 Some businesses do not begin to manufacture

5.3.4.2 However, for many industries capacity planning is more complex, involving many processes and many components and sub-assemblies. A technique calied rough cut capacity planning can be used in order to ascellain quickly whether or not the MPS is viable. This is a crude form of capacity planning that generally ignores work-in-progress and concentrates on key or critical resources. To aid the scheduler, a capacity bill of material is sometimes produced for each product that shows the capacity on key resources that the product will use. 5.3.5 Products and Bills of Material As explained in the preceding sections, the scheduler needs to have a thorough understanding of the families, the products and the way that bills of material are structured in order to decide the best method of creating and maintaining the master production schedule. 5.4 Types of Master Production Schedule 5.4.1 Format The format of the master production schedule varies according to the type of business as explained in 5.4.2 to 5.4.4. 5.4.2 Make-to-Stock Businesses that have to meet customer demand in less time than is needed to manufacture the product need to make for stock. Orders are in this case fulfilled by drawing from stock of finished products. Typically, I

until they receive an order from a customer. Often, the project has to be designed to meet the customer's unique requirements, for example, special purpose machinery, and, therefore, the master production schedule should also include schedules for the design and engineering departments. Long lead times are a characteristic of this kind of business. They involve the whole manufacturing cycle from design, through supply of material to component manufacture, assembly and test. Figure 5 shows an example of a make-to-order master production schedule. Few businesses can function on a purely make-to-order basis, since customers generally find the long lead times unacceptable. Many industries therefore operate on a combination of make-to-stock and complete-toorder. 5.4.4 Make-to-Stock and Complete-to-Order
5.4.4.1 There are several ways in which the lead time between receipt of a customer's order and delivery can be compressed. Designs may be standardized or products designed in modular form with variants so that only a minimum amount of design effort is required to customize the product The business may hold stocks of raw material, particularly those with long lead times. Manufacture may proceed against a forecast of demand up to some incomplete stage, such as,

I

Product Lead

A time 3 periods Opening free stock Periods 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

Forecast Scheduled Projected Planned P(anned receipts available order order receipts release

10

10
U

15

15

1s

15

20

29

10

0

30

15

0

-15
~ Lo

-30

-50
*40

-70

60-

Lo a `

FIG. 4 MPS MAKE-TO-STOCK 5

IS 15446 (Part 2) :2004

Product Lead time

B

6

periods

Periods 1 2 3 4 s 6 7 8

Customer Scheduled Planned Planned

order receipts order order

due

3 7

L

5 8

3

3 5

2

3

2

receipts ~ release -

~s

s- ~

~

FIG. 5 MPS MAKE-TO-ORDER

components or sub-assemblies, so that completion of the end product only occurs when the customer order is placed. 5.4.4.2 Figure 6 shows an example of a master production schedule in a make-to-stock or completeto-order situation. Note that the schedule is driven by the forecast, not customer's orders, the assumption being that the forecast demand will be fulfilled. The schedule also shows, period by period, how much projected product is uncommitted by orders. It, therefore, acts as a guide to the scheduler and to the sales department of what is available to sell in each period. 5.4.4.3 Products that are designed as modules that can be put together in a number of ways to produce a large variety of end products are a feature of this type of business. The motor industry is perhaps the most notable example, with its combination of body styles and colours, engine sizes, accessories and so on. Although the possible number of end item

combinations can run into many thousands, the number of items in the master production schedule can be kept to a comparatively small and manageable number. 5.5 Assembly Schedule 5.5.1 In many industries that make to a partial stage of completion and only carry out final assembly on receipt of a customer's order, the assembly schedule is the document that instructs the assembly department what to produce. The schedule typically covers a period of 1 week. It is important to note that the assembly schedule is subject to the constraint of higher level plans, and, therefore, the assembly schedule is usually a derivative of the master production schedule. 6 CAPACITY PLANNING 6.1 Objective of Capacity Planning 6.1.1 The objective of capacity planning is to ensure that sufficient manufacturing resources are available to fulfil the objectives expressed in the organization's

Module

`X' Periods Back orders 1 2 3 L 15 6 15 5 6 15 2 15 20 20 7 20 8 20

Forecast Customer Scheduled

` orders receipts 1

10
9

10
8

15
8 15

1s
k 15

10
to sell)

10
2

Uncommitted

(available

7

9

11

13

20

20

~

FIG.

6 MPS MAKE-TO-STOCKICOMPLETE-TO-ORDER
6

IS 15446 (Part 2) :2004

corporate and business plans. Resources are both manpower and plant. If design and development is involved, as, for example, with customized products, it is the responsibility of the design or engineering function to plan the necessary resources. 6.2 Definition of Production Capacity
6.2.1 Production capacity is the amount of resource

on many products, each having several levels in the bill of material. In these industries more sophisticated techniques are needed to plan and control capacity.
6.4.2 Capaci@ Requirements Planning (CRP)

available for loading work after deducting all nonproductive time such as planned maintenance, holidays and rest periods, allowances for plant breakdown, for sickness and absenteeism, etc. Machine set-up time may be included or excluded from capacity, according to whether it is treated as a planned activity or not. Activities that form a vital part of the production process, such as, testing, should be included in capacity planning. 6.3 Long- and Short-Term
Capacity Planning

6.4.2.1 Capacity requirements planning uses a similar methodology to material requirements planning (MRP). Starting with the due completion date in the master production schedule, CRP back schedules through each level in the bill of material and through successive operations, and applying lead time and batching policies set by management, calculates the start and finishing dates and the loads on each works centre for the manufactured parts.
NOTE -- A works centre is any convenient grouping of people by skill or machines by characteristics for the purpose of planning and control.

6.4.2.2 CRP calculates the load profile, and hence the

6.3.1 Capacity plans may be divided into long-term

and short-term. Long-term plans cover the acquisition or disposal of manufacturing plant and buildings and the recruitment and training of the workforce. Longterm capacity plans form part of the production plan referred in 6.1, and are often based on a sales forecast expressed in broad terms, perhaps product groups or volume.
6.3.2 Short-term capacity planning generally aims to

capacity required, on each work centre, based on the latest possible start and finish dates for each operation, in order to achieve the output in the master production schedule. It provides the basic information for the capacity planning and loading techniques described in 6.4.3 and 6.4.4. 6.4.3 Infinite Capaci@ Planning and Loading 6.4.3.1 This technique assumes that there are no constraints on capacity and that capacity can be expanded to meet any demand made upon it from the planned load (see Fig. 7). As such a condition very rarely occurs in practice, it is often necessary to reschedule the plan should load exceed capacity. To minimize the need for re-scheduling, which can be a time consuming and difficult exercise, the master production schedule should first be roughly balanced with capacity using a technique such as rough cut capacity planning described in 5.3.4. Small short-term overloads can then usually be managed by short-term expedients, such as, overtime working and subcontracting and by minor flexibility in the programme. Under these conditions, infinite capacity planning and loading is a valid and worthwhile technique. 6.4.4 Finite Capacity Planning and Loading
6.4.4.1 In this technique, as its name suggests, capacity

fine-tune the capacity to ensure that it is capable of dealing with the load imposed by the short-term production programme arising from the master production schedule. Capacity may be tine-tuned by overtime working, or shift working or sub-contracting. Occasionally it may be possible to increase capacity by introducing new plant at short notice. Methods improvement should also be considered as another possible way of increasing capacity from the same resources.
6.4 Capacity Planning Techniques 6.4.1 Simple Techniques 6.4.1.1 In industries where manufacture consists of a few operations or processes, and where the products have few components or levels in the bill of material, capacity may be measured in terms of units of output, such as, the number of products per day off an assembly line, or in standard hours, or by mass or size, for example, metres per hour from an extrusion machine, or in some other convenient unit. In such industries, ensuring that the master production schedule is realistic in terms of available capacity is a relatively simple matter of scheduling the work load on the assembly line or process. 6.4.1.2 In many industries, however, manufacturing control is more complex, involving many operations

is assumed to be fixed, and overloads should be rescheduled to fill any troughs that occur in the forward production plan (see Fig. 8). Such re-scheduling can become quite complex and generally requires the use of a computer since any alteration in the load profile in one work centre may involve re-scheduling the load profiles in other work centres downstream from it. Deferral of work into later time periods can result in orders becoming overdue unless there are floats or 7

1S 15446 (Part 2) :2004

Work centre A

I 1 I

,---

Manage

by overtime,

etc.-7 t
1 1

Capacity ------------------Hours Load Load

----------

----------

-- "------,

,---------

----------

-----------,

Load

Load

Load

Load

Load

Load

Timeperiods
FIG. 7 INFINITE CAPACITYLOADING

Work centre B

Reschedu~ later I------------------: # 1 I I
I 1 : I I :

;-------------------;
I I I : 1 1 1 : I / 1 I t : I t t

Capacity ------------------Hours Load Load

--------.

----

1 t

--------4

I I 1 ----I

: --------"`------------j -------T

Load

Load

Load

load

Load

Load

Time periods

FIG. 8 FINITECAPACITYLOADING

buffers between the various manufacturing stages to absorb the delay. 6.4.4.2 Re-scheduling has to take account of the relative priorities of the jobs being re-scheduled. These priorities, of which there area variety of forms, can be both internal and external. For example, an internal priority could be based on the proportion of operating time to slack time remaining between the current date and the due completion date. External priorities are

those based on the urgency of a customer's order. 6.4.4.3 The interaction of priorities in such a computer system can be very complex, and the resultant output difficult to understand. The technique has an application in industries in which accurate capacity planning is important, for example, the jobbing industry. However, many businesses prefer to use the more simple infinite capacity planning and loading technique and to smooth loads manually.

8

(Continuedfrom

second cover)

(Part 3): 2004 (Part 4): 2004 (Part 5): 2004 (Part 6): 2004

Ordering methods Dispatching (shop-floor control) Relationship between control and other management functions Computer aided production control

1) PROGRAMMING Business plan

4

+

Sales

orders

-

Customer

! I Resources: people mochines money 2) ORDERING

I
I > I Production programme A' I I I I I

I I
Purchase orders ) Factory orders A I I I I v Suppliers I

I I
1
3) DISPATClilNG-- --

1 1

r
,---- -- --------
Key _ --

I I I I
I I

I
J
Requirements Feedback Goods low

I I

`---

FIG.

1 STAGESOF PRODUCTION CONTROL

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffhmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision, Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. MSD 4 (228).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841
{

23378499,23378561 23378626,23379120

603843 { 609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD, JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Rmted at Prabhat Oftset Ress, New Delhi-2

