IRAI AAF IS 16474 : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


qapan — wad a ag Ra fate 
art ws at waa Wot c few 
utao ent fafir 


Geosynthetics — Method of Test for 
Tensile Properties of Geogrids by 
the Single or Multi-Rib Tensile 
Method 


ICS 59.080.70 


O BIS 2015 


ada AM em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WS, 9 TUE WL Art, we feeei-110002 
Lm MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2015 Price Group 5 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


In the formulation of this standard assistance has been drawn from ASTM D6637 - 11 ‘Standard test method for 
determining tensile properties of geogrids by the single or multi-rib tensile method', issued by the American 
Society for Testing and Materials, USA. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
Observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
*Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16474 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — METHOD OF TEST FOR TENSILE 
PROPERTIES OF GEOGRIDS BY THE SINGLE OR 
MULTI-RIB TENSILE METHOD 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This test method covers the determination of the 
tensile strength properties of geo-grids by subjecting 
strips of varying width to tensile loading. 


1.2 Three alternative procedures are provided to 
determine the tensile strength, as follows: 


a) Method A — Testing a single geo-grid rib in 
tension (N). 

b) Method B — Testing multiple geo-grid ribs 
in tension (kN/m). 

c) Method C — Testing multiple layers of 
multiple geo-grid ribs in tension (KN/m). 


1.3 This test method is intended for quality control 
and conformance testing of geo-grids. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards are necessary adjuncts to this 
standard: 


IS No. Title 
13321 (Part 1): Glossary of terms for geosynthetics: 


1992 Part 1 Terms used in materials and 
properties 

SP 45 : 1988 Handbook on glossary of textile 
terms 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given 
in SP45, IS13321 (Part 1) and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Atmosphere for Testing Geo-Synthetics — Air 
maintained at a relative humidity 65 + 2 percent and a 
temperature of 27 + 2°C. 


NOTE — Any other atmosphere for testing may be used as per 
the agreement between the concerned parties. 


3.2 Breaking Force (F) — The force at failure. 


3.3 Corresponding Force — The synonym for force 
at specified elongation. 


3.4 Force at Specified Elongation (FASE) — A force 
associated with a specific elongation on the force- 
elongation curve (synonym for corresponding force). 


3.5 Force-elongation curve — In a tensile test, a 
graphical representation of the relationship between 


the magnitude of an externally applied force and the 
change in length of the specimen in the direction of 
the applied force (synonym for stress-strain curve). 


3.6 Geo-grid — A geo-synthetic formed by a regular 
network of integrally connected elements with 
apertures greater than 6.35 mm to allow interlocking 
with surrounding soil, rock, earth, and other 
surrounding materials to primarily function as 
reinforcement. 


3.7 Geo-synthetic — A product manufactured from 
polymeric material used with soil, rock, earth, or other 
geotechnical engineering related material as an integral 
part of a man made project, structure, or system. 


3.8 Index Test — A test procedure which may contain 
known bias, but which may be used to establish an 
order for a set of specimens with respect to the property 
of interest. 


3.9 Integral — In geo-synthetics, forming a necessary 
part of the whole; a constituent. 


3.10 Junction — The point where geo-grid ribs are 
interconnected to provide structure and dimensional 
stability. 


3.11 Rib — For geo-grids, the continuous elements of 
a geo-grid which are either in the machine or cross- 
machine direction as manufactured. 


3.12 Rupture — For geo-grids, the breaking or tearing 
apart of ribs. 


3.13 Tensile — Capable of tensions, or relating to 
tension of a material. 


3.14 Tensile Strength — For geo-grids the maximum 
resistance to deformation developed for a specific 
material when subjected to tension by an external force. 
Tensile strength of geo-grids is the characteristic of a 
sample as distinct from a specimen and is expressed in 
force per unit width. 


3.15 Tensile Strength (a, ) — For geogrids the 
maximum resistance to deformation developed for a 
specific material when subjected to tension by an 
external force. Tensile strength of geo-grids is the 
characteristic of a sample as distinct from a specimen 
and is expressed in force per unit width. 


IS 16474 : 2015 


3.16 Tensile Test — A test in which a material is 
stretched uniaxially to determine the force elongation 
characteristics, the breaking force, or the breaking 
elongation. 


3.17 Tension — The force that produces a specified 
elongation. 


4 PRINCIPLE 


4.1 Method A 


In this method, a single, representative rib specimen 
of a geo-grid is clamped and placed under a tensile 
force using a constant rate of extension testing machine. 
The tensile force required to fail (rupture) the specimen 
is recorded. The ultimate single rib tensile strength (N) 
is then determined based on the average of six single 
rib tensile tests. 


4.2 Method B 


A relatively wide specimen is gripped across its entire 
width in the clamps of a constant rate of extension type 
tensile testing machine operated at a prescribed rate of 
extension, applying a uniaxial load to the specimen 
until the specimen ruptures. Tensile strength (kN/m), 
elongation, and secant modulus of the test specimen 
can be calculated from machine scales, dials, recording 
charts, or an interfaced computer. 


4.3 Method C 


A relatively wide, multiple layered specimen is gripped 
across its entire width in the clamps of a constant rate 
of extension type tensile testing machine operated at a 
prescribed rate of extension, applying a uniaxial load 
to the specimen until the specimen ruptures. Tensile 
strength (KN/m), elongation and secant modulus of the 
test specimen can be calculated from machine scales, 
dials recording charts, or an interfaced computer. 


5 SIGNIFICANCE AND USE 


5.1 The determination of the tensile force-elongation 
values of geo-grids provides index property values. 
This test method shall be used for quality control and 
acceptance testing of commercial shipments of geo- 
grids. 


5.2 In cases of dispute arising from differences in 
reported test results when using this test method for 
acceptance testing of commercial shipments, the 
purchaser and the supplier shall conduct comparative 
tests to determine, if there is a statistical bias between 
their laboratories. Competent statistical assistance is 
recommended for the investigation of bias. As a 
minimum the two parties shall take a group of test 
specimens which are as homogeneous as possible and 
which are from a lot of material of the type in question. 


The test specimens shall then be randomly assigned in 
equal numbers to each laboratory for testing. The 
average results from the two laboratories shall be 
compared using Student's t-test for unpaired data and 
an acceptable probability level chosen by the two 
parties before the testing began. If a bias is found, either 
its cause must be found and corrected or the purchaser 
and the supplier must agree to interpret future test 
results in light of the known bias. 


5.3 AII geo-grids can be tested by any of these methods. 
Some modification of techniques may be necessary 
for a given geo-grid depending upon its physical make- 
up. Special adaptations may be necessary with strong 
geo-grids, multiple layered geo-grids, or geo-grids that 
tend to slip in the clamps or those which tend to be 
damaged by the clamps. 


6 APPARATUS 


6.1 Testing Clamps — The clamps shall be sufficiently 
wide to grip the entire width of the specimens (as 
determined by the test method) and with appropriate 
clamping power to prevent slipping or crushing 
(damage). For a given product the same clamps shall 
be used in testing methods A, B and C prior to making 
any comparison between results. 


6.1.1 Size of Jaw Faces — Each clamp shall have jaw 
faces measuring wider than the width of the specimen. 


6.2 Tensile Testing Machine — A testing machine of 
the constant rate of extension type shall be used. The 
machine shall be equipped with a device for recording 
the tensile force and the amount of separation of the 
grips. Both of these measuring systems shall be 
accurate to + 1.0 percent and, preferably, shall be 
external to the testing machine. The rate of separation 
shall be uniform and capable of adjustment within the 
range of the test. 


6.3 Distilled Water and Non-ionic Wetting Agent — 
It shall be used for wet specimens only. 


6.4 Extensometer — When required by the method, a 
device capable of measuring the distance between two 
reference points on the specimen without any damage 
to the specimen or slippage, care being taken to ensure 
that the measurement represents the true movement of 
the reference points. 


Examples of extensometers include mechanical, 
optical, infrared or electrical devices. 


7 SAMPLING 


7.1 Laboratory Sample 


For the laboratory sample, take a full roll width swatch 
long enough in the machine direction from each roll 
in the lot sample to ensure that the requirements in 8.1 


can be met. The sample may be taken from the end 
portion of a roll provided there is no evidence it is 
distorted or different from other portions of the roll. 


8 TEST SPECIMEN 


8.1 The specimens shall consist of three (3) junctions 
or 300 mm in length, in order to establish a minimum 
specimen length in the direction of the test (either the 
machine or cross-machine direction). All specimens 
shall be free of surface defects, etc, not typical of the 
laboratory sample. Take no specimens nearer the 
selvage edge along the geogrid than 1/10 the width of 
the sample. 

NOTE — If a comparison of one geo-grid to another is to be 


made the length of each specimen shall be the same (as similar 
as possible) and agreed upon by all the parties. 


8.2 Preparation 
8.2.1 Method A 


Prepare each finished specimen, as shown in Fig. 1, to 


IS 16474 : 2015 


contain one rib in the cross-test wide by at least three 
junctions (two apertures) long in the direction of the 
testing, with the length dimension being designated 
and accurately cut parallel to the direction for which 
the tensile strength is being measured. 


8.2.2 Method B 


Prepare each finished specimen, as shown in Fig. 2, 
to be a minimum of 200 mm wide and contain five 
ribs in the cross-test direction wide by at least three 
junctions (two apertures) or 300 mm long in the 
direction of the testing, with the length dimension being 
designated and accurately cut parallel to the direction 
for which the tensile strength is being measured. 


8.2.3 Method C 


Prepare each finished specimen as shown in Fig. 2, to 
be a minimum of 200 mm wide and contain five ribs 
in the cross-test direction wide by at least three 
junctions (two apertures) or 300 mm long in the 
direction of the testing, with the length dimension being 


THREE (3) JUNCTION OR 300 mm 


Fic. 1 SPECIMEN DIMENSIONS FOR METHOD A 


ili 


Fic. 2 SPECIMEN DIMENSIONS FOR METHOD B AND C 


3 


THREE (3) JUNCTION OR 
300 mm 


IS 16474 : 2015 


designated and accurately cut parallel to the direction 
for which the tensile strength is being measured. This 
must be repeated for each layer of geo-grid included 
in the test. 


8.2.4 Within test methods A, B and C, the outermost 
ribs are commonly cut prior to testing to permit extra 
width of material in the clamps to minimize slippage 
within the clamps. If this procedure causes non-uniform 
distribution of load to the gauge length area of the 
specimen, the same width of material shall be included 
in the clamps as will be tested in the gauge length area. 
In either case, the test results shall be based on the unit 
of width associated with the number of intact ribs. 


8.3 Number of Test Specimens 


8.3.1 Unless otherwise agreed upon as when provided 
in an applicable material specification, take a number 
of test specimens per swatch in the laboratory sample 
such that the user may expect at the 95 percent 
probability level that the test result is no more than 5 
percent above the true average for each swatch in the 
laboratory sample for each required direction. 

NOTE — In some applications, it may be necessary to perform 

tensile tests in both the machine and the cross-machine 


directions. In all cases, the direction of the tensile test 
specimen(s) shall be clearly noted. 


8.3.2 Reliable Estimate of v 


When there is a reliable estimate of v based upon 
extensive past records for similar materials tested in 
the user's laboratory as directed in the method, 
calculate the required number of specimens using 
equation as follows: 


n= (tv/AY. (1) 
where 

n = number of test specimens (rounded upward 
to a whole number); 

v = reliable estimate, of the coefficient of 
variation of individual observations of 
similar materials; 

t = value of Student's t for one-sided limits, a 
95 percent probability level, and the degrees 
of freedom associated with the estimate of 
v; and 

A = 50 percent of the average, the value of 


allowable variation. 
8.3.3 No Reliable Estimate of v 


When there is no reliable estimate of v for the user's 
laboratory, equation given in 8.3.2 shall not be used 
directly. Instead, specify the fixed number of 5 
specimens for the required direction. The number of 
specimens is calculated using v = 9.5 percent of the 
average for the required direction. This value for v is 


somewhat larger than usually found in practice. When 
a reliable estimate of v for the user's laboratory 
becomes available, equation given in 8.3.2 will usually 
require fewer than the fixed number of specimens. 


9 CONDITIONING 


9.1 Expose the specimens to the atmosphere for testing 
geo-synthetics for a period long enough to allow the 
geo-grid to reach equilibrium within this standard 
atmosphere. Consider the specimen to be at moisture 
equilibrium when the change in mass of the specimen 
in successive weighing made at intervals of not less 
than 2 h does not exceed 0.1 percent of the mass of the 
specimen. Consider the specimen to be at temperature 
equilibrium after 1 h of exposure to the atmosphere 
for testing geo-synthetics. 


9.2 Specimen to be tested in the wet condition shall be 
immersed in water for a minimum of 1 h maintained 
at a temperature of 21 + 2?C. The time of immersion 
must be sufficient to wet out the specimens thoroughly, 
as indicated by no significant change in strength or 
elongation following a longer period of immersion, 
and at least 2 min. To obtain thorough wetting it may 
be necessary or advisable to use distilled water. 


9.3 Geo-grids may be received in the laboratory rolled, 
thus it is important to flatten the specimens to avoid 
misleading elongation measurements. Geo-grids which 
exhibit curl memory shall be laid flat and weighted, 
until the geo-grid remains flat without weight. 


10 PROCEDURE 


10.1 Zero the testing system. 


10.2 Machine Set up Condition 


At the start of the test adjust the distance between the 
clamps or the distance from centreline to centreline of 
rollers to the greater distance of three junctions or 200 
+3 mm such that at least one traverse rib is contained 
centrally within the gauge length. At least one clamp 
shall be supported by a free swivel or universal joint 
which will allow the clamp to rotate in the plane of the 
geo-grid. Select the force range of the testing machine 
so the break occurs between 10 and 90 percent of full 
scale force. The test shall be conducted at a strain rate 
of 10 € 3 percent per minute of the gauge length based 
on the gauge length as depicted in Fig. 3. 


10.3 Mount the specimen centrally in the clamps and 
tighten sufficiently to prevent damage to the specimen 
(see Notes). Measure the distance between clamp faces 
or centreline to centreline of the roller grips to 
determine test specimen gauge length. External 
extensometers or other external means of measurement 
(for example, photo methods) are encouraged for all 
tests where modulus is to be measured and must be 


FIXED CLAMPING 
SYSTEM 


IS 16474 : 2015 


EXTENSOMETER FOR STRAIN 


GAUGE LENGTH FOR STRAIN 
RATE 


ES 


ROLLER GRIP CLAMPING SYSTEM 


Fic. 3 GAUGE LENGTH FOR FIXED AND ROLLER GRIP CLAMPING SYSTEMS 


used to determine displacement when roller clamps 
are used in testing. Documentation shall be provided, 
if a discrepancy arises when extensometers are not used 
during testing. 


NOTES 


1 Some modifications of clamping techniques may be necessary 
for a given geo-grid depending upon its construction. Special 
clamping configurations may be necessary for geo-grids 
constructed of coated fibres or yams to prevent them from 
slipping in the clamps or being damaged as a result of being 
gripped too tightly in the clamps. When roller clamps are used, 
an external extensometer,as per Fig. 3, is often used to determine 
displacement. In this case, the distance between the moving 
feet of the extensometer will determine the gauge length for 
use in elongation calculations and not test speed. 


2 Care shall be taken while testing multiple geo-grid layers to 
assure even tensioning of the layers and uniform clamping 
pressure. The test result shall be discarded, if the result is a 
load at a small displacement or peak strength is reached without 
having all of the layers evenly tensioned. 


10.4 Initiate the test by starting the testing machine 
and continue running the test until rupture occurs. 
Report the maximum force obtained to cause failure, 
the time to failure and the elongation at the measured 
maximum force. 


10.4.1 If a specimen of one or more layers slips in the 
jaws, breaks at the edge of or in the jaws, or if, for any 
reason attributed to faulty operation the result falls 
markedly below average for the set of specimens 
(see 10.4.2). 


10.4.2 The decision to discard the results as given 
in 10.4.1 shall be based on observation of the specimen 
during the test of the geo-grid. In the absence of other 
criteria for such tests, all test which results in a value 
below 20 percent of the average of all the other breaks 
shall be discarded. No other break shall be discarded 
unless the test is known to be faulty. 


10.4.3 It is difficult to determine the precise reason 


why certain specimens break near the edge of the jaws. 
If a jaw break is caused by damage to the specimen by 
the jaws, then the results shall be discarded. If, 
however, it is merely due to randomly distributed weak 
places, it is a perfectly legitimate result. In some cases, 
it may also be caused by a concentration of stress in 
the area adjacent to the jaws because they prevent the 
specimen from contracting in width as the force is 
applied. In these cases, a break near the edge of the 
jaws is inevitable and shall be accepted as a 
characteristic of the particular method of test. 


10.5 If a geo-grid manifests any slippage in the jaws 
or if more than 24 percent of the specimens break at a 
point within 5 mm of the edge of the jaw, then (a) the 
jaws may be padded, (b) the geo-grid may be coated 
under the jaw face area, or (c) the surface of the jaw 
face may be modified. If any of the modifications listed 
above are used, state the method of modification in 
the report. 


10.6 Measurement of Elongation 


Measure the elongation of the geo-grid at any stated 
force by means of a suitable recording device at the 
same time as the tensile strength is determined, unless, 
otherwise agreed upon, as provided for in an applicable 
material specification. Measure the elongation to three 
significant figures. 


10.6.1 The strain within the specimen is calculated 
from the measurement of elongation as discussed 
in 10.6 and shown in Fig. 3. It can also be obtained 
independently of the cross head movement. These 
measurements can be made with extensometers or area 
measuring devices which are set to read the centre 
portion of the specimen and containing at least one 
transverse rib. When used, the minimum extensometer 
gauge length shall be 60 mm. 


IS 16474 : 2015 


11 CALCULATION 


11.1 For Method A (Single Rib Specimen) 


From the test data, the average ultimate rib strength in 
(N) is calculated by averaging the value of maximum 
force at rupture for all accepted specimens results. The 
average elongation at failure shall be determined 
separately for machine direction specimen and cross- 
machine direction specimens and expressed as the 
percentage increase in length, based upon the initial 
gauge length of the specimen. Report this as the 
elongation at failure. 


11.2 For Methods-B and C (Wide Width Specimen) 
11.2.1 Slack Displacement (d,) and Slack Tension (T.) 


Slack in the geo-synthetic reinforcement may have 
developed during test set-up or due to the testing 
equipment. For each test, the tensile load-displacement 
curve (see Fig. 4) may be examined to establish a point 
where the testing equipment fully engages the 
specimen, that is pick up load. The displacement where 
this occurs will be designated as the slack displacement 
d, The applied tension at the slack displacement will 
be designated as the slack tension, T,. Both values must 
be recorded in the report. 


11.2.1.1 The slack tension, T,, shall be limited to 1.25 
percent of the peak tensile strength or 225 N. The slack 
tension may only be applied once. The time between 
application of slack tension and test initiation must be 


FORCE PER UNIT WIDTH 


TEST INITIATION 


d, DISPLACEMENT 


less than 2 min. Slack displacement d, shall be selected 
in which the slack tension T, does not violate these 
criteria. 


NOTE — The slack tension, T,, and slack displacement, d,, 


may both be designated as equal to zero even if there is some 
slack behavior. 


11.2.2 Calculate the tensile strength for individual wide 
width specimens (see Note 1) that is, calculate the 
equivalent force per unit width expressed in N/m of 
width, using following equation: 

a, = [(F.- T. VN] xN, ... (2) 
where 


— equivalent force per unit width, N/m; 
— observed maximum force, N; 
slack tensile load, N; 


= number of tensile elements being tested; and 


SA ZNE 
I 


= number of tensile elements per unit width, 
equal to N./b (see Note 2) 


NOTES 


1 This equation is only for use in the determination of wide 
width tensile strength of the specimen based on Methods B and 
C above. This standard does not address the possible correlation 
between single-rib and wide-width tensile strength. 


2 N, is determined by taking the average of three measurements 
from samples at are 95 percent of the manufactured product 
roll width. Each measurement is performed by measuring the 
distance from the central point of the starting aperture (centre 
line to centre line aperture dimension divided by 2) to the centre 
point of the aperture a distance equal to 95 percent of the 


STRAIN, % 


Fic. 4 Stress-STRAIN CURVE WITH COMPLETE TEST RESULTS 


manufactured product roll width away from the starting aperture 
(This establishes the b value). As such, this measurement will 
result in a fractional value. The number of tensile elements, N, 
within the distance, »b/4, are counted and multiplied by the 
number of layers found in the test specimen. 


12.3 Strain 


Calculate the percent strain for individual specimens 
(see Fig. 4), that is, calculate the elongation of 
specimens, expressed as the percentage increase in 
length of the specimen using equation given in 11.2.2 
for XY type recorders and following equation for 
manual readings: 


€p = (AL x R x 100)/C x L ... (3) 
€p = (AL x 100) L 
where 


€p = elongation, percent; 

do = distance from zero force to the point 
where the curve leaves the zero load 
axis, mm; 

d = distance along the zero load axis 
from the point the curve leaves the 
zero load axis to a point of 
corresponding force, mm; 


R = testing speed rate, m/min; 
C, = recording chart speed, m/min; 


L=L,+ d, = slack displacement plus the initial 
nominal gauge length, mm; and 


AL = (d — d,) = unit change in length from the slack 
displacement point to the 
corresponding measured force, mm. 


11.2.4 Gauge marks or extensometers are preferred to 
define a specific test section of the specimen (see 
Fig. 3); when these devices are used, only the length 
defined by the gauge marks or extensometers shall be 
used in the calculation. Gauge marks must not damage 
the geo-grid. 


11.2.5 Secant Modulus 


See Fig. 4, select a force per unit width for a specified 
elongation €,, and label the corresponding point on 
the force-elongation curve as P,. Likewise, label a 
second point P}, at a specified elongation, €,, taken at 
d,. Draw a straight line (secant) through both points 
P, and P, intersecting the zero load axis. Calculate 
secant tensile modulus using the following equation: 


Joo = (a,x 100y/€, w. (4) 
where 
J... = secant tensile modulus at corresponding 


elongation, N/m; 


a, = peak force minus slack tension times the 
number of tensile elements in a unit width 
(m) divided by the number of elements 


IS 16474 : 2015 


tested. This is the equivalent force per unit 
width, N/m at a designated percent strain; 
and 


€, = corresponding percent strain with respect to 
the force per unit width (see equation 4). 


12 REPORT 


12.1 For Test Method A 


The report for geo-grid rib tensile strength shall include 
the following: 


a) Themaximum individual rib tensile strength, 
N, and elongation at failure for each specimen 
and the average ultimate rib tensile strength, 
N, average elongation at failure, and standard 
deviation for each set of specimens; 


b) Make and model of the testing machine; 

c) Type, size, and facing of grips, and 
description of any changes made to the grips; 

d) The number of specimen tested; 

e) Test conditions; 

f) Any departures from stan9ard procedure; 

g) Identification and description of geo-grid 
sample(s); 

h) Description of type and location of failure of 
each test; 


j) Direction of testing; and 
k) Full set of load versus strain charts. 


12.2 For Test Methods B and C 


Report that the specimens were tested as directed in 
this test method, or any deviations from this test 
method. Describe all materials or products sampled 
and the method of sampling for each material. 


12.2.1 Report all of the following applicable items for 
the machine direction and where appropriate, the cross 
machine direction of all materials tested: 


a) Ultimate tensile strength, a, in kN/m; 


b) Elongation at the ultimate tensile strength in 
percent, and the method of measuring 
elongation; 

c) Secant modulus, in KN, of width (see Fig. 4), 
and 11.2.4. If the secant modulus is reported, 
state that portion of the force-elongation curve 
used to determine the modulus, that is, €, to 
€, at zero tension, elongation reported as €, 
secant modulus. If it is agreed between parties 
that the secant modulus be reported then the 
entire load-strain curve shall be recorded and 
reported as shown in Fig. 4. 


d) The standard deviation or the coefficient of 
variation of the test results; 


IS 16474 : 2015 


e) 


Number of tensile elements, ribs, within the 
width of specimens; 


Number of specimens tested; 

Make and model of the testing machine; 
Grip separation (initial); 

Type, size, and facing of grips, and 


k) 


m) 


description of any changes made to the grips; 
Conditioning of specimens, including details 
of temperature, relative humidity, and 
conditioning time; and; 

Anomalous behaviour, such as tear failure or 
failure at the grip. 


IS 16474 : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Geo-synthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


Organization 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


Brahmaputra Board, Guwahati 


Business Coordination House, New Delhi 


Central Coir Research Institute, Alappuzha 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


CIDCO, Mumbai 
Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute , Vadodara 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Manufacture Association, Kolkatta 
In Personal Capacity 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 
Maharashtra Maritime Board, Mumbai 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 

National Jute Board, Kolkatta 

National Institute of Research on Jute and Allied Fibre Technology, 
Kolkatta 

Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 

Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 

Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 

Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr. A. N. Desar (Chairman) 
Suri V. K. Pati (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI SAMIR GUPTA 
SHRIMATI RiriKA. Gupta (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Joivr Director (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


SHRI NRIPENDRA KUMAR 
Suri MAnisH Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dn Swapan GHOSH 
Suri K. R. Gupta (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 


Suri S. Masoop Husain 
Suri Ravi BHUSHAN Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI TiRUMAL KULKARNI 
Suri S. J. Currwis (Alternate) 


Suri L. V. ASHARA 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri Kousuik Das (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Suri V. N. GORE 


Suri Y. K. KUSUMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri R. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. P. Sincu (Alternate) 


Suri T. SANYAL 
Suri A. K. KHASTAGIR (Alternate) 


Dr Gautam Bose 
Dr Sansoy DEBNATH (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
SHRI M. BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


Dn SANJEEV K. VERMA 
SHRI HARINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. VERMA 
Suri V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH Bacu (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANOI 
SHRI SAURABH Vyas (Alternate) 


DR MaNisHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI AsHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 


IS 16474 : 2015 


Organization 
Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Dr PRASHANT BHAVE 


SHRI PRABHAKAR Ral, Scientist ʻE’ and Head (TXD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri J. K. Gupta 
Scientist ‘C? (TXD), BIS 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (1186). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


