IS 13606 : 2013 


(Reaffirmed 2019) 


WRG HAF 
TS VHA oh Íelu aes 
ews Axa — fats 


(Ye FRAT) 


Indian Standard 


SYNTHETIC SULPHOCHLORINATED FATLIQUORS 
FOR LEATHER PROCESSING — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 59.140.10 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


October 2013 Price Group 4 


Leather, Tanning Materials and Allied Products Sectional Committee, CHD 17 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Leather, Tanning Materials and Allied Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 


Synthetic fatliquors of sulphochlorinated type are considered essential for the production of sophisticated leathers, 
such as light-weight garments, softie uppers, nappas, gloves, upholstery leathers, etc. The specific advantages of 
synthetic fatliquors are that they do not possess any obnoxious, foul or rancid odour or render spew formation as 
generally experienced with natural, marine, vegetable or animal oil based fatliquors. They contain higher emulsifier 
contents and hence are capable of producing fine water emulsions of penetrative type aiding in even distribution 
of fat in the leather. Further, the emulsions are insensitive to electrolytes and show remarkable stability to acids 
and salt solutions normally encountered in the tannery practice. The leathers processed with the synthetic fatliquors 
are light-weight and light fast. The basic raw materials needed are based on long straight chain hydrocarbons. 
The hydrocarbons are made polar by subjecting them to sulphochlorination in the presence of UV-light. The 
alkane sulphonyl chloride based on heavy normal paraffin is a free flowing clear oily liquid, insoluble in water, 
soluble in organic solvents like alcohol, benzene, etc, with sulphur content of 5.5 to 6.0 percent and chlorine 
content of 14 to 15 percent. A variety of fatliquors can be prepared by introducing the hydrophillic groups by 
reacting the alkane sulphonyl chloride with monoethanolamine followed by sulphation, sulphitation, phosphation, 
etc. 


This standard was originally published in 1993. In this revision, the requirement on pentachlorophenol (PCP) 
has been introduced keeping in view of the demand for eco-friendly inputs from the leather industry. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 


IS 13606 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


SYNTHETIC SULPHOCHLORINATED FATLIQUORS 
FOR LEATHER PROCESSING — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes requirements, methods of 
sampling and test for synthetic fatliquors of 
sulphochlorinated type used for leather processing. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 

1070 : 1992 Reagent grade water — Specification 
(third revision) 

1640 : 2007 Glossary of terms relating to hides, 
skins and leather (first revision) 

4905 : 1968 Methods for random sampling 

14575 : 1999 Determination of pentachlorophenol 
(PCP) in leather — Method of test 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 1640 shall apply. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Physical Requirements 


4.1.1 The product shall be a free flowing, light brown 
homogenous liquid/paste with anionic charge and shall 
form spontaneous emulsion in water. 


4.1.2 The product shall be free from rancid or 
putrefactive odour. 


4.1.3 Ten percent emulsion in water shall show stability 
to hard water, acids and chrome liquid when tested in 
accordance with the method given in A-1. 


4.2 Chemical Requirements 


The product shall also comply with the requirements 
given in Table 1 when tested according to the methods 
prescribed in A-2 to A-8. 


4.3 Keeping Properties 


The product shall be stable for at least six months from 
the date of manufacture when stored in original 
packing. It shall meet the requirements given in 4.1 
and 4.2 when tested any time during this period. 


Table 1 Chemical Requirements 


(Clause 4.2) 
SI Characteristic Requirement Method of Test, 
No. Ref to Cl 
0) (2) (3) (4) 
i) pH of the 10 percent solution 6.5-7.0 A-2 
ii) Water content, percent by 40.0 A-3 
mass, Max 
iii) Total fatty matter, percent by 60.0 A-4 
mass, Min 
iv) Total sulphur, percent by mass, 4.0 A-5 
Min 
v) Total chlorine, percent by mass, 22.0 A-6 
Min 
vi) Total ash, percent by mass, Max 4.0 A-7 
vii) PCP content”, mg/kg, Max 5 A-8 


D Calculated on moisture-free basis. 


5 PACKING AND MARKING 


5.1 Packing 


The product shall be packed in airtight containers which 
shall not develop any rust or deterioration of the product 
due to presence of water in the medium or any of the 
ingredients used in the formulation. 


5.2 Marking 


The containers shall be marked with the following 
particulars: 


a) Name of the product; 

b) Name of the manufacturer or its trade-mark, 
if any; 

c) Net content, in litre; 

d) Date of manufacture; and 

e) Batch/Code No. 


5.2.1 BIS Certification Marking 


The containers may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


IS 13606 : 2013 


5.2.1.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provision of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
The details of conditions under which the licence for 
the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


6 SAMPLING 


6.1 Lot 


In a consignment, all the containers of synthetic 
fatliquors of sulphochlorinated type used for leather 
processing, from the same batch manufactured under 
uniform conditions shall be grouped together to 
constitute a lot. Each lot shall be separately tested for 
various requirements of this standard. 


6.2 Scale of Sampling 


The number of containers to be selected depends on 
the size of the lot and shall be in accordance with 
Table 2. The containers shall be selected by the 
methods of random selection as given in IS 4905. 


6.3 Sufficient quantity of synthetic fatliquor of 
sulphochlorinated type used for leather processing, 
from each of the selected containers shall be withdrawn 
with the help of a suitable sampling implement and be 
stored separately. One test shall be conducted for lot 
size up to 100 and two tests shall be conducted for the 


lot size more than 100 containers for each of the 
characteristics, namely, pH and total fatty matter. After 
this a composite samples shall be prepared out of the 
material from individual samples and this composite 
sample shall be tested for the requirements for stability 
to hard water, acids and chrome liquid; water content; 
total combined sulphates; nitrogen content, total ash 
content and PCP content. The keeping quality shall be 
tested by the manufacturer at his end and the 
corresponding records shall be maintained. 


6.4 No failure shall occur in the tests conducted above, 
if the lot is to be considered conforming to the 
requirements of this standard. 


7 QUALITY OF REAGENTS 


Unless specified otherwise pure chemicals and distilled 
water (see IS 1070) shall be used in tests. 


NOTE — ‘Pure chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities which affect the results of analysis. 


Table 2 Scale of Sampling 


(Clause 6.2) 
Sl Lot Size Sample Size 
No. (No. of Containers ) n 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Up to 50 3 
ii) 51 to 100 4 
iii) 101 to 150 5 
iv) 151 and above 7 


ANNEX A 
(Clauses 4.1.3 and 4.2 and Table 1) 


METHODS OF TEST FOR SYNTHETIC FATLIQUORS OF SULPHOCHLORINATED 
TYPE USED FOR LEATHER PROCESSING 


A-1 TEST FOR STABILITY 


A-1.1 The stability of the synthetic fatliquor of 
sulphochlorinated type used for leather processing, is 
tested by adding 3 ml of the following salt solution to 
20 ml of 10 percent water emulsion of the fatliquors 
taken in a test tube: 
a) Calcium chloride solution, 5 percent by mass; 
b) Potash alum solution, 5 percent by mass; 
c) Sulphited quebracho, 20 percent by mass; 
d) Hydrochloric acid, 5 percent by mass; and 
e) Chrome liquor, 5 percent by mass. 
A-1.2 If the emulsions are stable without creaming for 


duration of at least 15 min, the product is stated to be 
satisfactory. 


A-2 DETERMINATION OF pH 


Determine the pH electrometrically, with the help of 
pH meter using glass electrodes. 


A-3 DETERMINATION OF WATER CONTENT 


A-3.1 Outline of the Method 


The percentage of water present is determined by 
distillation with a solvent. 


A-3.2 Procedure 


Heat 30 g of the product and 70 ml of a solvent (a light 
petroleum fraction, boiling between 100°C and 140°C 
is suitable) in a 300 ml flask connected, preferably by 
ground glass connections, to a condenser and a Dean 


and Stark receiving tube or similar apparatus graduated 
in divisions of 0.1 ml. Add a few glass beads to the 
flask to prevent bumping, but conduct the distillation 
in such a manner that the contents of the flask are in 
vigorous movement. 


Continue the distillation until the liquid falling from 
the condenser is clear. Then disconnect the receiving 
tube, allow to stand and read off the volume of water 
which has separated from the solvent. 


NOTES 


1 Thorough cleaning of the apparatus by a mixture of chromic 
acid and sulphuric acid, followed by thorough washing with 
water prevents the formation of troublesome drops of water 
difficult to get into the measuring tube. 


2 This method is not accurate if the sulphated oil contains 
mineral acids, free sulphonic acids or free sulphonic esters, 
alcohol, acetone or other water miscible solvents. 


A-3.3 Calculation 


Calculate the percentage of water present in the sample 
from the reading and the mass of the oil taken for the test. 


A-4 DETERMINATION OF TOTAL FATTY 
MATTER 


Follow the procedure given in Method A or Method B. 


A-4.1 Procedure 
A-4.1.1 Method A 


If inorganic salts or soaps are present, heat 3.5 g of the 
sample with 10 ml of 25 percent hydrochloric acid 
under a reflux condenser until the fat separates out 
clearly and free from emulsion. Cool and add 50 ml 
diethyl ether. If after a brief shaking, the upper ethereal 
layer is not clear, repeat the operation with longer 
heating with hydrochloric acid. Run the solution of fat 
and the acid wash-water into a separating funnel, run 
off the acid aqueous layer and when the ether layer is 
clear, wash with 10 percent sodium chloride (NaCl) 
until free from acid. If water soluble fatty acids are 
present, extract the combined aqueous layers again with 
ether. If other substances which are split by 
hydrochloric acid (HCI) only with difficulty are present 
(alkaline earth soaps, filling materials, etc), repeat the 
treatment with hydrochloric acid. If emulsions form, 
which prevent sharp separation, remove the material 
responsible for the formation of the emulsions by 
filtration and wash with ether. Dry the combine ether 
solutions for 30 min anhydrous sodium sulphate, 
having first rendered the sodium sulphate fat free by 
washing with dry ether. Filter the dried ethereal 
solution of the fat into a weighed flask. Distill off the 
greater portion of the ether and remove the final traces 
by blowing over the surface, preferably with a hand 
blower. The solvent rapidly evaporates and constant 
weight is rapidly attained by heating at 100°C. The 


IS 13606 : 2013 


weight may be taken as constant if it falls by not more 
than 0.1 percent during 15 min heating. 


A-4.1.2 Method B 


Where it is desired to extract the fat without 
pretreatment with hydrochloric acid, dissolve 3.5 g of 
the sample in 10 ml diethylether. Dry the ethereal 
solution over fat-free anhydrous sodium sulphate in a 
ground glass stoppered flask, to facilitate shaking, for 
30 min and filter. If the ether insolubles are required, 
filter the ethereal solution before drying. Then follow 
the procedure given in A-4.1.1. 

NOTE — The ether extract contains the saponifiable fatty matter 

(neutral fat and free fatty acids) and the other ether soluble 

materials, such as natural and added unsaponifiable matter, 


resins, naphthenic acid, and fatty acids combined with bases 
carried through the ether in small amounts only. 


A-5 DETERMINATION OF TOTAL SULPHUR 


A-5.1 Principle 


Total sulphur in synthetic fatliquor of 
sulphochlorinated type used for leather processing, is 
estimated by oxidation of sulphur to sulphuric acid and 
then titrating them with barium nitrate. 


A-5.2 Apparatus 

A-5.2.1 Conical Flask, with ground glass neck, 250 ml 
capacity. 

A-5.2.2 Oxygen Flask of 250 ml capacity. 

A-5.2.3 Platinum Rod 

A-5.2.4 Burette 


A-5.3 Reagents 


A-5.3.1 Barium Nitrate, approximately N, accurately 
standardized. 


A-5.3.2 Hydrogen Peroxide, 1.5 percent solution. 
A-5.3.3 Oxygen 

A-5.3.4 Isopropyl Alcohol 

A-5.3.5 Thorin Indicator 


A-5.4 Procedure 


Take 4 to 5 ml of 1.5 percent solution of hydrogen 
peroxide in an oxygen flask filled with oxygen. Take 
the sample, accurately weighed (10 mg to 30 mg) at 
the tip of a platinum rod and inside an ashless filter 
paper. Ignite the filter paper and immediately transfer 
to the oxygen flask. Shake the flask well in order to 
ensure complete oxidation of sulphur. After an interval 
of 10 min, transfer the solution to a conical flask. Wash 
the stopper and the oxygen flask thoroughly with 
isopropyl alcohol and transfer the washings into the 
conical flask. 


IS 13606 : 2013 


Titrate the content of the conical flask with standard 
barium nitrate solution using thorin as indicator. The 
change of colour from yellow to pink marks the end 
point. 


A-5.5 Calculation 


. NxVx32 100 
Total sulphur, in percent = —————Xx— 
1000 W 
where 
V = volume of barium nitrate used in the titration 
of the sample, 
N = normality of barium nitrate solution, and 


W = weight of the sample takening. 
A-6 DETERMINATION OF TOTAL CHLORINE 


A-6.1 Principle 


Total chlorine in synthetic fatliquor of 
sulphochlorinated type used for leather processing, is 
estimated by oxidation of chlorine to chloride and then 
titrating them with silver nitrate. 


A-6.2 Apparatus 


A-6.2.1 Conical Flask, with ground glass neck, 250 ml 
capacity. 


A-6.2.2 Oxygen Flask, 250 ml capacity. 
A-6.2.3 Platinum Rod 
A-6.2.4 Burette 


A-6.3 Reagents 


A-6.3.1 Silver Nitrate, approximately N, accurately 
standardized. 


A-6.3.2 Hydrogen Peroxide, 1.5 percent solution. 
A-6.3.3 Oxygen 


A-6.3.4 Nitric Acid Solution, approximately 1 N, 
accurately standardized. 


A-6.3.5 Phenolphthalein Indicator 


A-6.3.6 Sodium Hydroxide, approximately N, 
accurately standardized. 


A-6.4 Procedure 


Take 4 to 5 ml of 1.5 percent solution of hydrogen 
peroxide and 15 ml of N sodium hydroxide in an 
oxygen flask filled with oxygen. Take the sample, 
accurately weighed (10 mg to 30 mg) at the tip of a 
platinum rod and inside an ashless filter paper. Ignite 
the filter paper and immediately transfer to the oxygen 
flask. Shake the flask well in order to ensure complete 
oxidation of sulphur. 


After an interval of 10 min, when the fumes subside, 
transfer the solution to a conical flask and neutralize 
with 1 N nitric acid solution using phenolphthalein as 
indicator. 


Titrate the resultant solution of the conical flask with 
standard silver nitrate solution using phenolphthalein 
as indicator. The change of colour from yellow to red 
marks the end point. 


A-6.5 Calculation 


. N xV x35.45 
Total sulphur, in percent = ———— 
1000 x W 
where 
V = volume of silver nitrate in the titration of 
the sample, in ml; 
N = normality of silver nitrate solution; and 


W = weight of the sample taken; in g. 


A-7 DETERMINATION OF TOTAL ASH 


A-7.1 Weigh 3 g of synthetic fatliquor of 
sulphochlorinated type used for leather processing, in 
a platinum dish and heat gently until a charred residue 
remains. Extract this with hot water to remove soluble 
salts, filter through a low ash filter paper and wash 
through. Ash the filter paper and charred residue, 
moistening with ash-free hydrogen peroxide, if 
difficulty is experienced. 


Allow the dish to cool, add the aqueous extract and 
evaporate on a steam bath. Finally complete the ashing 
at as low a temperature as possible. Cool the dish and 
weigh. 


A-7.2 Calculation 


Bx1 
Total ash of the material = 2 
where 
B = mass of the ash (after subtracting the ash 
content of filter paper), in g; and 
A = mass of the sample taken for test, in g. 


A-8 DETERMINATION OF 
CHLOROPHENOL (PCP) 


PENTA- 


A-8.1 Transfer about 5 g of the synthetic fatliquor of 
sulphochlorinated type used for leather processing, into 
a separating funnel of about 250 ml capacity along 
with 100 ml water. Add 15-25 ml of sulphuric acid 
10 percent w/v aqueous solution and ensure that the 
PH of the contents is acidic. Then carry out liquid- 
liquid extraction using hexane, analytical grade, as the 
solvent. At first extract with about 25 ml hexane by 


shaking the contents thoroughly for about 15 min. Then 
set it aside for clear separation of the layers (see Note). 
Transfer the aqueous layer into another separating 
funnel and carryout three more extractions of the 
aqueous layer with hexane of 25 ml each time in the 
same manner explained earlier. 


NOTE — In case of any emulsion being noticed, break the same 
with the addition of 20-30 ml saturated sodium chloride aqueous 


IS 13606 : 2013 


solution or follow the steps explained in 4.3.4.2 of IS 14575. 


A-8.2 Combine the hexane extracts and dry it by 
passing through a bed of anhydrous sodium sulphate 
of about 10 g. The dried hexane layer is evaporated to 
near dryness by a rotary evaporator. 


A-8.3 The residue is taken for acetylation. Then follow 
the procedure as detailed in Method A of IS 14575. 


IS 13606 : 2013 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Leather, Tanning Materials and Allied Products Sectional Committee, CHD 17 


Organization 
Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


A. V. Thomas Leather & Allied Products Pvt Ltd, Chennai 


All India Skins & Hide Tanners and Merchants Association, Chennai 


BASF India Ltd, Mumbai 


Bata India Ltd, Hathidah 


Central Footwear Training Institute, Agra 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Central Pollution Control Board, Delhi 


College of Leather Technology, Kolkata 


Consumer Federation of India, New Delhi 


Council for Leather Exports, Chennai 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA), Kanpur 


Footwear Design & Development Institute, Noida 


Harman Sales Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Finished Leather Manufacturers & Exporters Association, 
Chennai 


Indian Footwear Component Manufacturers Association, Kolkata 
Indian Leather Products Association, Kolkata 


Indian Leather Technologists Association, Kolkata 

Indian Shoe Federation, Chennai 

Indofil Chemicals Co Ltd, Mumbai 

International Institute of Saddlery Technology and Export 
Management, Kanpur 

Italab Private Ltd, Chennai 

Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Mumbai 

Kings International Ltd, Kanpur 

Leather Chemicals Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 


Liberty Footwear, Karnal 


Ministry of Commerce, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Director (Chairman) 


SHRI HABIB HUSSAIN 
SHRI K. MANIVANNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI Monan M. SREENIVAS 
Suri S. MOHAMMED Hassan (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. CHAUDHARI 
Da S. A. Napcoupa (Alternate) 


Dr SupuiR Kumar Das 


Suri S. N. GANGULY 
SHRI S. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Dr C. MURALIDHARAN 


SHRI T. VENUGOPAL 
SHRI AJAY AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


DR BUDDHADEV CHATTOPADHYAY 
ProF Swaran Kumar Basu (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri M. M. HASHIM 
DR ZACKRIA Sait (Alternate) 


Suri G. C. KANNAUJIA 
Suri S. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Suri B. S. KATIYAR 
SHRI NAVENDU SHEKHAR (Alternate) 


Suri H. K. RAZDAN 
SHRI JEEVAN RAZDAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAFEEQUE AHMED 
Suri V. P. NAIMMUR RAHMAN (Alternate I) 
Suri M. SALAHUDDIN Bari (Alternate II) 


SHRI Mant ALMAL 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI ARNAB JHA 
Dr GAUTAM MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMESH SUBRAMANIAM 
SHRI ABHuIr SETH (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. JHA 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri M. A. ETIAPPAN 
SHRI J. J. PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI S. VAYA KUMAR 
Suri R. LAWRENCE (Alternate) 


Suri Tay ALAM 
Suri G. S. Kumaran (Alternate) 


SHRI VADUVUR T. SRIKANTH 
SHRI SANJEEV MEHTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ADESH GUPTA 
Suri S. S. LAHIRI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


IS 13606 : 2013 


Organization Representative(s) 

National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad SHRI SHEKHAR CHATTERJEE 
National Institute of Fashion Technology, New Delhi SHRI E. SIVASAKTHI 
Office of the Development Commissioner (MSME), New Delhi Suri S. K. Basu 

Suri R. K. Kapoor (Alternate) 
Planning Commission, New Delhi Dr S. C. LAHIRI 
Robinson Sports, New Delhi Suri S. S. JoLLY 
SGS India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon SHRI P. VENKATESAN 

Ms Monika SHARMA (Alternate) 
Sports Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi REPRESENTATIVE 
TALTEIA, Chennai SHRI VADIVELU 
Tata International Limited, Dewas Suri O. K. KAUL 


Suri R. G. Burun (Alternate) 


The Leather Forum Calcutta for Research and Development, SHRI SANJOY DASGUPTA 
Kolkata SHRI PRASANTO BHATTACHARJEE (Alternate) 
Vishnu Chemicals, Chennai Dr P. G. PRADHAN 
Suri C. P. C. KAMALAKAR Rao (Alternate) 
BIS Directorate General Scientist ‘F’ and Head (CHD) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri E. DEVENDAR 
Scientist ‘F’ and Head (CHD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 17 (1643). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


