IS : 3553 -1966

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

SPECIFICATION FOR WATERTIGHT ELECTRIC LIGHTING FITTINGS
Fourth Reprint JANUARY 1990 ( Incorporating Amendment No. I )

UDC

628'94 : 621'32 - 213'32

0 BUREAU MANAK OF BHAVAN,

Copyrighr INDIAN BAHADUR
DELHI

1972 STANDARDS SHAH ZAFAR

9

MARG

NEW

110002

Gr 4

August 1966

!

IS: 3553 - 1966 :

lnditzn

Standard

SPECIFICATION FOR WATERTIGHT ELECTRIC LIGHTING FITTINGS
Illuminating Engineerini;dd&igfts Sectional Committee,

Chairman SERI K. C.
GROVER Central

Repres#?lt& Public Works Department, New Delhi

Members R. R. ANADA SHRI P. Boss
SERI The

SH~I H. N. MULLIOK ( Alternate) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) CHIEP ELEOTRICAL ENQINEER, NORTHERN RAILWAY CHI~FB ELECTRICAL INSPECTORTO Chie~~~icc$cal Inspectorate, Government of Punjab, TAE GOVERNMENTOF PUNJAB The General Electric Co of India Rlvatc Ltd, SHRI B. CUNNIN~HAX Calcutta SHRI D. K. DAE ( Alternak ) Chief Ele&rical Inspcctopte, Government of West SHRI NI~HALEND~ Das GUPTA Bengal, Calcutta Hindco Lighting Industries Ltd, Bombay SARI D. M. DE~AI SHRI JAYANT R. PA~I ( Altanati ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHar B. $3. DRAMI Philips India Ltd, Calcutta Sam M. P. G~JFTA IndiaGe$t;y of Architect ( Northern Chapter ), SHRI N. K. KOTH~~RI
SRRI H. R. LAROYA (Alternate) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( MinisSnsr A. MITEA try of Supply & Technical Development), New Delhi Saar .J. N. VAZ ( Alternatr ) National Teat House, Calcutta SHEILA N. MUKERJI SHBI B..K. MUKH~RJEE ( Altcraats ) Premier Lighting Industrla Private Ltd, Bombay SH~I J. R. NAHAR J. J. Engineering Co, Bombay SHRI J. C. PATEL Bajaj Elcctrlcala Ltd, Bombay SH~I G. A. Rao Saar S. U. BEOJWANI ( Altnnhta)

Ahmcdabad Millowners Association, Eastern Regional Electrical Contractors' ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta

Ahmcdabad Association

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAELiDUR SHAH ZAFAI IHARe NEW DELHI 1loooZ

rsr35!53-1966

Mahb8rs SEBI K. S. SABMA
SEBI SA0EtlU Sm gz=ECT pz; B (1)

wti
National Physical Labtory ( CSIR ), New p Electric Lim and Acesmries Sectional Committee (ET&), IS1 Camal Public Worka Department, New Delhi Illuminating Engineering Society Of India, C8lCuth ) Otis Ekvator Co ( India ) Ltd, Bombay Central l!.lcctkity Board ( Ministry of Irrigation Q Power ), New Delhi

SE& IL K. ROEATOI (Al&m& SHBI P. L. VAEI %Bl v. VSNUQOPA?.AI'?
CExxr ErJccTnIOAL ImaPMB To TEE &JmNMBlsrT o# MADRAS ( Altamak ) SHBI Y. S. VEIUCATBBWABAN,

Director General, ISI ( JiTx-o$ici~ Manbn)

Diitor

I Elec tech ) Secret SHBI T. RAJARAMAN
Deputy Diitor ( Elcc tech), IS1

2

l8:s!w=lM6

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR WATERTIGHT ELECTRIC LIGHTING FITTINGS
0. FOREWORD

L.

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 14 April 1966, after the draft finalized by the Illuminating Engineering and Lifts Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 This standard has been prepared to cover certain special types of fittings which are designed such that entry of water is not possible under specified conditions, This specification includes watertight and submersible lighting fittings of all types and takes into account the various types Drip-proof, rain-proof and jet-proof of electric lamps now available. lighting fittings are covered by IS : 3526-1966;. 0.3 Though this standard covers submersible lighting fittings, then test for protection against entry of water has not been specified and it shallB matter of agreement between the purchaser and supplier; suitable testing procedure is being evolved and it is hoped that a satisfactory testing procedure will be added at a later date. 0.4 This standard sball be read in conjunction with IS : 1913-196lt. on electric

0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards lighting fittings. Other standards in this series are:

IS : 1777-1961 Specification for industrral lighting fittings with metal reflectors IS : 1913-l 961 General and safety requirements for electric lighting fittings IS : 1947-1961 Specification for flood lights 1s : 2149-1962 Specification for luminaires for streetlighting ( Siace revised ). IS : 2266 ( Part I )-1962 Specification for flameproof electric lighting fittings : Part I Well-glass and bulkhead types %pccification for waterproof electric lighting fittings.
tCkneral and ufety requirements for electric lighting fittingit Sittc~ nrlwd).

3

IS : 2493-1963 Specification for well-glass underground in mines ( Non-flameproof IS : 35281966 Specification for waterproof 0.6 In preparing this following publications: standard assistance

lightings fitting for use type ) electric lighting fittings derived from the

has been

IEC PublicltM 16 Lighting fittings for tubular fluorescent International Electrotechnical Commission. B.S. 3820 : 1965 Specification for electric lighting fittings. Standards Institution. 0.7 For standard ing the with IS rounded standard.

lamps. British

the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressresult of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance The number of significant places retained & the : 2-1960*. offvalue should be the same as that of the,specified value in this

1. SCOPE 1.1 This specification covers electric lighting fittings which prevent entr) of water and are designed for use at supply voltage not exceeding 25( volts and for the enclosure of tungsten filament or electric discharge lamps. 1.2 The fittings covered by this standard are classified type of construction and method of test specified as: a) watertight lighting fittings, and b) stkunersible lighting fittings. 1.3 This standard does not cover luminaires for street lighting (see IS : 214919627 ) drip-proof, rain-proof and jet-proof electric lighting fittings ( set IS : 35!28-1966: ). 2. TERMlNOLOkfl 2.0 For the purpose of this standard 19618 and the following shall apply. the .definitions given in IS: 1913according to the

2.1 Mktertight Fittings - Fittings which shall withstand submersion toa depth of 5 cm at its hi+est point without water entering, but not intended to be used permanently submerged in water. _ .-... _ __
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( raised ). tSpecilication for luminaires for streetlighting. $Specification for waterproof electric lighting fittings. $General and saftiy requirements for electric,lighting fittings.(

Since revised ).

4

2.2SdmedbkFiUings-WatcrtightfittingJar~co~tn1~tcd
would be capable of sgtbfirctory operation wbtn specified head of water for an indefinite period.

rummaged

that they
under a

2.3 Tight(umedursmSs) -Applies to a fitting such as watertight, dust-tight, etc, which is so constructed that it will exclude the specific material under couditions which may be spaSed 2.4 Type Tests -Tests carried out to prove co&amity with this specification. These arc intended to prove the gcucral qualities and design of a lighting fitting. 2.5 Rom&e Taata -`I@ carried out on each item to check requirements which an likely to vary during production. 3. MATERIAL, 3.0 Gaeralrcquireoxnts DRSIGN, CONSTRUCTION comply with AND WORRMANSEIP the general and safety

The fittings shall of IS : 19W1961*.

3.1 The fittings shall be so conatructcd that they shrill withstand me&anical stresses to which they may be rubjected during EIOIXIU~ USCand maintenance. 3.2 Protection Against CaadensatknFittings intended for use in situations where condensation may occur tili be adequately insulated oc shall bc so enclosed that normal insulation is sufkicntly protected. C&odon-Fittings shall be so 3.3Prowxtiom~~g~ costructcd from materials and have such fiGshea that no undue detcrioration occurs in the safety, performance or appearance during normal life when opcrating in the conditions for which they arc intmded. 3.3.1 A general guidance in rcspcct of ageing and amosion design of lighting fittings is given in Appendit A. 3.4 Pisotometric Data-The photometric data to be provided manutkctum of the `lighting fittings is given in Appendix B. ' 4. MARRlNG 4.1 The following inkrmation shall bc WelibIy marked on each lighting fitting in a place readily visible during titamnce: a) Man&ctua&s name, or trade-omrk or both, b) Modci.or type desi@atkm, c) Voltage,typcandwattagcofthelamptobcuscd,urd d) caUrtryofmaaufkturc. .for the by the

5

,

42IbwkimgaiM c3r&w&w fitting shall be identified by the symbol indelible manner on or adjacent to the
irarthe
.

eearth%gtWInina~ofany marked in a legi&

and

lighting fittings may

ah

be marked ISMYthe I$% C&if&ation

st8adard8 `5.

Institution.

TESTS of Tests The following shall constitute type tests: ( see 5.2 ); il

5.1 Ciabihation 5.1.1 Type ?-tsts-

4 Insulation resistance ( dry ) test b) High voltage test ( see 5.3 ); cl Test for temperature-rise ( q,5.4

4
4

); Test for thermal shock proofness for cover glass ( see 5.5 ); and Test for protection against entry of water ( see 5.6): 1) Test for-watertight fittings, on the classification. 2) Test for submersibke fitt'ings, depending

5.1.2 Routine Tejts - The insulation resistance ( dry) test ( see 5.2 ) and high voltage test ( see 5.3) shall be carried out as routine tests. 55 Insoir~on Reds( DrJ' ) Test

5.2.0 This test may be carried out at the prevailing atmospheric temperature and humidity. 5.2.1 The insulation resistance shall be measured between: a) live parts of different polarity inside the fitting, and b) live parts and external metal parts of the fitting by the appiication of a dc voltage of 500 V for one' minute. 5.2.2 The insulation than,5 megohms. &sistanee ti%~es thus measured shall not be less

AbTE - The. insulation &`Ky t* $$F applicaJ& to dwbaqc Jamp fittut,@ conLmrti&
tioh capacitors.

$~e~5~~~r_gti~ty~g! tra

6

5S.l.k The having any

test

Thi intill 5.61.2 `I%&Ml i& tiW$e slW b# pptilw gWWy. voltage shall IIot Me&d 30 p&&t o# tW Ml' ticrc+olta@ and shall be increased unifotrnly to the ffill v&8&k wWn 30 seconds. `I'M full test WC? e skrl! !% msintaS?+ fbr, one lxk%q $te@ *ti;the_test ~Olt8Je yfic dnnmlshed rapidly to 30 p&c&t 6f its Ml v&e W&e vwltchtig it OK , 53.I.3 There sh+l be no punetuti or rr&g'dkingz the hi& voltage test. !b.3.2 For routine test, the high voltage test ' be C@IW out in the "r form of a A8sh test by tk l pplit&M d 1 SD0 rriir fbr a duration of approximately 5 seconds between the parts speci!W in S&2.
NOTE- The high Volta tat betweaI live pra of difR!mlt @a&y #kAktor cable to discharge lamp Irttinp containing traadbhn~~ CW' ap8citon. 5.4 ia not l li. correct %'

Tm

fb

Toaqera~~~Rbe

5.4 Ti~tekc #t&k br? carried out with a lamp of daqiption and rating dcclsred by the manuf8&ntr to give the greatest rise in temperature. The lamp shall comply with tk relevant Indian Standard and shall be operated at ntiinal voIt8ge. 5.4.2 The metrurement with Appendix C.
more than momentarili

of. temperature .shall be made in accordance

5.43 In normal operation any crur&ce which is likely to be touched in ordinary service, shall not attain a tempeiature greater than 55�C if made of metal, or 65% if made of other materials.
NOTS- The tempcraMvAsa per8turc ofwc. given above xe with reference to an ambient tem-

steady temperature and then pou~~,~ gl- whik the bmp is still bur&g. 5.?&2 Thii tert sbil da&age to the glass. be npe*ted

W&

at 10 to 12% on the

bur t"siaw arid~shall not cause any 7

S.6 Tee f~Protection

Againat

Entry

of Water

5S.l The Wowing test shall be carried out depending on the classiImmediately afterwards the insulation fication of the lighting fittings. resistance of the fittings shall be measured in accordance with 5.2.1 and the measured value shall not be less than 2 megohms. 5.6.2 Test for Watmtight Fittings - The fitting shall be iaimerscd .for 24 hours in water at a temperature of 27 #`C, the highest point of the Before lighting fitting being about 5 cm below the surface of the water. so immersion, the lighting fitting is heated ( by switching on the lamp that the temperature of the lighting fitting exceeds the temperature o d the water by 5 to IOOC. At the knd of the 24-hour submersion period there shall be no visible evidence of water baving entered the fitting.
operation.

NOTE-T&

test ia aot adequate for testing lighting fittings designed for submerged under consideration.

5.6.3

Test for SubmmiMe Fittings OF APPROVAL

6. CRITERION

6.1 Samples,to be mutually agreed upon by t&k purchaser and the manufacturer, shall_b submitted for testing together with relevant data. The testing authority shall issue a `ypc approval certificate if the lighting fittings are found to comply with the requirements of tests given in 5. 622 In the case of failure in any one type test, the testing authority may, at its dir&on, call for fresh samples not exceeding twice the number of original samples and subject them to tests in which failure occurred. If in repeat tests, no failure occurs, the tests may be considered to have been satisfied.

APPENDIX ( a-awe3.3.1,)
PROTECTION AGAIN6T AGmG

A
AND GORRoEllON

M.1 The following general guidance on good practice for protection again&t seeing and .-ion is to be rcgkled as being typical and not exhaustive. Although the typa of .atmospherc in which lighting fittings 8

.

-ls133!53-1966 operate are numerous, they are divided into two main groups for the purpose of this specification: a) For use outdoors and in conditions of high humidity, and b) For use in chemically corrosive atmospheres. A-l. LIGHTING FITTINGS FOR USE OUTDOORS CONDITIONS OF HIGH HUMIDITY AND IN

A-l.1 Although. it is assumed that these lighting fittings will not be required to operate in conditions where chemical vapours are present, Iit should be remembered that all atmospheres contain a small proportion of corrosive gases, such as sulphur dioxide, and that in the presence of moisture these may cause severe corrosion over a long period of time. A-l.2 Where condensation takes place regularly, electroplated steel components should not be used., Although some electroplated finishes have very good resistance to corrosion attack, if the plated coating is damaged during the erection or maintenance, attack on the base metal will be It is, therefore, advisable for protection to choose suitable corrorapid. sion resistance metals (such as the stainless steel and silicon aluminium alloys ) for the base rather than to rely wholly on protective finishes. A-l.3 Dipped metal finishes are not covered by A-l.1 and A-1.2; ever, a heavy hot-dipped galvanized finish may be satisfactory. how-

A-l.4 Metal components that are in contact should be made from metals which lie close to each other in the potential series to avoid electrochemical corrosion. For example, brass or other copper alloys should not be used in contact with aluminium or aluminium alloys; stainless steel is much more satisfactory. A-l.5 Where plastics are used, materials shall be chosen which do not suffer significant change in dimensions caused by absorption of water. Cellulosic materials are in general unsuitable for conditions of high htunidity. Where the construction with plastic includes cemented joints, the cement used shall be able to withstand continuous exposure to moisture for long periods without deterioration. A-l.6 The effects of corrosion can be reduced by attention to details of design. As far as possible, hinges should be shrouded, fixing studs should be under rather than on upper surfaces, and lips should ,be incorpora@ in the design to shed water away from joints. A-2. LIGHTING FITTINGS FOR USE IN CHEMICAIZJf CORROSIVE ATMOSPHERES A-2.1 Where lighting fittings are to be used in chemically corrosive atmospheres, all the precautions given above,for 1ighting;fittings designed for
9

outdoor use and in humid atmospheres should be observed as condensation of corrosives is usually possible, and the following additional measures should be taken. A-2.2 In general, lighting fittings whose bodies are made by casting a corrosion resistance metal will give better service than sheet metal ones. A-2.3 The base metal and the paint or other protective system should be chosen to combat the particular corrosives present, as most materials are subject to attack by some corrosive, For example, paints which are highly acid resistance may not be able to withstand attack by some alkalis. A-2.4 While most plastics offer good resistance to attack by many organic acids and alkalis, they are liable to attack by a number of organic chemicals. The effect depends on the type of plastic and on the particular chemicals present, and materials shall be chosen to suit the conditions. A-26 Although vitreous enamel finishes are very resistant to many chemicals, it is essential for good service that the enamel coating should be free from any broken areas or cracks otherwise attack/on the base metal will be rapid. A-2.6. Where the corrosive conditions are very bad, it is advisable to paint the whole installation after assembly with a bitumastic anticorrosive paint.

APPENDIX ( Clause 3.4 )
PHOTOMETRIC B-1. Light distribution

B
DATA

data is required for the purpose of:

a) assessing the photometric pertbrmance of the lighting equipment, and b) designing lighting installations on a factual basis. B-2. Some or all of the following' items of-information ed by the manufacturer of the fitting : shall be provid-

4

Liiht distribution curve(s) in one or more vertical planes, b) Total light output ratio,

4

4

Upward light output ratio, and Downward light output ratio.

ls:3!553-1966 The above data shall be stated for the condition when a clean fitting 1s equipped with a lamp(s) each with its light centre in the correct normal position and each having a luminous output equal to the average luminous output throughout the life of such lamps, this reference value of the lamp output being recorded on each separate set of data or chart When the together with the technical description of the lamps used. lamp used for the test is covered by the relevant Indian Standards, the appropriate reference value for luminous output will be taken therefrom or a correction factor provided for adjusting the data accordingly if it has been prepared for a lamp output other than that specified.

APPENDIX ( CZause 5.4.2 )
METHOD

C

OF MEASUREMENT OF TEMPERATURE-RISE OF A LIGHTING FITTING OF MEASUREMENT

C-l.

METHOD

C-l.1 The test is made in a rectangular draught-proof enclosure, the top and at least three sides of which are double walled, the base being solid. The double walls which are spaced 15 cm apart are made of perforated metal, the maximum diameter of the holes being 2 mm and the area of the apertures being approximately 40 percent of the total area. The enclosure is of such size that there is a clearance of not less than 20 cm between any part of the fitting and the internal walls of the enclosure. The internal size of the enclosure is,, however, not to be less than 90 cm cube. The walls are painted to provide consistent testing conditions as between one enclosure and another. At the temperatures involved, the colour of the paint is of little significance, and a medium grey is often used. C-l.2 Fittings are so positioned that the light source is near the centre of Suspended and free standing fittings are supported in the the enclosure. Ceiling and wall mounting fittings are fixed to a black normal manner. painted wooden board to simulate the supporting surface. This board should be not less than 15 mm thick and of sufficient size to extend not less than 10 cm outside the projection on it of the fitting, and to leave a gap of not less than 10 cm between it and the inside wall of the enclosure. The board is separately supported in the appropriate position in the enclosure. 11

lsr3!%3-1966
C-13 Temperature measurements are made by means of thermocoupIcs ( see IS : 2053-1962 Specification for thermocouple pyrometers )*. C-l.4 Thermocouples for measuring the surface temperature of a fitting are attached to the surface in such a way that good thermal contact is obtained with the minimum of disturbance of the thermal conditions. Adequate thermal contact may be obtained by the following methods whichever is appropriate to the particular surface: a) By mechanical clamping under exis;ing screw. b) By soldering using the smallest possible amount of solder.
NATE-

Methods (a) and (b) are normally used on metal parts only.

_

c) By suitabIe adhesive using only the minimum quantity needed to fix the thermocouple and taking care that the junction is not separated by the adhesive from the surface QObe measured, or lagged by an excess of adhesive covering it. Applying the adhesive to the sides of the wires is a suitable technique. For tfansparent materials, a colourless cement is us+ to avoid absorbing With thermoplastic materials, the cement is preferradiation. ably one based on the material itself. When measuring the surface temperature of materials of low thermal conductivity a length of about 2 cm of the thermocouple wires leading to .the junction is also cemented to the surface to minimize conduction losses. d) By means of a thermocouple in a holder, such as those shown in Fig 1 and 2, a little oil or grease being applied to the.surface where the junction touches to ensure good thermal contact. A holder suitable for convex surfaces is shown in Fig. 1 in which the thermocouple is held under tension in a spring holder and A holder suitable for flat,surfacef pressed -against the surface. which when resting on the surface allows a bowed strip thermocouple to lie flat on the surface is shown in Fig. 2. The hottest point on the fitting is found by preliminary exploration using al,thermocouple in a holder, such as those shown in Fig. 1 and 2 and a thermocouple fixed to this point. With materials of low thermal conductivity, such as glass qr plastics, it is important to remember that the point of maximum temperature may vary widely from one position to another.
*The use of other devices for surface temperature measurement is being kept under review. Some instruments are available which use a thermistor mounted in a probe a& are convenient for exploring over a surface to find the hottest point. In the present stage of development, not all probes are suitable for accurate surface tcmperature measurement on materials of low thermal conductivity because they extract too Careful selection of instrument is necessary if much heat at the point of contact. reliable absolute measurements are to be obtained on such surfaces.

END PIECES OF LOW'
THERMAL CONOUCTIVITV PLASTIC`, TRANSPARENT

e-e METHVL ME THACRVLATE

SPRING,STRIP,

O*Smm TIMIt

X 1Omm WIOE PHOSPHOR 6RONZE

INSULATING

BLOCK

CLAMP TO HOLD HERMOCOUPLE

EBONITE THERMOCOUPLE, CLAMP, FOR THERMOCOUPLE JUNCTION AT CENTRE

HA NOLE

FKJ

1

~HEIUWXOUPCE

HOLDER

SUITABLE FOR

CONVEX SURFACES

The cmf developed by the thermocouple is preferably measured by a potentiometer circuit. The cold junction is kept in a small deep Debar vessel containing a suitable li uid, for example, glycerine, to p*veti rapid changes in temperature. I ts temperature is measured by an accurate mercury-in-glass thermometer. Cd.4 -The ambient temperature is measured within the test enclosure .by an accurate mercury-in-glass thermometer placed near to one of the side walls at the same height as the fitting. The bulb of the thermometer is shielded against radiation by a double walled cylinder of polished metal. A suitable sixe is about 10 cm long, the inner and outer cylinders having. The-temperature-rise is diameters of. about 6 cm and 8 cm respectively. to bedetermined by subtracting this ambient temperature from the temperature of the point measured on the fitting. The ambient temperature within the enclosure during the test should be.within the range of 15 to 50%. 01.7 The test is continued until steady temperatures are attained, the operating conditions fbr the fitting as &Gned under !5.4 being maintained constant. Cl.5
13

.

6

OUTSIDE DIA 90mm INSIDE DIA 75mm HEIGHT 2Onim

.

43 z

-CLAMP FOR THERMOCOUPLE

.

ADJUSTABLE F THE THREk FEET ARE ADJUSTED so THAT THE ~HER~~OCOUPLE LiES FLAT ALONG THE SURFACE

STRIP THERMOCOUPLE, FREE FROM KINKS,WHlCH HANGS IN AN ARC WHEN NOT RESTING ON A SURFACE

Fm.2

T~iuxo~ou~~~ HOLDER

SUITABLEFOR

FLAT SURFACES
a

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN
Marg,

STANDARDS
NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices)

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Regional
Central *Eastern Northern

Offices: : Manak

Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI-110002 : 1 /I4 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 Andheri (East),

Telephones 331 01 31 [ 3311375 36 24 99 21843 C31641 (41 24 42 I:; `2: :: 6329295

Southern tWestern

: Manakalaya,
BOMBAY

E9 MIDC, 400093

Marol,

Branch

Offices: 26348 E 26349 38 49 55 [ 38 49 56 66716 5 36 27 3 31 77 23 1083 63471 [ 6 98 32 21 68 76 1 21 82 92 62305 6 21 04 [ 621 17 251
Nagar,

`Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 SPeenya Industrial Area, 1 st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 53/5, Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road), HYDERABAD 500001 RI4 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, Nagar, JAIPUR 302005 208005

117/418

B Sarvodaya

KANPUR

~Patliputra

Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 T C. No. 14/1421, University P.0 , Palayam TRIVANDRUM 695035

lnspecfion Ofice (With Sale Point) : Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji PUNE 411005

71

5 2435

*Sales Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, Calcutta 700072 tSales Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, Bombay 400007 *Sales Office in Bangalore is at Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, Bangalore 560002

27 68 00 89 65 28 22 36 71

Printed at Slmco Printing Press. Delhi. India

