( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 6607 - 1972

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR REBATED MORTICE LOCKS (VERTICAL TYPE)
Bulder's.Hardware Chaimkan
SRRI Yusup MOWJEE

Sectional

Committee,

BDC 15

Rcficscnting
M. C. Mowjee & Company, Calcutta; and Builder's Hardware Industries Association of India, Calcutta

Members SHRI SamB SlMOR ( Aiterna~ to Shri Yusuf Mowjee ) SHRI D. R. BAWL SHRI P. K. SETHI ( Alternate ) SHRI J. P. BAJAJ Sxax A. K. B~rx~rn

Engineer-in-Chief's

Branch, Army Headquarters

Institution of.Engineers ( India), Calcutta Company Manufacturing Vertex Bombay

Limited,

SHRI H. C. SA~AT ( Ahaate ) Indian Aluminium Company Limited, Calcutta SHRI R. M. CHAWNRT SHRX J. K. ANAND ( ANcrnate ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) CONTROLLER OF STORES, EASTERN RAILWAY De's Lock Industries, Calcutta SHRI P. K. DE Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay SHRI R. L. GERLOTE Engineering Association of India, Calcutta SHRI K. P. JAIN

Jayna Trading Corporation, Delhi SHRI V. S. KAMBOJ Arvind Industries, Jamnagar ( Gujarat ) SHRIJ. R. KANSARA SHRI V. S. KAMBOJ( Alfernafc ) General of Supplies & Directorate SHRI S. C. KAPOOR ( Ministry of Supply ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. D. MAJUMDAR Gob~~nut~heet Metal Works and SHRI AJOYENDUPAUL DR A. V. R. Rno SURVEYOR OF WORKS (I) SHRI D. AJITHASctfm, Director ( Civ Engg )

Disposals

Foundry,

National Buildings Organization, New Delhi Central Public Works Department, New Delbi Director General, IS1 ( ikojicio Member) Secre tqy SHRI S. P. MAGGU

Senior Technical Assistant ( Civ Engg ), IS1 ( Conrinurdon &gr 2 ) INDIAN MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAJ3AlXJR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH `110002 ZAFAR MARG

IS:6607-1972
( Conhwedfrom jaga 1 )

Locks and Latches Subcommittee,
Convener SHRI J. R.
SACHDEVA

BDC 15 : 3
Organization ( Ministry of

Represenhg Defence Production Defence )

Members SHRI K. C. MISRA ( Alternate to Shri J. R. Sachdeva ) SHRI MAHABIRPRASADAOARWAL SHXIR. C. BHATTACHARYYA

Gopal Metal and Wood Works, ALigarh Directorate of Industries, Government of West Bengal Vertex Manufacturing Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. K. BHIMAN'I SHRI H. C. SAMPAT (Al!ernate) De's Lock Industries, Calcutta SHRI P. K. DE Godrej & Boyce Mfg Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. F. DESAI SHRI VINOD KTJMARJAIN P.P. Products, Aligarh Hemu Productions ( India), Calcutta SHRl u. c. LALL SHRI S. P. JHUNJHUKWALA ( Alternate ) SHRX MOHAN SINGH Eastern Commercial & Industrial Enterprises Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. S. GANDHI ( Altemafe) Industries, SHIU N. P. SArPATi Directorate of Government of Mabarashtra SHRX G. S. SUBBARAMAN Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Ministry of Supply ) SHRI YUSUP MOWJEE M. C. Mowjee & Co, Calcutta SHRX SAHIB SWGH ( Alternate)

IS:6607-1972

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR REBATED MORTICE LOCKS ( VERTICAL TYPE )
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard
was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 4 August 197.2, after the draft finalized by the Builder's Hardware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civii Engineering Division Council.

0.2 Mortice locks have become popular and are being used in all modern buildings specially where flush doors are provided. Certain situations demand the use of double leaf doors and ordinary mortice locks cannot serve the purpose because of the special rebate pattern involved. To cater to the specific problem of double leaf doors, rebated mortice locks have to It is with. this edd in view that this standard is being be provided. issued. 0.3 Wherever reference mean a rebated mortice to mortice lock. lock appears in the standard it shall

0.4 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the'field in this country. 0.5 This standard contains clauses 2.2, 5.1.1,7.1.2,8.1,9.1.1 and 10.1 to use his option for selection to suit his which permit the purchaser requirements and clauses 6.1 and 6.2 and Appendix A which require the purchaser to supply certain technical information at the time of placing orders. 0.6 This standard is one of a series of standards on builder's hardware.

0.7 While preparing this standard, the Sectional Committee took note of the acute scarcity of non-ferrous materials like copper, zinc and other alloys in the country and the need for conserving the use of the same in the national interest. However, in view of the demand for hardware items made of these materials in overseas markets, the Sectional Committee has retained them specifically to meet the requirements of export trade. For all indigenous use, it is recommended that hardware items made out of these materials should not be used. 3

IS : 6607 - 1972 0.8 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressoff in accordance ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded The number of significant places retained in the roundwith IS : 2-1960*. ed off value should be the same as that of the specified value in the standard. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down the requirements for rebated mortice suitable for use on double leaf doors with rebated meeting stiles. 2. SIZE 2.1 The sizes of mortice locks shall be as follows: locks

65 mm, 75 mm and 100 mm. 2.1.1 The size of the lock- shall be denoted by the overall length of the body measured from the outside face of the fore end to the rear end ( see Fig. 1). The measured length shall not vary more than & 3 mm

from the length specified for the size.
2.2 Mortice locks ofsizes other than those specified in 2.1 may be supplied by mutual agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. 3. MATERIAL 3.1 Material used for different component parts of the locks shall with the reqmrements given in Table 1 (see P 8, 9, 10 and 11 ). 4. SHAPE 4.1 The shape, design and mechanism of mortice locks and its component parts indicated in Fig. 1 are illustrative only. The manufacturer may make mortice locks of other shapes to suit his design. 5. DIMENSIONS 5.1 The leading dimensions of the mortice locks ( suitable doors ) shall be normally as given in Fig. 1. 5.1.1 It may be manu between the manufactur
*Rules comply

for double-leaf

for rounding off numerical values ( rc&d ).
4

1.25 MIN THICK

7

f
ASSEMBLY WITHOUT BOQY COVER (I) (2) (3) (4) Body Case/Face Plate Locking Bolt Latch Bolt

LEVER SPRING FULCRUM PIN @ BODY

(5) (6) (7)

Lever Latch Spring Follower

4g.

II
I

@

LATCII

BOLT

tl _@_
j-+25@

+===s
CASE/FACE PLATE STRIKING PLATE @ LOCKING BOLT

@

LEVER

LATCH

SPRING

\-8mmSQ

HOLE FOR CONNECTING ROD

@

FOLLOWER
in millimetres.

KEY
MORTICE

All dimensions FIG. 1 TYPICALDESIGN OF REBATED

LOCK ( VERTICALTYPE )

;1

5;

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS : 6607 - 1972 6. NON-INTERCHANGEABILITY 6.1. Two-Lever Locks - The mortice locks shall be manufactured to have non-interchangeable keys in a batch consisting of a minimum of 24 locks. In case a non-interchageability in a higher number is required, it shall be A masterso specified by the purchaser at the time of placing the order. key may be supplied if required by the purchaser. 6.1.1 For the purpose of testing non-interchangeability, six locks from each batch of 24 locks shall be so selected that the wards of the keys differ from each other slightly. These locks shall then be tested for non-interchangeability. If key of any of the locks opens any other lock, amongst the six locks, the whole lot shall be rejected. 6.2 Locks with More Than Two Levers - The mortice locks shall be manufactured to have non-interchangeable keys in a batch consisting of a in a higher number minimum of IO0 locks. In case, non-interchangeability is required, it shall be so specified if required by the purchaser. 6.2.1 For the purpose of testing non-interchangeability each batch of 100 locks shall be so selected that the wards of from each other slightly. These locks shall then be tested changeability. If key of any one of the locks opens any other the 12 locks, the whole lot shall be rejected. 7. MANUFACTURE 7.1 Lock 7.1.1 Body The depth of the body shall not be more than 15 mm. 12 locks from the keys differ for non-interlock, amongst

7.1.2 Rebated Fore End - The case plate may itself form the rebated fore end. In case desired by the purchaser, in order to obtain a clean finish free from rivets, etc and to assist in decorating the rebate a rebated face plate The rebated face plate shall be normallyfitted to the body may be provided. by suitable countersunk head machine screws conforming to IS : 1365 ]gtj8* or by any other suitable device. In order to secure the rebated face plate threaded lugs shall be firmly attached to the case plate by either riveting or electric resistance welding or similar other suitable means. 7.1.2.1 In case of reversible mortice locks the rebated fore-end shall be so designed that the fore-end can be fixed in any direction by reversing its position through 180 degrees without causing any obstruction or deterioration in the working of the lock or the latch bolt. In case of reversible rebated mortice locks the size oflatch and lock bolt in cross-section shall be similar to each other. *Specification for slotted countersunk head and slotted raised countersunk head screws ( dia range I.6 to 20 mm ) ( second revision j. 7

-.._ ----

--.--_

___
REQIJII?J?IlENTS FOR I\IATJLJIJALS FOR C:OhlPONbNT PARTS OF MORTIC:E LOCKS g s t

`ir'AJtJ.E J

((:lnrcs~~ 3.1, 7.15,

7.2.1 and 7.2.3)

(;OhIPONEhT

(1)

(2)

(3)
Jbdy, body cover, plate, key. facr striking locking and latch cast

(4)

(5)

bolt

C3

ii)

iii1

iV)

Brass sheet

Body, body cover, plate, face plate, and striking plate

case lever

The brass sheet shall meet the same bend test as specified for mild steel

Cast brasr cast from melting sheet cuttings and brass utensils may be used. Grade CuZn 40 of IS : 410-19670 IS

v)

Extruded

brass

Locking bolt

bolt

and

latch

Copper contents shall not t~;~less than 55 percent tensile strength 35 kgjmms, Min -

: 319~196811

vi)
vii)

Alum&urn castings Aluminium

alloy

Body, body cover, follower and key Body, body cover, case striking plate, plate, lever and face plate Locking bolt bolt and latch

IS Designation A-6-M of IS IS Designation HS 20 ofIS

A-5-M

or

: 617-19597
NS' 4 or

alloy sheet

-

: 737-1965**

viii)

Extruded alloy

aluminium

-

IS Designation HE 30-WP of IS : 733-1967tt

*Specification tspecification $$ecification @pecification IlSpecification ~Specification **Specification ( revised ) . ttspecification (first revision ) .

for hot rolled carbon for blackheart

steel sheet and strip iron castings. ( mised).

(sccandre&ion

).

malleable

for brass ingots and castings for rolled brass plate, for free-cutting for aluminium for wrought for wrought

sheet, strip and foil ( second revision). ( second reoision ). for general and engineering (for purposes (revised). purposes) purposes ) tl .. alloys, alloys, sheet strip general engineering engineering alloy ingots and castings aluminium

brass rods and sections and aluminium aluminium aluminium and

and aluminium

bars, rods and sections

( for general

( Conhud)

% 3
' s s

tf ..
TABLE 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR MATERIALS FOR COil&PONENT PARTS OF MORTICE LOCKS Conki ch g

SL No.

MATERIAL

COMPONENT-

REQUIREMENTSFOR MATERIAL

TYPICAL EXAMPLE

0)
ix) Leaded

(2)

(3)

(4) -

(5)

tin bronze

Follower

and key

Grade 2 of IS : 318-1962*

x) G

Zinc base alloy pressure die casting

cover, body Body, follower, face plate, striking plate, locking bolt and latch bolt

-

IS

: 742-19667

xi)

Phosphor

bronze

Lever spring spring

and

latch

The wire used for springs shall comply with the test given below: The lever spring shall be fitted into the lever specified under as 7.1.6 and shall be pressed down so as to touch the top edge of the lever and released. This shall be rrpcatcd six times minimum. At the end of the test the spring shall regain its original position

IS

: 1385-19682

xii)

Steel wire

.ing

and

latch

The wire used for sprirlgs shall comply with the test gi\ en below: The levrr spring shall be fitted into the lever specified under ;:l.S and shall br prcssrd down so as to touch the top edge the levrr and Of This shall relravd. be repeated six times mmlmum. At the end of the tesr the spring shall regain its original position

Grade 1 or Grade Is : 4454-1967s

2

of

E

xiii)

Stainless

steel

Key

-

Grade 15 Cr 13, 22 Cr 13 or 30 Cr 13 of IS : 1570-196111

*Specification tSprcification
jS~)rcil~r ation

for leaded

tin bronze bronze

ingots

and castings

(revised). and wirr (J;rst rtvirion ).

for zinc base alloy die castings for phosphor for schedules for steel wire, cold formed for wrought

( /irsf reuision ).

rods and bars, sheet and strip, springs. steels for gene,ral engineering

$Slvxifi(,:ltion I/Slxcikation

p~lrposes.

ISt6607-1972 7.1.2.2 In case dissimilar sections are used for the manufacture of latch bolts and lockbolts for the reasons of strength the locks shall be designed as either suitable for left-hand doors or right-hand doors and the same shall be clearly marked on each lock.
7.1.3 Locking Bolt - The locking bolt shall be made out of a single metal or a combination of metals recommended for this part in Table 1. The bolts shall be of section not less than 12 x 16 mm for all sizes of locks. When steel locking bolt is provided, it shall be adequately protected against corrosion. In case of non-reversible locks the dimensions of locking bolt In case of bolts made by casting other than specified above may be used. In the thickness of the bolt at no point in section shall be less than 4 mm. case sheet steel is used in the manufacture of locking bolt the thickness of the steel sheet shall not be less than 1.6 mm. 7.1.4 Mechanism - The locking mechanism shall type or any other type approved by the purchaser. 7.1.5 Leuers - Ordinary lever machanism with not less than two levers. 7.1.5.1 False ( dummy ( see Fig. be of ordinary lever

1 ) shall be provided

) leaves shall not be used.

7.1.6 Lever Spring - Each lever shall be fitted with one spring which shall comply with the materials specified in Table 1. The lever spring fitted into the lever shall withstand the following test without showing any sign of permanent set: The lever spring shall be pressed down so as to touch the top edge This shall be repeated minimum six times. of the lever and released. 7.1.7 Guide Pin, Lever Pivot Pin and Lever Spring Fulcrum Pin -The pins shall be SUitd_dy costed when used in conjunction with aluminium alloy body. 7.1.8 KvsEach lock shall be provided with two keys. 7.i.8.1 The key shall function smoothly and without any appreciable friction in the lock. The keys shall be suitably tied to the lock so that they are not lost or interchanged in transit. Malleable cast iron keys shall be protected against corrosion. 7.1.8.2 The lock shall be capable both: inside and outside. of being opened with the key from

7.1.9 Screw - The body cover shall be fitted to the body by countersunk Screws shall be of mild steel head machine screws (see IS : 1365-1968" ). and protected against corrosion,. where necessary. However the screws may be of aluminium alloy in the case of aluminium alloy bodies. *Specification for slotted countersunk head and slotted raised countersunk head scre\+rs ( dia range 1.6 to 20 mm ) (second revision).

12

IS : 6607 - 1972 7.2 Latch 7.2.1 Latch Bolt - The latch bolt shall be of single metal or a combination of metals recommended for this prrrt in Table 1. The bolt shall be reversible to enable the Iock to be fixed on right-hand as we!1 as on the lefthand door. The ho!t shall be of section not less than 12 x 16 mm for ail sizes of locks. Where steel is provided it shall be adequately protected against corrosion. In case of non-reversible locks the dimensions of casting of latch bolt other than specified above may be used. In case of bolts made of castings the thickness of the bolt in sectton at no point shall be less than 4 mm. In case sheet steel is used in the manufacture of latch bolt the thickness of the steel sheet shall not be less than 1 .G mm.
7.2.2 FollowerIt shall have a square the spindle I+Thich operates the larch bolt. corrosion when made from malleable iron. hole at the centra It shall be protected to suit against

7.2.3 Latch SpringEach latch bolt shall be fitted Gth one spring which shall be of materials as specified in Table 1. The la[ch spring shall withstand the test as given in 7.1.6 without showing any sign of permanent set. 7.2.4 Striking Plate - The rebated striking plate shall have tlvo rectangular slots to suit the locking bolt and the latch bolt. It shall have two countersunk holes for fixing it to the rebated end of the door shutter. 8. WORKMANSHIP

AND FINISH

8.1 Brass body shall be finished smooth and polished. .Yluminium alloy body may be anodized if required by the purchaser. The anodic coating shall not be inferior'to grade AC 15 of IS : 1868-1968". The rebated face plate and the striking plate may be polishrd, stained, chromium plated or Steel body shall be _b Given a suitable protective coating. oxidised. Steel parts before painting shall be given the protective treatment in accordance with 8.1.1 and 8.1.2. 8.1.1 All dents, burrs and sharp edges shall be removed TIXXI-, :hls v.+ri!>us components and t!ley shall IX pick!ed, scrubl,ed and rinsed to rcrnove grease, rust, scale or' any other foreign elemcmt. 8.1.2 After pickling, all the mild steel parts shall be given phospl~ati,lg treatment in accordance Tvith IS : 3618-l 966T followed by a coat of iititaj,ie primer, such as red oxide. xo~~-Putty shal! br applied to all the surfaces rrquirinq fillinc and &ail conform
to Is:426-!961:. ___-_ *Speclficatron for +Specification for $Specikation for $Specifkation for ;1!uminium primer shall conform to IS: 2931-I%+$. ano~hc coatings on alumm~um (jut rrLision ). phosphate treatment of iron a:~d steel for protection paste filler for colour coats t 7eisrdj. read, mixed paint, brushing, al~timinium-zinc oxitlc

againct

corrosioc.

I zniilosite primer.

13

IS : 6607 - 1972 8.1.3
Two

coats of enamel and

paint shall then be applied enamel

as follows: conforming to

a) Undercoat,

b) Finish coat with synthetic stoving IS : 2932-1964* or IS : 2933-1964t.

6.1.3.1 The components shall thereafter be baked at a specified temperature in an oven heated uniformly. The finish shall be smooth and uniform with a hard and tough film of enamel s,trongly adhering to the The finish shall be free from all visible defects and shall not chip, surface. when tapped lightly with a pointed instrument. 9. TESTS

9.1 The
to 9.1.6.

fina!ly

assembied

lock shall withstand

the tests specified

in 9.1.1

9.1.1 The locking bolt shall be first locked in the forward position. A of 40 kg minimum or as agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser shah be applied without shock in the direction perpendicular to securing face as well as on both the locking faces of protruding bolt in turn. Then the load shall be applied by means of a fixed steel board 3 mm thick 1~. a rounded edge heid in such a position that the centre line is approxim~trlv 3 mm from the fore-end. A typical arrangement for the purpose of this test is shown in Fig. 2.
load

9.1.2 When the spindle with handle is inserted into hole in the follower and turned, the latch bolt shall draw smoothly into the lock body and shah be within one millimetre from the face of the fore-end. 9.1.3 When the latch bolt is pressed into the lock body by pressure, the action shall be smooth and when fully pressed the latch bolt shall not project more than one millimetre from the face of the fore-end. 9.1.4 The latch bolt shall be subjected to 50 000 operations .either manually or by mechanical means. At the end of the test the components should not show any undue movement from their normal position to cause imnediment to the smooth working of the,mechanism. 9.1.5 1Yhen a key is inserted in key hole from one side of the lock and turrted to withdraw the locking bolt the action shall be smooth and without impediment. 1Vhen the direction of turn is reversed to lock the locking bolt then also the action shall be smooth and without impediment. In the locked position the locking bolt shall project 12 mm from the face of the fcre-end, although one millimetre free movement is permissible. ~~______.___ *Specification for'enamel, synthetic, exterior, Type 1, (a) undercoating, (b) finishing,
colour as required. tSpecification for enamel required. exterior, Type 2, (a) undercoating, (b) finishing, colour as

14

IS:6607-1972
BEAM 75

cm LONG

rFJ?ED

BEARER

STEEL BAR 75 cm LONG APPROX

I

II,/
i BASE FIG. 2

I
1
STRENGTH TEST FOR LOCKING BOLT

MOVABLE WEIGHT

J

In the withdrawn position the locking bolt shall not project more than one The locking bolt shall be worked millimetre from the face of the fore-end. by turning key in both the directions several times quickly, limiting the The purpose of this test is to check up total number of turns to 50 000. that the components do not move from their normal position to cause This test shall be impediment to the smooth working of the mechanism. repeated with the key inserted from the either side of the lock. 9.1.6 When the key is turned to lock the locking bolt at the same time applying a reasonable pressure by finger on it, after completion of the ke) rotation the locking bolt shall be positively locked in the forward position. This test shall be repeated with the key inserted from the other side of the lock. 10. INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE shall be permitted if he so desires. to inspect that

10.1The purchaser or his representative locks in open condition before purchasing,

10.2 Each manufacturer shall furnish? on request a certificate stating the mortice locks comply with the requirements of this standard. 10.2.1 The manufacturer's certificate shall be implied, the IS1 Certification Mark ( see II .l.l ).

if the lock bears

IS : 6607 - 1972 11. MARKING 11.1 Each mortice
Iock shall be stamped with the following information:

a) R$anufacturer's

name or trade-mark, by the purchaser ),

b) Year of supply ( if specified c) Size of mortice d) Number e) Country 11.~2 h4 a rk . lock,

of levers, and of origin. lock may also be marked with the 181 Certification

The morrice

?;OTL -The use of thi TSI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Instiru,lon ( &I tification Marks ) Act, and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. Prese~tce of this mail. on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys tht assui ancc tha: :i,cy 1' LA, 7.nbran produced to comply v:it!i th.e requirements of that standard, ;ll\der a :+-cjl-d&red system of inspection, testing and quality control during production. This s)stem, which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer, 11:~sthe f:irther safeguard that the piodocts aa actually marketed are connnuouslv c!:xked L.; 1.51 for conformity to the standard. Details of conditions, .;nder which a liccncc for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to ma,~ufacturcrs or processor:, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. I*. ? The

;<;+,

keys shall be stamped

on the head with the serial number

of the

12. PACKING 12.1 Each mortice
lock together with its keys shall be wrapped in a paper and packed in a cardboard box. Each cardboard box should be marked with the following information:

a) Manufacturer's b) Quantity in the

name or trade-mark, package,

c>
4-x

Country

of origin,

4 Year e) Type
`I

of manufacture, of lock, and

Size of leek.

`13. SAMPLING 13.1 The method
Appendix B. 16

of selecting

samples of mortice

locks shall

be as given

in

IS : 6607 - 1972

APPENDIX ( Clause 0.5
)

A

INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE PURCHASER WHEN PLACING AN ORDER FOR SUPPLY OF MORTICE LOCKS A-l. The purchaser shall furnish information supplier in regard to the following points:
to the manufacturer ( of a person ( of a person or the facing facing

Whether the door is opening inside or outside the door when standing outside the room ); Whether the door is with right or left overlap the door when-standing outside the room ); Width Width of stile, if any; of horizontal of stile, and lockrail, lockrail, if any; if provided,

Thickness itself; Depth

or thickness

of shutter

of rebate;

Angle of rebate.
- All locks are usually fitted to the overlapping NOTE shutter.

APPENDIX ( Clause 13.1)
SAMPLING B-l. SCALE OF SAMPLING OF MORTICE

B
LOCKS

all the mortice locks of the same type, B-l.1 Lot - In any consignment, size and manufactured from the same material shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. B-l.2 Sample Size--The number of mortice locks to be selected from a lot shall depend upon the size of the lot and shall be in accordance with co1 1 and 2 of Table 2. B-1.2.1 Mortice locks for the sample shall be selected at random from at least 10 percent of the packages subject to a minimum of three packages, equal number of mortice locks being selected from each such package. 17

IS : 6607 - 1972
TABLE 2 SCALE OF SAMPLING AND PERMISSIBLE DEFECTIVE MORTICB LOCKS ( C&useB-l .2 ) LOT SIZE
(1)
SAmPLe SlZE htMEMIBLE NUHBZR OI DEFECTIVZ MORTXCE Locu

NUMBER OF

(2)

up to 201 ,, 301 f, 501 ,, 801 and

200 300 500 800
above

15 20 30 40 50

(3) 0 1 2 2 3

--B-2. TESTS
&2.X Ail the morticc locks selected as in B-I.2 shall be inspected for dimerisional requirements ( zee Fig. 1 ) and finish and workmanship ( Jw 5 j and for compIia.qcc-: with tests epecified in 9. Any mortice lock for the &aracta-which fai!s to satisf)? any 3 e or more ofthe rcauireicenls &tic-: ::!:a11 be cor,sidered x defective mortice &k.

18

