, .

IS 10386 ( Part 4 ) : 1992

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

lndian Standard
CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RIVER VALLEY PROJE-CTS SAFETY CODE
PART 4 HANDLING, STORAGE AND TRANSPORTATION OF EXPLOSIVES

UDC 627'8'004'5

: 614'835

0 BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR 110002 MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI

Safety in Construction, RVD 21

Operation

and Maintenance

of River

Valley Projects

Sectional

Committee,

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian the Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Standards, after the draft finalized by of River Valley Projects Sectional Council.

With large scale increase in construction activity of river valley projects, the number of major Further, increased construction activity has created certain hazards for accidents have increased. persons working on the projects. The degree of safety achieved in project constructions has a direct bearing on the amount of effort expanded to avoid accidents by those who control the conditions and practices on the project. In order to avoid accidents it should be the overall responsibility of the project authorities to provide measures for the safety of all persons working on the projects. There are number of aspects that need to be kept in mind when the safety norms of an entire valley project are envisaged. To this end, various aspects that need consideration, from the point of safety, are dealt with in various parts of this standard. This part covers the safety aspects of explosives. to be kept in view during handling, transportation and river view-

storage

Explosives play a vital role in~the construction of different components of modern river valley projects. Proper handling, transportation and storage of explosives is as essential from the view point of safety as selection and judicious use of proper kind and quality of explosive is for successful and efficient progress of every job. Hazards arising out of mishandling the life of workers and inhabitants structures. of explosives are lrkely to result in accidents which may endanger in the vicinity and also endanger the safety of buildings and

ISIO386(Part4):1992

'

hdian Standard

CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS - SAFETY CODE
PART 4 HANDLING, STORAGE AND TRANSPORTATION OF EXPLOSIVES
1 SCOPE 1.1 This part lays down requirements regarding storage of different classes of explosives, selection of site for magazine, maintenance and operation of magazine, transportation of-explosives, their handling, loading, unloading and inspection as well as precautions to be taken therein.

2 GENERAL is very essential in bard ground tunneling, shaft sinking and other excavation operations of river valley projects. Selection dnd judicious use of proper kind and~quality of explosive is very essential fc., safe and speedy execution of various components of such projects. All operations I involved in transportation, handling and use ofexplosive should he as pet the Indian Explosive Act 1884 and should also conform to the pmvlsiom made therein. 2.2 Proper storage of explosives and accessories is important to ensure LLatthese materials are kept out of reach of unauthorized persons to reduce the hazard of accidental explosionand also to maintain themingood condition for use. 2.3 Gelatine tends to stiffen if exposed to low temperature fora long duration. Thereforesome times, it may he desirable to p1ac.eexplosives in a warm room for several hours `hefore use to enable them to soften and make them easier to prime and tamp in bore holes. In no case should the gelatine he placed close to a fire to thin or soften it. 3 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES
3.1 Effect of Storage on Explosives and Accessories 2.1 The use of'explosives

protection against moisture, provided the cases remain unopened. Stock should always he usedin the sequence of the date of manufacture, which is marked on the cases. This avoids any accumulation of old stock and helps to make sure that the material is in the best condition. Once a case is opened the contents should he used as early as possible, if all the explosives are not used during the same day, the original packing should be folded over and the case should be closed to give the maximum possible protection to the contents. Tbe storage of explosives s ball be done as per provisions of the Indian Explosives Act, 1884 and rules made thereunder and conditions given in the licence to be issued by the competent authority as laid down in the act. 3.2 Selection of Site for Magazine
The magazine should he kept away from residential buildings, railroads or highways, transmission lines, dams and their appurtenant works.

3.2.1 Tbe safe distance required under the Explosives Rules 1940 depends upon the storage capacity of the magazine and may he carefully planned taking into account the rate of consumption and the frequency of replenishment. 3.2.2 Tbe best site for a magazine is on well drained
sloping ground. The selected site should he accessible

by road and it is advisable to make sure that the existing tracks are usable throughout the year. If-there are overhead power transmission lines in the selected area, the distance between these and tbc magazine building should not he less than 92 me&es. 3.2.3 The construction and approval of the magazine shall he based on Standard Indian Practice as governed `by the Indian Explosives Act 1884 and Explosives Rules 1940, as amended from time to time. 3.3 Storage of Different Class of Explosives Under the Explosive Rules, the various explosives and accessories are classified under separate headings as below: Class 1 Class 2 Class 3 1 Gunpowder Nitrate mixtures (GN/L, Powerflow 1, Powerflow 2, and Powerflow 3) Nitrocompounds

Explosives and accessories are pcrl$bable goods which are liable to deteriorate aft?! prolonged storage, especially if subjected to lrilrb temperature and humidity. If kept in a moist place the compounds contained in the explosives may lose tbeir power. It is due to this reason that underground magazines are not preferred on river valley projects. On the other hand, explosives should also not he stored in a very dry place, because they may lose the moisture they naturally contain and thus their speed of explosion may change. 3.1.1 The . method of packing used by the manufacturers is designed to give maximum

IS 10386 ( Part 4 ) : 1992

Div. 1 - Blasting gelatine, special opencast gelignite, gelatines, permitted explosives, etc
Div. 2-Seismex,

4 l'he area surrounding explosive magazines
should be vegetation. kept

free from bushes and

seismex primers, gun cotton, PETN, TNT, primex, etc Chlorate mixtures Fulminates

4 Empty boxes, loose packing material or cotton
waste should not be kept on the magazine premises.

Class 4 Class 5 Class 6 -

t) Explosive magazines should be well ventilated and it is advisable to keep the magazine open every day for a period of one hour.

Ammunition Div. 1 - Safety fuse, fog signals, igniter cord connectors, electric lighters, safety electric fuses, percussion caps, safety cartridges for small arms
Div. 2 -

Detailed records of all outgoing and incoming stocks should be kept. Explosives shouid be used according to~date of manufacture.

Plastic igniter cord, detonating fuse, electric fuse, fuse igniters, etc Detonators, detonating refays, etc

h) All magazines should be securely locked, when
not attended.

j)

Div. 3 -

Cases of explosives should be stacked on trestles clear of the floor and a 15 cm air space should be left between the cases and the walls to allow circulation of air.
Care should be taken that repairs to magazines are attended to on priority basis.

Class 7 -

Fireworks

Under the Explosives Rules the following can be stored together in the same magazine: Gunpowder Nitrate mixture Nitrocompounds Chlorate ,mixtures Safety fuse Plastic igniter cord Detonating fuse Class Class Class Class Class Class Class 1 2 3 4 6 Div. 1 6 Div. 2 6 Div. 2

Every explosive magazine should prominently display general rules governing conduct in magazines indicating prohibition of smoking, carrying of matches and/or any other rules that may be required by the local licensing authorities. A copy of the licence and lightning conductor test certificate should also be preserved in the magazine.

4 On no account should the magazine be opened

On no account, however, should detonators be stored together with explosives. Normally detonators are stored in a separate building but if the number of detonators does not exceed 44 000 it is permissible to store themina properly constructed annexe attached to the magazine. 3.4 Maintenance
and.Operation of Magazines

during, or on the approach of a thunder storm and no person should remain in the vicinity of the magazine during such a storm.

The following precautions should be taken for maintenance and operation of magazines:

a) The inside of all magazines should be
scrupulously clean. The floor of the building should be cleaned with a brush on each occasion when the magazine is opened for delivery or receipt of explosives.

P) Under no condition shall explosive caps or fuse be stored in the same place or kept in the same container with other explosives. A make up house shall be provided at each working place in which cartridges will be made up by experienced powermen as required for the immediate work. This make up buildingshall becompletely without any internal source of heat, and only battery Powered illumination should be used. 9) The magazine should be guarded at all times. r) The area around the magazine should be properly fenced, provided with one entrance gate and should have adequate lighting arrangements. 3.5 Handling and Transportation
of Explosives

b)

The magazine-keeper should ensure that cigarettes and matches are not taken into the magazine. of explosive boxes should be of wood dr sofi non-ferrous metal such as brass, copper or bronze. Iron and steel tools are prohibited as they may cause sparking. 2

c) All the tools used in tht magazines for opening

3.5.1 Explosives are transported in specially fabricated and licenced explosive vans conforming to the specifications prescribed in Explosive Rules, 1940. The yan bears the inscription `EXPLOSIVE VAN' so

IS 10386 ( Part 4$ : 1992
as -to warn the workers and public. Before transporting from the magazine to the site of work it should be ensured that the entire cargo is securely loaded. Metal tools, oil, matches, electric storage battery, acids or corrosive compounds, etc, .are not to be carried in the body of the transporting vehicle. The van should be equipped with extinguishers. At the back of van, there should be two metallic chains hanging from the body in such a way that they are in contact with the ground all the time to provide necessary earthing for safety against lightning strike or the vehicle being short circuited. In addition to the ~above, all the provisions of Indian Explosives Act lb84 should be fully complied with.

night or at any other time in a public garage or similar building.

j) Explosives should not be transported on a
public highway during ~hours of darkness except in an extreme emergency and only with the written approval of the project authorities.

k)

Explosives should not be transported in any form of trailer, nor should any trailer be attached to a motor truck or vehicle hauling explosives.
of explosives from one vehicle to another should be made on any highway except in case of an emergency.

l-4 No transfer

3.5.2 Explosives should not be transported on the site of operations except in suitable cases or canisters which are so made as to prevent any escape of explosives and are without danger of sparks or other sources of ignition during conveyance. No explosive should be removed from such cases or canisters except when it is to be used forthwith for purpose of work. 3.5.3 No explosive should be transported in a mechanically propelled vehicle unless such a vehicle is locked and is of a type approved in writing by tbe Chief Inspector of Explosives. The following rules should also be observed:

n) Persons exployed in the transport or handling

of explosives should not carry with them, or in the vehicle, matches, fire arms or any flame producing devices. during

P) Smoking should be prohibited handling and transportof explosives.

9) As a special precaution at unmanned railway crossings, the vehicle should be brought to a complete halt and the journey proceeded with only after ensuring clear way. r) AI1 accidents should be reported to the Chief Inspector of Exlosives and others as specified in the Explosive Act. 3.5.4 Vehicles used for transporting explosives should conform to Explosive Rules and should be carefully inspected' daily to determine that:

a) Vehicles should have springs under the body.
Unsprung country carts should not be used.

b) Detonators and igniters should not be carried
in the same vehicle together with explosives.

cl

The speed of the vehicle should not exceed 25

km per hour. should be accommodated in the vehicle. The vehicle carrying explosives should not be used to transport workmen or other materials to work sites although there may be enough space for men or materials. should not leave the vehicle unattended while transpoting explosives. be marked or placarded on both sides and ends with the word "EXPLOSIVES" in white letters not less than 76 mm high on a red background. motor vehicle carrying explosive should not be refueled except in emergencies and no other vehicle should be allowed at the refueling station when the vehicle carrying explosives is being refueled. Refueling should be done at a fueling station located outside the city limits. Such vehicles should invariably have at least hvo fire extinguishers placed at convenient points. never be taken into a garage, or repairshop, or parked in congested areas, or parked over3

4 Fire extinguishers are filled and are in place; b) The electric
secured;
wiring

d) Besides the driver, only one more helper

is web insulated and firmly

4 Chassis, engine and body are clean and free
from surplus oil and grease;

4 Fuel tankand feed lines are not leaking; e) Lights, brakes and steering mechanism are in
good working order;

3 Drivers

9 All vehicles transporting explosive should

9 Tyres are properly inflated and in good
condition; and

&

Vehicle is in proper condition in all respects for the safe transportation of explosives.

g) The

35.5 Boxes of explosives should not be handled roughly or allowed to fall. Containers of explosives should be opened only by means of non-sparking tools or instruments. 3.5.6 After loading at the section to be blasted, all excess explosives and detonators should be removed to a safe location or returned at once to.the storage magazine, observing the same rules as when being conveyed to tbe blasting area. The used and unused explosives should be properly accounted for.

h) All vehicles transporting explosives should

IS10386(Part4):1992 3.5.7 Containers for detonators should always be used for storing detonators only: 3.5.8 Place of Loading and Unloading
.

to accumulate within 8 m of an explosive magazine.

4

3.5.8.1 Loading and unloading of explosives should be done at a safe distance from dwelling houses, power house buildings, transmission towers, stores of petroleum, timber or any other flammable material.

DON'T smoke or have matches, open lights, or other fire an.dior flame producing devices in or near an explosives magazine, or have them nearby while handling or loading explosives. DON'T shoot into explosives with any fire an, or allow shooting in the vicinity of an explosives magazine.

4 DON'T'S 4.1 For the purposes of this list of DONT'S, the terms contained therein shall be as follows: The term `Explosives' shall signify any or all of the following dynamite, black blasting powder, pette powder, blasting caps and electric blasting caps, etc:

i3) DON'Tstoreanymetallicroolsorimplements
in an explosives magazine.

h) DON'T drop, throw, or slide packages of
explosives or handle them roughly in any manner.

.i> DON'T open wooden cases of explosives

4 DON'T purchase, possess, store, transport,

handle, or use explosives except in strict accordance with organizational regulations.

b) DON'Tstore explosives anywhere except ina

magazine which is clean, dry, well ventilated, properly located, suitably constructed, securely locked, fenced and guarded and properly earthed . work site where workmen can get them.

with metallic tools. Use a wooden wedge and wooden, rubber, or fibre mallet. Metallic slitter may be used for opening fibre board casts, provided that the metallic Flitter dots not come in contact with the metallic fasteners of the case. DON'T store blasting caps or electric blasting caps in the same box, container or magazine together with other explosives.

cl DON'T leave explosives lying around the
DON'T allow leaves, grass, brush or debris

4

DON'T handle explosives during the approach or progress of an electrical storm. All persons should retire to a place of safety.

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark IS governed by the provIsIons of the Bureau ql lndwn Act, 1986 and the Kules and Kegulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervlsed by BE and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity Details of conditions under which a licence for the to that standard as a further safeguard. use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Standards

Bureau

of Iudiau

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the bureau of Indian Standurds Acl, 1986 to promote harmotiious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details. such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BlS. Revision of Indian Standards

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the the latest amendments or edition. following reference : Dot : No RVD 21 ( 3806 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend

No.

Date of Issue

.Tcxt Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telephones

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg,

New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Officer ) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

331 01 31 I 331 13 75 Maniktola 37 84 99, i 37 86 26, 53 38 43, i 53 23 84 235 02 16, t 235 15 19, 632 92 95, 632 78 91, 37 85 61, 37 86 62 53 16 40, 235 04 42, 235 23 15 63 27 80, 632 78 92

Eastern

: l/l4 C. 1. T. Scheme VII M. V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, : C. I. T. Campus, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol,

Northern Southern Western

160036 600 113

MADRAS

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

Andheri

( East )

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. LUCKNOW. PATNA. SRINAGAR. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

C~OIMBATORE. JAlPUR. KANPUR.

Printed-at Printrade, New Delhi, India

