**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



^^Eti^^tt^n f im^NS ^g^T^^i ra^gg fr ^Uft & fr^ 



IS 9797 (1981) 
Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



Cycle, Fret-saw [MHD 10: Medical Laboratory 



&&&i f /n^sb^s^ rs^arn^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 615*825*5 : 629*118*3 



IS: 9797 -1981 




Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
CYCLE, FRET-SAW 



( Reaffirmed 1997) 



a 

a 

o 

u 

JO 

3 

tn 



E 
a 
"5 
a- 

UJ 

c 
o 



JQ 
« 

a: 



1. Scope — Specifies the critical dimensions and functional requirements of fret-saw cycle. 

2. Shape and Dimensions 

2.1 A typical shape of fret-saw cycle is shown in Fig. 1. It shall satisfy the dimensions as specified 
therein. 

2.2 Fret-saw cycle may also have other dimensions as agreed to between the purchaser and the 
supplier. 

GRIP— ^ SAW 
WORK TABLE 




BOTTOM BRACKET 
FRAME 







mm 


Maximum height ( CD ) 




1130 


Base length (CE) 


I 


840 


Width of the base (CF)* 


520 


Distance of wheef centre 
from the ground 




280 


Height of the seat (AE) 
(adjustable) 




740 
to 910 


Height of work table from 
the ground ( CG ) 




960 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 1 CYCLE, FRET-SAW, TYPICAL 



Adopted 9 March 1981 



©July 1981 , ISI 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 9797 -1981 

3. Material 

3.1 Tubing— -The tube used in the framework of the fret-saw cycle shall conform to ERW or CEW 
quality specified in IS : 2039-1984 ' Specification for steel tubes for bicycle and allied purposes \ 

3.2 Standard Fret-Saw Cycle Components — Standard components used in the fabrication of cycle 
shall be made to the relevant Indian Standards on cycle components. 

3.3 Wheel Rim — The wheel rim shall conform to Table 1 of IS : 624-1975 ' Specification for bicycle 
rims ( second revision ) '. 

3-4 Spokes and Nipples — These shall conform to IS : 630-1981 'Specification for bicycle spokes 
( plain ) and nipples for spokes ( revised) '. The wheel shall have 32 spokes, 

3.5 Tyre — The tyre shall be of solid type. It shall be made of non-marking smooth tread rubber 
conforming to Type B, Grade 5 of IS : 5192-1975 'Specification for vulcanized natural rubber based 
compounds (first revision ) \ 

3-6 Cast iron or steel used for various components shall conform to IS : 210-1978 'Specification 
for grey iron castings (third revision) 1 and IS : 226-1975 'Specification for structural steel 
( standard quality ) ( fifth revision ) \ respectively. 

3.7 A dynamometer may be used to find the value of resistance to pedalling. 

4. Requirements 

4.1 Back-Rest and Seat — The back-rest and seat of the cycle shall be of rigid and comfortable 
construction. These shall be of adjustable type ( horizontally and vertically) and shall be properly 
rubber-padded or foamed and covered with expanded vinyl coated fabric. 

4.2 Frame — The frame may be of tubular or angular construction or made from cast iron or steel 
castings. Welding, wherever used, shall be sound and joints shall be fully dressed and finished 
smooth. There shall be no sharp edges or unsealed formation which may harbour dirt or foreign 
matter. 

4.3 Wheel — The wheel shall be fixed to the frame in such a manner that fitting shall be rigid 
enough to withstand shocks. The wheel shall be mounted on two bearings of adjustable cup and 
cone type. Two self-contained bearings on axle shall also be acceptable as an alternative bearing 
assembly. The wheel shall be removable from cycle without disturbing bearing assembly. 

4.4 Lubrication — The manufacturer shall provide complete information for the type of lubricant to 
be used with instructions. 

4.5 Hub — In case of chain type fret-saw cycle, hub assembly shall be standard unit, with each end 
of the hub provided with cup and cone type ball bearings. Bearings and races shall be hardened 
and polished. The minimum hardness at bearings and races shall be 800 HV. 

4.6 Drive chain of chain type fret-saw cycle, shall conform to designation 083-1 of IS : 2403-1975 
' Specification for transmission steel roller chains and chain wheels (first revision) 1 , 

4.7 Chain Cover — The chain type fret-saw cycle, shall be provided with cover suitably mounted so 
as to give adequate protection to operator and his clothing from contact with drive sprocket and 
drive chain. The drive chain shall not touch^chain cover at any place during operation. 

4.8 Servicing and Adjustment — Prior to delivery of the cycle the supplier shall service and adjust 
each cycle for operational use, including the following: 

a) adjustment of braking system, 

b) alignment of wheel, and 

c) complete lubrication of operating mechanism. 

4.9 The provision in the platform should be made for suitable gripping by hand while operating the 
machine. 

5. Finish 

5.1 The frame of the cycle, prior to assembly, shall be thoroughly cleaned by suitable nveans to 
remove rust, scale and oily substances. It shall then be made chemically rust-proof and stove- 
enamelled, spray-painted or otherwise finished to give a glossy finish. The colour of the finish 
shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 



IS: 9797 -1981 

IL2 All the -metallic parts other than frame shall have a smooth finish and shall be plated chromium 
over nickel in accordance with service Grade No. 3 of IS : 1068-1958 ' Specification for electroplated 
costings of nickel and chromium on iron and steel {first revision ) \ 

6. Test 

6.1 Suspend a load of 1 000 N ( 100 kgf approx ) at the bottom bracket by a rope so that the weight 
is 900 mm below the bottom bracket. Draw the weight by 450 mm perpendicular to the plane of the 
frame and allow it to swing freely till it comes to rest. The frame shall neither be deformed or start 
rocking nor shift its position after the test 

6.2 Suspend a load of 1 000 N ( 100 kgf approx ) from the bottom bracket of the frame after support- 
ing it suitably. Lift the weight up through a height of 50 mm and let it drop. The frame shall not 
be damaged or start rocking after the test 

6.3 Test for Finish — A solid steel ball of 13 mm diameter shall be dropped from a height of 1*5 m 
on any painted surface of the cycle. The paint at the place where the steel ball strikes shall stand 
the impact without showing any sign of tear or pealing off. 

7. Marking 

7.1 The cycle shall be marked by putting a label or otherwise with the manufacturer's name, initials 
or trade-mark. 

7.2 ISI Certification Marking — Details available with the Indian Standards Institution. 

8. Instruction Manual 

8.1 An instruction manual shall be supplied with each fret-saw cycle giving information in respect 
of its design, care and intended use. 

9. Packing 

9.1 The packing shall be done to ensure safe transportation. The packing may also be done as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 



Fret-saw cycle is an equipment used by disabled persons for physiotherapy exercises 
this standard, only critical dimensions have been specified leaving scope to the manufacturer! 
the development of new designs. 



„ rJ h 

manufacturers for 



Printed at Arcee Press, New Delhi, India 



