( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS : 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986

Indian Standard
MEASUREMENT OF AIRBORNE NOISE EMITTED BY PNEUMATIC TOOLS AND MACHINES
PART 2 METHOD FOR CHECKING NOISE LIMITS COMPLIANCE WITH

Acoustics
Chairman SHEI K. 1). PAVATE Members

Sectional

Committee,

LTDC

5

Reprcscnting Central Electronics Engineering ( CSIR ), Pilani Research Institute

SIIRI M. K. KAPOOR ( AI~ernn~e to Shri K. D. Pavate ) Swnr SANDEEP ARUJA Ahu.ja Radios, New Delhi SHRI K. R. GURU~UILTHY ( Alternate ) SHRI R. K. BIIA'L.IA Department of Telecommunication, New Delhi SHHI T. R. WA~IIWIZ ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI K. CHANUHACHUI~.~N Railway Board, New Delhi SHllI P. GHOSII SHHI SHANKAIL ( Ahmate ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi DIL P. N. GUPTA Ministry of Defcnce ( DGI ) COL KRISIIAN LAL SUILI B. S. RuI~I;,\I ( rllternnte ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), De V. MOIIANAN New Delhi Uolton Private Ltd, New Delhi SHHI .J. S. MON~A SHHI M. S. MONOA ( Alternate ) Electronic Component Industries Association SHILI J. S. M0Ha.k ( LLCINA ), New Delhi SHLLI GH~NISHAM D,\sv ( Alternate ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, bangalore SIULI B. S. NAIIAYAN Sn~r K. NAUARM ( ~lhrnate) All India Institute of Speech & Hearing, Mysore Dn ( Mrss 1 SI~ATLAJ~\ NIL-AM SHttr S. $3. M~IITIIY ( 11llernde )

( Continued on page 2 )
0 INDIAN Copyrighl 1987 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the In&on Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publiher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS I 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986
(Continued from page 1 ) Members PROE B. S. RA~AXRISHNA SHRI S. L. REDEY SRRI M. M. JOSAI ( Alternate) Srre~ M. SHANKARAL~NQAM Repmenling Central University, Hyderabad P&co Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay; and The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers' Association, Bombay

Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi Directorate General of All India Radio, SKRI S. K. SEN New Delhi SHRI W. V. B. RAMALINUArd ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) CDR P. K. SINHA LT R. S. DATTA ( Alfernuta ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SUPERINTENDENT SURVEYOR 0~ WORKS ( FOOD ) SURVEYOR OB WORKS I/FOOD ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&io Member ) SHRI N. SRINIVASAN,. Director ( Electromcs ) Secretary SHBI PAVAN KUMAR Deputy Director ( Electronics

), IS1

2

IS : 11702 ( Part2)-

1986

Indian Standard
MEASUREMENT OF AIRBORNE NOISE EMITTED BY PNEUMATIC TOOLS AND MACHINES
PART 2 METHOD FOR CHECKING COMPLIANCE NOISE LIMITS WITH

0.
0.1 This Indian Institution on 26 tional Committee nication Division

FOREWORD

Standard ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards May 1986, after the draft finalized by the Acoustics Sechad been approved by the Electronics and TelecommuCouncil. presenting the

0.2 This standard specifies methods for determining and acoustic characteristics of pneumatic tools and machines. 0.3 The purpose of this standard mance of machinery for acoustic with noise limits.

is to provide data on acoustic perforplanning and for checking compliance

0.4 For acoustic planning, the determination of both A-weighted and octave band sound power levels are normally required, whereas for checking compliance with noise limits normally only the A-weighted sound power level is required. 0.5 The more comprehensive data obtained in Part 1 may be used not only for acoustic comparison of different types of machines and for prediction of disturbance in the near vicinity ( in the case of a machine operating outdoors, for example, on a building site ), but also as a contribution towards assessing the risk of hearing damage for people operating or working close to the machine. 0.6 This standard deals, firstly, with determination of surface sound pressure levels and, secondly, with the calculation of sound power levels. The measurements shall be made in a free field over a reflecting plane. An examplr of the recommended form of test report is also included,

?

IS : 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 0.7 This standard has been divided into two parts. Part 1 is an engineering method for determination of sound power levels, and gives information for acoustic planning. Part 2 is a method for checking compliance with noise limits, and is primarily used for type npprova!s in accordance with legal or contractual requirements. Both parts arc complete in themselves and independent of each other. 0.8 The operating conditions in Part 1 are as far as possible conditions met in everyday use of the machinery which tend to g-iv, a relatively high degree of uncertainty. The operating conditions in this part are chosen so as to give the best possible repeatability of test results involving, if necessary, the isolation of machine noise and suppression of the tool and process noise. 0.9 Section 1 of this part gives a general specification of measurement methods valid for all types of machines cover-cd. Section two lays down special operating conditions for the various types of machines. If, in future, new machines are to be added, this can conveniently be done by adding further sections, thus maintaining the format of this part. 0.10 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from of airborne noise emitted by ISO/DIS 3181)Z.Z CAcous:ics - Measurement pneumatic tools and machines, Part 2 Method for checking compliance with noise limits' issued by International Organization for Standardization ( ISO).

0.11 In reporting

the result of a test made in accordance dard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.

with this stanrounded off, it

SECTION 1. SCOPE

1 GENERAL

SPECIFICATION

1.1 This standard ( Part 2 ) specifies a.method. for measuring . . .the airborne noise emitted by pneumattc tools and machmes and stipulates precise instructions for conducting the tests and reporting the results, for the purpose of checking noise limits. I.2 This standard covers measurements in a free field over a reflecting plane. Only the A-weighted surface sound pressure level is measured and the sound power is determined. It applies, for example, to rock-drills l~ickt~ammers, plug-hole-drills, picks and ( sinkers ), paving-breakers, spades.

*Rules for rounding OR numerical

vnlucs

( reuimf ).
4

IS : 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 1.3 Devices emitting isolated sound bursts, for example, low frequency pile-drivers, or series of sound pulses with a repetition frequency lower than 10 Hz are not covered by this part.
2. TERMINOLOGY

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, IS : 1885 ( Part 3 )* shall apply.
3. REFERENCE

the terms

and

delinitions

given

in

PRESSURE

AND REFERENCE

POWER

the reference pressure of 20 LLPa is used for the expression of sound pressure level and the reference power of 1 pW is used for the expression of sound power level. 4. INSTRUMENTATION 4.1 General 4.1.1 The instrumentation shall be designed to permit the determination of the value of the A-weighted sound pressure level averaged over time. ?`olerances as regards the several components comprising the instrumentation system shall not exceed the tolerances given in the relevant clauses of IS : 9779 - 19817, type 1 or better. Norrlc 1 - An example of an appropriate instrument for these measurements is a sound level meter that fulfils at least the rcAquiremc:nts for a type 1 instrument,
conforming with IS : 977%l!lUlt with a `slow' meter characteristic. In addition, for establishing the presence of impulsive noise, the `impulsive' meter characterutic, conforming with IS : 9779 - 198lt shall be used. instrumentation system is an NOTE 2 - Another c xample of an appropriate integrator which carries out an analogue or digital integration of the squared signal over a given time interval.

3.1 III this standard

4.2

Microphone

and Associated

Cable

4.2.1 So as to minimize the influence of the observer on the measurements, a cable should preferably be used between the microphone and the sound level meter. The observer shall not stand between the microphone and the source the sound power level which is being determined. The microphone shall comply with the specifications given in IS : 9779-1981t, type 1 or better. 4.3 Frequency

Response

of the Instrumentation

System

4.3.1 The frequency response of the instrumentation system for the angle of incidence specified !Jy the manufacturer shall be withill the tolerances given in IS : 9779-19817. *Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part 3 Acoltstics. ?Specification for sound lcvcl meters.

5

IS I 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 4.4 Calibration 4.4.1 At least before each series of measurements an acoustic calibrator with an accuracy of f0.5 dB shall be applied to the microphone to calibrate the entire instrumentation system, including cable, if used, at one or more frequencies. One calibration frequency should be in the range from 250 to 1 000 Hz. The calibrator shall be checked annually to verify that its output has not changed.
5.

OPERATING

AND
shall

LOADING
be operating in stable condition as for normal

5.1 The machine continuous service.

5.2 The machine shall be operated at an effective working pressure of 6 bar or at rated pressure, if this is considered more normal, and rated energy supply. During testing, air pressure shall be measured at the coupling which is closest to the machine while it is in operation. The machine shall operate normally; restriction of the exhaust by freezing shall be avoided. The type, quality and quantity of lubricant shall be as recommended by the manufacturer.
NOTE - The pressure may be checked by means of a dial pressure gauge, but, in view of the pulsation of the machine, it is preferable to use an arrangement consisting of an air receiver with a capacity of 50 to 100 1, supplied by a conventional hose, 20 m in length with a diameter of 19 mm. The machine will be supplied from this receiver through a hose, with a diameter between 25 and 30 mm diameter, and 4.5 mm in length connected to the coupling. The receiver shall be as far away from the machine as possible. The pressure inside the receiver shall be measured through a connection.

The pressure may be adjusted either through compressor or by a calibrated pressure regulator. A schematic diagram ker is given in Fig. I. For operating be referred to. 6. REFERENCE illustrating a typical

the outlet valve on the for a paving-breasection should

device

and loading

specifications,

the relevant

AND MEASUREMENT Parallelopiped

SURFACES

6.1 Reference

6.1.1 So as make the location of the microphone positions, more straightforward, the smallest possible imaginary rectangular parallelopiped (length I,, width I,, height Is ), just enclosing the source and terminating on the reflecting plane, is used for rcferrnce purposes. When defining the parallelopiped, small elements protruding from the source, which are unlikely to be major radiators of sound energy, may be disregarded.

ACOUSTIC

SHIELD ADJUSTMENT GF BY CONTROLLED PRESSURE LEAKAGE

PRECISION HOSE

PRESSURE qb 30mm xk5

GAUGE m LONG

,/--&kuI$~;,,`JPL~NG

SPRINGS

OR

REFLECTING BLOCK

t; ..

z

FIG. 1

EXAMPLEOF DEVJCEFOR SUPPLYINQ COMPRESSED AIR

IS : 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 6.2 Measurement Surface

6.2.1 The measurement surface is a hypothetical hemisphere with its geometric centre at the point at which the geometric centre of the reference parallelopiped is prqjected into the reflecting plane. 6.2.2 The radius of the hemispherical measurement 2 m or 4 m depending on the relevant section. 7. NOISE 7.1 Test MEASUREMENT Environment surface shall be

7.1.1 A suitable test area shall be a hard reflecting surface of such diameter that all microphone positions are within its perimeter. A qualification procedure for determining the adequacy of the acoustical environment and methods for determining the environmental correction factor, if necessary, are given in Indian Standard measurement of airborne noise emitted by construction equipment intended for outdoor use - Method for checking compliance with noise limits ( under jwekaration ). A surface of concrete or impervious asphalt may, for example, be satisfactory. 7.1.2 The presence of large objects such as buildings and machines within a radius of 10 m from the machine being tested shall be avoided. Measurements may be carried out indoors, if a suitable test room is available.

Nom - Careshall also be taken to ensure that gusts of wind do not distort the results of the measurements and that no microphone is placed in the exhaust air A microphone wind-screen shall be used. If neceszone during the mrasltremcnt. sary, in this case, a specified calibration correction may be required. Wind speed should not exceed 8 m/s.
7.2 Background Noise

7.2;1 The sound pressure level of the background noise with the machine being tested but not running shall be determined at the microphone positions to be used when carrying out the tests. The period of measurement shall be long in relation to any fluctuation in the background sound pressure level observed so that a correct average reading can be obtained with the %low' response setting of the sound level meter. 7.2.2 The readings at each position, with the machine running, should preferably exceed the background sound pressure level by at least 10 dB. If the difference is less, corrections shall bc applied as shown in Table 1. 7.2.3 If the difference between the measured sound pressure level and the background sound pressure level is less than 6 dB, a valid result cannot be obtained.

8

IS : 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986

TABLE 1 CORRECTIONS

TO BE APPLIED

( Clauses7.2.2 and 8.1.2 )

DIBFERENCEBETWEENSOUND PRESSURE CORRECTION TO BE SUBTRACTED FBOM LEVEL MEASIJRED WITRSOUND SOUIICI~ S~UXD PRESSURE LEVEL MEASURED WITH SOUNDSOURCE OPERATI~U~TO OPERATING AND HACKQROUND SOUND PRESSURELEVEL ALONE OBTAIN SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL ~~ETo SOUND SOURCE ALONE dB dB 6 to8
9 to 10 Greater than 10 1'0

0'5
0

7.3 Measurements 7.3.1 General

7.3.1.1 Observers and measuring instruments shall be at least 1 m behind the microphone. Care shall be taken to ensure that operating personnel do not come between or in line with the machine and the microphone while readings are being taken so as not to impair the validity of the measurements. 7.3.2 Readings to be Recorded

7.3.2.1 The A-weighted sound pressure levels shall be recorded at each microphone position as specified in 7.3.3, with the machine being tested running as laid down in 5. The sound level meter shall be used on the `slow' response setting. 7.3.3 Microphone Positions

7.3.3.1 The microphone shall be located on the measurement surface in accordance with the specifications laid down in the relevant section. 7.3.4 Measurement Technique in each of the positions levels shall be recorded given in the as specified

7.3.4.1 With the microphone relevant section, the sound pressure in 7.3.2.

7.3.4.2 The period of measurement shall be long in relation to any fluctuation in sound pressure level observed so that a visual average reading can be obtained with the `slow' response setting of the meter. 9

IS : 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 7.3.4.3 The microphone shall be held in the cidence or perpendicular incidence as recommended position of grazing inby the manufacturer.

NOTE - If the noise from the machine being tested contains strong audible discrete frequency components, errors in the measurement results may occur. Where the discrete-frequency components are of high frequency, the errors can be reduced by slowly raising and lowering the microphone by approximately kO.3 m from each nominal microphone position. During the movement, care shall be taken to avoid the generation of noise, either mechanical or aerodynamic in origin, which could influence the measurements. If the moving microphone technique is used, this shall be reported.

8. CORRECTIONS 8.1 Application

AND

CALCULATIONS

of Corrections corrections and wind-screen of background Level correcnoise

8.1.1 Instrumentation calibration tions shall be applied, as appropriate. 8.1.2 Readings shall be corrected in accordance with Table 1. 8.2 Calculation of the Surface

for the influence Sound Pressure

8.2.1 If the spread between the readings for one set of microphone positions does not exceed 5 dR, the surface sound pressure level can be obtained by arithmetically averaging the readings and subtracting the environmental correction K ( see below ). 8.2.2 If the spread exceeds 5 dB, the A-weighted surface sound pressure level L, in decibels, is calculated usiug the following formula:

L,= 10 log
where

$74 C

antilog

-$

+

antilog

+ $-

+ . . . + antilog

+

)

1

--X

L1 is the sound pressure level, at microphone position decibels, corrected in accordance with 8.1; L, is the sound pressure level, at microphone position decibels, corrected in accordance with 8.1; Jv is the number and K of microphone positions at a given

Ko.

1, in

No. n, in distance;

is the environmental correction, in decibels, as determined by one of the procedures specified in Indian Standard measurement of airborne noise emitted by construction equipment intended for outdoor use - Method for checking compliance with noise limits ( zlndel- @$zration ) for test environments meeting the requirements of 7.1, K = 0. IO

IS : 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 9. CALCULATION OF THE SOUND Surface POWER LEVEL

9.1 Area of the Measurement

9.1.1 For the purposes of calculating sound power level, the area S of the measurement surface, in square metres, shall be calculated from the formula s = where 9.2 2 rcra mexuremcnt surf~e, in metres. I is the radius of the hemispherical of A-Weighted

Calculation

Sound Power Level in decibels, of the machine

9.2.1 The weighted sound power level, L,, being tested is given by the formula

LW=Lr,+lO1og
where

(

-&
0

> of the machine metres, calcul-

L,
S

is the surface sound pressure level, in decibels being tested, calculated in accordance with 8.2; is the area of the measurement surface, ated in accordance with 9.1; and 1 m2. relation 10 log -$in square

So =

The logarithmic

( of 4 m and 14 dB for a hemisphere 10. TEST 10.1 The REPORT test report reference shall include

is 20 dU for a hemisphere > Radius of 2 m.

radius

at least the following being tested

information ( including

:
make,

a) b) a 4 4

to this part;

description of the machine model and serial number );

the operating conditions ( including ambient temperature, wind speed and air pressure at the machine ) and nature of the energyabsorbing device; a sketch showing the test layout, pinpointing the microphone positions and indicating the direction and distance to large objects within the test area; the make, model and serial number of the acoustic instrumentaany device used for protecting the microtion used, including phone against effect of wind, and calilxation method; 11

IS : 11702( Part 2 ) - 1986
f) the A-weighted the microphone be stated; background sound pressure level, in decibels, at positions used for the test; the correction shall

g) the sound pressure level at each microphone position, reported in the table in the test report ( after the correction for background noise and wind-screening have been made ); h) the environmental the test report; j) the surface correction correction factor, to be stated in the table in

sound pressure factor; index in

level, surface

corrected

by the environmental level; and specifications of

k) graphs m)

giving A-weighted

sound pressure with the

the directivity Appendix A.

accordance sound power,

For the purposes of stating information shall be given: b) the A-weighted The recommended

the following metres;

additional and

a) the area of the measurement

surface,

in square

sound power level. format for the test report is shown in Appendix B.

SECTION

2

SPECIAL TEST CONDITIONS FOR PAVINGBREAKERS, PICKHAMMERS, ETC

11. GENERAL 11.1 For the purposes of testing the noise emission from paving-breakers, pickhammers, plug-hole-drills and similar tools used on building sites, the special test conditions given in this section are applicable. The general specifications laid down in 1 to 10 shall be valid for the test.
12.

LOADING

OF MACHINE
shall be operated in the following way:

12.1 During

the test the machine

4
b)

In a vertical position on the device consisting of a concrete block in which a tool is embedded ( see 13 ). The device shall be placed in a concrete pit ( see 14 ). Unattended by an operator and firmly held down on the tool shank described below by means of a flexible device preventing the machine from bouncing while operating, that is, giving the same operating conditions as when the tool is embedded in the material to be broken up, before it fractures. The flexible device may take the form of calibrated springs or pneumatic jacks. 12

IS : 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 13. CONCRETE 13.1 General 13.1.1 The machine shall be run, as described in 12, on the tool which is embedded in a cube-shaped concrete block, placed in a concrete pit, below the surface of the ground. The tool shank shall be tested for correct type and dimensions for the machine.
13.2

BLOCK AND TOOL

Block Characteristics
with 0.6 m vibrated in

13.2.1 The block shall be in the shape of a regular cube sides, it shall be made of reinforced concrete and thoroughly layers up to 0.2 m to avoid excessive sedimentation,
13.3 Composition The of Concrete for the block shall have cement, non calcareous alluvial the following

13.3.1

concrete

proportions: size of 0.5 to size of 5 to 25 ties, each rod

a) 50 kg pure Portland b) 65 1 of ungraded, 5 mm; and c) 115 1 of calcareour, mm.

class 400 or equivalent; sand with a grain with a grain

gravel

The cube shall be reinforced by 8 mm steel rods without being independent of the others. The 13.4 design concept of the block is illustrated in Fig. 2.

Tool

13.4.1 The tool shall be sealed into the concrete and shall consist of a rammer of not less than 178 mm and not more than 220 mm in diameter and a tool chuck component identical to that normally used with the pick or concrete-breaker to be tested. The tool shall comply with the relevant standard and shall be long enough to enable the practical test to be carried out. 13.4.2 Suitable treatment shall be carried out to integrate the two components. The tool shall be fixed in the block so that the bottom of the rammer is 0.30 m from the upper face of the block ( see Fig. 2 ).
13.4.3 The block shall rcamin mechanically sound, particularly at the point where the supporting tool and the concrete meet before and after each test it should be ensured that the tool sealed in the concrete block is integrated with it.

13

IS : 11702( Part 2 ) - 1986

SECTION

AA

A

A

-f--

T

1 Fra. 2 13.5

o.so
CONCRETE BLOCK
AND

l

TOOL

block with the tool shall be set into a pit which is cemented throughout. The block shail be covered by a screening slab weighing at least 100 kg/ma, as indicated in Fig. 3. `l`he upper surface of the screening slab is flush with the ground. The block shall be insulated against the bottom and sides of the pit by means of elastic blocks. They should have a cut-off frequency which shall be not more than half the blow frequency of the paving-breaker or hammer to be tested. 14

Test Site 13.5.1 The concrete

IS : 11702( Part 2 ) - 1986

SUPPORT

TOOL

All dimensions

in millimetres.

FIG. 3

TEST SITE

13.3.2 The opening in the screening slab through which the tool shank component passes shall be as small as possible and be sealed by a flexible sound proof joint. 13.6 Measurement Surface and Microphone Positions 13.6.1 The measurement surface in accordance with 6.2 shall be chosen according to Table 2. TABLE 2 CHOICE OF MEASUREMENT SURFACE AND MICROPHONE POSITIONS (Clause13.6 1
WEIGET OFTHEPAVINO-BREAKEK
on HAMMER AS NORMALLY AND EXCLUSIVE OB TOOL kg < 10

USED

HEMIGPHEXE RA~xus m 2

HEICJHT ABOVE GROUND FOR MEABUREMENTPOBITIONS m ~--.----~_~~~ Ito8 9to 12

> 10

4
15

0.75 1'50

1'40
2.80

IS: 11702( Part 2 ) - 1986 13.6.2 In Fig. 4, measurement positions 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11 and 12 are the key measurement points which should always be used. If it is deemed necessary to introduce more measurement positions, they should conform with measurement positions 2, 4, 6 and 8.
In no circumstances are more than 12 measurement positions necessary.

13.6.3 The exhaust shall following pairs of microphone 7or8 and 1.

be directed to fall between one of the positions, between 2 and 3, 4 and 5, 6 and

r _ Radius

of hemisphere

FIG. 4

MICROPHONE ARRAY FOR MEASUREMENT OF NOISE FROM PAV~~-BK~~XERS 16

IS : 11702( Part 2 ) - 1986

APPENDIX ( Clause10.1 )
DETERMINATION A-l.

A
INDEX

OF DIRECTIVITY

The directivity index, DI, of a source operating in a free field above a reflecting plane is defined as the tliflYrence between the highest value of the A-weighted sound pressure level measured at one of the microphone positions and the energy-averaged vah~e of the A-weighted sound pressure levels at all of the microphone positions: -

DI = Lpi -L,

where ~5,~ is the highest value of the A-weighted sound in decibels, at the microphone positions; pressure level,

15; is the energy-averaged mean A-weighted sound level, in decibels, at all microphone positions.

pressure

is different from that of Indian Standard measurement NOTE 1 - This formula of airbrone noise emitted by constructional equipment intended for outdoor use Method for checking compliance with noise limits ( lrndsr pre/~paraLion), which is given for spherical radiation. NOTE 2 - For some purposes it may bc advantageous to calculate the directivity index for a particular plant, for example, the horizontal plane. For these purposes the directivity index is defined as the difference between the highrst value of the A-weighted sound pressure level measured at OC~C? of the microphone potitions in the plane and the energy-averaged value of the A-weighted sound pressure levels at all the microphone positions in the plane: DZ-&,--&I where Lpi is the highest at microphone value of the A-weighted positions in one plane; sound pressure level, in decibels, in deci-

&I is the energy-averaged bels, at all microphone

mean A-weighted sound pressure positions in the same plane.

level,

APPENDIX ( Clause10.1 )
FORMAT FOR HAND-HELD

B
REPORT

TOOL

Report on Tool Noise Test
The following test has been made in accordance with this standard.

1. Description of Tool
Manufacturer: _. . ...*. . .,... ..- . . . . . . . . . . . . . .._.... . . . . . . . . ..*.s -. . . . . . . . . . . . . Serial No. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Model: ..- . . . . . . . . ._. . . . . ~ . . . . . . . . 9.e.. Rated speed and capacity: ._. . . . . . . .., ,.. . . . .__ _.. . . .., . . . .,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Description: . . . . . . . . 4.,I............... . . . . . . . .. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

IS I 11702 ( Part 2. Operating 2.1

2 ) - 1986

Conditions

frequency, r/min: ............................. Air flow, l/s: ... .............. Air pressure supplied, bar: ............ On load-Rotational/blow Running free--Speed, rev/min: ............................................. device: ................. .....................

2.2 2.3

Nature of energy-absorbing

3. Test Conditions Barometric pressure, bar: ......... Ambient temperature, "C: ......... Wind speed, m/s: ............................................................ Reflecting plane, composition and dimensions, m: ....................... Remarks: .....................................................................

4. Instrumentation Microphone: .................................. Serial No ................... Serial No. : ................ Serial No. : .................. or Serial No. :. ................. Serial No. . - ..................

Sound level meter: ............................. Octave band analyser: ....................... ............................... Calibrator: wind-screen for example Other, recorder: 5. Test Layout Area of the measurement ......................................

surface, ms: ........................................

Sketch showing microphone positions, orientation of machine, direction of exhaust, direction and distance to large objects near machine being tested.

Height above reflecting plane: ............................................... Background noise measured at microphone posi,tion No.: ...............

The test results are given in the table on the following page. Reported by: ............................ Date: .............................. Date: .............................. 18

Approved by: .........................

REPORT

ON TOOL

NOISE

TEST Levels

Sound Pressure

and Sound Power

level corrected for

level corrected for

NOTE -

Readings that need correction for background noise shall be shown in parentheses.

