anda HAF IS 5182 (Part 24) : 2019 
Indian Standard 


RECURS 
ATT 24 Gan GARA (UT UA) 


Methods for Measurement 
of Air Pollution 
Part 24 Fine Particulate Matter (PM 


25) 


ICS 13.040.20 


© BIS 2019 


Urea Ae ST 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR UI, 9 TEE TH HM, ay Reef 110002 


A et MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2019 Price Group 5 


Air Quality Sectional Committee, CHD 35 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 24) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Air 
Quality Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Particulate matter (PM) or particulates are microscopic solid or liquid matter suspended in atmosphere. They 
can be either anthropogenic or naturally occurring. Some examples include dust, ash and sea-spray. Particulate 
matter (including soot) is emitted during the combustion of solid and liquid fuels, such as from power generation, 
domestic heating and in vehicle engines. Particulate matter varies in size (that is, the diameter or width of the 
particle). PM, ¿means suspended particles that are 2.5 micrometers (um) or smaller in diameter. It is often called 
as fine particulate matter. 


Inhalation of particulate matter can have adverse health effect. The biggest impact of particulate air pollution on 
public health is understood to be from long-term exposure to PM, „ which increases the age-specific mortality 
risk, particularly from cardiovascular causes. Children, the elderly and those with pre-disposed respiratory and 
cardiovascular disease, are known to be more susceptible to the health impacts from air pollution. Keeping this 
in view, it is important to develop standards for determination of fine particulate matter present in atmosphere. 


In the development of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following; 

Appendix L to Part 50 of USEPA Federal Register — Reference Method for the determination of Fine Particulate 
Matter as PM, , in the atmosphere. 

ASTM F 316-94 Standard Test Methods for Pore Size Characteristics of Membrane Filters by Bubble Point and 
Mean Flow Pore Test 

ASTM D2896a-99 Standard Practice for Evaluation of Air Assay Media by the Monodisperse DOP (Dioctyl 
Pthalate) Smoke Test 

The list of committee members responsible for development of this standard is given in Annex A. 

In reporting the results of a test or analysis in accordance with this standard, if the final value observed or 


calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised )’. 


IS 5182 (Part 24) : 2019 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT 
OF AIR POLLUTION 


PART 24 FINE PARTICULATE MATTER (PM,.) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 24) prescribes the method for 
measurement of the mass concentration of particulate 
matter (PM, .) in ambient air based on the principle of 
segregation of non-PM, , particles from the air stream 
followed by filtration and gravimetric determination of 
PM, ¿ mass on the filter substrate. 


2 REFERENCE 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
4167 : 1980 Glossary of terms relating to air 
pollution (first revision) 
5182 (Part 23) Methods for measurement of 
: 2006 air pollution: Part 23 Respirable 
suspended particulate matter 
(PM,,) cyclonic flow technique 
17025 : 2017 General requirements for the 
competence of testing and 


calibration laboratories (second 
revision) 


It is further recommended to refer the following 
documents for more information: 


a) Quality Assurance Guidance Document 2.12: 
Monitoring PM, , in Ambient Air using Designated 
Reference or Class I Equivalent Methods, EPA. 


b) EPA Compendium Method IO 3.3. 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given in 
IS 4167 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Particulate Matter PM,, — Figure 1 in 
IS 5182 (Part 23), defines various size distributions 
of particulate matter in ambient air. Particulate matter 
having an aerodynamic diameter less than or equal to a 
nominal 2.5 micrometers is referred to as PM, .. 


NOTE — It may however, be noted that the internationally 
accepted size distribution for PM,, particulates includes a 
small fraction of particles up to an aerodynamic diameter of 
less than 5 micrometers. 


4 PRINCIPLE 


An electrically powered air sampler draws ambient 
air at a constant volumetric flow rate of 16.67 Ipm 
(1 m’/h), maintained by a mass flow controller 
coupled to a microprocessor, into a specially shaped 
inlet and through an inertial particle size separator 
(impactor) where, suspended particulate matter in 
the PM,, size range is separated for collection on a 
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) filter over the specified 
sampling period. 


Each filter is weighed (after moisture and temperature 
conditioning) before and after sample collection to 
determine the net mass of PM, , particles. 


The total volume of air sampled is determined by the 
sampler at actual ambient temperature and pressure 
prevailing at the time of sampling. 


The mass concentration of PM,, in ambient air is 
computed as the total mass of collected particles in 
the PM, , size range divided by the actual volume of 
air sampled and is expressed in micrograms per cubic 
meter of air (ug/m?). 


The measurement process is considered to be non- 
destructive, and the PM,, sample obtained can be 
subjected to subsequent physical or chemical analysis. 


5 RANGE AND SENSTIVITY 


5.1 Minimum Detection Limit 


The lower detection limit of the mass concentration 
measurement range is estimated to be approximately 
2 ug/m? based on noted mass changes in field blanks. 
It may be mentioned that the above limit assumes use 
of a standard micro balance with a resolution of 1 ug. 


5.2 Upper Detection Limit 


The upper limit of the mass concentration range is 
determined by the filter mass loading beyond which 
the sampler can no longer maintain the operating flow 
rate within specified limits due to increased pressure 
drop across the loaded filter. The upper limit is also 
a function of size distribution of particles, humidity 
and sampler flow rate control system. Nevertheless, 


IS 5182 (Part 24) : 2019 


all samplers are expected to be capable of measuring 
24 h samples with a PM, , mass concentration of upto 
200 ug/m while maintaining the operating flow 
rate within specified limits. For PM, , concentration 
above 200 ug/m? or environmental conditions of high 
humidity (above 80 percent RH), the sampler can be 
operated in two or three shifts of equal time duration by 
changing filter paper. 


6 INTERFERENCES AND SOURCES 
ERROR 


OF 


6.1 Filter Conditioning 


Filter conditioning environments can lead to different 
mass measurements as a function of relative humidity 
(RH). Several species of PM, , particles are known to 
be hygroscopic and can absorb substantial quantities of 
water especially above the deliquescence point. Humid 
conditions will therefore cause a positive bias. Some 
PM, , fractions are known to be volatile and can be lost 
with few degrees rise in temperature. As such higher 
temperatures during operation or storage of the filters 
can lead to a negative bias. The temperatures during 
operation stage and during storage of the filters are to 
be maintained as per requirements given in 8.4 to avoid 
any bias. 


6.2 Change of Oil Soaked Filter Paper 


The PM,, sampler has a well impactor ninetysix 
(WINS) designed to trap medium size particulates with 
an aerodynamic diameter between 2.5 and 10 microns 
on a 37 mm diameter GF/A paper immersed in silicone 
oil to avoid sampling errors due to the tendency of 
small particles to bounce off the impaction surface. The 
oil soaked filter paper shall be removed after every run. 


6.3 Static Charge 


Sensitivity of micro-balances can lead to artifact errors 
due to static charge buildup on the PTFE filters. Static 
charge can also be transferred to the filter from the 
clothes / body of the operator during handling. Good 
handling practices, for example, non-metallic, non- 
serrated forceps for handling weights, use of grounded 
wrist cuffs while handling the filters, antistatic, nitrate- 
free, phosphate-free, sulphate-free, and powder free 
vinyl gloves or use of appropriate devices for static 
charge removal, such as antistatic strips for static 
charge neutralization are recommended if filter weights 
vary by more than + 0.2 mg. 


6.4 Contamination with Ambient Dust 


PM,, samples often have a net mass of only few 
micrograms. As such filters from PM, ¿ samplers can be 
easily contaminated by even a few particles of settleable 
dust leading to a positive bias. To avoid such errors 
filters should be kept covered at all times, handled only 
with tweezers and loaded into filter carriers/cassettes in 
a clean lab environment as mentioned in 9. 


6.5 Contamination during Filter Handling 


PM,, filters should be handled only with non- 
metallic, non-serrated blunt forceps to hold the filter 
only on the support ring and by wearing antistatic, 
nitrate-free, phosphate-free, sulphate-free, and 
powder free vinyl gloves. Handling filters with bare 
hands can leave residues on it leading to a positive 
bias. Contact with exposed surface of the filter can 
dislodge some of the dust deposited leading to a 
negative bias. 


6.6 Contamination from Pump Exhaust Releases 


Oil lubricated or rotary carbon vane suction pumps 
constantly release fine oil mist droplets and fine carbon 
particles (as carbon vanes are continually abraded) 
through their exhaust. These mists / droplets / fine 
carbon dust can get entrained into the sampler inlet 
and can cause a positive bias. Therefore, as mentioned 
in 7.2, sampler shall use only oil and carbon vane free 
pumps. 


7 APPARATUS 


7.1 Filter for PM, , Sample Collection 


Any filter manufacturer offering filters for collection 
of PM,, samples shall conform to the following 
performance specifications, certified from an IS/ISO 
17025 accredited laboratory. 


7.1.1 Size 


Circular (outer diameter), 46.2 + 0.25 mm. Direct 
outside diameter measurement with caliper. 


7.1.2 Medium 


Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) with integral support 
ring. 


7.1.3 Support Ring 


Polymethylpentene (PMP) or equivalent inert material 
like perfluoroalkoxy (PFA), 0.38 + 0.04 mm thick 
(measurement with micrometer). Width of 3.68 mm 
+ 0.00 mm, - 0.51 mm (measurement with caliper) all 
along the outer periphery of the filter membrane. 


7.1.4 Pore Size 

2 um, measured as per method described in ASTM 
F316-94 

7.1.5 Filter Membrane Thickness 


30 to 50 um (measurement with micrometer). 


7.1.6 Maximum Pressure Drop 


For a clean filter, measured maximum pressure drop 
shall be limited to 30 cm Water Column at 16.67 Ipm 
air flow while measuring as per method prescribed in 
ASTM D2986a-99. 


7.1.7 Collection Efficiency 


Greater than 99.7 percent for 0.3 um particles as 
measured by the DOP test at the samplers operating 
face velocity (see 7.1.6). 


7.1.8 Filter Numbering: 


It is advisable that each filter has a unique ID number 
printed on the support ring to facilitate keeping of 
initial & final weight records and other relevant sample 
information. 


7.1.9 Maximum Moisture Pick Up 


The filter shall not increase in weight by more than 
10 ug after 24 h exposure to air of 40 percent RH at 27 + 
2°C compared to its weight after 24 h exposure to air of 
35 percent RH at 27 + 2°C (gravimetric). 


7.1.10 Filter Weight Stability 


The average filter weight loss shall be less than 20 ug 
as measured in each of the following two tests. Filter 
weight loss shall be the average of difference between 
the initial and the final filter weights of a random 
sample of test filters selected from each lot. 


a) Test for Loose Surface Particle Contamination — 
After the initial weighing, each filter shall be 
placed in a filter cassette and dropped from a 
height of 25 cm onto a clean particle free surface. 
Repeat two more times for a total of 3 drops. Each 
filter is then removed and reweighed. The average 
change in mass shall be less than 20 ug. 


b 


wm 


After drop test is completed each filter is then 
exposed to a drying oven, at 40 + 2°C, for not less 
than 48 h. Remove, condition to room temperature 
and reweigh each filter. The average change in 
mass shall be less than 20 ug. 


7.1.11 Alkalinity 


Less than 25 micro-equivalents/gram of filter when 
tested as per the procedure prescribed in Quality 
Assurance Guidance Document 2.12 Monitoring PM, , 
in Ambient Air using Designated Reference or class 
I equivalent methods. 


7.1.12 Packaging 


The filters shall be packed clear, hard, dust tight, non- 
contaminating plastic containers. 


7.1.13 If filters are also to be used for metal analysis, 
these will be tested for metal contamination by 
X-Ray fluorescence as per EPA compendium method 
IO 3.3 and maximum concentration shall be, 
Pb - 4.8; Hg - 4.4; Cd - 10.8; As - 2.8; Cu - 2.8; Fe - 5.8; 
Mn — 2.2; Ni - 3.0 and Cr - 2.2 ng/cm?. 


7.2 Sampler 


The PM, ¿ sampler shall consist of a sample air inlet, 
downtube, particle size separator (impactor), filter 


IS 5182 (Part 24) : 2019 


holder assembly, oil free carbon vane pump, air flow 
rate control system, flow rate measuring device, 
ambient and filter temperature monitoring system, 
barometric pressure measuring system, all housed in an 
outdoor environment enclosure. Fig. 1 shows a typical 
system configuration. 


7.2.1 Recording Facility 


The sampler shall have facility to record the air flow 
rate, total volume of air sampled, coefficient of variation 
of flow rate, ambient and filter temperature, barometric 
pressure and filter pressure prevailing during the 
operation of the sampler. The data of flow control must 
be upgraded at least every 30 s and recorded (logged) 
every five minutes. Barometric pressure, ambient 
temperature and filter temperature should be measured 
on the same schedule. Filter temperature must not 
exceed the ambient temperature by more than 5°C for 
more than 30 min. Blowing filtered ambient air through 
the enclosure provides the necessary cooling effect. 
The supporting run-time (interval data) generated after 
5 min intervals as well as the integrated performance 
(filter) data for the 24 h sampling period shall be stored 
in the sampler’s microprocessor with the facility to 
retrieve the same as and when required. The data may 
also be extracted to a portable computer. 


7.3 Sampler Height 


The sampler shall be equipped with means to maintain 
the sampler in a stable, upright position and such 
that the center of the air sample inlet is maintained 
in a horizontal plane at 2.0 + 0.2 m above the floor. 
Suitable means like bolt holes, brackets /tie downs may 
be provided to mechanically secure the sampler from 
toppling over due to wind. 


7.4 Dust Segregation System 


The dust segregation system shall comprise of two 
stage impaction separators connected bya downtube 
as indicated in Fig.1. The parts of the PM,, impactor 
and downtube shall be fabricated as per internationally 
accepted designs (refer Figures L-1 through L-19 
of appendix L of 40CFR 50 of the USEPA federal 
register). 


7.5 PM, ¿ Impactor 


The PM,, impactor (particle size separator) is the 
heart of the system and shall be fabricated to close 
tolerances as per internationally accepted designs to 
ensure effective size cut-off (refer Figures L-20 through 
L-24 of appendix L of 40CFR 50 of the USEPA federal 
register). 


7.5.1 Impactor Filter 


Impactor filter shall be circular in size, 35 to 37 mm 
diameter, made of glass fiber with poresize of about 
1.5 um, without binder. 


IS 5182 (Part 24) : 2019 


Ambient 
Temperature 


USEPA Design 
Impactor Assembly 


why] WINS 
J Impactor 


Filter Temperature 


aS 


DATA LOGGER 
CONTROLLER 


Barometric 
Pressure 


Filter Pressure 


USB Port for 
Data Transfer 


Pump Control 


Pump Assembly 


Power Input 


Fıc. 1 PM, A SAMPLER SCHEMATIC 


7.5.2 Impactor Oil 


The filter placed inside the oil well of the impactor 
shall be soaked with 1 ml single compound silicone 
oil having a vapor pressure of 2 x 10% mm Hg and 
viscosity 36 — 40 centistokes at 25°C. 


7.5.3 Filter Holder Assembly 


The sampler shall have a filter holder assembly 
connected to the lower portion of the PM, , impactor 
assembly, which can hold and seal the filters placed 
in filter casettes. The filter holder shall be placed in 


a horizontal position such that the sample air passes 
down through the filter at a uniform face velocity. 


7.5.4 Leak Check Adaptor 


The sampler shall include an accessory device that 
can be mounted on the downtube in place of the PM, 
impactor with a provision to completely seal/shut- 
off the air inlet into the system so that a leak check 
operation can be performed in the field without any 
additional hardware. 


7.6 Analytical Balance 


For precise and reliable measurement of mass of 
PM, , in ambient air, use of digital microbalance with 
higher resolution is recommended (see note below). 
The installation of digital micro balance shall be as 
per manufacturer’s instruction on a vibration damping 
surface. 
NOTE — A digital microbalance with a resolution of 10 ug 
shall suffice for PM,, levels encountered at large number of 
site conditions in India. However, if a laboratory wants to 
increase its range of measurement of PM, , levels to cover the 
sensitive areas or other very low dust environments a digital 
balance with a resolution of 1 ug is recommended. 


8 PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 


8.1 Sample Flow Rate 


For effective separation of particulate matter (that 
is, PM,, and PM, .) and performance of the impactor 
system, specific air velocities should be maintained 
through the device. The sample air flow rate of 16.67 
l/min (1.00 m*/h), measured as actual volumetric flow 
rate using a mass flow controller at the temperature and 
pressure of the sample air entering the inlet, should be 
maintained at all times with an accuracy of + 2 percent, 
through proper operation of the impactor. 


8.2 Coefficient of Variation 


The flow rate control system should be capable of 
maintaining flow rate with a coefficient of variation 
not exceeding 2 percent throughout the duration of 
operation of the sampler. 


8.3 Flow Rate Cut-off 


The sampler’s air flow rate control system shall have 
provision to terminate operation of air sampler for the 
remainder sampling period in the event that the air 
flow rate deviates by more than 10 percent from the 
designed flow rate for a continuous period exceeding 
60 s. However, this sample cut-off provision shall not 
apply during periods the sampler is inoperative due to 
temporary power interruption. 


8.4 Filter Temperature Control 


The sampler shall have suitable means to limit the 
temperature rise of the sample filter from insolation 
and internal dissipation sources by not more than 5°C 
above the temperature of ambient air surrounding the 
sampler during the entire sampling period. 


9 PROCEDURE 


9.1 PM,, filter shall be inspected, conditioned and 
weighed in a clean lab environment that shall include 
separation to avoid cross contamination including 
controlled access for restricted movement of personnel. 
The samplers are not recommended to be stored 


IS 5182 (Part 24) : 2019 


or maintained in filter inspection, conditioning or 

weighing area. 
NOTE — Use of semi-wet methods to clean floors, work 
surfaces as per the regime established by laboratory and 
measures as removal of shoes before entry into the PM, , filter 
handling area; use of dedicated lab coats inside; cleaning of 
hands at entry; use of floor mats or air curtains or double door 
entries as decided by lab depending upon site conditions. 


9.2 Suitable arrangement like light box shall be 
available for inspection of filter. Filters with following 
defects shall be discarded: 


a) Pinhole — Any small hole appearing as a distinct 
and obvious bright point of light when examined 
over a lighted table. 


b) Separation of Ring — Any separation or lack of 
seal between the filter and the filter support ring. 


c) Chaff or Flashing — Any extra material on the 
reinforcing ring or on the heat-seal area that would 
prevent an airtight seal during sampling. 


d) Loose Materials — Any extra loose materials or 
dirt particles on the filter. 


e) Discoloration — Any apparent discoloration that 
might be evidence of contamination. 


f) A filter with any imperfection not described above, 
such as, irregular surfaces or poor workmanship. 


9.3 Filter Weighing and Equilibration 


Filters and balance must be handled in a controlled 
environment. For conditioning/equilibration of filter 
prior to weighing, place blank or exposed filters in 
conditioning chamber with temperature maintained at 
25 + 2°C and RH at 45 + 5 percent for at least 24 h. 
As loose dust particles can affect the measurement, 
the filters should be kept in covered petri-dishes at all 
times. Store pre-weighed filters in covered dishes in 
a clean area. Filters must be equilibrated in the same 
environmental conditions prior to the pre and post- 
sampling weighing. 


Filters should be weighed immediately after removal 
from the conditioning chamber maintaining temperature 
of balance room at 25 + 2°C and RH at 45 + 5 percent 
during the weighing process. Use clean, gloved hands 
and handle the filters carefully with blunt tweezers 
(see 6.3). Tare the balance to zero without any weight 
on pan. Place filter on the pan of the balance and read 
the weight. Record the filter ID and weight. Once the 
difference between consecutive readings is less than 
0.015 mg, the filters are considered stabilized. 


NOTE — Verify the zero after weighing of every ten filters. 

After every 10 filters it is recommended that the weight of a 

standard weight be verified to check for drifts in the balance. 
After initial weighing, filters shall be used for sampling 
within 30 days. Post sampling conditioning and 
weighing of filters shall be completed within 10 days 
after the end of sampling period. 


IS 5182 (Part 24) : 2019 


9.4 A system of filter blanks shall be maintained. Filter 
blanks must be transported to the site and processed 
almost exactly as the actual filters (except the sampler 
would not be operated). Filter blanks are an important 
quality control procedure and consistent blank weights 
will increase the confidence level of actual sample 
weights. A lot blank check can also be performed. 


9.5 Loading Filters into Cassettes 


Avoid direct contact with filters at all times. To facilitate 
the same, filters are placed in plastic cassettes which 
are in turn placed in the filter holder of the sampler. To 
load a pre-weighed filter in a cassette, open the cassette 
by prying open the two halves. Carefully place the filter 
in the cavity of the lower half and place it by pressing 
the top part. Immediately place the loaded cassette in a 
covered carrier / container for transporting to the field 
site. 


9.6 Field Sampling 


Use the sampler manufacturer”s instructions to setup 
the instrument. Place a filter cassette (with pre-weighed 
filter) in the filter holder of the sampler. Switch on 
the sampler and check the sampling rate. For systems 
having air volume totalizer, record the initial volume 
reading else record the time totalizer reading. Allow 
the sampler to operate for the desired sampling period. 
Before switching off the sampler, check that the flow 
rate has been maintained within acceptable limits as 
per 8.1. Record the volume totalizer or time totalizer 
reading to determine the total volume of air sampled. 
Remove the filter cassette from the filter holder 
assembly of the sampler and immediately place it in a 
covered container for transportation to the laboratory 
for post sampling weighing. 


9.7 Period of Operation 


Samples shall be collected for 24 h period in line with 
NAAQS (National Ambient Air Quality Standards), 
India. However, in areas of frequent power failure or 
difficult site conditions a sample that has been collected 
for at least 16 h (out of the 24 h period) may also be 
accepted as a valid sample. 


9.7.1 In areas with high PM concentration, it has been 
observed that particularly in the presence of high 
humidity/fog the PTFE filter membrane gets rapidly 
choked and it becomes impossible to determine a 24 h 
average concentration via one continuous sampling. In 
such situations a 24 h value may be reported by taking 
an arithmetic mean of 2 or more samples covering a 
period of at least 16 h out of the 24 h duration. 


10 QUALITY ASSURANCE MEASURES 


10.1 Leak Check 


Follow the sampler manufacturer’s manual to setup 
the leak check apparatus. External leak check should 
be performed periodically to ascertain that there is 


no leakage of air that affects the performance of the 
system. It is recommended that a leak check must 
be performed after any maintenance activity on the 
sampler and after the instrument has been moved to a 
new site. The procedure should include a method that 
checks the system's ability to hold a vacuum of at least 
75 cm water column for a period of 10 min with a drop 
in pressure that corresponds to a leak rate of less than 
80 ml/min. 


10.2 Calibration 


Periodic calibration of the sampler and balance must 
be performed as per the calibration plan prepared by 
laboratory at such intervals as determined on the basis 
of use. The laboratory shall have masters of F2 class or 
better (weight box for balance and an independent flow 
rate measuring device traceable to national primary 
standards with an accuracy of + 2 percent) to perform 
intermediate checks at a single point for balance and 
sampler. If during any intermediate check, deviation 
of more than + 4 percent of the designed flow rate is 
observed, calibration must be performed again. 
NOTE — Calibrations shall be carried out by accredited 
laboratories following system as per IS/ISO 17025 or by 
laboratories having traceability system. For balance, on 
intermediate checks, if the standard deviation is greater than + 
3 micrograms, and the R? is not better than 0.995, the balance 
should be carefully inspected and submitted for maintenance 
and recalibration by an IS/ISO 17025 accredited calibration 
laboratory. The overall frequency of calibration shall in no case 
be more than 2 years. 


The quality of the entire sampler system to determine mass 
concentration of PM, . is based on the dust segregation system 
and PM, , impactor as given in 7.4 and 7.5. The model of PM, , 
sampler shall thus be approved for 2.5um cutoff size from 
National Measurement Institute (NMI) or any other institute 
authorized by the National Standards Body of India. 


11 CALCULATION 


11.1 Calculation of Volume of Air Sampled: 
V=Oxt 
Where, 
V = volume of air sampled, in m’; 
O = average flow rate, in m*/h; and 
t = total sampling time, in h. 
11.2 Calculation of PM, „ Concentration in Ambient 
Air: 
PM, ¿(as ug/m?) = (W, - W,) x 10°)/V 
Where, 
PM 


as = Mass concentration of fine particulate matter 


less than 2.5 microns diameter, in ug/m?; 
W, = initial weight of the filter, in g; 
W, = final weight of filter, in g; 
V = Volume of air sampled, in m’; and 


10° = conversion factor of g to ug. 


IS 5182 (Part 24) : 2019 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. 40 CFR, Part 50, Appendix L — USEPA Reference Method for the determination of Fine Particulate 
Matter as PM, in the atmosphere. 


IS 5182 (Part 24) : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE MEMBERS RESPONSIBLE FOR DEVELOPMENT OF STANDARD 


Organization 
In personal capacity 


Avantha Centre for Industrial Research and 
Development, Yamuna Nagar 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research, 
Dhanbad 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 
Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 
Delhi Technological University, New Delhi 


Director General, Factory Advice Service & Labour 
Institute, Mumbai 


Ecotech Instruments, Greater Noida 
Envirotech Instruments Pvt Ltd 


Environment Protection and Training Research 
Institute, Hyderabad 


Gujarat Pollution Control Board, Gandhinagar 
Green Economy Initiatives Pvt Ltd, Mohali 
Himachal Pradesh State Pollution Control Board 


In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 


Indian Association for Air Pollution Control — 
Delhi Chapter 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 
Jharkhand State Pollution Control Board 
Maharashtra State Pollution Control Board 


National Environmental Engineering Research 
Institute, Delhi Centre 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Ballabhgarh 


National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Dr (Mrs) Gaur! G. PANDIT 


Dr NisHi KANT BHARDWAJ 
Dr SuniL Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr A. VINOD KUMAR 
Dr S. K. Sanu (Alternate) 


Dr R. C. TRIPATHI 
Dr N. K. Srivastava (Alternate) 


SHRI V. K. SHUKLA 
Dr R. C. Srivastava (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIKHAR JAIN 
Ms NanDINI Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr RAKESH MEHROTRA 
Dr ANUBHA MANDAL (Alternate) 


Dr Bru MOHAN 
Ms DHANASHREE ACHREKAR (Alternate) 


Dr RAJENDRA PRASAD 


Dr BALBIR SINGH 
SHRI HARSH Kumar Dixit (Alternate) 


Dr N. RAVEENDHAR 


Dr D. N. VANSADIA 
DRR. S. SANI 


Dr T. B. SINGH 
Dr Mano) CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIB Ku. GOSWAMI 
Dr S. K. TYAGI 
Dr H. K. PARWANA 


Dr J. S. SHARMA 


DR RAKESH KUMAR 
Dr Pranav K. Tripatut (Alternate I) 
Suri J. I. Sevak (Alternate II) 


Dr S. C. BARMAN 
SHRIR. N. KASHYAP 


Dr A. R. SUPATE 
Dr V. R. THaxur (Alternate) 


Dr S. K. GoYAL 
Dr P. K. LABHASETWAR (Alternate) 


Dr N. K. Tiwary 
SHRI ANAND BOHRA (Alternate) 


DR SHANKAR AGARWAL 


Suri V. Ravi BABU 
SHRI SUDHIR DAHIYA (Alternate) 


IS 5182 (Part 24) : 2019 


Organization Representative(s) 

Sriram Institute for Industrial Research, New Delhi Dr MUKESH GARG 

SHRI RAJNEESH Ku SHARMA (Alternate) 
Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi SHRI SATYA SUBRAHMANYAM 

Suri MANISH GoswAMI (Alternate) 
Thermofisher Scientific Ms JAYA NANGIA 

SHRI ANANT GHADIGAONKAR (Alternate) 
UNIPHOS Envirotronics Pvt Ltd SHRI VuJAY PANDEY 

Dr R. C. Naik (Alternate) 
West Bengal Pollution Control Board, Kolkata Dr Usa Ku MUKHOPADHYAY 

SHRI SHYAM Ku ADHIKARI (Alternate) 
Director General, BIS SHRI U. K. Das, Scientist E AND HEAD, CHD 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio) | 


Member Secretary 
Ku Kreeti Das 
Scientist B (CHD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 35 (10951). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


