( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 9401 ( Part

V )- 1980

Indian Standard
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF WORKS IN RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS ( DAMS AND APPURTENANT STRUCTURES )
PART Method of Measurement
Chairman SHRI S. P. CAPRII~AN

V

MASONRY

of Works of River Valley Projects, BDC 69
Representing Irrigation Department, Pradesh, Bhopal Government of Madhya

Members Engineers India Limited, New Delhi K. D. ARGOT SHRI G. K. NATRAJAN ( Akcrnafs ) Irrigation Department, Government of Bihar, Patna SHRI J. BAHADUR CHIEE ENQINEER, IRRIQATION Irrigation Department, Government of Karnataka, Bangalore Department, Government of Andhra C (RN'?: )ENBLNEICB ( MAJOR Irrigation Pradesh, Hyderabad IRRITATION & GENERAL ) CHIEF ENGINEER I MEDIUM IRRITATION & D&I~NS ) ( Alternate) Water and Power ( Irrigation ) Department, CHIEF ENQINEER ( PROJECTS ) Government of Kcrala. , Trivandrum DEPUTY CHIEB ENQINEER SHRI s( F;;~F ) ( Alternate ) Irrigation and Waterways Department, Government . . of West Bengal, Calcutta Central Water Commission, New Delhi DIREOTOR ( R & C ) Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar SHRI OM PRAKASH GIJPTA Pradeah, Lucknow Institution of Surveyors, Delhi SHRI G. G. KARMARKAR Irrigation Department, Government of Rajasthan, SHRI B. N. MATHUR
SHRI

SHRI T. S. MURTHY

Nati%?6rojects, New Delhi SHRI M. G. SAMPATHKUMARAN ( A[temate )

Construction

Corporation

Ltd,

( Continued on page 2 )
INDIAN @ Cofiyright 1980 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian CopyIight Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any Feans except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infrmgementOf copyrightunder the said Act.

IS : 9401( Part V ) - 1980 ( Continued from page 1 )
Members SERI G. A. MUSTAFBA
SHRI R. G. PATEL

Representing Public Works Department, Government of Jammu & Kashmir, Srinagar Public Works Department, Government of Gujarat, Ahmedabad Irrigation Department, Government of Haryaaa, Chandigarh Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, Bombay Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member )

Saxr P. S. RAO
SHRI D.M. SAVUR

SIIRI K. N. SEUKLA SHRI D. AJITHA SIYHA, Director ( Civ Engg )

SHRI J. VENKATARAMAN Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI

2

IS t 9401 ( Part V ) - 1980

Indian Standard
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF WORKS IN RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS ( DAMS AND APPURTENANT STRUCTURES
PART V MASONRY

)

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard ( Part V ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 January 1980, after the draft finalized by the Method of Measurement of Works of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 In measurements of quantities in construction of river valley projects a large diversity of methods exists at present according to local practices. This lack of uniformity creates complication regarding measurements and payments. The estimator is also left in doubt as to the true meaning and intention of items in the schedule of work. This standard is intended to provide a uniform basis for measuring masonry works in the construction of river valley projects. 0.2.1 The provisions contained in this standard will generally have precedence over the provisions in IS : 1200 ( Part III )-1976* and However, the provisions of both these IS : 1200 ( Part IV )-1976t. standards and this standard be considered complimentary and supplementary to each other. 0.3 In reporting the result of measurements made in accordance with observed or calculated, is to be this standard, if the final value, rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960:. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This masonry structures standard ( Part works in river ). V ) covers the valley projects method of measurement of ( dams and appurtenant

*Method of measurement of building work ( third rcuirion ). t&thod of measurement of building
masonry ( third r&ion ). fRu]es for rounding off numerical

and and

civil engineering works: Part 111 Brick_
civil ( rehd engineering ). works:

Part IV Stone

values

3

IS : 9401 ( Part V ) - 1980 2. GENERAL 2.1 The purpose of measurement
of proposed work is preparation of bill of quantiries for estimating and tendering. The purpose of measurement of executed work is assessment of value of work for payment. In either case the method of measurements should be such that it is fairly quick, reasonably accurate and amenable to check at any time.

2.2 In case of measurement

of proposed work, the dimensions are scaled or read from drawings and then worked up that is reduced to length, area, or volume in recognized units of measurements for the particular In case of assessment of executed work, the dimensions are item. measured in the field. Calculations of length, area, volume, weight, etc, are made on the basis of these dimensions and payments are made accordingly. Where measurement of a number of units are the same it is the usual practice to take measurements of one unit and multiply the calculated length, area or volume by the number of units. 2.3 Measurements shall be taken to nearest centimetre including of levels. Fractions less than half shall be disregarded and fractions half and above are to be regarded as unity. Areas shall be worked out to be nearest 0.01 m2 and cubic contents shall be worked out to nearest 0.01 ms. However, in measurement of repetitive nature, this practice shall be applied to the total of the item and not to individual unit. It is essential that measurements shall be as accurate as possible. 2.4 Measurements are closely linked with detailed drawings, description of items and specifications of the work. These should, therefore, be very clear and properly worded and the order of precedence shall be sanctioned drawings, approved specifications and specified description of items. 3. MEASUREMENT

OF IRREGULAR

AREAS AND VOLUMES

3.1 The

irregular area shall be divided into a number of figures of known area, say, triangles, rectangles, etc. The remaining part ( which cannot be formed into a triangle or a regular figure ) may be evaluated by taking out average height drawn on a common base by Simp,ons volume, the volume shall be determined by

Rule.
3.2 In case of an irregular the Prismoidal formula.

4. MEASUREMENT 4.1 General 4.1.1 Masonry work be given and measured

OF MASONRY

WORKS

differing in characteristic under separate headings. 4

and

specification

shall

IS : 9401 ( Part V ) - 1980 4.1.2 The work executed shall be specified clearly that is stone, mortar ( ratio, percentage with respect to volume of work, water: cement ratio ), and labour. It shall be stated if the stone is to be set on its natural bed or otherwise. 4.1.3 No deduction shall be made of embedded for the following: material up to 0.05 ma in area; 100 mm and

a) Any opening

b) Plates or the like where bearing does not extend d) For chamfers provided,

thickness does not exceed over the entire area;

c) Blocks for hold fasts, holding

down bolts and the like; and in stages of ground level

if any, less than 50 x 50 mm.

4.1.4 Works shall be measured under different categories 3 m stating the height above ground level or depth below as the case may be indicating the ground level. 4.2 Masonry Work

4.2.1 finishing ( except setting, rubbing

Masonry work shall be measured in cubic metres including of face which should be clearly stated and including all labour as stated otherwise ), necessary staging, shoring, hoisting, etc, jointing, pointing and for preparing of slurry, cleaning off and down on completion, if required. as

4.2.2 The measurement shall be made to the neat lines of structure shown in the drawing or actually executed whichever is less.

4.2.3 In case of structures having base area 500 ma and above, the measurement shall be made according to pre-work and post-work levels dividing the area into small glids of 3 metre square. 4.2.4 In measurement volume of embedded pipes, recesses, passages, chambers, openings, cavities, depressions, drains and niches and other metal works excluding reinforcement, bolts and HT cables, etc, having a cross-sectional area more than 0.05 ma shall be deducted. 4.2.5 For slurry or cement mortar required in construction joints, no separate measurement for its use shall be made as these form part of masonry. 4.3 Extra Lift

4.3.1 An item of extra lift measured in cubic metres shall be given for all masonry works above 3 metres from the ground level in stages of 3 metre each inclusive of necessary staging, shoring, hoisting,`etc. 4.3.2 Similarly an item of extra descending measured shall be given for all masonry works more than 3 metres 5 in cubic metres from the ground

IS : 9401 ( Part V ) - 1980 level and
etc.

in stages of 3 metres

each including
etc

necessary

staging,

shoring,

4.4 Piers, Pillars/Columns,

4.4.1 Masonry work in piers, pillars/columns, bed and measured in cubic metres according a) b) c) 4.5 Rectangular Curved or polygonal on plan, or on plan to any radius,

etc, shall be fully descrito following categories:

Any other type. in Arches described and measured for spans up to 2 metres. separately.

Masonry

4.5.1 Masonry work in arches shall be separately in cubic metres including centering

4.5.2
4.5.3

For spans exceeding Facing to arches

2 t-n centering

shall be measured

shall be measured
Work

separately.

4.6 Facing
4.6.1

and Hearting work

If the facing

work shall be measured multiplied by depth of facing cubic metres. facing

is of different specification than hearting, separately on the basis of exposed surface as specified or actual whichever is less, in

4.6.2 The measurement of hearting shall be in cubic metres worked Out on the basis of total volume of masonry minus the volume of facing
work worked 4.7 Masohry out as in 4.6.1. Work Built Entirely of Facing Block Parapet or

boundary walls, which are built fair face both sides or entirely of facing blocks shall be measured on its central line as a single item in square metres. 4.8 Special
4,S.l Work

measured

Any special in square

work and other

connected

stone work less than 25 cm in thickness metres, stating the thickness, describing
works to be done.

shall
the

be
face

4.8.2 Any special pointing work required to be done shall be measured in square metres describing the nature of work mcluding materials to be

used. 4.9 Band Masonry work. in bands
If the width 6 metres stating the thickness, square metres. shall be measured in running 1s less than 25 cm otherwise in

IS : 9401 ( Part 4.10 Projections - Projections to masonry, piers, etc, shall be measured in cubic metres.

V ) - 1980

such as footing,

attached

4.11 Cornices, Copings, Strings, etc - Masonry work in cornices, string course, plinth courses, sills, coping, etc, shall be described and measured in running metres. 4.12 Ornamental Works - Masonry work in ornamental works such as bead, dart and similar items shall be described and measured separately in running metres. 4.13 Block-Outs

4.13.1 Block-outs in masonry work shall be measured in running metres specifying the shape of the block-outs including dimensions. 4.13.2 Filling work required to be done in block-outs shall be described in detail and measured in running metres. 4.14 Cutting Grooves - Cutting grooves shall be measured in running metres specifying the shape and size of cutting. 4.15 Cutting of Openings - Cutting of openings shall be measured in cubic metre and item shall include provision for fixing and removal of existing support and temporary support. 4.16 Levelling-Up - When levellinpup of uncoursed or random work is required, it shall be measured separately in square metres and the material, such as concrete or mortar to be used in levelling-up shall be described.

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units
QUANTITY

SYSTEM OF UNITS
UNIT metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole
SYMBOL m kg s

( SI UNITS )

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Units

A K cd mol

Supplementary
QUANTITY

UNIT radian steradiari

SY YIBOL

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units QUANTITY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, atreas

rad sr

UNIX newton joule watt weber tesla hertz sicmcns volt pascol

SYZslBOL

DEFINITION 1 1 IW N 1 kg.mJs* J = lN.m - 1 J/s = 1 V.s 1 Wb/ms

N

J
W Wb T HZ S V Pa

1 Wb
1 1 1

T -

1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-1) S==lA/V V1 W/A

1 Pa-IN/m'

