IS 13946

( Part 4 ) : 1994
( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Indian Standard

DETERMINATIONOFROCKSTRBSSCODEOFPRACTICE
PART 4 USING FLAT JACK TECHNIQUE

UDC 624-121.4

o BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG
l

March 1994

Price Group 5

Rock

Mechanics

Sectional

Committee,

CED 48

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 4 ) was adopted by the Bureau by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been Council. Vertical stress on a rock mass varies in a more predictable former is primarily affected by the weight of overburden. When an opening is introduced in the rockmass, the rock mass attains a new state of equilibrium. The man-made activities is termed `induced stress' as describes the original, undisturbed state of stress. in situ stress. of Indian approved fashion Standards, after the draft finalized by the Civil Engineering Division than horizontal stress because the

natural state of stress is disturbed locally as the stress around an opening resulting from various opposed to virgin stress or absolute stress which The natural state of stress is often termed as

Underground in situ stress is sometimes sufficiently high ( relative to the rock mass strength ) to cause or other ground control problems. In such cases, knowledge rock bursting spalling, buckling, heaving, to the design and construction of engineering of the state of in situ stress is of critical importance structures in a rock mass. Even in cases where the effects of stress are less dramatic, the optimum shape, orientation and layout of under-ground structures, as well as the effectiveness and ultimate cost of rock support systems, can be significantly influenced by the in situ stress. Factors affecting the magnitudes and orientation of in situ stress include the weight of overlying and materials, geologic structures ( on local and regional scales ), tectonic forces within the earth's crust, residual stress and the thermal stress. The complexity of the relations between theses factors and the in situ stress usually prohibits reliable estimation of rock stress. In addition, stress cannot be measured directly, and therefore, rock stress determination techniques rely on the measurement of some response ( fcr example displacement, strain, deformation ) that is induced by a disturbance of the rock mass. This measured response of rock in a stress-disturbed zone ( for example, the wall of a tunnel ) is extrapolated, from the opening outwards, through a numerical model or analytical techniques or measurements must be made via a drillhole that extends into an undistrurbed region of the rock mass. Several methods have been tried to different advantage and disadvantages Different methods for measurement got wide acceptance : Part 1 Using the hydraulic arrive at a reliable means of measuring with respect to a particulur applicable. of rock stress fracturing have been covered

in situ stress.
four parts

Each which

offers have

in following

technique gauges

Part 2 Using Part 3 Using Part 4 Using

a USBM type drillhole deformation gauge a CSIR or CSIRO type cell with 9 or 12 strain flat jack technique

For field use, the technique for measuring stress in rock should be simple and enable a number of measurements to be made easily. The flat jack method is one such technique. The method consists of cutting a thin slot into the rock surface by drilling a series of overlapping holes. This process relieves the rock surface of the stress which originally existed across it. Because of the stress relief, the sides of the plot converge. This is measured between two points across the slot fixed in the rock prior to cutting the slot. The convergence occurring is then neutralized by inflating a flat jack fixed in the slot and the cancellation pressure is noted, Assuming that the rock mass is elastic within range of working stress, this canceIlation pressure is taken as very nearly equal to the pressure that existed in the rock normal to the plane of slot before the slot was cut. The main limitations assumption of elastic test cannot be carried of the test are : the size of the flat jack in relation to the recovery, errors due to stress concentration due to driving out at any appreciable depth from the rock surface. elaborated publication size of the rock mass, of tunnels, etc. This

In this part method covered in IS 7292 : 1974 has been and reporting of results besides using SI units. After withdrawn. The committee responsible for the formulation

further to include calibration aspect of this part IS 7292 : 1974 shall be A.

of this standard

is given at Annex

( Continued on third cover )

IS 13946 ( Part 4 ) : 1994

Indian Standard

DETERMINATIONOFROCKSTRBSSCODEOFPRACTICE
PART 1 SCOPE 1.1 This code deals magnitude of stress in jack technique. 2 TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, ing definitions shall apply. 2.1 Gauge Points These are arbitrary marked points on both sides of the slots and are used as observation points for deformeters ( see Fig. 1 ). 2.2 Flat Sack An equipment used hydraulic pressure. 2.3 Gauge Length Gauge length is the distance between two gauge points, taken on either side of the slot in the plane normal to it ( see Fig. 1 ). for applying cancellation the followwith rock determination mass by using of flat 4 USING FLAT JACK TECHNIQUE 2.4 Deformeter A high precision ment of change points. 2.5 Cancellation equipment in distance Pressure used for measurebetween two gauge

This is the hydraulic pressure in the flat jack at which the displcements created by cutting the slot are cancelled. 2.6 Slot Axis This is the axis passing through the centre of the slot section and parallel to the plane of slot width and the plane of exposed rock face ( see Fig. 2 ). 3 SYMBOLS 3.1 For the purpose of this code, unless otherwise defined in the text, the following symbols shall apply ( see Fig. 2 ) : c = half length half length of the slot; of the flat jack; co =

j

/

ii

I

SECTIONAL VIEW OF ROCK FACE

ROCK

FACE

A-D and E-H, 500mm pair gauge point B-C and F-G, 250 mm pair gauge point
i, k 250 mm gauge length j, I500 mm gauge length All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 1 DBTAILS OF SLOT AND GAUGE POINT 1

IS 13946 ( Part 4 ) : 1994
E P s = = =

deformation cancellation rock slot; slot;

modulus pressure

( in situ ); in the flat jack; plane of the of the

4.2 The method involves tions and considerations

the :

following

assumpin in or

stress normal

to the

Q = rock stress parallel w=

to the plane

a) The cutting of the slot causes a change stress distribution in the rock which turn produces a corresponding strain displacement at the gauge points.

observed displacement of the rock along the axis normal to slot at the gauge point as a distance from the slot axis; of the rock along the axis normal to slot at the gauge point at a distance from the slot axis due to stress on an infinitely thin slot;

b) The strain or displacement produced by pressure in the flat jack at cancellation pressure is equal and opposite to that developed as a result of cutting of slot.

wo = the displacement

c) The application

WI = a correction

term, for the slot of finite width 2 Y, regarded as an elongated ellipse, shall be added to W,;

of by flat jack restores in the rock around cellation pressure is initial stress existing fore the slot was cut

cancellation pressure the initial stress field the slot and the cantherefore eqnal to the within the rock ( be).

wp = displacement

of the rock at the gauge point at a distance y from the slot axis due to stress Q, in the direction of w,;

Value of deformation modulus E and Poisson's ratio ( p ) has been assumed to be the same in all directions.

e) Errors due to stress concentrations
driving of tunnels are negligible. 4.3 Theory

due to

Wj E

displacement of the rock at the gauge point at a distance from the slot axis caused by flat jack when raised to pressure P, in direction opposite to W, distance of the gauge axis and normal to it; finite from the slot

Y

=

Since the stress system S and Q existing within the rock prior to slot cutting is compressive, the total displacement after cutting the slot is given by the following equations: w = w,+w,+w, (1 --p) (a _ $)+W . . . . . (1) 1 . . . ...(2) w 1 =syoE i 2/z a ( _v_
c >

y. = IJ =

half \+idth of the slot; and ratio.

W, __%I

Poisson's

4 GENERAL + .!rw 4.1 The determination of rock properties by flat jack method consists in measuring the displacement in the rock due to cutting a slot in it. A flat jack is then cemented into the slot and pressure applied to it until the displacement created due to cutting the slot is cancelled. This cancellation pressure is then used to compute the rock properties by means of equations given in 4.3.
S
SLOT AXIS FLAT JACK

a

I . . . . . (3) . . . ...(4)

WI = -w;$ where a= J 1+ $-

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 2 STRESS FIELD AROUND THE SLOT 2

1s 13946 ( Part 4 ) : 1394 After the flat jack is grouted raised to hydraulic pressure the given by: in the slot displacement and is and, when the slot was cut using equation (10) of 4.3. Q = 0.815 in vertical x S plane, . . . . ..(12)

x 16.87 + 0.064

. . . ...(5) where 14; 0 J If the pressure in the pressure, then, w = wj or
Wj = W0 + WI + wZ ... - (7)

Q = 14.90 kg/cm2 4.4 In order to determine the principal stresses at least three tests shall be carried out at one site in three orthogonal planes. The test shall be carried out at the same site but in the zone not influenced by any previous test. For this, tests should be carried out at a distance of more than 3 times the length of the slot from the centre of the slot along its length. 4.5 Site Selection

a, =

flat

jack

is cancellation . . . ...(6)

Substituting the values of WO, WI, Ws and WI from equations 2, 3, 4 and 5 in equation 7. . . . . . (8) s - FI P + Fz Q where, F1 and Fz are constants and their values can be taken as 0.815 and 0.064 respectively, for a slot length ( 2c ) = 33 cm, flat jack length ( 2 c, ) = 30 cm, slot width ( 2 y0 ) = 4.0 cm, gauge length ( 2 y ) = 25 cm and Poisson's ratio ( p ) ranging from 0 15 to 0.25. The equation (8) involves two unknowns, namely, S and Q and as such the flat jack tests are carried out in two directions, normal to each other so as to formulate a set of two equations. These equations shall then be solved for the values of S and Q. Thus Ph and Pv are the in horizontal and vertical tively, then S = FI
NOTE
Ph + Fz

The test site shall be as flat as possible and not adjacent to any pronounced irregularities. The test site selected should be in sound rock. The soundness shall be tested by striking the rock by a 35 mm diameter and 1 to I.5 m long steel rod. Ligther bars may not give the difference in sound. If there is any drumminess at the site, it shall be rejected. Sites where the rock is damaged as a result of weathering and stress relaxation, shall be avoided. Sites too near a large excavated opening having loosened rocks due to blasting or points of stress concentration, such as corners shall be voided. If required, test drifts may be excavated inside the tunnel. 5 TEST EQUIPMENT 5.1 Hydraulic Pump

cancellation pressures slot directions respec-

Q

a.. -. (9)
. . . . ..(lO)

Q -1. F, P,

+ F, S

Capable of giving pressures up to 20 MPa. The pump shall be capable of holding a given pressure for a period of 24 h with a maximum drop in pressure of 2 percent. 5.2 Deformeter The deformeter consists of two arms with conical legs 25 or 50 cm apart ( for 25 or 50 cm gauge lengths respectively ) centre-to-centre at their outer ends, The deformeter is provided with a precision dial gauge which records the movement of the legs. The deformeter should be sensitive to measure change in lengths up to 0.002 mm. In case such deformeters are not available damec type mechanical strain gauges of similar sensitivity may be used. 5.3 Invar Test Length

- To make the equations clearer, an example is shown below: Example: a) Length of slot 2c = 33 cm b) Length of flat jack 2c0 = 30 cm c) Width of slot 2 yo = 40 cm d) Gauge length 2 y = 25 cm e) Poisson's ratio (a typiEL = 0'167 cal value for the rock )

f) Cancellation pressure when slot is horizontal g) Cancellation pressure when slot is vertical

Ph = 21'10 kg/cm' PV = 16'87 kg/cm'

Using the equations given in 4.3, constants Fl and Fz are computed O-064, respectively.

the values of as 0.815 and plane, . . . ...(n)

This consists of a 28 cm or 53 cm long invar bar having two small holes 25 cm apart centreto-centre in the 53 cm bar to check the distance between the legs of the deformeter. 5.4 Flat Jack It is a hollow square shaped hydraulic pressure cell made of 2 mm mild steel plates welded on

Thus when the slot was cut in horizontal using equation (9) of 4.3. S = 0.815 x 21.10 + 0.064 x Q

IS 13946 ( Part 4 ) : 1994 the four sides. A nozzle is provided for connecting rt with the pump as shown in Fig. 3. Oil is pumped into the cell to apply the pressure by the flat jack. It would be desirable to provide for an air exit valve in the flat jack for releasing all the air from the jack. Flat jacks of 30 cm x 30 cm, 45 cm x 45 cm or 60 cm x 60 cm may be used depending on its availability. Larger size flat jack should be preferred, particulary in jointed rock, as it gives more representative results due to stressing of larger zone of rock mass. 5.5 Gauge Pin These are 12 mm square cross-section mild steel or brass bar 10 cm long and are wedge shaped. These are embedded in the rock face at the gauge points. The outer end of these bars are machined to have a spherical or conical seat depending upon the deformeter points. The angle of cone is exactly the same as that of the deformeter leg. The inverted cone shall serve as gauge point and shall provide seat for the deformeter leg. Details are shown in Fig. 4. The outer face of this end is threaded so as to cap the conical seat while gauge readings are discontinued. This thread end shall be screwed to the holes of the spacer bar while mortaring the socket. 5.6 Jig It isa frame made of mild steel and has location for the flat jack slot and gauge points. This ensures accuracy for the positionings and alignment of the holes to be drilled in the rock face both for slot and gauge points ( see Fig. 5 ). 5.7 Rock Drill Electrically operated drilling machine supply is available ) or pneumatic machine with accessories, the former ferred. ( if power rock drill being pre5.8 Spacer Bars A set of 25 mm x 12 mm cross-section mild steel bars 300 mm ( or 550 mm ) long with two 10.5 mm diameter holes drilled 250 mm &O*OOl mm ( or 500 mm f 0.001 mm ) centre-toThe bar shown in Fig. 4 has a screw centre. joint at its middle length and can be easily detached in order to unscrew the gauge pin after setting. This shall be used to position the pins accurately during their mortaring and shall ensure the gauge lengths to be within the range of the deformeter. 6 PROCEDURE 6.1 Each test location should be a firm, flat or slightly concern rock surface. The test site selected should be in sound rock. The roundness shall be tested by striking the rock by a 35 mm diameter and 1 to l-5 m long steel rod. Lighter bars may not give the difference in sound. If there is any drummines; dimensions at the site, it shall be rejected. Sites where the rock is damaged as a result of weathering and stress relaxation shall be avoided. If no suitable location is immediately available, hand or pneumatic tool excavation should be used to prepare the test surface. The distance between the test location and any significant geological drscontinuities or irregularities on the rock surface should be at least three times the length of the flat jack slot. 6.2 Calibration Fiat jack suppliers should measure this difference using suitable laboratory procedures and should supply an appropriate calibration factors with each flat jack. Edge effect caused by welding, particularly for small-sized flat jacks, lead to hydraulic pressure within the jack being higher than the pressure exerted by it on the walls of the slot.

1,

25 A

(
i
300

AXIS
A

WELD

lmm
SQ
2 mm

APPROX MS PLATE

1 +4

ENLARGED DETAIL AT A
WITH AND 10 00 3 ID

/NOZZLE

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG.3 DETAILS OPFLATJACK

IS 13946 ( Part 4 ) : 1994

I

ll$

THREADED

HOLE

SCREW

t--506+----SPACER BAR

125----+

-DEFORMETER GAUGE PIN

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 4 DETAILS OF SPACER BAR 300 mm LONG AND GAUGB PIN gauge readings. The gauge capped unless the observations pins shall remain are taken.

All pressure and displacement measuring devices shall be calibrated prior to its use in each test series. Calibration should be done by an independent testing laboratory. 6.3 Installation 6.3.1
Fixing

and Testing

the Jig

After preparing the test site, the jig shall be fixed in the desired plane, that is, the slot position shall be parallel to the plane in which the test is to be carried out. Eight holes shall be drilled for gauge points with a 20 mm drill to a depth of 10 cm from the face. The jig shall be removed after drilling the holes. The holes shall be filled with 1 : 3 cement sand mix with water/ cement ratio between 0.4 and 0.5. The gauge pins shall then be inserted ( Fig. 1 ) and held in correct positions with the help of spacer bars. 6.3.2 After the mortar has set and hardened, readings shall be taken with the help of deformeters as specified in 6.5. These readings shall be repeated three times so as to avoid any error of measurement. These are the initial 5

6.3.3 The jig shall be refixed and the slot cut by 40 mm overlapping holes. The depth of holes shall be 35 to 65 cm and slot length 33 to 63 cm depending on the size of the flat jack used for the test. Gauge reading shall be observed during slot cutting also in the same order as the initial reading to observe the behaviour of the rock mass. If these readings indicate any expansion or no change over the initial gauge readings the test shall be discontinued as the rock shows some abnormal conditions at the site. 6.4 Fixing the Flat Jack 6.4.1 When the gauge readings indicate normal rock behaviour, the flat jack shall be embedded with its axis coinciding with that of the slot. Before holding the flat jack in its position, the slot shall be filled with 1 : 3 cement sand mortar at water/cement ratio between 0.4 and 0.5 and grouted under pressure or using temping rods to ensure that no air gap remains in any corner of

IS 13946 ( Part 4 ) : 1994

I

/
L25

600 -

@ HOLE FOR FIXING FRAME IN POSITION

All dimensions

in millimetres.

FIG. 5 A TYPSCALJIG FOR FLAT JACK OF 30 cm x 30 cm SIZE the slot. Flat jack shall be placed in desired position and left till the mortar gains compressive strength of 10 MPa at `least. For this normally 3 to 5 days are required. 6.4.2 When the mortar in the slot has set and hardened, pressure shall be applied in the flat jack through a pump at slow but steady rate. Instantaneous raising of pressure shall be avoided. The raising of the pressure in the jack to cancellation pressure shall be done in steps of 0.5 MPa for stronger rocks or less for weaker rocks depending on the condition of rock at site. These steps may be modified in the light of experience at site. A minimum of 10 readings for the expected maximnm pressure range shall be taken. At every step the pressure shall be maintained for a period of 30 min after the change in gauge reading is 0.007 mm or less. All the air in the flat jack shall be bled out before raising pressure in it. The simple way of bleeding out the air is to raise the pressure in the flat jack to 0.3 MPa and slacken the pressure pipe connection and retighten. Gauge reading shall be taken before and after increasing the pressure in the flat jack. When the deformation is nearly recovered the pressure shall be retained for 24 h. The cancellation pressure for 100 percent recovery of the total deformation shall be adjused. 6 6.5 Observations Gauge reading of all pair gauge points as specified ( Fig. 1 ) shall be taken continuously. The readings shall consist of i,j, k and I and shall be recorded as in Tables 1 and 2. The gauge readings shall be taken right from fixing the gauge pins and shall be continued during the drilling of the slot and fixing the flat jack, and shall be plotted against time. Similarly the displacement recoveries shall be observed and plotted against pressure in the flat jack to record the cancellation pressure ( see Fig. 6 ). The cancellation pressure thus recorded shall be used for computing the rock properties as given in 4.3. If the deformation at all the gauge points does not recover simultaneously, an average cancellation pressure shall be taken. 6.6 Reporting of Results 6.6.1 The report shall general informat ion : a) A description include the following

of the test site location. location within the

b) Details of the test test site.

c) Rock type and local geological structures. d) Flat jack specification and calibration.

IS 13946 ( Part 4 ) : 1994 e) The type, manufacturer and calibration information of the displacement gauge used. 6.62 The report shall include the following detailed information for each flat jack test. a) Initial pin displacement cavation. prior to slot exb) Pin displacement tion. c) A tabulation displacement d) Interpretation following slot excava-

and graphic history of pin versus flat jack pressure. of test results.

EXCAVATION FIG.

TIME

FLAT

JA=ESSLJRE

6 PIN SEPARATION VERSUS EXCAVATION TIME AND FLAT JACK PRESSURE ( NOTICE
IDENTIFICATION OE CANCELLATION PRESSUREPC )

IS 13946( Part 4 ) : 1994

ANNEX

A

( Foreword )
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION

Rock Mechanics
Chairnron DR
RHAWAt.3 srh_Q~

Sectional
University

Committee,

CED 48

Representin.: of Roorkee, Roorkee

Members P. K. JOIN ( dhrrrate tti Dr Bhawani Singh ) ASSISTANT RESEARCH OBFICEI~ Dn R. L. CHAURAN CHIEF EN~INEEI~( R & D ) DIRECTOR ( ENQ~ ) ( Alternate ) SURI DA~ES~WAH. GANQADHAR DHAYAQUDZ SHHI PRAEAS~ MADH~KAR Jostrr ( Alternate1 DR A. K. DUBE SHR~ A. K. SONI ( Alternate) SHRI A. GEOSH Dtz G. S. Merrnoer~a ( Alternate ) DR S. GARQOPADRYAY SHRI S. K. MUKHERJEE ( Alternate ) DR M. R. GOYAL Sa~r KARMVIR ( Alternate ) SIIRI B. M. RAXA GOWDA DIRIXTOR ( Alternate ) Dn UDAY V. KULPAHNI DR R. P. K~L~ARNI MEMB~~L SECRETARY D,IRECTOR (CJ ( Alternate ) Dr M. V. NAGENUI~A Sartr D. N. NA~ES~ ( Alternate ) SHRI M. D. NAIR PROF T. S. NactaRAJ ( Alternate ) SHRI D. M. PANCZIOLI Drt U. D. DATIR ( Alternate) DR Y. V. RAX~NA PR~F T. RAYAMUI~THY DR G. V. Rao ( Alternate ) SHRI C. B. LAKSHMANA RAO SHRI A. K. RAMAKRIYHNA ( Alternate ) DR V. hf. SBARXA S&RI A. K. DHAWAN ( Alternate ) MAJ S. K. SHARMA CAPT S. P. S. KOHLI ( Alternate ) SHIII D. S. TOLIA SHRI P. J. RAO ( Alternate ) SHRI J. VENKATRAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) SHKI

Irrigation Department, Governn ent of Uttar Pradesh Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board, Shimla Irrigation Department, Haryana Asia Foundations & Constructions Station Ltd, Bomba)

Central Mining Research Central Building Research Geological Irrigation

( CSIR ), Roorkee ( CSIR ), Roorkee

Institute

Survey of India & Power Department, Chandigarh Station, Pune

Central Water & Power Research

Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay Irrigation Department, Maharashtra Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi National Thermal Associated Irrigation Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi

Instrument Department,

Mfrs (1) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Government of Gujarat

National Geophysical Research Indain Institute of Technology, Karnataka Engineering Central Soil & Materials Engineer-in-Chief's Research

Institute, Hyderabad New Delhi Station, Karoataka Station, New Delhi

Research

Branch, New Delhi Institute, New Delhi

Central Road Research Director General, Secretaries SHRI J. K. PJ~ASAU

BIS ( Ex-o&cio Member )

Joint Director

( Civ Engg ), BlS
( Civ Engg ), BIS

SMT NBETA SHARMA Deputy Director

( Continued on page 9 )

8

1s 13946 ( Part 4 ) : 1994
( Continued from page 8 )

Field Testing of Rock Mass and Rock Mass Classification
Convener

Subcommittee,

CED 48 : 1

Representing U. P. Irrigation University Department Central Indian Research Institute, Roorkee

SHRI U. S. RAJVANSHI Members PROF K. B. AQARWAL ENCXNEER/R-CUM DIXECTOR RESEARCH OFFICER ( Alternate ) Ds A. K. DUBE PROB A. K. GEOSE PROF V. D. CHOUBEY ( Alternate) SEIRI B. M. RANE GOWDE SHRI V. K. MEHROTRA SHRI G. S. MEHROTRA SHRI U. N. SINHA ( Alternate ) SHRI D. M. PANCHOLI SHRI U. D. DATIR ( Alternate ) DR G. V. RAO DR K. K. GUPTA (Alternate ) RESEAECH OFFICER ( SR & P DIVISION ) SHRI B. K. SHACMA DR V. M. SHAR~V~A DR R. B. SIN~H ( Alternale) SHRI VITTAL RAM
CHIEF

of Roorkee, Roorkee of Irrigation and Power, Station Dhanbad Research Institute, Institute

Government

of Punjab

Mining Research School of Mines,

( CSIR
Station, Roorkee ( CSIR

), Dhanbad

Central Water and Power U. P, Irrigation Research Central Building Research Irrigation Indian Department, Institute

Pune ), Roorkee Gandhinagar

Central

Designs

Organization,

of Technology

Maharashtra Engineering Research Institute, Nasik National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi Department of Irrigation, Government of Haryana

9

( Continuedfrom

second cover )

In the formulation of this standard due weightage have been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off values should be the same as that of the specified values.

Rureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory

institution established under the Bureau of Zndian Standards Act, I986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BTS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. CED 48 ( 5130 ).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 160036 600113

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone
331 01 31 331 13 75 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 53 38 43, { 53 23 84 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 4u

235 02 16, 235 04 42 235 15 19, 235 23 15 632 92 95, 632 78 91, 632 78 58 632 78 92

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 '

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. Branches : AHMADABAD. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at New

India

Printing

Press, Ktrorja.

India

