( Reaffirmed 2004 )

(

Superseding

IS : 6820 - 1987 IS : 1233 - 1969 )

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MODULAR CO-ORDINATION IN BUILDING INDUSTRY APPLICATIONS :

( First Revision )
Modular
Chairman SHEI AJAYA
BHARADWAJ

Go-ordination

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

BDC

10

Bharadwaj Bharadwaj & Association ( Pvt ) Ltd, . New Delhi

Members Hindustan Prefab Ltd, New Delhi

SHRI H. S. PASRIC~A ( Alternate ) School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi Prtop H. D. CIIHAYA CHIBF ARC~IYX~T Central Public Works Department, Ne ,v Delhi SHRI M. B. SAXENA ( Alternate ) All India Housing Development Association, PROF CRISTOP~ER C. BBNNINQER New Delhi SHRI V. L. DATE Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi SHR: A. B. KI~~~TAVAKAR ( Alternate ) EN~INEEI~MEMBEI~ Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi SHRI B. B. GARB Cent&lI~~~lding Research Institute ( CSIR ),

SHRI V. K. AGGAXWAL ( Alternate ) Jain & Associates. New Delhi SHRI KAMAL HAIJKAIL SHRI A. P. KANVINDE Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay Maharashtra Housing & Area Development SHRI M. K. LAKHANI Authority, BombayDn A. G. MADHAVA RAN Stru;;ctisEngineering Research Centre ( CSIR ),

PROF S. P. MXXIXOPADIIYAY SHRJ J. S. SAC~~EV

Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur Eggeleston Associates, New Delhi ( Continued on page 2 ) 0 Copyright 1987 STANDARDS

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

I

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

fS : 6820 - 1987
(Continued from page 1 ) Members
SARI S. K. SEARMA

Representing Housing & Urban Development New Delhi Corporation Ltd,

SHRI H. K. YADAV ( Alternate ) Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay SHRI G. B. SINGH SHRI S. SUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SIIRI K. S. SRINIVASAN SHRI M. M. MISTRY ( Alemale) Designs & Standards Organization Research, Sam L. G. TOYE

( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow
General,

SHRI V. K. PIJNJ ( Altertmte ) SHRI G. RAMAN,

Director

(Civ

Engg

Director

BIS ( E'x-@cicio Member )

)
Secretary
SERI C. K. BEBARTA Joint Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS

IS: 6820 - 1987

hdian Standard
RECOMMNDATIONS FOR MODULAR CO-ORDINATION IN BUILDING INDUSTRY APPLICATIONS ( :

First Revision

0. FOkEWORD
0.1 This Indian
standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 27 February 1987, after the draft finalized by the Modular Co-ordination Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 The word `Module' originated from the Latin Word `Modulus' meaning a small dimension. In the past, the word expressed a certain dimensional relatiouship among the varied elements of a building. The dimensional relationship was established on simple multiple of a module. A module is a unit of measurement, it may be measured in terms of any number of cubits or inches or centimetres. These units may be applied to width, depth and height of building components, or to a whole building. The system devised for planning and designing, and further developed to correlate the size of components, based on internationally agreed units of measurements in building industry, is widely known as a `Theory of The principle of dimensional relationship in Modular Co-ordination'. building has been known in this country as Quoted in vedic treatise Bhrigu-shilpa Sanhita and Mansar-Vastu-Shastra. In order to bring uniformity in thinking and execution of building project, it is necessary to lay down simple principles of modular co-ordination. 0.3 This standard is an amalgamated revision of IS : 6820-1972 and IS : 1233-1969*. This revision has been prepared incorporating the advancement made in the modular planning and application since more than a decade. The spatial reference system, choice of dimensions, horizontal and vertical coordination, dimensioning of modular components, etc have been elaborated and general concepts, design drawings, preferred sizes etc, have been included to make this standard comprehensive, *Recommendation ( jird revision) . for modular co-ordination 3 of dimensions in building industry

IS: 6820 - 1987 0.4 In the preparation
rendered of this standard, considerable assistance by the National Buildings Organization, New Delhi. has been

0.5 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in diKerent countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. This has been met by deriving assistance from the following:

4 AJ Metric Handbook. The Architectural b) India, Ministry of Works & Housing.
Prefabrication 1978. and Modular

Press, London

(1969).

Development Group on Co-ordination in Buiiding Report. design. ( r:vised ).

c)

Industrialized Building and Modular Henric Nissen. Cement and Concrete Association, London ( 1972 ). Co-ordination in Building Modular Group, 1982.

d) The Principles of Modular CIBW-24, the International

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard deals with application of modular planning and design of buildings and manufacture building componenrs.
2. AIMS co-ordination and assembly in of

2.1 The aims of modular

co-ordination

are as follows:

Making planning simpler and clearer by distinct indication of the location of the building components in the building, both in relation to each other and to a modular grid;

b)

Limiting the number of sizes of building linkage is based on modular measurement; site work; assembling for and

components

so as the

Simplifying c> ments, in nents;

example, in setting out of measurelocation of modular building compo-

4

Creating building details; suppliers

a basis for rationalization of both general and special drawings for modular building components and assembly cooperation and builders; and between designers, manufacturers,

e) Facilitating

4

IS : 6820 - 1987 f) Providing practical and logical construction methods for the coordination of the position and dimensions of elements, components and spaces in building design which will contribute to. i) increased design freedom, and cost in manufacand ii) improved balance between quality ture and construction, and iii) greater interchangeability infield practices. 3. FIELD OF APPLICATION co-ordination shall be of building, components, applied to the design, manufacture their assemblies and installation. at

design,

construction

3.1 Modular and assembly

3.2 Modular co-ordination shall ensure proper fittings of the components relative to the position and the dimensions with reduced material wastages and on site modifications. 3.3 Modular co-ordination shall be applied to a wide range of building technologies, ranging from building materials and components through partial prefabrication to rationalize traditional building methods. 4. TERMINOLOGY 4.1 In order to assure clarity and unambiguous expression in modular coordination nrincinles. reference shall be made to the &>ssarv of terms " ' as given in Is' : 49<3-1$83* and IS : 64@8-1971t. 5. GENERAL CONCEPTS

5.1 A dual nomenclature exists in the building industry when referring to modular co-ordination; it is sometimes referred to as modular co-ordination while in other cases it is called dimensional co-ordination. The difference between the basic modular theory and modified version of dimensional co-ordination of preferred sizes of components lies in fact that the pure `modular theory uses the Module ( 100 mm ) as the only common dimensional denominator with no preferential treatment for any particular number of increments. This theory gives the desired unrestricted flexibility within pattern of 100 mm multiples. 5.2 Modular Co-ordination co-ordination theory relates to the is detailed as follows: a) Dimensional co-ordination whole multiple thereof. The general rationaltzation employing concepts of modular of building process and the basic module or some

*Glossary of terms relating to modular co-ordination ( second re&ion ). tRecommendation for modular co-ordination application of tolerance industry.

in bui]ding

5

IS : 6820 - 1987 b) The three-dimensional modular reference system of points, lines and planes in which the dimensional increment is the basic module or some whole multiple thereof ( see Fig. 1 and 2 ). c) The basic module is the smallest dimensional reference system. 5.3 Dimensional Co-ordination modular increment in three

5.3.1 A convention for the co-ordination of dimensions of building components and the building incorporating basic module of 100 mm offers preferred sizes for their design, manufacture and assembly. In dimensional a preferential treatment of selected pattern of co-ordination theory, increment is given. 5.3.2 The increment in basic modular system establishes an hierarchy of preferred units. It conveys the relationship of dimensions of building components and building with increment of basic module.

FIG.

1

MODULAR

THREE-DIMENSIONAL

REFERENCE

SYSTEM

6

. .
A.,

,./`L
, `N.

% n.M

1.'

Fro. 2

MULTI-MODULAR THREE-DIMENSIONAL REFERENCESYSTEM

5.3.3 The position and size of component, assembly or element shall be related to the three-dimensional reference system of points, lines and planes ( see Fig. 1 and 2 ). 5.3.4 The basic arrangement of components within grid lay out is dimensionally co-ordinated; it allows a maximum use of standardized components. 5.3.5 The first preference is 300 mm, second preference is 100 mm, the third preference is 50 mm up to a maximum 300 mm and fourth preference is 25 mm up to a maximum 300 mm and fifth preference of 20 mm up to a maximum 300 mm ( see Fig. 3 ) ( see also 7.2.3 ). 6. BUILDING

FITS AND TOLERANCES

6.1 The dimensional

relationship between a component and the space intended to accommodate it with due regard to the practical limit within the size and position, shall be in harmony. The space allocated shall be over-sized and component shall be under-sized ( see Fig. 4 ).

7

IS:6820 -1987

FIG.

3 PREFERRED UNITS

OVER

SIZED

COMPONENT

t
FIG. 4

UNDER

SIZE0

4

RELATIONSHIP OF DIMENSIOXS 8

6.2 The modular dimensions ing components in catalogues drawing.

shall provide a convenient means of describand for allocating spaces for them on design AND ) SUBMODULAR

7. BASIC MODULE, MULTIMODULE INCREMENTS ( SPACE MODULE 7.1 Basic Module

7.1.1 The basic module is the fundamental unit of a size in modular co-ordination, and for general application to buildings and components the size of basic module is 100 mm. It is represented by the letter `M' ( see IS : 10316-1986* ). 7.1.2 The basic module is considered to be large enough to effect some variety reduction in range of component size and small enough to provide a flexible unit of measure for purpose of design. 7.2 Space Module/Multimodule/SubmoduIar

Increment
increment are cer-

7.2.1 Space module, multimodule and sub-modular tain multiples or sub-multiples of the basic module.

7.2.2 Certain whole simple multiples of basic module, usually expressed as M with numerical prefix, such as 2M and 3M are referred to as multimodules. 7.2.3 Certain submultiples of the basic modules which are whole simple fractions shall be chosen when it is absolutely necessary for an increment smaller than the basic module for practical consideration. This sub-modular increment shall be expressed as M with fractional prefix such as l/5 M, ). l/4 M and l/2 F ( see IS : 10316-1986' 7.3 Applications of Modules shall be selected for a partiand vertical dimensions for 7.&l Space Module - The space modules cular application to determine horizontal components and buildings. 7.3.2 12hltimodule The multimodule

shall be used for:

a) spans, b) room sizes, c)
e) increments

storey heights, space allocation,
co-ordination

d) room heights, *Recommendations For modular (Jirst revision ).

: Basic

module

and

sub-modular

9

f)

sizes for components, displacement of planning grids for specific reasons, and

g) relative

h) sizes of modular components which are larger than IM and require to be sized in increments smaller than IM to fulfil specific functional needs. 7.3.2.1 The multimodular grid provides flexible solution to determine reference point, line or plane at finished floor level or at structural slab level in case of known modular floor and wall thicknesses located within modular zones ( see also 12.2 ). 7.3.3 Submodular Increments - Submodular increments shall be used where there is a need for an increment smaller than the basic module ( see IS : 10316-1986* for details ). 8. CHOICE

OF DIMENSIONS

8.1 Designers

have a trend to select simple whole number ratios, such as double or triple, to express relationship in set of dimensions. Sometimes the system of geometrical proportions established on human body measurments and frequently proportional relationship based on `Golden Section' are also used. The designers may select any of system of proportion, the same purpose is being served that is, of establishing an intrinsic order in terms of relationship of component or space dimensions through modular co-ordination dimensions to satisfy the needs of architectural aesthetics. Some of the essential features of preferred of M( dimensions 100 mm ), by greater or addition possible of the the are as

8.1.1 follows:

a) all dimensions

shall be whole multiple

b) al1 dimensions in the system shall be divisible number of smaller dimensions, c) all dimensions shall be smaller dimensions, and d) smaller larger: dimensions shall obtained be more by multiple densely

distributed

than

9. SPATIAL 9.1 In as the which related

REFERENCE

SYSTEM

modular co-ordination, the term spatial reference system is defined three-dimensional system of orthogonal space co-ordinates within the position and size of components, assemblies and element are by reference to points, lines or planes.

*Recommendations for modular co-ordination : Basic module and sub-modular increments ( jrst revision).

10

IS : 6820 - 1987
9.2 Within this spatial reference system dimensional terms of basic module or some multiple thereof increments shall be in

9.3 In general, buildings comprise elements of construction which are either load bearing or non-load bearing and include an external envelope of horizontal and vertical elements which subdivide the enclosed space. This system shall act as a tool to correlate the main elements of construction and the intervening spaces. 9.4 Certain essential reference planes shall be identified which locate the main vertical and horizontal elements of construction; for example, floors, roofs, walls and columns. These planes shall delimit the modular height, length and width dimensions of built spaces such as activity spaces, zones, etc ( see Fig. 5 ). 9.5 A zone in this context shall be modular or non-modular space between reference planes which is provided for a component or group of components which do not necessarily fill the space or which may be left empty ( see Fig. 6 ). 9.6 The spatial reference system means of two dimensional modular section at the design stage. shall be represented on drawings by grids which are applied in plan and

9.7 The dimensional increments of such grids shall be basic module or some multiple thereof. The increment may differ for each of the two dimesions of the grid. 9.8 This system shall be used as a planning tool.

9.9 Due to some economic or other reasons, need may arise to accommodate non-modular elements, components or assemblies within a modular space by introducing additional ireference planes to represent the COordinating reference planes of such elements, components or assemblies ( see Fig. 7 ).

10. GRIDS 10.1 There are various types of grid patterns developed for building The grids which are most frequently used are explained in Fig. 8.
10.2

design.

Grid

Lines

10.2.1 Grid lines representing the modular reference planes shall define the co-ordinating spaces for elements of construction, building components and assemblies.
10.2.2 The co-ordinating spaces are deviations and .joint clearances. deemed to include allowance for

11

IS :6820 -1987

o-`--

.

-_

i

/

------o _. ___._-.Q

____ -_

-------a _ ---"J FIG. 5
MODULAR HEIGHT

12

IS :6820 - 1987

___.__m-7---

MODULAR

f LOOR

HEIGHT

_-_-__----FLOOR CONSTRUCTION FILLS MODULAR HEIGHT 6A FLOOR CONSTRUCTION FILLS ONLY PART OF THE MODULAR HEIGHT Floor Zone ( Vertical

__-.
DIFFERENT FARTS,THAT FLOORING, CEILING COMBINE TO FILL MODULAR HEIGHT IS,

Section)

COMPONENTS FILL MODULAR WIDTH

ONLY

PART

OF THE

WALL

FILLS

MODULAR

WIDTH

6B

Wall

Zone

( Horizontal

Section

)

FIG. 6

ZONES

13

fS : 6820

- 1983

7A

Modular

Storey

Height

and Modular Floor Partition Height

Height

Tends

to Modular

,
I .

"8,

__

-__

-

- -.

___ -6ir.-.-,

b
Tends to Adaptation

7B

Modular

Storey

Height and Nonmodular Floor Height Pieces and Nonmodular Heights

FIG. 7

MODULAR AND NONMODULAR PARTITION HEIGHTS ( VERTICAL PART SECTION )

IS:6820- 1987

:

I
I _i _i

8A

BASIC

GRID

0B

SQUARE

GRID

EC

RECTANGULAR

GRID

8 D MULTIMODULAR

GRiD

II -.-.-.-.-.-.-

I;

-.- I

1 __ I -.-!+-i-l_

I

I

-

A_/_
_;_/_ -.-.-

__
-i_!

_,_!_

I I;
I!
I!

_g_i_ _.-. -.-1 I I i I _l-l-.__~_
_ _.II -.!

i I. ---.-----.____ _ _I_; _ _!_!-.-.-.

/ ii

1

i I _ _I_!_

_
_
I
8E

_._!_' _
I!
. I _._+

_i_i_._._._._i_L i1
I! I!
_!-L_[_~_._!_L I I
GRID

11

_!_!_.-!_!_.Z!Z!Z

II _.-._.-._LqI I

I

i I i I i I _i_!_._.-._._._.-.__._
I I
GRID PATTERN

TARTAN

FIG.

8

IS : 6820 - 1987

10.2.3 Such grid points, lines and planes are essentially design tools; these shall not necessarily be shown on the drawings which are part of the production information. However, certain modular reference planes shall be selected to indicate the basis for dimensioning drawing of a project and positioning building elements and components on the site.
10.2.4 In such cases, care shall be taken to ensure that building setting out system is effectively related to the selected reference points, lines and planes. 10.2.5 In addition, care shall also be taken in marking dimensions on drawings and to clearly distinguish between modular dimensions and work sizes expressed in millimetres. 10.3 Basic Modular Grid

10.3.1 The fundamental modular grid is that in which the interval between consecutive parallel lines equals to the basic module. This is the smallest planning grid. It shall be used as the basis for developing other grids. 10.3.2 The basic modular grid shall normally be shown only on large scale drawings to clarify the interrelationship between components. 10.4 Multimodular Planning Grid grids in shall be of the multi-

10.4.1 In addition to the basic modular grid, multimodular which the interval between consecutive lines is a multimodule used. 10.4.2 This multimodule grid ( see Fig. 9 ). 10.4.3 Multimodular ple of the basic module may differ for each of the two direction

planning grids shall be based upon selected adopted for specific applications.

10.4.4 Such grids shall be used to determine the layout of building complexes, buildings and/or position of main structural features. 10.4.5 Such grids shall be used to ensure consistant co-ordination of components in relation to specific use of activity spaces which they enclose. 10.4.6 These grids shall normally be used in the earlier on a small scale general location drawings. 10.4.7 Modular grids shall preferably whole of the b,uilding plan. be without design stages for the

interruption

10.4.8 The modular grids may be interrupted at consistant intervals by bands of different modular dimensions or in certain cases non-modular dimensions ( see Fig. 10 ).

16

IS : 6820

- 1987

FIG. 9

MODUL.AR GRID AT CHANOE IN DIRECTION

10 A

WITH

MODULAR

ZONE
FIG. 10

10 B. WITH

NON-MODULAR

ZONE

INTERRUPTED GRID 17

IS:

6820 - 1987 to facilitate the design

10.4.9 A multi modular grid may be interrupted of joint movement in the structure.

10.4.10 Mu!timodular grids may be super-imposed one upon another at various stages of planning process. Multimodular planning grids may be displaced in relation to one another to accommodate the size of nonmodular tomponents ( see IS : 7921-1987* ). 11. S-mm RULE

11.1 5-mm Rule for Horizontal and Vertical Dimensions Sizes of building components, room dimensions and buildings are based on preferred horizontal modules. The wall, which is the structural part of the vertical division, shall be placed one joint proportion on the boundaries of a modular plane, that is, the actual dimension as a rule for the structural elements shall be 5 mm less on all modular boundary plane. This rule is called as 5-mm rule for all horizontal dimensions. The floor slab, which is a structural part of horizontal division, is placed one joint proportion under a modular plane. This rule is called All other vertical dimensions shall 5-mm rule for all vertical dimensions. be taken from this plane. 12. HORIZONTAL CO-ORDINATION

12.1 Traditionally, at sketch design stage and working drawing stage of the building project, the drawings are prepared by two methods; first illustrating internal clear dimensions of activity spaces; and secondly at working drawing stage, introducing centre line dimensions for elements of In modular co-ordination theory, it is recognized as bounconstrnction. dary planning and axial planning respectively. In practice, however, such clear cut distinction does not exist. 12.2 The modular grid shall establish the primary reference. The boundary planning is the first point, line or plane for positioning components and elements of construction in relation to such grid ( see Fig. 11 ). 12.3 Axial planning shall normally be adopted to decide, certain structural components like, columns, cross walls may be referred to IS : 7921-1987*. only position of beams, etc, and for posiand a size Horizontal
CO-

12.4 Boundary planning shall be combined with axial planning tioning structural elements ( see Fig. 12 and Fig. 13 ). 12.5 Boundary of components, planning shall be a deciding factor for position assemblies and elements of construction.
co-ordination in building industry:

*Recommendation for modular ordination (first w&on ) .

18

n.M

i
FIG. 11

DOORSET

I

6
BOUNDARS PLANNING FOR COMPONENTS

0
-.-I-.-.-.

I

0

!

!

`-0

i

-ri-FIG. 12 REPRESENTATIONOF BOUNDARY PLANNING AND AXIAL PLANNING 13. VERTICAL

BOUNDARY i PLANNING

3 1

CO-ORDINATION
plane

13.1 In vertical section, the modular floor plane is the reference from which modular dimenr;ions shall be taken ( see Fig. 14 ). 19

IS : 6820 - 1987

P.M

P.M 0

FIG.

13

COMBINA'IION OF BOUNDARY AND AXIAL PLANNING

13.2 A horizontal modular plane eontinuous over the whole of each storey of a building and coinciding with upper surface of floor covering, the upper surface of the base floor or the upper surface of the structural floor shall be selected as a reference point, line or plane ( see Fig. 15 ). in the level may require to 13.3 At a particular storey level, changes accommodate the specific functional need of structure which may be met by further reference point or line or plane. This auxiliary reference plane shall be shown in Fig. 16. 13.4 In the vertical section, only the main reference planes of the controlling zone containing external envelope and interval elements of construction which subdivides the building horizontally and vertically, shall be identified on drawings of vertical sections like modular storey height, modular room height and modular floor height along with modular doorset height, windowset height, window sill height, etc ( see IS : 7922-1987" ). 14.

PREFERRED

SIZES
size for specific primarily be

14.1 A preferred size is a modular or multimodular purposes which shall be selected in advance of all others.
multimodular sizes 14:2 The preferred horizontal intended for sizing components, assemblies and spaces.
*Recommendation for ordination ( jrst revision ). modular co-ordination in building

shall

industry

: Vertical co-

20

IS I 6820 - 1987

IJ-

O-

I c

r+-

_ --------.-

.___

_

.\ /

p I

I c

--

.-.--

-.-_-_-

\

FIQ. 14 REFERENCE PLANSIN NORMAL STOREY HEIQHTS

21

tSr6820

- 1987

FLOOR

COVERING ~ ----_--

.,y;.:..*

_:_ ;.d:`_. ..: ."_g ,:- `a".,, ; , : .._ `4 _._ STRUCTURAL FLOOR' ;A .. ,,: fi.: I._ * .,. `..:-:`,:*::;~ .:, t"

15A

Upper

Surface

of Floor

Covering

FLOOR

COVERING

158

Upper

Surface

of Base

Floor

FLOOR

COVERING

';-A:-,A:
. : :.:

0.r. .._,

.J.:;.::

0..

: __:-.g:_;.:<j

15C

Upper

Surface

of Structural

Floor

FIG. 2

MODULARFLOOR
22

PLANE

ts : 4820- 1983

MODULAR -_ ._?L2!!0

FLOOR

AUXILIARY 4 REFERENCE _-_ ..~~~,:.~~.~,~~~,.~~,,~~;~,~; PLANE ::`~~...~.`~`:..:~,~,~.,:: ".. ........::.::..;y i:.:.: ... .. .. ,..;. ::::::;::.:..

:

AB c-

an upstand on structural

slab reaches

up to the modular

floor plane.

the wall shows positive boundary condition in order to reach down to auxiliary reference plane at the upper surface of the structural slab. an adaptation the auxiliary piece fills the space between reference plane. the modular

the

floor plane and

NOTE - Vertical section shows modular floor height, modular floor plane at upper surface of floor covering. FIG. 16 AUXILIARY REFERENCE

modular room height and

PLANE

14.3 The preferred multimodular with arithmetical value of 2 or 3.

sizes shall be multiple

of basic

module

14.4 The preferred size shall provide a flexible choice of multimodular dimensions in line with the characteristics of conventional design practices adopted in buildings. 14.5 The preferred sizes shall normally be used for smaller dimensional increments in vertical plane than in the case of horizontal plane.

14.6 The preferred sizes of modular components share a common factor. ( 3M ), for example 3M, 6M, 12M, etc and only the spaces which are a multiple of that common factor shall be filled. 14.7 The nonmodular They shall be combined As such, the selection following formulae shall component sizes do not share common factor. beyond a certain point to fill all multiples of IM. of .sizes shall be based on critical number. The be used to determine the critical number ( CN) :

a) For Pairs of Comjonent Sizes CN= (u1)(61)

where a and b are component sizes. Example : a=5M b = CN = -4x5 = 20 Therefore, the components can be combined to fill all the spaces of 1M from 20M upwards ( see Fig. 17 ). b) For Triplets of Components Sizes which are Consecutive Multiples Basic Module
1) CJV = (a*-+!?)

6M (5-l) (61)

of

where a is the smallest size and is an even number Example : a= b = c = 4M 5M 6M

The smallest size is 4M which is an even number C./v-4x4+2 =16+!2 = 8 Therefore, these components can be combined to fill all the spaces of 1M from 8M upward ( see Fig; 18 ), 24

CN = (a-l)(b-1) =(5-1)(6-l) 2 20

FIG. 17

CRITICAL POINT ( PAIR OF COMPONENTS )

IS:6820

- 1987

2)

CN=[a(a-1) Example :

+2]

where a is the smallest size and is an odd number 5M b = 6M c = 7M The smallest size is 5 M which an odd number. c.N = 5 ( 5 =5x4+2 = 10 1) + 2
a =

Therefore, these components can be combined to fill all the spaces of 1 M from 10 M upwards ( see Fig. 19 ).

3L5670

b C

CN= =

a2+2
Lx Lf?

= 8

I ( ( ( ( ( ` 5M SM 5M 6M LM 5M 1 >K
I

I >: :( >( m ' 5M m I SM 5M SM 6M 6M I m m I
I

> ;c )! ;K I x I 5M 5M 5M 6M. 6M > -1 > )

6M. ) I x 5M
I

>
(

;y

5M

FIG. 18

CRITICAL POINT ( TRIPLET OF COMPONENTS WITH SMALLEST DIMENSION EVEN ) 26

IS:6820-

1987

CN=

a (a-l)+2 = S(S-lIi2
= 10 ' ( ( 5M SM ;( ): SM SM )( >( SM 6M > >

MIllI
FIG. 19

CRITICALPOINT ( TRIPLETOF COMPONENTS WITH SMALLEST DIMENSION ODD ) OF MODULAR COMPONENTS

15. DlMENSItiNS

15.1 In building component design, the application of spatial reference system as well as selection of preferred sizes for components and space dimensions is only the first step towards ensuring that the components as supplied can be assembled with case of fit. 15.2 The reference system enables designers to relate the position and size of components by means of modular planes. Such co-ordinating planes from the boundaries of modular component spaces inclusive of allowances for inaccuracy and the size clearances. 15.3 In modular design practice, therefore, these spaces will be defined by co-ordinating dimensions which are modular. 15.4 It is important to stress the essential theoretical nature of such dimensions in the context of building component manufacture. 27

I$:6820

- 1987

15.5 The modular
and vide the and

co-ordination shall provide co-ordinating length, width thickness of interval dimension of components. It means it shall profacility to ensure dimensional compatibility between the position of different designed sub-systems comprising components, and position dimensions of those fuctional sub-systems. the

15.6 The modular sizes shall provide the basis only for determining manufacturing sizes of components as explained in Fig. 20.

15.7 Deduction from the modular sizes shall require to be made to accommodate any allowance for joint end for the dimensional deviations that occur in production and erection. 15.8 The basic principles relating to the tolerances size and shape are embodied in IS : 6408-1971*. 16. 16.1 DESIGN Designers a) b) Main c) Detail However, detail drawings, 16.1.1 modular b) 16.1.2 drawings followsf DRAWINGS are well familiar drawings, drawings and for contract documents. with three types of drawings: ofcomponent design,

Sketches,

it is necessary to work with different types ofworking each serving its own purpose in the design process. the

In addition to this, special drawings that are used to clarify problems in the project shall be prepared for: modular detail drawings, drawings. and modular

a) general

For partially or totally prefabricated buildings, where the working are made as operational drawings, these shall be classified as

drawings, a) Component b) Assembly details, c) Type drawings, d) Lay-out for componets, e) Register
industry.

and

of components.
in building

*Recommendation for modular co-ordination - Application of tolerances

28

IS:6820-1987

t

MOOULAR OR PLANES MODULAR

POINTS.LlNES

.
SPACE

n.M

MODULAR

SIZE

MAXIMUM

GAP

2g(TOTAL

MAXIMUM

GAP)

-`I \
/ n bj-(2g+P) >

POSITION

TOLERANCE

\,

2g+P' ,

MINIMUM

DEDUCTION

!

MAXIMUM

SIZE

I
ZgtP+T

T

::
>

I
I

MANUFACTURING TOLERANCE MAXIMUM DEDUCTION

MINIMUM

SIZE

MANUFACTURING

SIZE

FIG.

20

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MODULAR SIZE AND MANUFACTURING SIZE

29

IS t 6820 - 1987 16.2 Sketches 16.2.1 During the preliminary design process, the main arrangements and dimensions of the building shall be determined in accordance with the building programme and prevailing building regulations, alongwith choice of structures, materials and techniques of construction. 16.2.2 The preliminary drawings for residential building shall be based on 3M planning module and scale 1 : 50. If modular paper with a suitable square grid, like 6 mm, is not available, 3M grid may be drawn on paper. 16.2.3 In the preliminary design, the load bearing walls building elements shall be placed in accordance with the axial principle as given in 16.3, that is, with the centre line of the wall placed along planning modular line while the exterior walls are placed approximately in relation to the modular grid. 16.2.4 The exact placing of all the walls shall be first determined when all the details have been thoroughly worked out. 16.2.5 It shall not be necessary for placing relation to the component of the structure. 16.3 Modular Details of the monular lines in

16.3.1 The placing of the modular line in relation to the structure shall be determined on the basis of technical analysis of a structure. 16.3.2 In order to achieve accurate dimensioning, large-scale modular detial drawings shall be made to indicate the placement, of components/ elements in relation to each other and to the modular lines and shall be on scale of 1 : 1 or 1 : 2 so that all details regarding assrmbly and joint sizes are made absolutely clear. 16.3.3 Modular sketch details shall form the basis for assembly detaiIs which shall be a part of the operational drawing containing all specifications required for assembly at the site. This shall be drawn to a scale 1 : 2 and reduced to scale 1 : 5 or less, where so desired ( see Fig. 21 ). 16.3.4 Subsequently, the modular dimensions and grids shall be replaced by basic dimensions and reference lines ( see Fig 22 ). 16.4 General Modular Drawings 16.4.1 General modular drawings shall be prepared once the location of modular lines in relation to the various components has been determined on detail drawings, along with selection of all material specifications and components. 30

fS:6820-1981

FLOOR

COVERING

SUPPORT CAST-IN-SITU CONCRETE BRICK BRICK

JOINT

WORK ON EDGE

-3Ik
NOTE 2 tion

230 All dimensions

>Ik-

5

in millimetres. connection in their proper

NOTE 1 - The drawing sets the components of the felationship to each other and to the modular lines.

of operational drawings

The

drawing

is further used in the overall design for the preparaof the connection details ( see Fig. 22 ).

FIG. 21 TYPICAL MODULAR DETAIL DRAWING SHOWINGCONNECTION BETWEEN EXTERIORWALL AND FLOOR ( VERTICAL SECTION)

31

230

c

, ..:
":

I-r

195 TERRA20 FLOOR

SKIRTING FLOORING BASE

BRICK

ON

EDGE

-

2 BARS,+ CONCRETE M 15

10

-

65 85 CEMENT NORMAL MORTAR JOINT C/C GROUT

BARS,+6@150 BRICK ON EDGE -

t
k---l/2 BRICK CEMENT 1 BRICK ,395 PLASTER -325

All dimensions in millimetres.
NOTE 1 - The drawing is prepared all design and contains all specifications dimensions as an operational drawing required for assembly. 21 ). under the overby basic

NOTE2 -

and reference

The modular dimensionsand grid have been
lines ( refer Fig.

replaced

FIQ. 22 TYPICAL OPERATIONAL DRAWJNGSHOWINGCONNECTION BETWEENEXTERIORWALL AND FLOOR ( VERTICALSECTION)

32

IS :6820 16.4.2 These drawings shall show: used in the project, to each other, to modular modular and drawings lines.

-1987

a) the modular b) their location c) 16.4.3 modular their location

components in relation in relation

The dimensions on the general dimensions in terms of M.

shall be mainly office. They is mm and

16.4.4 These drawings shall mainly be used Sor drawing are not intended for use at site, where unit of measurement not M. 16.5 Operational Drawings

165.1 workshop works.

Operational drawings shall be prepared and building site, such as excavation,

for use in the factory, concreting and brickon all of the

16.5.2 The component drawing shall provide detailed data dimensions and quality requirement necessary for manufacture components, on the basis 01' structural analysis.

16.5.3 All dimensions shall be specified in millimetres and shall not include modular dimensions, even though principle dimensions are derived from modular dimensions. 16.6 Assembly Details employed for site work shall also be jointing, shall be selected

16.6.1 The usual detail drawings made as operational drawing. 16.6.2 These. drawings possible joint reinforcement,

shall contain data on placement, flashing and insulation, etc.

16.6.3 The placing of the components forming a connection shown in relation to the site reference lines; not necessarily modular reference lines of the project plan of the building.

16.6.4 The placing measurements and detail dimensions shall be specified in millimetres and again no modules appear on these drawings. 16.7 Assembly Drawings shall be

16.7.1 prepared

The assembly drawings showing location of components on the basis of the general modular drawings.

16.7.2 The components shall be designated and numbered, and their location with relation to reference points lines or planes adopted on project site shall be indicated. _

IS : 6820 - 1987

16.7.3 Horizontal
drawings. The

or vertical component assembly drawings measurements shall be specified in millimetres.

are working

16.7.4 Assembly drawings shall also be provided with a register ofcomponents which shows the number of different components and shall include information on their modular dimensions and any special remarks. 16.7.5 The numbering of components shall be made with a four digit numbering system, indicating first two digits as length dimensions and last two digits as variants from 01 to 99 for different components with the same unit length. 17. NOTATIONS

AND SYMBOLS
drawings, reference

17.1 For notations
shall be made

and symbols used in the modular to IS : 11778-1986*.

*Recommendation for modular co-ordination : Notations and symbols for modular drawings.

34

