1S/1S0 8042:1

S88

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

hxiian Standard

SHOCK AND VIBRATION MEASUREMENTS -- CHARACTERISTICS TO BE SPECIFIED FOR SE!SMIC PICK-UPS

ICS 17.16G

@ BKI 1996

BUI?EAUC)F
MANAK BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADLJR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR

MARG

NEW DELHI 110002
March 1956

Price Group

2

Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee, LM 04

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 8042 : 1988 `Shock and Vibration Measurements Characteristics to be Specified for Seismic Pick-Ups', issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee and approval by the Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. In the adopted standard, certain terminology and conventions are not identical with those used in Indian Standards; attention is especially drawn to the following: a) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards the current practice is to use point ( . ) as the decimal marker.
,

b) Wherever the words `International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'. In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standard which is to be substituted in its place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated:
International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence

IS0 2041 : 1975

IS 11717 : 1985 Vocabulary Vibration and Shock

on

Identical

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provisions of IS0 5347 : 1993 and IS0 5348 : 1987 referred in this adopted standard and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard.

IS/IS0

8042

:

1988

Indian Standard

SHOCK AND, VIBRATION MEASUREMENTS CHARACTERISTICS TO BE SPECIFIED FOR SEISMIC PICK-UPS

1

Scope

and field

of application

4.2

Type

This International Standard lays down rules for the presentation of important characteristics for electro-mechanical shock and vibration pick-ups (seismic pick-ups), the electrical outputs of which are known functions of the uniaxial, multiaxial or angular accelerabions, velocities or displacements of objects the motions of which are being measured. It is intended as a guide to instrument manufacturers for indicating characteristics of their pick-ups and as a help to users in selecting a particular type of pick-up or preparing performance specifications. The intention is to ensure that the user receives an adequate description of the characteristics of any particular pick-up. Throughout this International Standard, shock and vibration pick-ups will be referred to simply as "pick-ups".

The manufacturer shall state whether the output of the pick-up is substantially proportional to the displar ment, velocity or acceleration of the vibration or shock inpur.

4.3

Type of motion
to

The manufacturer shall indicate the nature of the motion which the pick-up will respond, such as uniaxial;

- multiaxial;
angular.

4-4

Sensing

element

2

References
Vocabulary. and shock Mechanical

The type of sensing element shall be indicated, for example, as follows :

IS0 2041, Vibration and shock IS0 5346, Mechanical
mounting vibration

- strain-sensitive
-

resistance wire, bonded or unbonded;

resistive potentiometer; variable capacitance; variable inductance; differential transformer; element;

of accelerometers. for the calibration of vibration and shock

IS0 5347, Methods
pick-ups.

-

3

Definitions

-

electromagnetic piezoelectric

For the purposes of this International Standard, the definitions given in IS0 2041 and IS0 5347 apply.

element;

electronic tube; photoelectric electrokinetic piezoresistive element; element; element;

4
4.1

General General

information

-

The information specified in 4.2 to 4.16 may be helpful to the user of pick-ups. It is recommended that the manufacturer provide this information, in full or in part, in his literature and in any descriptive leaflet supplied with the pick-up.

optical element; magnetostrictive.

IS/IS0

8042. : 1988

4.5

Orientation

The suitability of the pick-up for use in vertical, horizontal and inverted mounting positions shall be stated.

length, mass, shielding, connection to case and type of COI nectars (if any) shall be stated, together with the recommende method of fixing the cable assembly to avoid unwante dynamic effects on the pick-up.

4.6

indication

of sensitive

direction

4.14

Energy source

The sensitive direction of the pick-up, called the axis of measurement, shall be indicated, for example by an arrow. If practical, the positive direction shall be marked or indicated by the orientation of an arrow and the polarity of output for motion in the positive direction shall be described. 4.7

The manufacturer shall state whether the pick-up is self generating and, if not, shall indicate the nature of the energiz ing or polarizing source.

4.15

Nature of output

Overall dimensions

The nature of the output of the pick-up shall be indicated. Various indications may be useful, for example, as follows : a) that the output is a voltage or, furthermore, that it is a modulated carrier voltage or a frequency-modulated voltage; or b) that the output is linearly, logarithmically or otherwise related to the input vibration.

Overall outline dimensions of the pick-up shall be given in a diagram.

4.8

Material

The material of the mounting base and surfaces exposed to its operational environment shall be stated.

4.15 4.9 Attachment

Auxiliary

equipment

It shall be indicated whether the pick-up a) is screwed, clamped, cemented, `etc. to the vibrating surface, or whether it b) may be hand-held, as for a probe type.

The manufacturer shall state the type of or certain relevant characteristics of any required auxiliary equipment, for example, as follows ; - a charge amplifier to convert the charge output of a piezoelectric pick-up to a low impedance voltage;

4.10

Mounting

- a specified input impedance - this may be required for auxiliary equipment such as an impedance convertor;
a demodulator, used to eliminate the carrier frequency; a filter, us$d to remove undesired signals;

The method of mounting and the location and size of the mounting holes or the studs in the pick-up shall be given. If screws are used to mount the pick-up, the mounting torque shall be recommended. For all factors relating to mounting, see IS0 5348.

- a biasing voltage or bridge network, used to obtain zero output when a zero value of the motional function is applied;

4.11

Mass and moment

of inertia

For uniaxial and multiaxial pick-ups, the mass and centre of gravity of the pick-up should be given; for angular vibration pick-ups, the moment of inertia, referred to the axis of measurement, should be given. If a pick-up is normally used above its natural frequency, the magnitude of the seismic mass shall be specified.

- certain non-linear devices, used to correct for non-linearity of the output signal;
integrating and differentiating circuits, their frequency range being stated. A wiring diagram shall be given to enable the pick-up to be correctly connected to the auxiliary equipment.

-

4.12

Position

of sensing element

5
If applicable, the location of the centre of gravity of the sensing element shall be given. (This information is needed in the calibration of accelerometers on a centrifuge and in other applications where there may be a spatial grad&t or a combination of uniaxial and rotational motion in the quantity being measured.) 4.13 Connections

Characteristics Measurement range

5.1

The maximum and minimum measurement range for reliable indication shall be given in terms of acceleration, velocity and/or displacement. The maximum range may be limited by maximum motion within a specified accuracy which could lead to loss of linearity, motions exceeding the setting of stops, motions exceeding the

If electrical connections between the pick-up and auxiliary equipment are required for its use, their type (e.g. low noise),

2

IS/IS0

8642

: 1988

ability of a pick-up mechanism which would damage The minimum

to follow faithfully,

and motions

NOTE

-

ihe

phase

response

may

be given

relative

to

a known

a pick-up. resolving

reference.

range may be limited by the minimum

5.5

Damping
and electrical termination conditions,

,power of a pick-up, sticking where rubbing friction is present, thermal or electrical noise interference, or reduced accuracy due-to loss of linearity.

In well defined mounting logarithmic decrement

the damping ratio shall be given. This may be stated in terms of or Q-factor.

5.2

Sensitivity,

frequency
output

.response 5.6 Transverse sensitivity

Data concerning in the operating which

versus input for a specified frequency The maximum ment measured motion. If the sensitivity to transverse motions varies depending on the direction of the motion, the maximum sensitivity, its direction and. frequency shall be stated. sensitivity to motions transverse to the measureand the frequency its output, at which e.g. it is with its sensitivity to other rotational factor shall axis of the pick-up which

range shall be given. For pick-ups the output of to input, the proportionality

is proportional

be given in the form of a rated sensitivity.

The probable error of

shall be given, together will affect

sensitivity

calibration

shall be stated. The effect of frequency

kinds of motion

on sensitivity may be presented graphically by plotting the sensitivity as a function of frequency. The terminating impedance which applies to this presentation, as well as to other sensitivity presentations, shall always be specified. In pick-ups requiring an energizing obtained voltage (alternating the recommended or direct), a carrier voltage or voltage is applied or the a biasing voltage, when value obtained the rated sensitivity shall be either the value

5.7

Limits

for maximum

motion

without

damage

per volt. The recommended

value of the biasing The maximum transverse operation displacement vibration and shock motion in both sensitive and velocity and/or for reliable (and, where applicable, damage its frequency), axes, given in terms of acceleration, without shall be given.

voltage shall be stated. The relationship

of output to input shall

be given in compatible units such as r.m.s. voltage or charge in conjunction with r.m.s. velocity, or peak voltage orcharge in conjunction with' peak velocity, Some and not as r.m..s. volt@e of the appropriate or charge with peak velocity. given in the table. units are

5.6

Linearity

and hysteresis

Table Quantity
Uniaxial Uniaxial Uniaxial Angular Angular Angular
l

-

Appropriate measured

units

for measured

quantities Input unit*
m m/s

The maximum deviation from a straight line for output versus input over the whole range of the pick-up shall be stated. This deviation may be expressed as a percentage of the reading or as a percentage of the full scale.

Output unit*

displacement velocity acceleration displacement velocity acceleration preferably e.g. in powers of 10-3, V: c

5.9
rad rad/s rad/s*

Electrical

impedancre
of a pick-up is the ratio bf the open Where appropriate, shall be

m/s*** degree; degree/s; degree/s*; are used

The electrical the magnitude tabulated

impedance

circuit voltage to the short-circuit and phase angle for several frequencies

current.

of this impedance

Sub-multiples,

in practice

over the range of operation, the impedance shall be r'esistance

for convenience,
l

pm for displacement.

or, alternatively,

a plot of these values as a function of frequenIf applicable, values of inductance,

cy shall be included. * Reference should also be made to IS0 2041. and capacitance,

stated in terms of equivalent frequencies

as appropriate,

which apply over the range of

5.3

Frequency

range

for which the pick-up is recommended.

In well defined mounting conditions, the operating frequency range over which the pick-up sensitivity does not vary from the rated sensitivity by more than a stated percentage shall be given, together with its seismic resonance frequency and any spurious resonance frequencies which affect the output signal. Where applicable, the approximate magnification (Q-factor) shall be stated for each resonance frequency. 5.4
The

6
6.1

Environmental Temperature

effects and humidity
and/or

effects
range over which The

The operating

temperature

humidity

the pick-up sensitivity and damping do not vary from their rated values by more than a stated percentage shall be given. change of these quantities with temperature can be shown

Phase
maximum

shift,

frequency
shift

response
angle between an

graphically. phase or phase impressed sinusoidal vibration output signal, with a specified given for operation The phase shift versus and the resulting sinusoidal output termination, shall be frequency range. Minimum and maximum storage temperatures and humidity

in the recommended

shall be given. The temperature and humidity limits beyond which the pick-up might be damaged shall also be given. The effects and limitations of any pick-up mounting cables over the specified temperature accessories and range shall be stated.

graphically.

frequency may be presented If the phase shift is zero, this shall be stated. 3

IS/IS0 8042:1988

6.2

Thermal

transients
due to transient of output temperature change changes to magnitude applied should and

c) ating

the effect voltages

of alternating in the pick-up

electromagnetic vibration

fields in genercable, for for a magnetic which fields

and its connecting

Any error outputs be stated length up. in terms

example,

by giving

the equivalent

proportional

field of 1 T and of specified

frequency

in the direction

of time of the temperature

to the pick-

gives maximum response; any effects of magnetic shall be stated for the relevant frequencies.

6.3

Disturbing

acoustic
acoustic

fields
fields on the electrical output of

6.5

Earth

currents
coupling (ground is provided loops), to avoid interference from of

The effect the pick-up

of external

If an insulated earth currents the pick-up

shall be stated.

any effect

on the performance

shall be stated.

6.4
Where stated. Such a) b)

Disturbing
applicable,

electromagnetic
the effect of both

fields
constant and alternating shall be

6.6

Base-strain

sensitivity
output of the pick-up

electromagnetic

fields on the operation

of the pick-up

The effect

of base strain on the electrical

shall be stated. a statement the effect the effect shall include

6.7
of constant magnetic fields on the sensitivity; masses on the

Radiation

exposure

of neighbouring

ferromagnetic

The etfect of radiation exposure on the performance and longterm behaviour of the pick-up shall be stated if the pick-ups are in a radiation environment.

sensitivity;

and

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

of Indian

Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the, latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot
: ~~~ LM

04 (0144).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 0131,323 83 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17 1 323 38 41 37 84 99,37 85 61 37 86 26,?)7 9120 60 38 43 1. 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 { 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 832 78 91,832 78 92

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern
: l/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

1

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

MUMBAI 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAF'URAM. h,,,ted at Pnntograph.
New Delhr. Ph ~7~68~7

