атт Ah IS 1723 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ura; — fats 


(ена JTÜ ) 


Pork — Specification 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 67.120.10 


© BIS 2023 


“т нч э] 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
COP ЧИШ, AH чач, 9 гет BS HK AMT, 4$ Reet - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 7 


Slaughterhouse and Meat Industry Sectional Committee, FAD 18 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Slaughterhouse and Meat Industry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council. 


Monitoring and regulating quality of pork is crucial for ensuring consistent quality, safety, and fairness in the 
industry. Overall, standardization ensures that consumers can trust the quality and safety of the pork they purchase 
while promoting transparency and accountability in the industry. 


This standard was originally published in the year 1960 and subsequently revised in the year 1973 in order to 
incorporate requirements related to freedom of pork from Trichinella spiralis, quick freezing, ante-mortem and 
post-mortem inspection of animals and sampling scheme to draw representative samples of various grades of pork. 
In this second revision of the standard, the following changes have been incorporated in order to align the standard 
with recent developments in industrial practices and technological changes: 


a) Types of pork have been updated along with incorporation of a figure of pork side primal diagram with 
respective bone demarcation for portioning; 

b) The grades for pork have been redefined as per yield grade and quality grades, which is intended to 
ensure that the concerned stakeholder has a choice in selecting a consistent and predictable quality of 
meat; 

c) Conformance of the quality of water for processing with IS 10500 has been mandated; 

d) Standard dressing specifications for Indian pig carcasses has been incorporated; and 

e) A guidance for packaging of meat and meat products has been added. 


Apart from the above, the standard has been brought out in the latest style and format of the Indian Standards. 
Also, amendment 1 and 2 to the standard have been suitably incorporated. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 1723 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
PORK — SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the requirements and 
methods of sampling and test for pork. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the edition indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of these standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS 1982 : 2015 Ante-mortem and post-mortem 
inspection of meat animals — 
Code of practice (second 


revision) 


IS 4393 : 2016 Basic requirement for an 
abattoir (second revision) 


IS 10500: 2012 Drinking water — 
Specification (second revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 
3.1 Abattoir — a slaughter house. 


3.2 Barrows — males that were castrated at a 
young age and are destined for the production 
of pork. 


3.3 Boars — sexually mature males used for 
breeding/male hog or pig with intact testicles. 


3.4 Carcass — all parts, including viscera of a 
slaughtered animal that are capable of being 
used for human food. 


3.5 Cutting — any division of any carcass or part 
thereof, except that the trimming of carcasses or 
parts thereof, to remove surface contaminants is not 
considered as cutting up. 


3.6 Gilts — younger females usually destined 
to become mothers. 


3.7 Grading — a means for quality evaluation of 
specific traits. 


3.8 Inspection — examination of an animal, meat 
and meat product by an official inspector to certify 
wholesomeness and condition. 


3.9 Label — a display of written, printed, or graphic 
matter upon the immediate container (not including 
package liners). 


3.10 Retail — the sale of commodities to ultimate 
consumers, usually in small quantities. 


3.11 Sows — older females who have given birth to 
at least 1 littre. 


3.12 Stag — boar that is castrated after maturity. 


3.13 Swine — a generic term for every kind of hog 
and pig. 


3.14 Wholesale — the sale of commodities in large 
quantities to retailers or jobbers rather than to end 
consumers directly. 


4 METHOD FOR GRADATION OF 
CARCASSES 


For the purpose of this standard, the grouping of the 
various characteristic of a carcass under 
conformation, finish and quality, based on which the 
grade of a carcass is determined, shall be as follows: 


a) Conformation — The head should be small 
in relation to the carcass. The shoulder and 
jowl should be light and the loin full and 
deep. The back should appear to be 
excessively long. The ham should be broad, 
well-fleshed to the hock, showing a fine 
bone and U-shaped in the space between the 
legs. Bone formation should be light, flat 
and pinkish in colour. 


b 


wm 


Finish — This refers to the quality of fat 
laid down. The quantity of internal and 
external fat should be such as to require no 
trimming. The cut sternum should show the 
predominance of lean over fat. When cut 
through, the amount of fat at the last rib 
should not be excessive. The fat should be 
white, dry and firm to touch. 


IS 1723 : 2023 


c) Quality — The rind should be free from 
wrinkles, scores, stabs and fighting scars. It 
should have an attractive colour and should 
not be unduly dry. The colour of the flesh 
should be bright, sappy and attractive pink. 


5 TYPES 
Pork shall be of the following six types: 


a) Type A— Fresh carcass/half carcass. 


b) Type B — Fresh, chilled carcass/half 
carcass. 


c) Type C — Fresh, frozen carcass/half 
carcass. 


d) Type D — Pork cuts, fresh (see Fig. 1): 


i) Ham, fresh, uncured, regular; 
ii) Ham, fresh, uncured, skinned; 
iii) Shoulders with hock on; 

iv) Shoulders with hock off; 

v) Shoulders, skinned; 

vi) Loins; 

vii) Tenderloins; 


Cut through the 
center of the hock 


ee 


Between the 2nd and 


3rd sacral vertebrae 


Parallel to the shoulder 
cut through the seam 


viii) Spare-ribs; 
ix) Butts; 
x) Bacon; and 
xi) Jowl. 


e) Type E — Pork cuts, fresh, chilled (as listed 


under Type D). 
f) TypeF — Pork cuts, fresh, frozen (as listed 
under Type D). 
6 GRADES 


The grading system mentioned hereunder 
categorizes pig carcasses by yield and quality, and 
provides producers, wholesalers, retail meat 
operator, and restaurants the information they need 
to purchase a grade of meat that suits their particular 
needs. This standard describes the parameters and 
procedures for the grading of barrow, gilt, and sow 
carcasses. Grades are not provided for boar 
carcasses, as the meat from boar is unacceptable/not- 
preferred for marketing owing to the boar taint. 


Form a Boot Jack 


From the edge of the 
tenderloin (posterior) 
to the ventral side of 
the scapula (anterior) 


Between the 2nd 
and 3rd ribs 


Cut 1/2 inch above 
the knee jomt £ 


FIG. 1 PORK SIDE PRIMAL DIAGRAM WITH RESPECTIVE BONE DEMARCATION FOR PORTIONING 


6.1 Yield Grades for Pig Carcasses 


Yield grades for gilt/barrow and sow carcasses shall 
be as specified in Table 1 and Table 2 respectively. 


6.1.1 Yield Grades for Gilt and Barrow Carcasses 
6.1.2 Yield Grades for Sow Carcasses 

6.2 Quality Grades for Pig Carcasses 

Pork quality grades (irrespective of age and sex) 
shall be as given in Table 3. 


Example: 


The final grade of a carcass with chilled carcass 
weight 80 kg and back fat thickness 22 mm may 
be noted as ‘Grade 3; fat class 3’. 


7 REQUIREMENTS 
7.1 General Requirements 


The pig from which pork is derived should be 
healthy and slaughtered in a hygienically-managed 
abattoir (see IS 4393). The slaughter should be 
supervised by a competent authority. The material 
shall be subjected to ante-mortem and post-mortem 


IS 1723 : 2023 


inspection according to the procedure laid down in 
IS 1982 and shall be certified as being sound and 
free from contagious and infectious diseases and fit 
for human consumption. The material shall bear a 
mark of such inspection giving the date of 
inspection. 


7.2 The material shall be free from Trichinella 
spiralis. 


7.3 The material shall be prepared in a plant which 
is regularly operated under the supervision of the 
competent authority concerned. 


7.4 The material shall be handled and delivered 
under hygiene and sanitary conditions. 


7.5 Material and Workmanship 


The material shall be the carcasses or derived from 
the carcasses of pigs free from bruises and 
discolorations. Oily pork; pork from boars, stags and 
pork with dark flesh, thick rind or coarse muscle 
fiber shall not be accepted. 


7.6 Quality of water used for processing shall 
conform to IS 10500. 


Table 1 Yield Grades for Gilt and Barrow Carcasses 


(Clause 6.1) 


SI No. Primary Criteria Secondary Criteria/Additional Criteria 
n n 
| \ f 1 
Grade Based on Chilled Carcass Grade Based on Back Fat 
Weight Thickness 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) Grade 1 < 64.9 kg Fat class 1 < 14.9 mm 
Fat class 2 15 mm to 19.9 mm 
Fat class 3 20 mm to 24.9 mm 
Fat class 4 »25mm 

ii) Grade 2 65 kg to 74.9 kg Fat class 1 « 14.9 mm 
Fat class 2 15 mm to 19.9 mm 
Fat class 3 20 mm to 24.9 mm 
Fat class 4 »25mm 

iii) Grade 3 75 kg to 84.9 kg Fat class 1 < 14.9 mm 
Fat class 2 15 mm to 19.9 mm 
Fat class 3 20 mm to 24.9 mm 
Fat class 4 »25mm 

iv) Grade 4 > 85 kg Fat class 1 < 14.9 mm 
Fat class 2 15 mm to 19.9 mm 
Fat class 3 20 mm to 24.9 mm 
Fat class 4 > 25 mm 


IS 1723 : 2023 


Table 2 Yield Grades for Sow Carcasses 
(Clause 6.1) 


SI No. Primary Criteria Secondary Criteria/Additional Criteria 
h Л 
| \ | \ 
Grade Percent Yield of Grade Based on Back Fat 
Primal Cuts Thickness 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) Grade 1 >70 % Fat class 1 25 mm to 34 mm 
Fat class 2 35 mm to 44 mm 
Fat class 3 45 mm or more 
Fat class 4 24 mm or less 

il) Grade 2 65 % to 69.9 96 Fat class 1 25 mm to 34 mm 
Fat class 2 35 mm to 44 mm 
Fat class 3 45 mm or more 
Fat class 4 24 mm or less 

iii) Grade 3 60 % to 64.9 % Fat class 1 25 mm to 34 mm 
Fat class 2 35 mm to 44 mm 
Fat class 3 45 mm or more 
Fat class 4 24 mm or less 

iv) Grade C < 59.9 % Fat class 1 25 mm to 34 mm 
Fat class 2 35 mm to 44 mm 
Fat class 3 45 mm or more 
Fat class 4 24 mm or less 

NOTES 


1 Grade C represents ‘cull’ grade. 


2 As an example, the final grade of a carcass with chilled carcass weight 67 percent yield of primal cuts and back fat thickness 41 mm 


would be ‘Grade 2; fat class 2’. 


Table 3 Quality Grades for Indian Pig Carcasses 


(Clause 6.2) 
SI No. Grade Meat Colour Firmness of Back Degree of Marbling 
Fat 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) Grade P Light red — Reddish Firm Moderate — Slightly abundant 
pink marbling 
ii) Grade I Pinkish gray Soft to slightly firm Slight marbling 
iii) Grade N Gray Very soft No/negligible marbling 
iv) Grade D Dark red Very firm Abundant marbling 


NOTE — Pork quality refers to the expected eating characteristics 
(tenderness, juiciness and flavour) of the cooked product. The 
quality grades mentioned in this standard reflect differences in 
expected eating quality among slaughter pigs and their carcasses. 
Conventional methods for carcass quality measurement, such as 
meat colour, degree of marbling and firmness in back fat were 
considered for developing quality grades for Indian pork 
carcasses. Four different quality grades (Grade P, Grade I, Grade 
N and Grade D) were developed (Table 3), wherein Grade P and 
Grade I indicates pork carcasses with highly acceptable 
characteristics while Grade N and Grade D indicates carcasses 


with less acceptable characteristics. For example, pork carcasses 
(irrespective of age and sex) with reddish pink colour, firm back 
fat and moderate marbling, which are indications of good quality, 
will be graded as ‘Grade P’. Similarly, those carcasses with very 
soft back fat, gray colour and no/negligible marbling will become 
“Grade N’ while those with dark red meat, very firm back fat and 
abundant marbling will be graded as ‘Grade D’. In other words, 
eating quality will be most desirable for “Grade P and Grade Г” 
and least desirable for “Grade N and Grade D”. The uppercase 
letters used in the naming of grades that is, P, I, N and D were 
selected in order to indicate the pork (P) from India (IND). 


7.7 Dressing Process Specifications for Indian Pig 
Carcasses 


In order to have uniformity in the dressing 
operations of pig carcass and to facilitate grading, 
required dressing specifications shall be as given in 
Table 4, separately for gilts/barrows and sows. 
Under section Ш and IV of Table 4, option has been 
provided to the processors during dressing 
operations for either including or excluding tongue, 
kidneys, kidney fat and diaphragm, as to meet the 
specific requirements of customers in case of 


IS 1723 : 2023 


domestic market or that of importing countries in 
case of export. Accordingly, required dressing 
coefficient reductions based on chilled carcass 
weight have been specified in Table 5. The 
procedure demands weighing of the chilled 
carcasses to the calibration divisions on the scale and 
recording of the actual scale display. When pig 
carcasses are weighed ‘hot’ a ‘hot weight rebate’ has 
been calculated that is, the hot carcass is reduced in 
weight by 2 percent, if weighed within 45 min of 
slaughter. This is to allow for moisture loss from the 
carcass during chilling. 


Table 4 Standard Pig Carcass Dressing Specifications 


(Clause 7.7) 
SI No. Standard Dressing Specifications for Carcass of Gilts and Barrows 
i) Section I: a) Hair 
The parts of the pig carcass which b) Liver, spleen, heart and lungs (pluck/race) 
shall be removed completely c) Stomach 
d) Leaf fat/mesenteric fat 
e) Genito-urinary 
f) Organs, excluding kidneys 
5) Scrotal sac in barrows 
h) Nails on each foot 
il) Section II: a) Head 
The parts of the pig carcass which b) Feet and tail 
shall not be removed c) Ear root and eyes 
d) No trimming on neck beyond cutting of ragged 
edges 
Ш) Section Ш: a) Remain attached to the carcass ог 
The tongue may either: b) Be removed from the head attached to the pluck, 
taking with minimum amount of meat attached to 
jaw 
iv) Section IV: a) Remain attached to the carcass or 
Kidney fat, kidneys and b) Be entirely removed 
diaphragm (KFKD) may either: 
Standard Dressing Specifications for Carcass of Sows 
v) Section I: a) Head 
The following parts shall be b) Tail 
removed, in addition to ‘a-e? с) Front and hind feet 
mentioned in section I above, that d) Udder (to be removed tidily) for 


of gilts and barrows. 


NOTE — Other points mentioned in section II, Ш and IV above will remain applicable. 


IS 1723 : 2023 


Table 5 Dressing Coefficient Reductions Based on Chilled Carcass Weight 


(Clause 7.7) 
SI No. Chilled Carcass Tongue Out, Tongue In, Tongue Out, Tongue In, 
Weight KFKD Out KFKD Out KFKD In KFKD In 
(kg) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) < 50 0 0.25 0.60 0.85 
ii) 50.5 to 74.5 0 0.30 0.80 1.10 
iii) 75 to 99.5 0 0.30 1.30 1.60 
iv) > 100 0 0.30 1.80 2.10 
NOTES 
1 КЕК” - Kidney fat, kidney and diaphragm. 
2 The coefficients are applied in addition to the 2 percent hot carcass weight rebate. 
7.8 Detailed Requirements c) Loins — These shall be commercial cut 


7.8.1 Type A 


The deepest part of the carcass near the bone shall 
be cooled to the atmospheric temperature when 
delivered and shall show по evidence of 
deterioration. 


7.8.2 Type B 


The carcass shall be chilled so that the temperature 
at the deepest portion of the flesh near the bone shall 
be 1 °C and shall show no evidence of deterioration. 


7.8.3 Type C 


The pork shall be quick frozen preferably at a 
temperature of - 20 °C in the minimum possible time 
and shall show no evidence of deterioration, such as 
dehydration, oxidative rancidity and advanced 
changes in texture. 


7.8.4 Type D 


These shall be prepared from carcasses which 
conform to the requirements given in 7.8.1. The pork 
cuts may be as follows: 


a) Hams, fresh, uncured, regular (skin 
on/skinned) — These shall be well-trimmed, 
commercial, short-cut hams. 


b) Shoulders (picnic shoulder) with hock 
onlhock off (skin on/skinned) — shall be 
commercial cut, well-trimmed shoulders 
with hock on or hock off, as applicable. 


well-trimmed loins fat shall be in normal 
proportion to the weight of the loins. 


d) Butt (boston butt) — These shall be 
commercial-cut, well-trimmed butts. 


e) Bacon (belly) — These shall be commercial- 
cut, well-trimmed bacon. 


f) Spare ribs — These shall be in whole or half 
sheets with all semi loose pieces removed. 


g) Jowl — Jowl can be either skin-on or skin 
removed. 


h) Tender loin —These shall be whole 
tenderloins, free from fat. 


7.8.5 Type E 


These shall be the same as 7.8.4 except that they 
shall be prepared from carcasses which conform to 
the requirements given in 7.8.2. 


7.8.6 Type F 


These shall be the same as chilled except that the 
pork shall be frozen solid when delivered and shall 
show no evidence of refreezing or deterioration. 
Frozen pork cuts shall be in refrigeration for not 
more than three months from the time they were 
placed in the freezer to the time they are offered for 
delivery at final destination. 


8 PACKING AND MARKING 
8.1 Packing 


Unless agreed otherwise between the purchaser and 
the vendor, the material shall be packed in clean, 


foodgrade materials sufficiently strong to withstand 
repeated handling. Guidance on use of different 
packaging materials/technology suitable for meat 
and meat products is given in Annex A. 


8.2 Marking 


The containers shall be marked to give the following 
information: 

a) Type and grade of the material; 

b) Name of the manufacturer; 

c) Batch or code number; 

d) Number of pieces; 

e) Net quantity and gross quantity; 

f) Date of packing; 


g) Shelf life/best before, relevant to distance 
market; and 


IS 1723 : 2023 


h) Any other requirement as stipulated under 
Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and 
regulations framed thereunder and Legal 
Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 
2011. 


8.2.1 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, апа the 
products may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


9 SAMPLING 


The method of drawing representative samples of 
pork and the criteria for conformity shall be as given 
in Annex B. 


IS 1723 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 8.1) 
GUIDANCE FOR PACKAGING OF MEAT AND MEAT PRODUCTS 


A-1 THE PRESERVATION METHODS 


A-1.1 The common packaging technique used for 
selling fresh meat and meat products in India that is, 
wrapping, belongs to non-preservative packaging 
types wherein the packaging contains and protects 
the product from contamination and water loss 
without creating in-pack conditions very different 
from outside that is, these types of packaging have 
no/little effect on extending the shelf life of meat. 


A-1.2 With higher concentrations of population, 
however, this traditional system now becomes 
outmoded because more time is needed between 
slaughtering and ultimate consumption. Meat 
frequently has to be stored, transported, prepared 
and distributed through a retailer or supermarket, all 
of which is considerably time consuming. In order 
to safeguard fresh meat during this extended time, 
certain methods of preservation have to be applied. 


A-1.3 Refrigeration is the obvious solution, but this 
is expensive and therefore frequently not available 
in rural areas. Energy saving storage methods are 
therefore particularly relevant in these areas. For 
both methods, either using the refrigeration 
technology or energy saving methods to extend the 
shelf-life of meat and meat products, proper 
packaging has an important part to play. 


A-2 SUITABLE MATERIALS AND 
EQUIPMENT FOR PACKAGING MEAT AND 
MEAT PRODUCTS 


A-2.1 Packaging films can be subdivided into 
cellulose films, plastic films and aluminum foil. 
They can either be used as monofilms or as two or 
more different films laminated together. These 
materials differ in oxygen permeability; water vapor 
barrier; resistance to hot and cold temperatures; and 
mechanical strength. Nearly all available films are 
of thermoplastic materials, and therefore heat 
sealable, resulting in hermetically sealed plastic 
pouches, bags, etc. A high oxygen barrier is 
important in the application of films for packaging 
meat and meat products. Films made of 
polyvinylchloride (PVC), polyethylene (PE) or 
polypropylene (PP) have a relatively high oxygen 
permeability, whereas polyvinylidene chloride 
(PVDC), polyester (PETP), polyamide (PA) and 


cellulose film (ZG) are less or almost 
non-permeable to oxygen. The latter materials are 
therefore better suited for packaging meat and meat 
products. However, the materials of the first group 
are frequently used as laminates with materials of 
the second group in order to achieve special effects 
regarding mechanical strength, heat sealing 
properties or making the package practically 
impermeable to both oxygen and water vapor. 


A-2.2 Vacuum Packaging 


A-2.2.1 For the efficient utilization of these 
materials, air must be drawn out completely from 
the packages with the meat product 
(vacuum-packaging) and the package should be 
hermetically closed by heat sealing or metal clip. 
Vacuum-packaging will inhibit the growth of yeasts, 
moulds, and most aerobic bacteria under 
refrigeration temperatures. However, facultative 
anaerobes such as acid producing bacteria grow 
freely under adequate  air-conditions. These 
micro-organisms do not threaten the health of 
consumers but may affect the quality of the products 
by negatively influencing colour and taste. 
Therefore, efforts should be made to keep the initial 
number of bacteria low, which can be obtained by 
simple hygienic measures during cutting and 
packaging, such as frequent hand washing, clean 
tools and clean tables. The above general 
considerations refer to vacuum-packaged meat and 
meat products with a high moisture content. 


A-2.2.2 Longer storage times for traditionally 
preserved dried meat can be achieved with 
vacuum-packaging in laminated films, which 
protect against humidity and oxidation by oxygen 
from the atmosphere. Vacuum-packaging can also 
gain importance for traditionally preserved 
products. Although they are shelf-stable, exposure 
of these products to oxygen and the humidity of the 
surrounding atmosphere will cause unfavorable 
alterations (rancidity, loss of flavour, growth of 
certain micro-organisms) over the long term. 


A-2.2.3 Air and vapor-tight packaging will ensure a 
prolonged shelf-life. Simple vacuum-packaging 
machines, suited to less developed regions, are 
available. They consist of a chamber with a 
removable lid, so that the plastic pouch or bag 
containing the product can be placed inside the 


chamber, which is evacuated with an electrically 
driven vacuum pump. By closing the lid, air can be 
drawn out of the chamber and also out of the open 
bag. While still in the vacuum chamber, the bag is 
hermetically closed by heat sealing by means of a 
manual or automatic electrically heated sealing 
device. After being sealed the bag can be exposed to 
ambient conditions without air penetrating the 
package. 


A-2.3 The situation is different for the traditionally 
preserved meat and meat products. All these 
products are shelf-stable because of their low water 
activity and therefore do not require refrigeration. 
They are partly dried in the sun, or others are dried 
and smoked over a wood fire. These low-moisture 
products are hygroscopic and should be protected in 
the case of high air humidity. Traditional wrapping 
methods using paper, jute or linen will not inhibit 
the penetration of water vapor. However, a simple 
polyethylene bag is sufficient as a water vapor 
barrier, but care must be taken that the bag is tightly 
closed. If plastic bags are used for packing, then the 
pieces of dry meat should be cut to a certain length 
so that they can be better arranged in the bags. The 
bag should be bound with rope, rubber or cello tape. 


IS 1723 : 2023 


Bags stuffed with meat in this way are best stacked 
into a carton. 


A-2.4 The large uneven cuts like bacon, ham, loin 
etc can be wrapped neatly by shrink packaging. The 
materials for shrink packaging shall have high 
structural strength and the commonly used ones are 
polypropylene, polystyrene and poly vinyl chloride. 
These films are manufactured by stretching the film 
under controlled temperature so that they are mono 
or biaxially oriented to stay stretched at ambient 
temperature and then locking the film in this 
stretched condition by cooling. 


A-2.5 Due to the increased concern over the *non- 
biodegradable’ nature of plastic packaging films, the 
concept of using biodegradable packaging materials 
is picking up momentum in recent past. Any 
material claiming to Бе biodegradable shall 
completely decompose into carbon dioxide and 
water within six months period. Biodegradable films 
are mainly vegetable in origin and the most common 
ones are derived from polysaccharides namely, 
starch, cellulose, gelatin, gum, gluten etc. Such 
films have good mechanical and optical properties 
but have poor water vapor barrier property which 
makes them unsuitable for packaging fresh pork. 


IS 1723 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 9) 
SAMPLING OF PORK 


B-1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


B-1.1 In drawing, preparing, storing and handling 
test samples the precautions given in B-1.1.1 and 
B-1.1.2 shall be observed. 


B-1.1.1 The  ante-mortem and post-mortem 
inspection report shall be verified. 


B-1.1.2 The sample shall be kept in pre-cooled 
insulated boxes. 


B-2 SAMPLING 
B-2.1 Lot 


All pork in a single consignment belonging to the 
same type and grade shall constitute a lot. If a 
consignment is declared or is known to consist of 
different types and grades, the pork belonging to the 
same type and grade shall be grouped together and 
each such group shall constitute a separate lot. 


Samples shall be tested for each lot for ascertaining 
the conformity of the material to the requirements of 
this specification. 


B-2.2 Sampling and testing of pork belonging to 
Types A, B and C each pork belonging to the above 
types shall be tested for grades (see 4), general 
requirements (see 7.1), material and workmanship 
(see 7.5) and detailed requirements (see 7.8). 


B-2.3 Sampling and Testing of Pork Belonging to 
Types D, E and F 


B-2.3.1 The number of pork cuts (n) to be chosen 


from the lot shall depend on the size of the lot (N) 
and shall be in accordance with col (2) and (3) of 
Table 6. 


B-2.3.2 If the pork cuts are packed in loose bulk, the 
sample shall be taken at random from various 
positions and levels in the bulk. If the pork cuts are 
packed in containers, adequate number of containers 
shall be chosen at random. Required number of 
samples [see col (2) in Table 1] shall be taken at 
random from the chosen containers. 


B-2.4 Number of Tests 


B-2.4.1 The pork cuts selected according to B-2.3.2 
shall be visually inspected for the requirements of 
the particular type and grade given in 4. 


B-2.4.2 The lot shall be further test for the general 
requirements (see 7.1), material and workmanship 
(see 7.5) and detailed requirements (see 7.8). 


B-2.5 Criteria for Conformity 


B-2.5.1 Pork Cuts Belonging to Types A, B and C — 
The lot shall be declared as conforming to the 
specification when each of the individual pork 
satisfies the relevant requirements. 


B-2.5.2 Pork Cuts Belonging to Types D, E and F — 
The lot shall be declared as conforming to the 
specification if the samples tested in B-2.4 satisfy 
the relevant requirements of this specification. 


Table 6 Number of Pork Cuts to be Chosen for Sampling 
(Clause B-2.3.1) 


SI No. Lot Size, No. of Pork Cuts to be 
No. of Carcass Chosen 

N n 

(1) (2) (3) 
i) 5 to 10 1 
ii) 11 to 25 3 
iii) 26 to 50 4 
iv) 51 to 100 5 
у) 101 and above 7 


IS 1723 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Slaughter House and Meat Industry Sectional Committee, FAD 18 


Organization 


National Research Center on Meat, Hyderabad 


Agricultural & Processed Food Products Export 
Development Authority (APEDA), New Delhi 


АП India Meat апа Livestock Exporters 


Association, Mumbai 
Animal Welfare Board of India, Balabhgarh 
AOV Exports Private Limited, Noida 


Confederation of Indian Food & Trade Industry & 
Industry, New Delhi 


CSIR - Central Food Technological Research 
Institute, Mysuru 


CSIR - Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


CSIR - National Environmental Engineering 
Research Institute (NEERI), Nagpur 


Deonar Slaughterhouse, Mumbai 


Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, 
New Delhi 


Indian Stainless Steel Development Association 
(ISSDA), Gurugram 


Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar 


Kerala Veterinary and Animal Sciences University, 
Thrissur 


Minister of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying, New Delhi 


National Research Center on Meat, Hyderabad 
National Research Centre for Pig, Guwahati 


People for Ethical Treatment of Animals, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


DR S. B. BARBUDDHE (Chairperson) 


SHRI UMESH KUMAR 
MS SAMIDHA GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR D. B. SABHARWALL 


SHRI M. G. JAYASIMHA 
SHRI AJAY TANDON 


MS PRIYANKA GUPTA 


DR NUSRATH NAZIR 


DR T. S. UMA 
DR GIRISH POPHALI 
DR YOGESH JAYPRAKASH SHETYE 
DR KALIMPASHA AHMEDKHAN PATHAN 


(Alternate) 


DR S. K. SAXENA 
DR AMIT SHARMA (Alternate) 


DR FIRDAUS JAHAN 
SHRI ROHIT KUMAR 

SHRIRAJEEV GUPTA (Alternate) 
DR S. K. MENDIRATTA 


DR SUNIL B. 
DR VASUDEVAN V. N. (Alternate) 


DR M. K. AGNIHOTRI 


DR M. MUTHUKUMAR 
DR R. THOMAS 


DR MANILAL VALLIYATE 
М5 BHUVANESHWARI GUPTA (Alternate) 


IS 1723 : 2023 


Organization 


Tamil Nadu Vet & Animal Sciences University, 
Chennai 


In Personal Capacity (Amity Institute of Food 
Technology, I - 1, 4th floor, Amity University, 
Sector - 125, Noida - 201313) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


DR R NARENDRA BABU 
DR S. EZHILVELAN (Alternate) 


DR V. K. MODI 


SHRIMATI SUNEETI  TOTEJA, SCIENTIST  'E" 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (£x-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI DEBASISH MAHALIK 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSITANT DIRECTOR 
(FOOD AND AGRICULTURE), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 18 (14404). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


