Indian Standard
APPLICATION GUIDE FOR ac ELECTRICITY METERS ( First Revision )

ICS 17.220.20

0 BIS 2000

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 July 2000

Price Group 4

Equipment for Electrical Measurement and Load Control Sectional Committee, ET 13

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Equipment for Electrical Measurement and Load Control Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. This Standard was originally issued in 1985 and in the first revision the requirements for Static Energy Meters have been added. Selection of electricity meters and instrument transformers of appropriate accuracy classes is of very vital importance to ensure accurate measurement of energy commensurate to the level of energy consumption, distribution, transfer and exchange. This guide has been prepared with the specific purpose of describing the various metering arrangements that are possible and also to suggest the selection of meters for different category of electricity~tariffs. The introduction of static meters for measurement of electricity has changed the utility practices in installation and reading of meters for billing the consumers. By using static meters, apart from billing, various other applications are possible. This revised guide also covers the application of static electricity meters in measurement and control of electricity supply. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, comprising the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 11448 : 2000

Indian Standard APPLICATION GUIDE FOR ac ELECTRICmY METERS ( First, Revision )
1 SCOPE This guide gives information on different types of electricity meters and their application in measurement, recording and control of electricity supply. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards given in Annex A are necessary adjunct to this standard. 3 TERMINOLOGY In addition to the definitions given in various standards listed in Annex A, the following definitions shall apply. 3.1 Concurrent Demand The sum total of the energy values obtained in all the feeders in a multi-feeder supply system feeding into a load system and divided by the demand integration period over which these energy values are summated in real time. 3.2 Concurrent Maximum Demand The maximum ofthe concurrent demand values obtained in consecutive demand integration periods over a specified period of time. 3.3 Multi-Energy Meter Meter which, in a single case, measures two or three type of electrical energies (watt-hour, Var-hour, VAhour). 3.4 Multi-Function Meter Basic or multi-energy meter which. in a single case, has functions that are not described in basic standards for energy meters.
NOTE - Multi-function meter may include maximum demand indicator, time switch. radio transmitter/receiver. pulse output device, etc.

4.1 Unit Tariff A single parameter unit tariff is generally imposed on low and medium voltage consumers primarily to recover the running energy dependent cost ofelectricity. It is sometimes accompanied with a time based or load based or frequency based differential pricing or a combination of these to justify the economics of supply and demand. 4.2 Two Part Tariff It combines unit tariff and maximum demand tariff with or without reactive energy based surcharge for low power factor, and with or without time based differential pricing of unit and/or maximum demand for preferential time of use. It is generally applied for consumers supplied at medium and high voltages. It is made up of two parts, one to pay for the fixed power dependent cost and other for running energy dependent cost. The metering consists of_kWh and kVArh and/or kVAh meters/metering elements in a single case, having the required accuracy with an arrangement to measure the maximum demand. The integrating period of maximum demand indicator is controlled by an internal time clock or by an external time switch. 4.3 Time of Day (TOD) / Time of Use (TOU) Tariff In this type of time based unit or two part tariff for differential pricing ofenergy and/or maximum demand, the entire hours of one day or of seven days of one week or 365 days of one year are grouped in specific time slots, each slot being associated with specific metering register(s). Different Time ofUse (TOU) tariff for energy and/or maximum demand are then applied to various meter values obtained from these registers, with the objective of encouraging consumption in the lean demand hours of day/week/year and discouraging the same in the peak demand hours of the day/week/year in order to even out the profile of energy consumption curve. When the preferential "Time of Use" tariff (TOU) is limited only to 24 h of the day, it is called the "Time of day" tariff (TOD). 4.4 Reactive Energy Based Two Part Tariff Where two part tariff is b&ed on kWh and kW maximum demand, the surcharge for low power factor is some times levied when the average power factor for the entire billing period is determined from kWh and kVArh (lag only) advances and the same is below a threshold value. 1

3.5 Actual Metering Point The physical location at which the electricity is metered. 3.6 Defined Metering Point ,The physical location at which the accuracy reqiirements are to be met. 4 ELECI'RIClTYTARlFF

IS -11448 : 2000 4.5 Bulk Supply Tariff 4.5.1 The term "bulk supply" implies transfer or exchange

consumers on low and medium voltages. 5.1.1.2 Class I. 0 accuracy These meters are generally recommeneded for registration of energy supplied to consumers at high voltages. Low and medium voltages consumers having large off-take may also be metered by meters of this accuracy class. 5.1.1.3 CIass 0.5 accuracy These meters are generally recommended for registration of energy supplied to consumers at extra high voltages. Consumers supplied at high voltages but having considerable offtake may also be metered by meters of this accuracy class. 5. I. 1.4 Class 0.2 accuracy These meters are generally recommended for registration ofenergy in bulk supply, that is transfer or exchange of considerable amount of power at sending/receiving ends of an interconnected extra high voltage network. Consumers supplied at extra high voltages but having considerable off-take may al's0 be metered by meters of this accuracy class.
NOTE - lfenergy drawal is low (not zero) for appreciable period of time, meters of special measuring range designated by `S' after the class index, namely class 0.2s and class 0.5s. are recommended in place of class 0.2 and 0.5 respectively. Static meters of class 0.2s and OSS conforming to IS 14697 are available.

of considerable amount of power at the sending/ receiving ends of an inter-connected extra high voltage network. The tariff imposed is basically a two part time of day tariff with various combinations of differential unit pricing and maximum demand pricing. For optimum evaluation and control of cost and demand, more detailed information is generally required than in the case of two part tariff. Sometimes, frequency based differential pricing is applied for drawal of energy in different frequency blocks, in order to make a balance between supply and demand. On the other hand, voltage based differential pricing for reactive energy values is effected to endeavour correction of voltage profile. The~metering generally consists of a combination of the following instruments: kWh meter with maximum demand indicator/ register - Import/Export.

b) kVArh meter with maximum demand indicator/
register-Import/Export, Inductive/Capacitive.

cl kVAh meter for full power factor range with
maximum demand indicator/register- Import/ Export.

4 Multi-feeder summator with concurrent
Maximum Demand -by mechanical/electrical/ electronic devices. Average demand recorder - PrintometerIDemand Profile Monitor. Meter having external or internal frequency measuring devices to register energy values in different frequency blocks.

5.1.2 Long Range Meters Long range meters with continuous current carrying capacity of 400 percent of basic current or more for single-phase meters and 200 percent of basic current or more for 3 phase meters are recommended for use:

g) Meter having voltage dependent device to
activate reactive unit registers for over voltage and under voltage blocks. 4.5.1 The metering may consist of single static meter having capability for multi-energy measurement and registration and also to perform the multi-functional aspects of above instruments. 5 METERING ARRANGEMENT FOR VARIOUS TARIFF 5.1 Watt-Hour Meter
5.1.1 Recommendations ofAccuracy Classfor Dl@@rent Consumers 5.1.1.1 Class 2.0 accuracy

a) On circuits where wide variations in the load
are involved,

b) On circuits where growth ofdemand is envisaged
in near future, and

c) To effect standardization of meters manufactured
or handled by a supply utility. 5.1.3 Instrument Transformer Error Compensation In a microprocessor-based static meter, it is possible to compensate for error profiles of external instrument transformers (CTs and VTs). In such a compensated metering system, high overall metering accuracy can be obtained as per any statutory requirement, contractual agreement or recommendation given in a code of practice. For effective error compensation, actual connected burdens of current and potential transformer circuits need determination either by measurement or by 2

Watt-hour meters of class 2.0 accuracy are generally recommended for registration of energy supplied to

IS 11448 : 2000 estimation. The CT and VT ratio and phase errors for such values of working burdens are required to be found out. 5.1.4 Compensation for Transformer and Line Losses Where the Actual Metering Point and Defined Metering Point do not coincide, compensation for power transformer and/or line losses are provided, if necessary, to meet the overall accuracy requirements at the Defined Metering Point. 5.1.4.1 Sometimes electro-mechanical meters are designed to read p-hour and p-hour to registertransformer loss and/or line loss respectively, the proportional constants having been determined from data available for the transformer and line conductors. The loss can be computed with meter values at Actual Metering Point so that the requirements at the Defined Metering Point are met. 5.1.4.2 In a singlemicroprocessor based static meter, it is possible to incorporate similar compensation for transformer and/or line losses based on p-hour and p-hour measurements, the proportional constants having been fed into the memory, so that the meter values at Defined Metering Point are obtained. 5.2 Maximum Demand and Power Factor 5.2.1 Maximum Demand
It is calculated using the following two methods.

power factor, It is necessary to consider the application of meters or combination of meters which take into account the kVA demand and reactive energy consumption. Tariffs based on maximum demand in kVA have an ever-increasing importance in our country where inductive loads take a very high share of the total power supplied. The apparent energy may be measured by rather complex instruments and methods. On the contrary, simple methods having a strictly restricted range of power factor areavailable. These ~meters are covered by IS 14415. Outside the designated power factor ranges, the errors are sometimes so high as to become totally unacceptable. 5.2.3.2 It is however recommended that for ail systems above 3.3 kV, the tariff be based on kWh and maximum demand in kVA, provided the available metering equipment registers kVA with commensurate accuracy at all_power factors from unity to zero lagging/leading. The desired metering technique utilises an apparent energy computer actuated by one kWh meter and one kVArh meter to achieve the vector sum definition of the total equivalent kVAh ofthe polyphase circuit. Alternatively, it employs a linear converter consisting of a rectifier and a solid state inverter or a transductor to achieve the arithmetic-sum definition of the total equivalent kVAh of the polyphase circuit. Due to ambiguity of 3-phase kVA, the tariff must specify the adopted definition of the 3-phase kVA.maximum demand. 5.2.4 Kilowatt Maximum Demand Meter with Reactive Kilovolt Ampere-Hour Meter A combination of 3 phase watt-hour meter with Maximum Demand indicatorand a reactive volt ampere hour meter may be installed together for computation of average power factor during the billing period from the active energy units and the reactive-energy units when the tariff is linked to kilowatt maximum demand as well as a surcharge is levied for deterioration of power factor. The Var hour meters are generally provided with reverse running stops to prevent reverse registration during the period when the power factor of the consumer is leading. However, with static meters, computation of average power factor may be carried out using reactive energy values, either lag only or lag and lead. 5.2.5 Cumulative Maximum Demand Register For checking purpose, it is often necessary to know the maximum demand reading for the previous assessment period. An additional register may therefore be provided with a gear train coupled to the maximum demand pointer spindle. When the maximum demand pointer is reset at the end of the demand assessment period, the maximum demand reading is automatically 3

5.2.1.1 Block average demand - In this method, demand calculations are computed successively over discrete demand integration periods in a specified period of time. 5.2.1.2 Sliding window demand - In this method, demand calculations are computed over demand integration period which progressively moves or slides in a specified period of time. There is continuous overlapping between the previous and the current integration periods. 5.2.2 Kilowatt MaximumDemand Meter 5.2.2.1 These meters register energy consumption as well as kilowatt maximum demand which is based on energy consumption in successive interval (sliding/ block) of a prescribed time, which is normally 30 min, but may be 5,15 or60min as well. 5.2.2.2 The meters are used for a tariff, which is linked to kilowatt maximum demand, in place of precision kVA maximum demand metering, if not available or justified in the-concerned system. 5.2.3 Kilovolt Ampere Maximum Demand Meter 5.2.3.1 To discourage.consumption of energy at low

IS 11448 : 2000

transferred to the cumulative register which thus shows the sum of all the maximum demands to date. The reading for the last period can be determined merely by deducting the previous reading from the existing one. In case of static meters, a cumulative maximum demand register is provided for this purpose, so that on each reset, maximum demand of the current period is added to cumulative maximum demand register. 5.2.6 Maximum DemandMeter with Repetition Counter Some tariffs are based on the number of times near peak average demand are registered in a billing period instead of one single maximum demand registration. For this purpose, a special type of MD meter may be installed containing a counter that registers the number of times average demand exceeds a near peak threshold value. With static meters, demand recording facility may be installed for this purpose. The readings registered in the meter memorymay be analyzed to findthe number of times the average demand exceeded at near peak threshold level. 5.2.7 MD Reset Count An electromechanical or a static meter may be provided witha register to record every time the maximum demand is reset. A static meter may also record the date and time of reset for easy identification. 5.2.8 VAr Maximum Meter When tariff provides for penalties for low power factor at the time of peak demand in kW, kVA, generatly average power factor based on the maximum demand readings of reactive power meter and a_kWh meter are taken into consideration. This method would be correct only if the maximum demand indications of kW and kVA occur during the same integration period which usually does not happen all the time. VAr Max meter is designed to measure not the maximum but the average reactive power demand arising in the same demand integration period as kW or kVA maximumdemand. 5.2.9 Integrated Multi-Energy Meter In modern integrated multi-energy meters having combinations of active, reactive and apparent energy and demand registers, the apparent energy/demand computation can be done based on the reactive energy (lagging only or lagging + leading). The power factor in such cases is computed based on reactive lagging only or lagging + leading. Power factor can also be computed as the ratio of active to apparent energy values. 4

5.3 Bulk Supply Meters and Recorders
5.3.1

Import and Export Registration

5.3.1.1 When there is an exchange of energy between two systems. It is necessary to have a metering arrangement whereby the import and export data are available separately. The information is generally registered by different sets of meters or a single set of meters having different setsof registers, with reverse running stop.
5.3.1.2 Four quadrant meters - In an interconnec-

ted system, it is important to determine at various measuring points amount of energy supplied or consumed. Moreover, it is important to note whether such energy is active or reactive and in the later case whether it is inductive or capacitive. The same applies to apparent energy. If the vectorial circle is divided into four quadrants, the following measurements can be obtained:

a) Active energy - Import or export, b) Reactive energy-Inductive and simultaneously 0 Active energy-Export, and
ii) c) i) ii) d)

Active energy -Import. Reactive energy -Capacitive and simultaneously Active energy -Export, and Active energy - Import. Apparent energy also measured in the same conditions as for reactive energy.

The instrument consists of a full power factor range kVAh meter fitted with special counters and of two reverse power relays, one for active and other for reactive energy. By means-of this instrument, all the above measurements can be obtained with a minimum number of meters. The apparatus consists of a'watt hour meter and a reactive energy meter. The kWh meter is fitted with a pair of counters. One of these registers the import active energy and the other the export active energy. The reactive energy meter is controlled similarly, but it is fitted with four counters grouped in pairs. The speeds of the two meters are constantly added vectorially by means of a set of differential gear wheels and the resultant speed is transferred to the apparent energy counter. This is also provided with four counters grouped in pairs. A static meter may beprovided.with various registers as required for four quadrant metering. 5.3.2 Summation Metering When energy is transferred or exchanged at a number of points, the unit consumption and average~demand data are generally summated by employing impulse

IS 11448 : 2000 counters based on mechanical/electrical/electronic devices. The output from these meters are then fed into average demand recorders. In case of static meters, the unit consumption and average demand data are alternatively summated by employing direct digital transfer of meter values by serial communication between various metering points and the Summator unit. It collects unit values from the individual meters, computes the concurrent average
demand and registers the concurrent maximum demand. 5.3.2.1 Average demand recorders

from one registe! to another is maintained by an internal real time clock. These are also capable of recoi-ding up to eight numbers of kW/kVA TOD demand in different registers. 5.4.2 Load Based Differential Meter This meter is also known`as excess consumption meter. It registers the total consumption as we11 as energy consumed at loads higher than a stipulated limit. The meter is used where the tariff provides for charging at a higher rate at loads above the stipulated limit. It is equipped with two separate counters, one giving the total energy consumption and other giving the energy Consumption wheneverthe load is above the specified maximum demand. The second register is actuated whenever the speed of the rotor exceeds the reference speed, which dependsonthe specified maximum demand as sensed by an arrangement of differential gearing. Load based differential tariff can also be implemented using static meters. 5.5 Frequency Based Tariff Metering This type oftariffmay be implemented for grid discipline in inter-utility power transfers. The tariff structure discourages drawal of active energy at a rate in excess of contractual. demand when the grid frequency is low, that is during "deficit" period and encourages the same when the grid frequency is high, that is during "surplus" period, thereby helping to maintain a stable supply frequency of the grid. For implementing
this tariff, a meter is required to record the following:

The conventional average demand recorders and maximum demand meters give only maximum demand during the billing period. However, at bulk supply points, it is essential to know the load curve in detail. The instruments called printometer and maxigraph record the load curve. These instruments are operated from kWhlkVAh meters and provide data of the average demand during every demand integration period, normally I5130 min. In printometers, the data is provided in the form of printed numerical digits, whereas in maxigraph, this is provided in the form of "Bars", both on strip charts rotating at constant speeds. In print0 maxigraph both forms of data, that is, numerical prints as well as bar graphs are recorded side by side. These instruments can also be executed as code printers to be used with computerised systems for load analysis. 5.3.2.2 Modem multi-function, muti-energy static meters are capable ofrecording kWlkVA/kVAr IaglkVAr lead, load profiles for 35 days or more for 15!30 min demand integration period. 5.4 Multi-Rate and Differential Metering 5.4.1 Time Based Multi-Rate ( TOD) Meter
5.4.1.1 The kWh meter is provided with 2 or 3 energy

4 kWh units for each successive'fixed time block, b) Average supply frequency for the same time
block, and

one for the peak hour period, one for the day period and one for the night period. The changeover from one register-to the other is done by an internal or external time switch. In the event of non-availability of the above type, two or three separate meters may be used with time switches, one registering energy during the peak hours, the other during day hours and the third during the night hours.
registers,'

c) kWh units computed for each successive
frequency block. 5.6 Voltage Based Reactive Meterigg This type of tariff may be implemented for grid,discipline in inter-utility power transfers. The tariff structure discourages drawal of reactive energy when the grid voltage is below a threshbld value and encourages the same wher-.the grid voltage is above a threshold value. For implementing this tariff, the reactive energy registers are activated to register on the over-voltage and under-voltage blocks. A normal voltage zone between the two threshold limits is also provided for, where reactive energy is not considered. 5.7 Selection of Instrument Transformers The current transformers conforming to IS -2705 (Part 2 ) used for metering of a particular category of tariff are recommended tdhave accuracy class, generally 5 '

5.4.1.2 In the event of multirate tariff metering being applied for two-part tariff, the corresponding maximum demand readings would also be required for the specified periods. It is then necessary to provide two or three kilowatt maximum demand meters or kVA maximum demand meters which compute kVA as described ur$r $2.2. 5.4.1.3 In case of static meters, the kWh/kVArhikVAh meters are provided with up to eight numbers of TOD registers for different time zones. The change,over

IS 11448 : 2000

one index better than that of the meter. The voltage transformer conforming to IS 3 156 ( Part 2 ) and used for metering for a particular category ~of tariff, are required to have accuracy class similar to that of the meter. The following may be taken as the guideline:
Meter accuracy class 2.0 1.0 0.5 0.5s 0.2s CT accuracy class VT accuracy class 1 . 0 0 . 5 0 2 0 2 s 0.2SOl

6.2 Meter for Energy Audit~PurpDse

0.1
-

1.0 0.5 0.5 0.2

Statistical data for system evaluation and planning is often a by-product of revenue metering. But some times additional meters are also installed. These are precision meters of accuracy class 0.5 employed for various statistical purposes, for example, determination of losses and efficiency of electrical transmission system. Apart from the stringent accuracy limits, specified performance at power factor outside the normal limits of unity and 0.5 lag are also required in these meters (For example 0.25 lag and 0.5 lead). These meters have capability of recording kW/k.VA/ kVAr load `profiles for several days with integration period of 15/30 min: This data can be transferred to a computer directly or by using a metei reading instrument through a communication port provided on the meters. This data can be analyzed by using a suitable software programme. 6.3 Meters for Testing Purposes Standard meters used for testing of other meters and electrical plants belong to the precision accuracy class of 0.5 or even better up to class 0.05, the meter should have minimum tolerance in error during repetitive measurements and suitable for a restricted variation of test current as compared to revenue meters. 6.4 Measurement of Single Phase Power Supplied
for Railway Traction

It is important to note thrit measuring range of current transformer used should preferably be compatible to the measuring range of meter. Also, the connected burden of each current/voltage circuit should preferably be within the operating range of instrument transformer, that is between 25 percent and 100 percent of the rated output of each CT/VT. 6 MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATIONS Meters herein before specified are used for accounting purpose as required by various electricity tariffs. These are revenue meters. Besides, other fields of application are as follows. 6.1 Supervision and Control of Average Demand
6.1.1 For effective use of the maximum demand tariff

and to cope with any statutory restriction on maximum demand when electricity is scarce, industrial consumers and bulk importers employ maximum demand metering/ average demand recorders with monitoring equipment that indicates continuously on the spot average demand and corrective load with the objective of manual/ automatic control of load/operations so that the average demand may be-restricted closely within the desired limit of maximum demand. These demand controllers are provided with potential free output contacts so as to provide alarm/tripping of certain loads when demand exceeds pre-specified limit. 6.1.2 A complete supervisory equipment is one that incorporates :

Track side substations (TSS) of railways are fed over two single phase feeders with automatic PT changeover in the event of failure of supply in one~phase. The load condition is either one, or both may be feeding to the TSS. Hence the meter must perform the summation metering to arrive at the concurrent maximum demand. The modern static meters can be used for traction metering even without the need of PT changeover relay. 6.5 Installation Checks and Site Diagnostics A static energy meter is sometimes provided with additional facility to validate the electrical service wired up to~the meter. It determines the service type, its phase rotation, the phasor relationship among the voltages and the currents, realistic nature of the phase currents and the true power/energy including the content of distortion. Sometimes, suitable error codes' are displayed in order to facilitate the corrective action, whenever such installation checks reveal inappropriate outcome. In order to ensure proper operation while in service; energy met&s perform periodic checks of vital hardw`are components like memory, RTC, etc,. and display/record diagnostic outcome whether satisfactory or not. It runs through a series of electronic analysis
some static

a) Measuring units operated from meters with.
impulsing output and impulse rate comparators;

b) Controllers with various relaying contacts for
alarm, sequential tripping and controlled operatiqn of various processes;

cl Average demand recorders; and 4 Continuous display of on the spot demand,
elapsed time of the integration period, corrective load, etc. These are provided with additional incorporation of transducers and electronic circuits. 6

1s 11448 : 2000

verifying various functions of the meter and provides an important tool for monitoring of meter performance. This feature can be alternatively provided on meter reading instrument. 6.6 Pre-payment Metering Unlike in revenue (credit) metering where a consumer is supplied electricity on credit, a pre-payment metering system requires a consumer to pay for the electricity units intended to be consumed in advance, thereby obviating the need of meter reading and billing if not at all eliminating the same. A pre-payment system essentially consists of a `electricity dispenser' installed at each consumer site. The electricity dispenser is generally a static metering unit with a built in isolating device. Electricity units are `sold' at `Vending station', which issues `tokens' against advance payment. Tokens are information that can be securely transferred to the electricity dispenser to `credit' them with electricity units. Tokens could be sent by magnetic cards, smart cards, as encrypted

numbers (to be entered on an electricity dispenser keypad) or by direct remote communication. The vending station may be linked to central computer system called `System Master Station' that carries out the database management. Once credited with vend tokens, the consumer can use electricity units until his credit falls to a pre-defined minimum value, when he is disconnected by the isolating device. The consumer has to maintain this minimum credit (or debit) level by adding further valid tokens in order to get uninterrupted supply. Alternatively, currency units and not electricity units are credited by the vend tokens in a pre-payment meter, wherein different tariff structures can be programmed by means of codes as part of the vend tokens. Depending on the manner of electricity dispensation, that is quantum, period, time of use, etc, the residual currency units get updated and are shown on the display of the meter. , 6.7 Remote Meter Reading Under consideration.

ANNEX A ( Clause 2 )
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS IS No. Title IS No. Title

1885 ( Part 11) : Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part 11 1966 Electrical measurements 2705(Part2): 1992 3156(Part2): 1992 8530 : 1977 Current transformers : Part 2 Mesauring current transformers Voltage transformers : Part 2 Measuring voltage transformers Specification for maximum demand indicators, Class 1

13010 : 1990 13779:1999 14415: 1997 14798 : 1999

a.c. watt-hour meters, class 0.5, 1 and 2 a.c. Static watt-hour meters, class 1 and 2 Volt-ampere hour meters for restricted power factorrange a.c. Static transformer operated watthour and VAr-hour meters, class 0.2S, 0.5s

7

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau oflndian StandardsAct, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and atEending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form-without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to i copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BI'S. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed`when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. ET 13 ( 5023 ). Amendments Issued Since Pubiication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Headquarters:
'

Manak Bhavan, 9 `Bahadur Shah Zafar Mar-g, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 33 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M; V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : (s: I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHBNNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 323 76 17 323 38 41 337 84 99, 337 85 61 337\86 26,337 86 62 60 38 43 1 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 235 15 19,23523 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 8327891,8327892

Branches : AHMADABAD. BHUBANESHWAR. BANGALORE BHOPAL. COIMBATORE FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW: NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurjh hiia

