INAT Wad IS 15930 (Part 8) : 2017 
Indian Standard 


saa pà ern ARA at 
sae — suain 


WT 8 WY ud Ae STER 


Requirements for Good 
Agricultural Practices — 
IndiaGAP 


Part 8 Cattle and Sheep Base 


ICS 65.020.01 


© BIS 2017 


ada AM emu 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
e WM WH, 9 eg AHL AM, ae feeei-110002 
eadal MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2017 Price Group 4 


Agricultural Systems and Management Sectional Committee, FAD 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 8) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Agricultural Systems and Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council. 


Considerable milestones have been reached in productivity of farm produce in the country. Concerns about food 
safety and quality, environmental protection, worker safety and welfare have also gained importance. Thus, it is 
desirable to set up control and compliance systems for various kinds of farm produce covering horticulture, 
floriculture, food grains, aquaculture, livestock, poultry, etc. In this context, it is necessary to pay attention to the 
quality of production practices requiring minute attention at different aspects of production, storage, handling and 
distribution. 


There are different systems and standards available for control measures for processing of food meant for human 
consumption and feeds for animals producing food for human consumption. The areas where appropriate control 
measures need to be strengthened are farms producing raw material such as food grains, fruits and vegetables, 
floriculture produce, aquaculture produce, livestock products, etc, to ensure sustained supply of produce of the 
desirable quality. 


Although grade standards on size, shape, colour and local preferences are available for most of the agricultural 
produce marketed and consumed in India, their quality in terms of maturity standards, residues of pesticides and 
other contaminants, microbial loads, etc, have not been adequately covered. Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) 
have a bearing on these parameters. In other words, a farm producing raw material for direct consumption or for 
further processing and following GAP would have an advantage in terms of safety and quality over the other 
farms. Thus, these practices would add value to the produce. 


In India, agricultural practices are highly localized occupations and display a lot of variability in cultural practices 
and varietal preferences across regions. Further, with the opening up of the world market, there is a flow of trade 
in the agricultural products. It is, therefore, necessary to define and assign certain common minimum standards to 
facilitate trade in these products and to win the confidence of the consumers within the country and outside. 


Such standards envisaging focused approach for implementing good agricultural practices, traceability, etc, through 
appropriate infrastructure, record keeping and monitoring would reap following broad benefits: 

a) Development of basic infrastructure at the field level, 

b) Build up culture for good agricultural practices by the farmers, 

c) Uniform approach across farms regardless of their sizes, 


d) Increased awareness among the farmers as well as the consumers about the need for consumption of 
good quality and safe food, 


e) Traceability through complete integration of food chain, 

f) Improvement in the environment as well as soil fertility, 

g) Worker safety and welfare, 

h) Reputation in the international market as a producer of good quality and safe produce, and 
j) Overcoming the Technical Barriers to Trade (TBTs). 


With this in view, this standard has been formulated to standardize cattle and sheep based agricultural practices in 
India, keeping in mind the best of international practices and suiting the needs of the Indian producer. 


This standard is published in nine parts. The other parts in this series are: 
Part 1 Crop base 


Part2 Fruit and vegetable base 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 15930 (Part 8) : 2017 


Indian Standard 


REQUIREMENTS FOR GOOD AGRICULTURAL 
PRACTICES — INDIAGAP 
PART 8 CATTLE AND SHEEP BASE 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 8) covers the control points and 
compliance criteria necessary to be followed by the 
producers (individual producers and/or members of a 
producer group) of cattle and sheep. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Good Agriculture Practices — Practices that 
address environmental, economic and social 
sustainability for on-farm processes, and result in safe 
and quality food and non-food agricultural products. 


2.2 Applicant Producer/Producer Group — 
Individual/organization that has applied for certification 
to IndiaGAP certification body. 


2.3 Hazard — A biological, chemical, physical agent 
in, or condition of, food with the potential to cause an 
adverse health effect. 


2.4 Individual Producer — A person/organization 
legally responsible for on farm production, who retains 
ownership of all the produce covered in the IndiaGAP 
licence. 


2.5 Inspection — An examination of all agricultural 
practices in order to verify compliance to requirements 
specified in this standard. 


2.6 Water, Potable — Water which does not contain 
objectionable pollution, contamination, minerals, or 
infection, and is considered satisfactory for domestic 
consumption. 


2.7 Record — Document showing objective evidence 
of the tasks performed and results achieved. 


2.8 Self-inspection — Internal inspection of the 
registered product carried out by the grower on his/her 
farm using control points and compliance criteria. 


2.9 Traceability — The ability to trace the history, 
use or location of a product (that is, the origin of 
materials and parts, processes applied to the product, 
or its distribution and placement after delivery) by 
means of a record. 


2.10 Worker — Any person on the farm that has been 
contracted to carry out a task. This includes farm owners 
and managers. 


2.11 Producer Group — A recognized group of 


producers applying for certification with an internal 
procedure and internal control of all the members 
registered to the IndiaGAP requirements, which and 
complying the requirements as specified in this 
standard. 


2.12 Field — Separate unit of land within a farm. 


2.13 Farm — A farm is an agricultural production unit 
or group of agricultural production units; covered by 
same operational procedures, farm management. 


2.14 Environment — Surroundings in which an 
activity takes place including air, water, land, natural 
resources, flora, fauna, humans, and their interrelation. 


2.15 Customer — A customer is anyone who 
purchases products or services from a supplier. 


2.16 Certification — All actions leading to the 
issuance of an IndiaGAP licence. 


2.17 Waste — Any materials unused and rejected as 
worthless or unwanted 


2.18 Standard Operating Procedure — A written 
document which details an operation, analysis, or action 
whose mechanisms are prescribed thoroughly and 
which is commonly accepted as the method for 
performing certain routine or repetitive tasks. 


2.19 Home Mixer — The production of home mixed 
feeds that do not leave the farm where they were 
produced. These are divided into producers who mix 
or blend feed on farm for own use using-premixes or 
additives (creating a compound feed), and producers 
who mix ingredients on farm, but do not use pre-mixes 
or additives (and therefore do not create a compound 
feed). 


2.20 Compound Feed — Compound feeds (which can 
be complete or complementary), that may be produced 
using any ingredients (except medicated feed/ 
supplements) as raw materials. Compound Feeds 
exclude the production of ingredients such as forage 
or grains (Simple feed materials), pre-mixtures, 
additives or medicated feeds (Prepared feed 
supplements), etc. 


3 CONTROL POINTS AND COMPLIANCE 
CRITERIA 


3.1 Control points and compliance criteria required to 
be followed by the applicant producer (individual 


1 


IS 15930 (Part 8) : 2017 


producer and/or member of a producer group) as well 
as by the certification body for independent verification 
of the agricultural practices that have gone into the 
production of the produce are given in Annex A. In 
addition, the applicant producer (individual producer 
and/or member of a producer group) shall demonstrate 
compliance with all applicable statutory and regulatory 
requirements. 


3.2 In addition to 3.1, the applicant producer 
(individual grower and/or member of a grower group) 
shall demonstrate compliance with Control Points and 
Compliance Criteria laid down in IS 15930 (Part 6) 


3.3 These criteria are marked as ‘Major’ or ‘Minor’ 
or ‘Reco’. The criteria marked as ‘Major’ have a 
definite effect on the safety and quality of the produce 
and shall, therefore, be complied with, or shall give 
adequate assurance about the safety and quality of the 
produce. The criteria marked as ‘Minor’, though have 
a bearing on quality, are those which, if implemented, 
would provide an advantage to the assessment for 
IndiaGAP certification. The criteria marked as ‘Reco’, 
are those, which though may not have direct bearing 
on safety and quality of produce but may have other 


benefits to the producer and are recommended for 
implementation and are advisory in nature. 


3.4 For the purpose of verification, a grading pattern 
given below shall be followed for grant of IndiaGAP 
licence: 


Category of Compliance Compliance 
Licence of Major of Minor 
Requirements Requirements 
Percent Percent 
IndiaGAP — A 100 90 
IndiaGAP — B 100 80 
IndiaGAP — C 100 75 


4 BIS IndiaGAP CERTIFICATION 


BIS IndiaGAP certification shall be as prescribed under 
the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and Rules and Regulations framed there under. The 
details of the conditions under which the licence may 
be granted to producer (individual producer and/or 
member of a producer group) may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 3.1) 


IS 15930 (Part 8) : 2017 


CONTROL POINTS AND COMPLIANCE CRITERIA 


Sl Item Level | IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 

No. 

A-1 IDENTIFICATION AND TRACEABILITY 

A-1.1 Procedure for Major | Livestock entering into the | Record of all incoming stock including 
Residency of IndiaGAP registered farm | IndiaGAP status. System to ensure all 
Animals (Cattle-90 from non-IndiaGAP farms | non-IndiaGAP approved stock are held 
Days and Sheep-60 shall undergo a period of on farm for more than 60 (Sheep) / 90 
Days) Entering the residency on an approved | (Cattle) days. 

Farm from Other farm prior to qualification as 

Farms IndiaGAP stock. Cattle — 
90 days Sheep — 60 days. If 
the lamb is bought and not 
kept for at least 60 days, the 
previous farm shall also be 
certified (This residency 
period may be shared between 
certified farms). Evidence of 
the certification status of 
stock from the previous 
owner shall be recorded. 

A-2 BREEDING AND YOUNG STOCK 

A-2.1 Selection of Sires Reco |Cattle sires should be |The farmer to describe what factors 
for Breeding carefully selected (especially | influence his choice of bulls. Record of 

for maiden heifers) taking | calving difficulty/ mortality demonstrate 
into account breed, size, age | an acceptable level. Not applicable, if 
and previous record so as to | no breeding cattle. 

reduce the likelihood of sub- 

sequent calving difficulties. 

A-2.2 Provision of Minor | If sheep are to lamb outdoors, | Visual assessment of lambing areas and 
Reasonable steps shall be taken to shelter. Farmer to describe lambing 
Lambing Shelter minimize neonatal mortality | provisions that is bales, shelters, etc. 

by choosing terrain that is | Suitability of breed to be considered. 

naturally sheltered from Where this is impracticable, only sheep 

inclement weather, or through | breeds that are well-adapted to survive 

the provision of artificial | in the relevant terrain must be allowed 

shelter. to remain. Ewes less well adapted to the 
terrain must be removed to more 
favorable areas. 

A-2.3 Procedure for Minor | The farmer shall demonstrate | Check calves, if available. Calf must 
Handling New- a policy for ensurmg that, | receive full milk within the first three 
born and Feeding whenever possible newborn | days after birth whether from their dam 
of Colostrum calves receive — colostrums | or an alternative source. For the full 

ideally within 1 hr of birth. immunological benefits to be gained, 
colostrums must at most be fed within 
6h of birth. Farmer has to describe the 
feeding policy. Not applicable, if no 
COWS. 

A-2.4 | Adequate Minor | Milk shall be available for | Assess the stock and farmer to describe 
Availability of Milk calves until their intake of | weaning policy and feeding regime for 


IS 15930 (Part 8) : 2017 


SI Item Level | IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 

No. 

Till Weaning concentrates and hay is young stock. All young stock present 
sufficient for growth. less than 5 weeks old have milk diet. 
Not applicable only where no breeding 

stock. 

A-2.5 Procedure for Minor | Only calves housed in | Inspect housing for tethering facilities 
Tethering of Calves groups shall be kept fixed in | and ask farmer to explain policy. Not 

one place, and then only for | applicable only where no breeding 
the duration of feeding. stock or if no fixing of calves in one 
place (that is tethering). 

A-2.6 | Muzzling Policy for | Reco | Muzzling of calves should | Inspect calves/facilities for muzzles 
the Calves Less not be allowed. and ask workers to demonstrate 
than 5 week awareness. Not applicable where no 

breeding stock and no calves bought 
in less than 5 weeks old. 

A-2.7 Cleanliness of Cal- | Minor | To minimize the risk of|Inspect bedding available and ask 
ving Areas/Boxes infection to both cow and | workers to demonstrate awareness at 

calf, calving areas shall be | interview. Not applicable only where 
clean and have suitable | no breeding stock. 
bedding. 

A-2.8 State of Lighting Minor | Proper lighting to allow full | Calving boxes must have available 
and Facilities for inspection of all calving | permanent restraining facilities and 
Proper Restraining stock and adequate restrai- | lighting at a level that allows the 

ning facilities shall be | reading of normal newspaper print. 
available. Not applicable only where no breeding 
stock. 

A-2.9 Procedure for Minor | A nutritionally sound diet, | Check calves, if available, ask 
Scientific Feeding appropriate to the calf’s| workers/farmer to describe policy. 
of Calves development shall be fed | Not applicable only where no breeding 

twice daily. stock. 

A-2.10 | Procedure for Fee- | Minor | Calf milk replacer shall be | If possible, observe preparation and 
ding Calf Milk prepared according to the| feeding, failing which workers to 
Replacer manufacturers’ instructions | demonstrate awareness. Not applicable 

and fed at a regular time and | only, if no milk replacer used or 
at a suitable temperature. where no breeding stock. 

A-3 FEED AND FORAGE 

A-3.1 | Adequacy of Minor | Where access to feed is Assess the feeding system and 
Trough Feeding restricted, all livestock shall | condition of stock. If trough feeding 
Space be able to obtain their daily | space is insufficient for all stock to 

ration and be content. feed at the same time, farmer to 
describe how he ensures all stock 
receive their ration. Not applicable 
only, if no restrict feeding. 

A-3.2 | Evidence of Reco | When sheep are kept on|Where sheep are grazed on forage 
Contentment of forage crops, they should | crops, evidence that run-back is 
Sheep/Goats when have access to a dry run- suitable, that is stock reasonably 
Grazed on Forage back area or straw and clean and content. If no forage crops, 
Crops sheep should be content as|ask farmer, if used and if so, his 

evidenced by their behavior. | policy. Not applicable where no forage 
crops used or no sheep kept. 


IS 15930 (Part 8) : 2017 


Sl Item Level | IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 

No. 

A-4 HOUSING AND FACILITIES 

A-4.1  |Policy on longer Reco |Prolonged periods (more | Inspect facilities and if evidence of 
Restraint when than 7 days) of close con- | tethering, workers/farmer to explain 
Tethered finement should not be|policy of  restraint/exercise. Not 

permitted. If tethered in | applicable where no tethers. 
cowsheds, exercise should 
be provided at least daily. 

A-42 Sufficiency of Light | Major | Housed stock shall have | Check that lighting is available at a 
in the Various lighting (natural or artifi- level that allows the reading of 
Sheds of the Farm cial) throughout the hours of | normal newspaper print. Not 

normal daylight (8 h/day) applicable only, if no livestock 
such that all stock can be | housing. 

seen clearly. Calving/ 

lambing areas shall have 

permanent available lighting 

to allow full inspection of 

all stock. 

A-4.3 Availability of Major | A well drained, dry lying | All livestock can lie in a clean dry 
Clean and Dry area shall be provided for all | place. Not applicable only, if no 
Lying Area stock. housing. 

A-4.4 | Complete Cleaning | Minor | Housing shall be cleaned at | Visual assessment of housing. 
of Entire Covered least annually Housing must be cleaned annually by 
Accommodation of removing dung and pressure cleaning. 
the Farm If not in use, farmer to describe how 

and when the housing is cleaned. Not 
applicable only if no housing. 

A-4.5 | Evidence of Minor | Whenever, a housing area is | Visual assessment of housing, farmer 
Cleaning of the emptied, it shall be cleaned | to describe policy. Not applicable 
Shed as and when and disinfected together | only, if no housing. 

Emptied Due to with all associated fixtures 
Any Reason and fittings. 

A-4.6 Availability of Well | Minor | Well maintained facilities | For cattle (except for calf rearing), 
maintained for handling and loading | these facilities must incorporate a 
Facilities for stock shall be provided. cattle restraint (that is cattle crush) 
Handling and and the crush must have a well 
Loading of Animals maintained solid floor. If no crush, 

there must be an alternative means of 
restraint, for example lead restraint at 
the end of a race. The facilities must 
be fit for the purpose and safe for 
both livestock and operatives. 

A-4.7 Provision for Minor | Provision shall be made to | Shelter should be available in extreme 
Prevention of avoid cattle being exposed | conditions (this includes shade trees). 
Animals from to extreme weather and 
Exposure to temperature for prolonged 
Extreme Weather periods. 

A-4.8  |Out-wintering Minor | A well drained lying area | Inspect out wintered stock and assess, 
Policy, if shall be available to stock | if adequate dry lying area is available 
Applicable kept outside in winter. by their condition (muddy coats etc). 

In summer, farmer to describe his out- 
wintering policy. Not applicable only, 
if no out wintering. 


IS 15930 (Part 8) : 2017 


SI Item Level | IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 

No. 

A-4.9 Written Guidelines | Minor | Visitors entering enclosed | Written list of protective clothing and 
for Entry of systems of production shall | physical presence on farm. 

Visitors, Including be provided with protective 
Provision of clothing. 
Protective Clothing 

A-5 HYGIENE 

A-5.1 Cleanliness of Major | Precautions shall be taken to | Farmer to describe his policy for 
Animals Before ensure that the cleanliness of | handling excessive soiling at point of 
Transportation stock is maintained. dispatch. Livestock must be free from 

excessive faecal material and 
preferably, dry at the time of being 
loaded for transportation to a 
slaughterhouse. Slaughterhouse 
feedback on stock cleanliness, if 
available, must be kept, and an action 
plan put in place if excessive soiling 
is found, which could include 
structural items or the cleaning of 
livestock prior to dispatch. 

A-5.2 | Records of Reco | Domestic farm dogs should | Check that domestic/working dogs are 
Deworming of be dewormed regularly and | dewormed and that it is recorded. 
Farm Dogs a record should kept. 

A-6 HANDLING 

A-6.1  |Policy on Minor | Veterinary visits shall take | Records of routine veterinary visits by 
Veterinary Care place more than twice a| specified surgeon or practice. 

year. 

A-6.2  |Policy and Major | All calves shall be disbud- | If the vet carries out disbudding, then 
Competence of ded by chemical cauteriza- assume competence. If not, ask for 
Personnel carrying tion without anesthetic | explanation of procedure and assess, 
out Disbudding during its first two weeks of | if this indicates competence. Not 

life. applicable where no disbudding on 
farm 

A-6.3  |Policy and Minor | Dehorning of cattle over 90 | No evidence of recently de-horned 
Competence of days shall only be permitted | mature cattle. Check medicine book 
Personnel for in cases where it can be for evidence and justification of 
Carrying out shown to be necessary (for treatment (for example anesthetic/vet 
Dehorning example in growing horns) | invoice). 

and then only by a vet. 

A-6.4  |Procedure for Major | The farmer shall follow a | Farmer to describe inspection routine 
Daily Inspection of stock inspection routine. and assess adequacy of different 
Animals situations. Stock must be inspected 

regularly at a frequency appropriate to 
the class of stock. As a guide twice 
daily when stock are housed and once 
daily when outside except where 
circumstances (for example the 
nature of the terrain) do not allow it 
and then once weekly, except for 
exceptionally extensive conditions. 

A-6.5 | Suitability of Minor | Proper consideration in | Suitability of breed must be 


Breeds to the 
Terrain for 


exposed grazing areas shall 
be given to the suitability of 


considered, condition of stock, local 
weather conditions and available 


IS 15930 (Part 8) : 2017 


Sl Item Level | IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 

No. 

Grazing and breeds to the terrain. shelter. If stock are poorly adapted to 

Sheltering the terrain, they must be removed to 
more favourable areas to safeguard 
their welfare, or provided with 
additional shelter in the absence of 
appropriate natural sheltering (for 
example hedges and trees) to protect 
them from inclement weather. 

A-6.6 | Policy on grouping | Minor | Cattle shall be grouped | Assess, if groups are appropriate to 
of animals for according to management | sex, size and nutritional requirements. 
sheltering criteria that will include 

size, age, interaction 
between social groups (that 
is suckler cows and calves, 
bull with cows, etc) 

A-6.7 | Evidence of Reco |Social groupings of stock | Stock should be grouped to provide 
Grouping as per should be maintained. social grouping of similar types. 
Policy 

A-6.8 Policy on Grouping | Minor|Sexually mature male and Sexually active young males are not 


of Adult Males and 
Females 


female stock shall be kept in 
appropriate  groupings to 
avoid unwanted pregnancies. 


mixed with females unless breeding is 
planned. 


IS 15930 (Part 8) : 2017 


IS No. 


1982 


2491 


2732: 


2733 : 


2981: 
5238 : 


5253: 


5284 : 


6027 : 


6558 : 


6559 : 


6692 : 


7005 : 


7049 : 


7607 


(Part 1) : 1975 
(Part 2) : 1975 
(Part 3) : 1975 


: 1971 


: 2013 


1985 


1985 


1964 
2001 


1969 


1969 


1970 


1972 


1972 


1972 


1973 


1973 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
Title IS No. 
Code of practice for ante-mortem 8182 : 1976 
and post-mortem inspection of meat 
animals (first revision) 8895 : 1978 
Food Hygiene — General principles 
— Code of Practice (third revision) 
Code of practice for poultry housing 9854 : 1981 
(second revision) 
Code of practice for sheep and goats 9863 . 1992 
housing (first revision) 
Layout plan for dairy laboratories 11786 : 1986 
Transport of poultry — Code of 
practice (second revision) . 
Guidelines for cleaning and Meee tee 
sterilizing dairy equipment 
Recommendations for community 1194211386 
milking shed 
Recommendations for farm cattle 12237 : 1987 
housing for large dairy farms 
Code of practice for cold storage of 14904 : 2007 
shell eggs 
Code of practice forante-mortem and 15000 : 2013 
post-mortem inspection for poultry 
Method of milk recording of cattle 
Code of hygienic conditions for 
production, processing transportation —— IS/ISO 22000: 
and distribution of milk 2005 
Code for handling, processing, 
quality evaluation and storage of — IS/ISO TS 
poultry 22003 : 2007 
Code of practice for keeping dairy 
accounts: 
Primary milk collection units IS/ISO TS 22004 : 
Market milk plants 2005 


Products plants 


INDIAN STANDARDS WHICH FACILITATE IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS STANDARD 


Title 
Code of hygienic conditions for 
processed meat products 
Guidelines for handling, storage 
and transport of slaughter house by- 
products 
Code of construction of milk 
delivery vans 
Nutrient requirements for poultry 
(first revision) 
Recommendations for cattle 
housing for an average farmer 
Recommendations for cattle 
housing in rural areas (first revision) 
Recommendations for GAUSHALAS 
and other organized milk producers 
Recommendations for loose 
housing systems for animals 
Transport of livestock — Code of 
practice (first revision) 
Hazard Analysis and Critical 
Control Point (HACCP) — 
Requirement for any organization in 
the food chain 
Food safety management systems — 
Requirements for any organization 
in the food chain 
Food safety management systems — 
Requirements for bodies providing 
audit and certification of food safety 
management systems 
Food safety management systems — 
Guidance on the application of ISO 
22000 : 2005 


(Continued from second cover) 


Part 3 Combinable crop base 
Part 4 Tea base 

Part 5 Coffee base 

Part 6 Livestock base 

Part 7 Poultry base 

Part 9 Dairy base 


In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the draft document prepared by 
Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA). 


NOTE — The standards given in Annex B may be read to facilitate the implementation of this standard and are for guidance purpose. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 22 (2199). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


