INATA Ah IS 18271 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


arraren À À arfta eee — 
Rfs 


Fire Safety in Commercial Kitchen — 
Guidelines 


ICS 13.220, 13.220.99 


© BIS 2023 


ARAA HAR ST 
Ly BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WH, 9 FTL Me TH AM, Ag Reet - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


Ea 


August 2023 Price Group 12 


Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Fire Safety 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


With the growing business and economic activity in the country, and to cater to the human needs, increased 
cooking activity through large number of commercial kitchens such as hotels, food courts, malls, banquet halls, 
restaurants, /angars, etc is witnessed. From the erstwhile, fuel options which mainly included wood, kerosene, 
the options now include LPG, CNG, electric based, oil/deep fat fryers, etc. Other associated electromechanical 
appliances are commonly housed in or next to such kitchen. Deployment of ducts, chimneys, or other mechanical 
exhaust systems on the one hand helped in maintaining the ambience but ignoring their upkeep or disuse of the 
same have resulted in untoward fire accidents. Not all such establishments have adequate fire safety inbuilt in 
them. Based on all such reported fire incidences in such kitchen, some fire protection provisions related to 
commercial kitchen were introduced in the National Building Code of India 2016 (NBC 2016) in its Annex G 
under Part 4 ‘Fire and life safety’. 


This standard addresses and provides further detailed provisions towards ensuring fire safety in such kitchen. This 
standard is formulated with a view to supplement the provisions given in NBC 2016, and to comprehensively 
cover various aspects of commercial kitchen with regard to fire and life safety. Informatory Annexes (B and C) 
regarding detection types and actuation units in kitchen hood and test procedure for fixed extinguishing systems 
in kitchen have been included for reference. 


The considerable assistance was derived from the following documents while drafting this standard: 


NFPA 96, Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations, National 
Fire Protection Association, USA, 2017 


UL 300, Standard for Fire Testing of Fire Extinguishing Systems for Protection of Commercial Cooking 
Equipment, Underwriters Laboratories, USA, 2019 


Loss Prevention Standard LPS 1223, Requirements and Testing Procedures for the LPCB Certification and 
Listing of Fixed Fire Extinguishing Systems for Catering Equipment, BRE Global Ltd, 2014 


IHG Group Hotel’s Safety Manual, Inter-Continental Hotels Group PLC 


This standard relates to the SDG 9 (industry, innovation, and infrastructure) and SDG 11 (sustainable cities and 
communities) as it provides guidelines for ensuring that the infrastructure is safe and reliable. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of the standard is given in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules 
for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of specified value in this standard. 


IS 18271 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
FIRE SAFETY IN COMMERCIAL KITCHEN — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the types of fire hazard and 
fire-related hazard posed by the kitchen area which 
is equipped with commercial cooking facilities and 
equipment. 


1.2 It also covers the fire safety requirements to be 
maintained in the kitchen areas to avoid damage and 
loss of property. 


1.3 This standard is applicable to those commercial 
kitchens serving in centrally air-conditioned 
buildings such as kitchens of starred hotels, food 
courts, malls, banquet halls and restaurants. It is 
strongly advised that other types of kitchens in non- 
air-conditioned buildings should also suitably utilize 
the provisions of this standard with further 
supplementary material. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain 
provisions, which through reference in this text, 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time 
of publication, the edition indicated were valid. 
All standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms given 
below and those in IS 8757 shall apply. 


3.1 Access Door — A door providing access into 
ducts for maintenance or inspection. 


3.2 Access Panel — A closure device used to 
cover an opening into a duct, an enclosure, an 
equipment, or an appurtenance. 


3.3 Air Intakes — An opening in a building’s 
envelope whose purpose is to allow outside air to be 
drawn into the structure to replace inside air that is 
removed by exhaust systems or to improve the 
quality of the inside air by providing a source of air 
having a lower concentration of odours, suspended 
particles, or heating content. 


3.4 Air Pollution Control Devices — Equipment 
and devices used for the purpose of cleaning air 
passing through them or by them in such a manner 
as to reduce or remove the impurities contained 
therein. 


3.5 Appliance Flue Outlet — The opening or 
openings in a cooking device where vapours, 


combustion gases, or both leave the cooking device. 


3.6 Appurtenance — An accessory or a subordinate 
part that enables the primary device to perform or 
improves its intended function. 


3.7 Assembly Occupancy — A building occupancy 
or a part of it, where number of persons not less than 
50 congregate or gather for amusement, recreation, 
social, religious, patriotic, civil, travel and similar 
purposes, for example, theatres; motion picture 
houses; assembly halls; auditoria; exhibition halls; 
museums; skating rinks; gymnasiums; restaurants; 
places of worship; dance halls; club rooms; 
passenger stations and terminals of air, surface and 
marine public transportation services; and stadia. 


3.8 Automatic — Performing a function without the 
necessity of human intervention. 


3.9 Baffle Plate — An object placed in or near an 
appliance to change the direction, or to retard the 
flow of air, air-fuel mixtures, or flue gases. 


3.10 Class F Fires — Fires in cooking appliances 
involving cooking fats and oils. 


3.11 Clean(ing) — For kitchen exhaust systems and 
cooking equipment, the act of removing grease, oil 
deposits, and other residues. 


3.12 Cleaning Schedule — A document containing 
information on how and when cleaning is carried out 
and what equipment and chemicals are used. 


3.13 Cooking Appliance/Equipment — A cooking 
device that has or is capable of having a surface of 
liquid grease or one in which grease is involved, 
such as a deep fat fryer, griddle, range, chain broiler, 
electric char-broiler, charcoal broiler, mesquite 
broiler, gas-radiant char-broiler, wok, tilt skillets, 
and similar appliances. The protected area is limited 
to the cooking surfaces of the appliance only. 


3.14 Cylinder/Valve Assembly — A container that 
incorporates a valve and that provides storage of the 
extinguishing agent and expellant gas until the valve 
is actuated. For cartridge operated units, this 
assembly includes the extinguishing agent storage 
container and cartridge mechanism. When actuated, 
the valve releases the agent into the distribution 
network of the extinguishing system. 


3.15 Damper — A valve or plate for controlling 
draft or flow of gases, including air. 


3.16 Detection Devices — Electrical, pneumatic, 
thermal, mechanical, or optical sensing instruments, 
or subcomponents of such instruments, whose 
purpose is to cause an automatic action upon the 


IS 18271 : 2023 


occurrence of some preselected event. 


3.17 Detergent — Substance which on its own or in 
combination with others, in water, assists cleaning. 


3.18 Dips — Depression or cuplike places in 
horizontal duct runs in which liquids could 
accumulate. 


3.19 Discharge — The final portion of a duct or pipe 
where the product being conveyed is emptied or 
released from confinement; the termination point of 
the pipe or duct. 


3.20 Discharge Rate — The ratio of the quantity of 
agent discharged from a nozzle to the discharge time 
measured within + 1 s. When a minimum discharge 
rate is indicated, reference is made to the minimum 
quantity of agent discharged and the time measured 
within + 1 s. 


3.21 Duct Termination — The final or intended 
end-portion of a duct system that is designed and 
functions to fulfil the obligations of the system in a 
satisfactory manner. 


3.22 Ducts (or Duct System) — A continuous 
passageway for the transmission of air and vapours 
that, in addition to the containment components 
themselves, might include duct fittings, dampers, 
plenums, and/or other items or air-handling 
equipment. 


3.22.1 Bleed Air Duct — An intake duct in a 
manifold duct system, designed to input air to 
maintain system balance. 


3.22.2 Grease Duct — A containment system for the 
transportation of air and grease vapours that is 
designed and installed to reduce the possibility of 
the accumulation of combustible condensation and 
the occurrence of damage if a fire occurs within the 
system. 


3.23 Easily Accessible — Within comfortable reach, 
with limited dependence on mechanical devices, 
extensions, or assistance. 


3.24 Enclosure 


3.24.1 Continuous Enclosure — A recognized 
architectural or mechanical component of a building 
having a fire resistance rating as required for the 
structure and whose purpose is to enclose the vapour 
removal duct for its full length to its termination 
point outside the structure without any portion of the 
enclosure having a fire resistance rating less than the 
required value. 


3.24.2 Grease Duct Enclosure 


3.24.2.1 Factory-built grease duct enclosure — A 
certified factory-built grease duct system evaluated 
as an enclosure system for reduced clearances to 
combustibles and as an alternative to a duct with its 
fire-rated enclosure. 


3.24.2.2 Field-applied grease duct enclosure — A 
certified system evaluated for reduced clearances to 
combustibles and as an alternative to a duct with its 
fire-rated enclosure. 


3.25 Equipment 


3.25.1 Fire-Extinguishing Equipment — Automatic 
fire-extinguishing systems and portable fire 
extinguishers provided for the protection of grease 
removal devices, hoods, duct systems, and cooking 
equipment, and certified for such use. 


3.25.2 Solid Fuel Cooking Equipment — Cooking 
equipment that utilizes solid fuel. 


3.26 Extract Plenum — The space in the canopy 
normally after the grease filters but before the duct. 


3.27 Extract Ventilation — Ventilation by which 
the air is discharged to atmosphere. 


3.28 Filter 


3.28.1 Grease Filter — A removable component of 
the grease removal system designed to capture 
grease and direct it to a safe collection point. 


3.28.2 Mesh Filter — A filter construction 
consisting of a net made from intersecting strands 
with a space between each strand. 


3.29 Fire Resistance Rating — The time, in 
minutes or hours, that materials or construction will 
withstand the standard fire exposure as accordance 
with standard methods of fire test of materials/ 
structures. 


3.30 Fire Suppression System — An active system 
which operates to detect and suppress a fire. 


3.31 Flash Point — The lowest temperature at 
which a liquid gives off sufficient flammable vapour 
in air to produce sustained combustion after the 
removal of the ignition source. 


3.32 Fire Wall — A wall separating buildings or 
subdividing a building to prevent the spread of the 
fire and having a fire resistance rating and structural 
stability. 


3.33 Fume Incinerators — Devices utilizing 
intense heat or fire to break down and/or oxidize 
vapours and odours contained in gases or air being 
exhausted into the atmosphere. 


3.34 Fusible Link — A form of fixed temperature 
heat-detecting device sometimes employed to 
restrain the operation of an electrical or mechanical 
control until its designed temperature is reached. 


3.35 Grease — The residue of by-products from 
cooking. A variable mix of animal fats/oils, 
vegetable oils, water vapour, ash, carbon, dust, flour, 
and other particles. 


3.36 Grease Removal Devices — A system of 
components designed and intended to process 


vapours, gases, and/or air as it is drawn through such 
devices by collecting the airborne grease particles 
and concentrating them for further action at some 
future time, leaving the exiting air with a lower 
amount of combustible matter. 


3.37 Greasetight — Constructed and performing in 
such a manner as not to permit the passage of any 
grease under normal cooking conditions. 


3.38 Hazard — Substances, equipment, or methods 
of work with the potential to cause harm, such as 
death, injury, property damage and/or business 
interruption. 


3.39 High Limit Control Device — An operating 
device installed and serving as an integral 
component of a deep fat fryer that provides 
secondary limitation of the grease temperature by 
automatically disconnecting the thermal energy 
input when the temperature limit is exceeded. 


3.40 Hood — A device provided for a cooking 
appliance(s) to direct and capture grease-laden 
vapours and exhaust gases. 


3.40.1 Fixed Baffle Hood — A certified unitary 
exhaust hood design where the grease removal 
device is anon-removable assembly that contains an 
integral fire-activated water-wash fire-extinguishing 
system certified for this purpose. 


3.41 Interconnected — Mutually assembled to 
another component in such a manner that the 
operation of one directly affects the other or that the 
contents of one specific duct system are allowed to 
encounter or contact the products being moved by 
another duct system. 


3.42 Liquid Tight — Constructed and performing 
in such a manner as not to permit the passage of any 
liquid at any temperature. 


3.43 Maintenance — Work, including, but not 
limited to, repair, replacement, and service, 
performed to ensure that equipment operates 
properly. 


3.44 Plenum — The volume of enclosed space 
between the grease filters and the portion of the hood 
above the grease filters in a hood and duct system. 


3.45 Qualified — A competent and capable person 
or company that has met the requirements and 
training for a given field acceptable to the authority 
having jurisdiction. 


3.46 Recirculating Systems — Systems for control 
of smoke or grease-laden vapours from commercial 
cooking equipment that do not exhaust to the outside. 


3.47 Removable — Capable of being transferred to 
another location with a limited application of effort 
and tools. 


3.48 Replacement Air — Air deliberately brought 


IS 18271 : 2023 


into the structure, then specifically to the vicinity of 
either a combustion process or a mechanically or 
thermally forced exhausting device, to compensate 
for the vapour and/or gases being consumed or 
expelled. 


3.49 Single Hazard Area — Where two or more 
hazards can be simultaneously involved in fire by 
reason of their proximity, as determined by the 
authority having jurisdiction. 


3.50 Solid Cooking Fuel — Any solid, organic, 
consumable fuel such as briquettes, mesquite, 
hardwood, or charcoal. 


3.51 Solvent — A substance capable of dissolving 
or dispersing another substance; a chemical 
compound designed and used to convert solidified 
grease into a liquid or semiliquid state in order to 
facilitate a cleaning operation. 


3.52 Space 


3.52.1 Concealed Spaces — That portion(s) of a 
building behind walls, over suspended ceilings, in 
pipe chases, attics, and whose size might normally 
range from 50 mm, stud spaces to 2.5 m and that 
might contain combustible materials such as 
building structural members, thermal and/or 
electrical insulation, and ducting. 


3.52.2 Confined Space — A space whose volume is 
less than 1.5 m° of the aggregate input rating of all 
appliances installed in that space. 


3.53 Spark Arrester — A device or method that 
minimizes the passage of airborne sparks and 
embers into a plenum, duct, and flue. 


3.55 Thermal Recovery Unit — A device or 
series of devices whose purpose is to reclaim only 
the heat content of air, vapours, gases, or fluids that 
are being expelled through the exhaust system and 
to transfer the thermal energy so reclaimed to a 
location whereby a useful purpose can be served. 


3.55 Trap — A cuplike or U-shaped configuration 
located on the inside of a duct system component 
where liquids can accumulate. 


4 HAZARDS AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 
FOR COOKING EQUIPMENT 


4.1 General 


4.1.1 Cooking equipment used in processes 
producing smoke or grease laden vapours shall be 
equipped with an exhaust system that complies with 
all the equipment and performance requirements of 
this standard. 


NOTES 


1 Cooking equipment if certified by recognized agencies 
with regard to reduced emissions as per requirements need 
not be required to be provided with an exhaust system 
subject to approval of authorities concerned. 


IS 18271 : 2023 


2 The evaluation of cooking equipment covered by 4.6.1 
shall demonstrate that the grease discharge at the exhaust 
duct of a test hood placed over the appliance shall not 
exceed 5 mg/m? when operated with a total airflow of 
0.236 m/s. 


4.1.2 All such equipment and their performance 
shall be maintained in accordance with the 
requirements of this standard during all periods of 
operation of the cooking equipment. 


4.1.3 The following equipment shall be always 
maintained in expected working condition: 


a) Cooking equipment; 


b) Hoods; 
c) Exhaust ducts; 
d) Fans; 


e) Fire extinguishing equipment; 
f) Fire detection and alarm systems; 
g) Gas leakage detectors; and 


h) Special effluent or energy control 
equipment. 


4.1.4 Preventive and breakdown maintenance shall 
be performed on all equipment and their components 
at intervals necessary to maintain them in expected 
working condition. 


4.1.5 Continuous airflows shall be maintained. 


4.1.6 Either the user or the supplier shall be 
responsible (as per contract) for inspection, testing, 
maintenance, and cleanliness of the ventilation 
control and fire protection of the commercial 
cooking operations. In case of multi-tenanted 
premises, similar contract shall be available between 
the owner and the respective tenants. 


4.1.7 All interior surfaces of the exhaust system 
shall be accessible for cleaning and inspection 
purposes. 


4.2 Potential Hazards 


4.2.1 The potential hazards posed by the commercial 
cooking facilities are given below: 


a) Electricity, gas and in some cases solid 
fuels such as wood or charcoal are the 
energy sources used to power a commercial 
kitchen; 

b) On cooking appliances using grease, the 
grease can self-ignite due to overheating of 
the cooking appliances or through open 
flames; 


c) Any combustible like clothing, cooking 
materials, oils etc when if they come into 
contact with open flames; 


d) Full grease residues trapped in the exhaust 
ventilation system can ignite through 
overheated air flues or open flames; 


e) Poor housekeeping results in quick spread 
of fire in dirty and cluttered walkways and 
storage areas. Also, poor cleaning of the 
ventilation system provides ground for the 
fire spreading into the ventilation system 
and further into the building structure; 


f) Faulty electrical equipment and electrical 
installation are more likely to spark, failure 
of thermostat and safety switches that may 
lead to overheat and consequent fire; and 


g) Flammable materials in the vicinity of open 
flames or heat sources. 


4.3 Fire Hazards in Cooking Appliances 


4.3.1 Fires are common in restaurants and typically 
start in the kitchen area. Cooking materials are the 
most frequent ‘first item’ ignited. Experience shows 
that the majority of kitchen fires will involve the 
kitchen exhaust hood or ductwork. 


4.3.2 Kitchen exhaust fires can spread in a number 
of ways. A fire that originates within the kitchen or 
at the hood filters can spread into and up the 
ductwork system, fuelled by the oil and grease 
within the duct. A fire within the duct can ignite 
combustible materials outside of the duct, via 
radiant heat transmission, or can ignite grease that 
has leaked out of duct seams, spreading the fire in 
the building. Because fire dampers are not allowed 
within kitchen exhaust ductwork, fire spread within 
and between ducts can compromise a building’s 
passive fire protection such as fire-rated 
compartments. 


4.3.3 Fire-related hazards in a kitchen include: 


a) Flames, sparks, and hot gases from food 
preparation can ignite residues in exhaust 
ducts; 


b) Food preparation equipment left without 
supervision during operation; 

c) Failure to switch-off equipment, especially 
at the end of activity; 


d) Overheated oils that can lead to 
spontaneous ignition; 


e) Food preparation equipment based on solid 
fuels; 


f) Gas blowtorches used for browning some 
foods; 


g) Poorly operating thermostats or lack of 
thermostat or fault-detecting equipment; 


h) Faulty or overheating electrical equipment; 


j) Metal exhaust flues that conduct heat and 
ignite nearby material or debris; 


k) Ovens without igniters/pilot lights (lit with 
burning pieces of paper); 

m) Cooking equipment left unattended during 
operation; 


n) 
p) 
q) 


r) 


s) 


u) 


v) 


w) 


y) 


Individual equipment not switched off, 
especially at the end of a cooking session; 


Poor maintenance of all equipment and 
systems; 

Overheated oils, leading to spontaneous 
ignition; 

Fan-motor failure or overheating caused by 
hardened grease when restarting in 
seasonal catering establishments, or non 
24 hour operations; 


Thermostats not working correctly and/or 
the absence of a second, high-level safety 
thermostat; 


Metal extract ducts are good conductors of 
heat and can ignite adjacent materials or 
litter; 

Catalytic converters decompose grease but 
operating at 1 000 °C are a potential source 
of ignition; 

Solid fuel cooking equipment (such as 
barbecues, charcoal grills); 


The use of burning pieces of paper to light 
tandoori ovens; and 
Absence of flame failure or safety shut-off 
device in appliances. 


4.3.4 Fire Hazards and Grease Deposits 


4.3.4.1 Different cooking styles will create different 
grease residues as given below: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


Certain types of cooking create a very 
sticky, syrup-like grease that can become 
firmly attached to metal surfaces. The 
surface tension cannot be broken by normal 
scraping or with general purpose cleaning 
chemicals; 


Solid fuel cooked/charbroiled meat creates 
large quantities of grease. A first layer of 
grease will bond to metal surfaces and then 
additional layers of thick, heavy black 
carbon will build up, containing ash and 
grease from the cooking process; 


Deep frying creates a grease similar to 
translucent creosote; and 

Frozen foods containing large quantities of 
water create a hard shiny layer of grease. 


4.3.4.2 There is no difference in the hazard posed by 
different types of cooking oil or fat although the 
following should be noted: 


a) 


b) 


Safe cooking with oils and fats is usually at 
temperatures below 200 °C. Flammable 
vapours are given off at 200 °C/300 °C and 
spontaneous ignition occurs at 310 °C to 
360 °C; 

The flashpoint of cooking oil is reduced by 


c) 


d) 


IS 18271 : 2023 


progressive oxidation through repeated 

use; 

Deposits of some mixtures, such as chicken 

fat and vegetable oil, ignite quite readily; 

Identified hazards to be reduced by: 

1) Minimizing the build-up of grease 
deposits within the kitchen extract 
ventilation; 

2) Reducing the risk of spreading fire; 

3) Reducing the growth of bacteria and 
odour; 

4) Improving airflow 
kitchen; and 

5) Reducing fire hazards which will 
avoid the associated business loss and 
liabilities in the event of a fire. 


through the 


4.4 Ignition Hazards in Cooking Appliances 


4.4.1 Many cooking appliances represent a potential 
source of ignition. Such appliances include as fired 
equipment with an immediate source of flame, deep 
fat frying apparatus, and also electric appliances 
such as toasters, fryers and griddles. 


4.4.2 Fuel is available in various forms including: 


a) 
b) 


c) 


Oil/fat and food products; 

Combustible materials adjacent to exhaust 
ducts; and 

The power supply to the apparatus for 
example, gas supply. 


4.4.3 Air is supplied in large quantities by the inlets 
of the ventilation system and extract ducts can act as 
chimneys, increasing the intensity of any fire. 


4.5 Additional Hazard Factors 


The following additional hazard factors add to the 
vulnerabilities of kitchens: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


Combustible food debris trapped in the 
grease filter; 


Design aspects of the extract ventilation, 
such as length of ducts, length of 
horizontal ducts, type of fan, and number 
of duct access panels; 


Remnants of paper napkins or other 
combustible waste oddments which may 
have been inadvertently left in cooker 
hoods or inside the extract ducting etc; 


Insufficient number of access doors in 
ductwork to permit effective inspection 
and cleaning; 


Extract ducts are often completely 
inaccessible, for example in older buildings 
some duct systems may be routed inside 
masonry chimney breasts; 


IS 18271 : 2023 


f) Grease filters left out during cooking; 


g) Poor cleaning maintenance practice may 
compromise fire protection cladding or 
fire-rated access panels on ducts; 


h) Poor siting and/or maintenance (or 
absence) of fire suppression system; 


j) Unsuitable ductwork for kitchen 
environment; 


k) Poor cleaning maintenance practice may 
compromise fire protection cladding or 
fire-rated access panels on ducts; 


m) Level of competence of cleaning contractor; 


n) Lack of a capable person on site, human 
error; and 


p) Lack of knowledge about the extract 
ventilation. 


4.6 Cooking Equipment 


4.6.1 Approval of cooking equipment shall be based 
on one of the following criteria: 


a) Conforming to available Indian Standards. 


b) Such test results being acceptable to the 
local authorities. 


4.6.2 Installation 


4.6.2.1 All certified appliances shall be installed in 
accordance with the terms of their certificate of 
conformity and the manufacturer’s instructions. 


4.6.2.2 Cooking appliances requiring protection 
shall not be moved, modified, or rearranged without 
prior re-evaluation of the fire-extinguishing system 
by the system installer or their authorized personnel, 
unless otherwise allowed by the design of the fire 
extinguishing system. 


4.6.2.3 The fire extinguishing system shall not 
require re-evaluation where the cooking appliances 
are moved for the purposes of maintenance and 
cleaning, provided the appliances are restored to 
already approved design location prior to cooking 
operations, and any disconnected fire extinguishing 
system nozzles attached to the appliances are 
reconnected in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
certified design manual. 


4.6.2.4 An acceptable procedure shall be followed 
that will ensure that the appliance is restored to an 
approved design location. 


4.6.2.5 All deep fat fryers shall be installed with at 
least 450 mm space between the fryer and surface 
flames from adjacent cooking equipment. 


4.6.2.6 Provision of 4.6.2.5 shall not apply where a 
steel or tempered glass baffle plate is installed at a 
minimum 200 mm in height between the fryer and 
surface flames of the adjacent appliance. 


4.6.2.7 If the fryer and the surface flames are at 
different horizontal planes, the minimum height of 
200 mm shall be measured from the higher of the 
two. 


4.6.3 Operating Controls 


Deep fat fryers shall be equipped with a separate 
high limit control in addition to the adjustable 
operating control (thermostat) to shut of fuel or 
energy when the fat temperature reaches 250 °C at 
25 mm below the surface. 


5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Commercial cooking operations are defined as 
kitchens that have cooking equipment that produce 
grease and grease laden vapours. This includes flat 
grills, char broilers and deep fat fryers. The typical 
residential range (electric or gas) would not be 
considered a grease producing appliance. Other 
equipment, such as ovens, microwaves and steam 
kettles also fall into the non-grease producing 
appliance category. The following is information 
regarding two of the most common types of 
equipment that produce grease and/or grease laden 
vapours. 


5.1.1 Deep Fat Fryers 


Deep fat fryers are a major cause of kitchen fires. 
Oil can splash and easily come into contact with an 
open flame from an adjacent piece of cooking 
equipment, such as a gas-fired range top. A450 mm 
clearance shall be maintained between the deep fat 
fryer and the open flame cooking equipment. The 
normal temperature range for food service frying is 
160 °C to 190 °C. As the temperature of oil 
increases, so does the risk of an accidental grease 
fire. All deep fat fryers shall be equipped with a high 
temperature limiting device, which will shut off the 
fuel or energy in the event the cooking oil exceeds a 
temperature of 250 °C. It is strongly recommended 
to provide back-up devices also for limiting the 
temperature as mentioned above. 


5.1.2 Flat Grills/Griddles 


Flat grills and griddles are typically used for cooking 
foods that require flat, even cooking surface. When 
used for this type of cooking, grease and grease 
laden vapours will be produced. To adequately 
control the fire hazard associated with these types of 
cooking operations, two fire protection components 
shall be installed namely, a hood and ventilation 
system and an automatic extinguishing system. 


5.1.3 Hood and Ventilation System 


A kitchen hood and ventilation system will include 
an exhaust hood or canopy, ductwork, fan system, 
and a means of providing adequate make-up air. 
This system will effectively remove the heat, grease, 


and grease laden vapours from the cooking area. 
The hood and ventilation system shall be 
professionally installed according to relevant Indian 
Standards. Local fire officials shall also be 
consulted, for any additional requirements. The 
hood shall be equipped with the appropriate grease 
removal filters. Only baffle style filters complying 
with concerned standards shall be used in cooking 
operations so as to produce a moderate to heavy 
amount of grease. Mesh filters are not appropriate 
for commercial cooking operations. Filters shall be 
cleaned regularly to prevent the build-up of grease. 
Lighting units shall be equipped with tight fitting 
protective globe lights with steel enclosures that are 
mounted on the outer surface of the hood. All 
electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance 
with SP 30 by a licensed electrician. 


5.1.4 Clearance 


Where enclosures are not required, hoods, grease 
removal devices, exhaust fans, and ducts shall have 
a clearance of at least 450 mm for high combustible 
material, 80 mm for moderate combustible material, 
and 0 mm for non-combustible material. 


5.1.5 Clearance Reduction 


5.1.5.1 Where a clearance reduction system 
consisting of 0.35 mm sheet metal spaced out 25 mm 
on non-combustible spacers is provided, there shall 
be a minimum of 230 mm clearance to combustible 
material. 


5.1.5.2 Where a clearance reduction system 
consisting of 0.75 mm sheet metal on 25 mm 
mineral wool or ceramic fibre blanket reinforced 
with wire mesh or equivalent spaced 25 mm on 
non-combustible spacers is provided, there shall be 
a minimum of 80 mm clearance to combustible 
material. 


5.1.5.3 Zero clearance to moderate combustible 
materials may be permitted by authorities concerned 
where the latter are protected by metal lath and 
plaster, ceramic tile, quarry tile, other non- 
combustible materials or assembly of non- 
combustible materials, or materials and products 
that are certified by recognized agencies for the 
purpose of reducing clearance. 


5.1.6 Clearance Integrity 


5.1.6.1 In the event of damage, the material or 
product shall be repaired and restored to meet its 
intended conformity or clearance requirements and 
shall be acceptable to the authority having 
jurisdiction. 


5.1.6.2 In the event of a fire within a kitchen exhaust 
system, the duct, and its enclosure (rated shaft, 
factory-built grease duct enclosure, or field-applied 
grease duct enclosure) shall be inspected by 


IS 18271 : 2023 


qualified personnel to determine whether the duct 
and protection method are structurally sound, 
capable of maintaining their fire protection function, 
and in compliance with this standard for continued 
operation. 


5.1.6.3 Protection shall be provided on the wall from 
the bottom of the hood to the floor, or to the top of 
the non-combustible material extending to the floor, 
to the same level as required in 5.2.1. 


5.1.6.4 The protection methods for ducts to reduce 
clearance shall be applied to the combustible or 
limited-combustible construction, not to the duct 
itself. 


5.2 Factory-Built and Field-Applied Grease Duct 
Enclosures 


5.2.1 Field-applied grease duct enclosures shall be 
protected with a through penetration firestop system 
having a fire resistance rating of the assembly being 
penetrated. The firestops shall be tested as per 
IS 12458. 


5.2.1.1 The surface of the field-fabricated grease 
duct shall be continuously covered on all sides from 
the point at which the duct enclosure penetrates a 
ceiling, wall, or floor to the outlet terminal. 


5.2.1.2 The field-applied grease duct shall be 
certified by recognized agencies and installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and 
the listing requirements. 


5.2.2 Where subject to physical damage, field- 
applied grease duct enclosures shall be protected as 
deemed necessary by the authority having 
jurisdiction. 


5.2.3 Factory-built grease duct enclosures shall be 
protected with a through-penetration firestop having 
a fire resistance rating of the assembly being 
penetrated from the point at which the duct 
penetrates a ceiling, wall, or floor to the outlet 
terminal. 


5.2.3.1 The factory-built grease duct protection 
system shall be certified by recognized agencies. 


5.2.3.2 The factory-built grease duct protection 
system shall be installed in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions and the certificate of 
conformity. 


5.2.4 Field-applied grease duct enclosures and 
factory-built grease duct enclosures shall 
demonstrate that they provide mechanical and 
structural integrity, resiliency, and stability when 
subjected to expected building environmental 
conditions, duct movement under general operating 
conditions, and duct movement due to fire 
conditions. 


IS 18271 : 2023 


5.2.5 The specifications of material, gauge, and 
construction of the duct used in the testing and 
listing of field-applied grease duct enclosures and 
factory-built grease duct enclosures shall be 
included as minimum requirements in their listing 
and installation documentation. 


5.2.6 Clearance Options for Field-Applied and 
Factory-Built Grease Duct Enclosures 


The following clearance options for which field- 
applied grease duct enclosures and factory-built 
grease duct enclosures have been successfully 
evaluated shall be clearly identified in their listing 
and installation documentation and on their labels: 


a) Open combustible construction clearance 
at manufacturer’s requested dimensions; 


b) Closed combustible construction clearance 
at manufacturer’s requested dimensions, 
with or without specified ventilation; and 


c) Rated shaft clearance at manufacturer’s 
requested dimensions, with or without 
specified ventilation. 


5.3 Building and Structural Duct Contact 


5.3.1 A duct shall be permitted to contact non- 
combustible floors, interior walls, and other non- 
combustible structures or supports, but it shall not be 
in contact for more than 50 percent of its surface area 
for each 0.30 m of contact length. 


5.3.2 Where duct contact shall exceed the 
requirements of 5.3.1, the duct shall be protected 
from corrosion. 


5.4 Duct Clearances to Enclosures 


Clearances between the duct and interior surfaces of 
enclosures shall meet the requirements of 5.2. 


5.5 Drawings 


A drawing(s) of the exhaust system installation 
along with copies of operating instructions for sub- 
assemblies and components used in the exhaust 
system, including electrical schematics, shall be 
kept on the premises. 


5.6 Construction 


5.6.1 The hood or that portion of a primary 
collection means designed for collecting cooking 
vapours and residues shall be constructed of and be 
supported by steel not less than 1.2 mm in thickness, 
stainless steel not less than 1.0 mm in thickness, or 
other approved material of equivalent strength and 
fire and corrosion resistance. 


5.6.2 All seams, joints, and penetrations of the hood 
enclosure that direct and capture grease-laden 
vapours and exhaust gases shall have a liquid tight 
continuous external weld to the hood’s lower 


outermost perimeter. 


5.6.3 Seams, joints, and penetrations of the hood 
shall be permitted to be internally welded, provided 
that the weld is formed smooth or ground smooth, so 
as to not trap grease, and is cleanable. 


5.6.4 Internal hood joints, seams, filter support 
frames, and appurtenances attached inside the hood 
shall be sealed or otherwise made grease tight. 


5.6.5 Penetrations shall be permitted to be sealed by 
devices that are certified for such use and whose 
presence does not detract from the structural 
integrity of hood or duct. 


5.6.6 Certified exhaust hoods with or without 
exhaust dampers shall be permitted to be constructed 
of materials required by the listing. 


5.6.7 Certified exhaust hoods with or without 
exhaust dampers shall be permitted to be assembled 
in accordance with the listing requirements. 


5.6.8 Eyebrow-Type Hoods 


5.6.8.1 Eyebrow-type hoods over gas or electric 
ovens shall be permitted to have a duct constructed 
from the oven flue(s) connected to the hood canopy 
up-stream of the exhaust plenum. 


5.6.8.2 The duct connecting the oven flue(s) to the 
hood canopy shall be connected with a continuous 
weld or have duct-to-duct connection. 


5.6.9 Insulation materials other than electrical 
insulation shall have a flame spread index of 25 or 
less. The flame spread index shall be determined as 
per the specialist literature. 

NOTE — Specialist literature could be ASTM E84 


“Standard Test Method for Surface Burning Characteristics 
of Building Materials’. 


5.6.10 Adhesives or cements used in the installation 
of insulating materials shall comply with the 
requirements of 5.6.9 when tested with the specific 
insulating material. 


5.6.11 Penetrations shall be sealed with certified 
devices in accordance with the requirements of 
devices that require penetration of the hood, such as 
pipe and conduit penetration fittings and fasteners, 
shall be certified by approved agencies. 


5.6.12 Wall-mounted exhaust hood assemblies shall 
be tight fitting against the back wall so as to not 
permit passage of grease vapour behind the hood or 
between the back wall and the hood assembly. 


5.6.13 Hood Size 


Hoods shall be sized and configured to provide for 
the capture and removal of grease-laden vapours. 


5.6.14 Exhaust Hood Assemblies with Integrated 
Supply Air Plenums 


The construction and size of exhaust hood 


assemblies with integrated supply air plenums shall 
comply with the requirements of 5.3 and 5.4. The 
construction of the outer shell or the inner exhaust 
shell shall comply with 5.3. Where the outer shell is 
welded, the inner shell shall be of grease tight 
construction. 


5.7 Fire Dampers 


5.7.1 A fire-actuated damper shall be installed in the 
supply air plenum at each point where a supply air 
duct inlet or a supply air outlet penetrates the 
continuously welded shell of the assembly. 


5.7.2 The fire damper shall be certified for such use 
or be part of a certified exhaust hood with or without 
exhaust damper. 


5.7.3 The actuation device shall have a maximum 
temperature rating of 141 °C. 


5.7.4 Supply air plenums that discharge air from the 
face rather than from the bottom or into the exhaust 
hood and that are isolated from the exhaust hood by 
the continuously welded shell extending to the lower 
outermost perimeter of the entire hood assembly 
shall not require a fire-actuated damper. 


5.8 Grease Removal Devices 
5.8.1 General 


5.8.1.1 Certified grease filters, certified baffles, or 
other certified grease removal devices for use with 
commercial cooking equipment shall be provided. 


5.8.1.2 Certified grease filters and grease removal 
devices that are removable but not an integral 
component of a specific certified exhaust hood shall 
be certified in accordance relevant standards. 


5.8.1.3 Mesh filters shall not be used unless 
evaluated as an integral part of a certified exhaust 
hood or certified in conjunction with a primary filter 
in accordance relevant standards. 


5.8.2 Installation 
5.8.2.1 Separation distance 


The distance between the grease removal device and 
the cooking surface shall be as great as possible but 
not less than 450 mm. Where grease removal 
devices are used in conjunction with charcoal or 
charcoal-type broilers, including gas or electrically 
heated char broilers, a minimum vertical distance of 
1.25 m shall be maintained between the lower edge 
of the grease removal device and the cooking 
surface. For cooking equipment without exposed 
flame and where flue gases bypass grease removal 
devices, the minimum vertical distance shall be 
permitted to be reduced to not less than 150 mm. 
Grease removal devices supplied as part of certified 
hood assemblies shall be installed in accordance 


IS 18271 : 2023 


with the terms of the listing and the manufacturer’s 
instructions. 


5.8.3 Grease Removal Device Protection 


5.8.3.1 Where the distance between the grease 
removal device and the appliance flue outlet (heat 
source) is less than 450 mm, grease removal devices 
shall be protected from combustion gas outlets and 
from direct flame impingement occurring during 
normal operation of cooking appliances producing 
high flue gas temperatures. 


5.8.3.2 This protection shall be permitted to be 
accomplished by the installation of a steel or 
stainless-steel baffle plate between the heat source 
and the grease removal device. The baffle plate shall 
be sized and located so that flames or combustion 
gases travel a distance not less than 450 mm from 
the heat source to the grease removal device. The 
baffle shall be located not less than 150 mm from the 
grease removal devices. 


5.8.4 Grease Filters 


Grease filters shall be certified and constructed of 
steel or certified equivalent material. They shall be 
of rigid construction that will not distort or crush 
under normal operation, handling, and cleaning 
conditions. The filters shall be arranged so that all 
exhaust air passes through the grease filters. Grease 
filters shall be easily accessible and removable for 
cleaning. They shall be installed at an angle not less 
than 45° from the horizontal. 


5.8.5 Grease Drip Trays 


Grease filters shall be equipped with a grease drip 
tray beneath their lower edges. Grease drip trays 
shall be kept to the minimum size needed to collect 
grease. The trays shall be pitched to drain into an 
enclosed metal container having a capacity not 
exceeding 4 litres. Grease filters that require a 
specific orientation to drain grease shall be clearly 
so designated, or the hood shall be constructed so 
that filters cannot be installed in the wrong 
orientation. 


5.9 Exhaust Systems 
5.9.1 General 


5.9.1.1 Ducts shall not pass-through fire walls. All 
ducts shall lead directly to the exterior of the 
building, so as not to unduly increase any fire hazard. 
Duct systems shall not be interconnected with any 
other building ventilation or exhaust system. 


5.9.1.2 All ducts shall be installed without forming 
dips or traps that might collect residues. Also, 


a) In manifold (common duct) systems, the 
lowest end of the main duct shall be 
connected flush on the bottom with the 


IS 18271 : 2023 


branch duct; and 


b) Exhaust ducts used in downdraft appliance 
ventilation systems shall be allowed to 
include an upturn in the duct provided the 
trapped area contains a low point drain to 
an approved grease reservoir not exceeding 
4 litres in capacity and the entire length of 
the duct is easily accessible for cleaning. 


5.9.1.3 Openings required for accessibility shall 
comply with 5.9.3. A sign stating the following 
shall be placed on all access panels: 


ACCESS PANEL 
(DO NOT OBSTRUCT ) 


5.9.1.4 Certified grease ducts shall be installed in 
accordance with the terms of the certificate of 
conformity and the manufacturer’s instructions. 


5.9.2 Clearance 


5.9.2.1 Clearance between ducts and combustible 
materials shall be provided in accordance with the 
requirements of 5.2.6. 


5.9.2.2 Where single-wall ductwork penetrates a 
non-fire-rated roof assembly, the penetration point 
shall be of limited-combustible or non-combustible 
construction unless a field-applied grease duct 
enclosure is installed to the top of the roof kerb or 
the clearances of 5.2.6 are maintained. 


5.9.3 Openings 


Openings shall be provided at the sides or at the top 
of the duct, whichever is more accessible, and at 
changes of direction. The openings shall be 
protected by approved access constructed and 
installed in accordance with the requirements of 
5.10. Openings shall not be required in portions of 
the duct that are accessible from the duct entry or 
discharge. For hoods with dampers in the exhaust 
or supply collar, an access panel for cleaning and 
inspection shall be provided in the duct or the hood 
within 450 mm of the damper. For common exhaust 
duct systems, access panel openings shall be 
provided for installation and servicing of the fire- 
extinguishing system. The access panel openings 
shall not be required in portions of the common 
exhaust duct or branch duct that are accessible from 
the branch duct connection to the exhaust hood. 
Exhaust fans with ductwork connected to both sides 
shall have access for cleaning and inspection within 
1 m of each side of the fan. 


5.9.4 Openings in Ducts 


All openings shall comply with the following 
requirements: 


5.9.4.1 Horizontal ducts 


a) On horizontal ducts, at least one 
500 mm x 500 mm opening shall be 
provided for personnel entry; 


b) Where an opening of the size specified as 
above is not possible, openings large 
enough to permit thorough cleaning shall 
be provided at 3.7 m intervals; 


c) If not easily accessible from a 3 m 
stepladder, openings on horizontal grease 
duct systems shall be provided with safe 
access and a work platform; 


d) Support systems for horizontal grease duct 
systems 600 mm and larger in any cross- 
sectional dimension shall be designed for 
the weight of the ductwork plus 360 kg at 
any point in the duct systems; and 

e) On non-certified ductwork, the edge of the 
opening shall not be less than 40 mm from 
all outside edges of the duct or welded 
seams. 


5.9.4.2 Vertical ducts 


a) On vertical ductwork where personnel 
entry is possible, access shall be provided 
at the top of the vertical riser to 
accommodate descent; 


b) Where personnel entry is not possible, 
adequate access for cleaning shall be 
provided on each floor; 


c) If not easily accessible from the floor or a 
3 m stepladder, openings on vertical grease 
ducts shall be provided with safe access 
and a work platform; and 

d) On non-certified ductwork, the edge of the 
opening shall not be less than 40 mm from 
all outside edges of the duct or welded 
seams. 


5.9.4.3 Access panels 


a) Access panels shall be of the same material 
and thickness as the duct; 


b) Access panels shall have a gasket or sealant 
that is rated for 815 °C and shall be grease 
tight; 

c) Fasteners, such as bolts, weld studs, latches, 
or wing nuts, used to secure the access 
panels shall be carbon steel or stainless 
steel and shall not penetrate duct walls; and 

d) Certified grease duct access door 
assemblies (access panels) shall be 
installed in accordance with the terms of 
the listing and the manufacturer’s 
instructions. 


5.10 Protection of Openings 


5.10.1 Openings for installation, servicing, and 


inspection of certified fire protection system devices 
and for duct cleaning shall be provided in ducts and 
enclosures shall conform to the requirements of 
5.9.3. 


5.10.2 Enclosure openings required to reach access 
panels in the ductwork shall be large enough for 
removal of the access panel through the enclosure 
opening. 


5.11 Other Grease Ducts 


Other grease ducts shall comply with the following 
requirements: 


5.11.1 Materials 


Ducts shall be constructed of and supported by 
carbon steel not less than 1.6 mm in thickness or 
stainless steel not less than 1.2 mm in thickness. 
Factory-built grease ducts certified by approved 
agencies shall be permitted to use materials in 
accordance with their certificate of conformity. 


5.11.2 Installation 


All seams, joints, penetrations, and duct-to-hood 
collar connections shall have a liquid tight 
continuous external weld. Duct-to-hood collar 
connections shall not require a liquid tight 
continuous external weld. Penetrations shall be 
permitted to be sealed by other certified devices that 
are tested to be grease tight and are evaluated under 
the same conditions of fire severity as the hood or 
enclosure of certified grease extractors and whose 
presence does not detract from the structural 
integrity of hood or duct. Internal welding shall be 
permitted, provided the joint is formed ground 
smooth and is readily accessible for inspection. 
Penetrations shall be sealed with certified by 
recognized agencies. Devices that require 
penetration of the ductwork, such as pipe and 
conduit penetration fittings and fasteners, shall be 
certified by recognized agencies. 


5.11.3 Welded Duct Connections 


5.11.3.1 Duct-to-duct connection shall be one of the 
following: 


a) Telescoping joint; 

b) Bell-type joint; 

c) Flange with edge weld; and 
d) Flange with filled weld. 


5.11.3.2 Butt-welded connections shall not be 
permitted. 


5.11.3.3 For telescoping and bell-type connections, 
the inside duct section shall always be uphill of the 
outside duct section. The difference between the 
inside dimensions of overlapping sections in such 
connections shall not exceed 6 mm. For such 
connections, the over-lap shall not exceed 50 mm. 


IS 18271 : 2023 


5.12 Exterior Installations 


5.12.1 The exterior portion of the ductwork shall be 
vertical wherever possible and shall be installed and 
supported on the exterior of a building. 


5.12.2 Bolts, screws, rivets, and other mechanical 
fasteners shall not penetrate duct walls. 


5.12.3 Clearance of ducts shall comply with 5.2.6. 


5.12.4 All ducts shall be protected on the exterior by 
paint or other suitable weather-protective coating. 


5.12.5 Ducts constructed of stainless steel shall not 
be required to have additional paint or weather- 
protective coatings. 


5.12.6 Ductwork subject to corrosion shall have 
minimal contact with the building surface. 


5.13 Interior Installations 
5.13.1 Duct Enclosures 


5.13.1.1 In all buildings where vertical fire barriers 
are penetrated, the ducts shall be enclosed in a 
continuous enclosure extending from the first 
penetrated fire barrier and any subsequent fire 
barriers or concealed spaces to or through the 
exterior, to maintain the fire resistance rating of the 
highest fire barrier penetrated. 


5.13.1.2 In all buildings more than one storey in 
height and in one storey buildings where the roof— 
ceiling assembly is required to have a fire resistance 
rating, the ducts shall be enclosed in a continuous 
enclosure extending from the lowest fire-rated 
ceiling or floor above the hood, through any 
concealed spaces, or through the roof, to maintain 
the integrity of the fire separations required by 
Part 4 of SP 7. 


5.13.1.3 The enclosure shall be sealed around the 
duct at the point of penetration of the first fire-rated 
barrier after the hood, to maintain the fire resistance 
rating of the enclosure. 


5.13.1.4 The enclosure shall be vented to the exterior 
of the building through weather-protected openings. 


5.13.1.5 The continuous enclosure provisions shall 
not be required where a field-applied grease duct 
enclosure or a factory-built grease duct enclosure is 
protected with a certified duct-through-penetration 
protection system equivalent to the fire resistance 
rating of the assembly being penetrated and where 
the materials are installed in accordance with the 
conditions of the conformity and the manufacturer’s 
instructions and are acceptable to the authority 
having jurisdiction. 


5.14 Rooftop Terminations 


5.14.1 Rooftop terminations shall be arranged with 


IS 18271 : 2023 


or provided with the following: 


a) A minimum of 3 m of horizontal clearance 
shall be maintained from the outlet to 
adjacent buildings, property lines, and air 
intakes; 

b) A minimum of 1.5 m of horizontal 
clearance shall be maintained from the 
outlet (fan housing) to any combustible 
structure; 


c) A vertical separation of 1 m below any 
exhaust outlets for air intakes shall be 
maintained within 3 m of the exhaust outlet; 


d) The ability to drain grease out of any traps 
or low points formed in the fan or duct near 
the termination of the system into a 
collection container that is 
non-combustible, closed, rainproof, and 
structurally sound for the service to which 
it is applied and that will not sustain 
combustion; 


e) A grease collection device that is applied to 
exhaust systems that does not inhibit the 
performance of any fan; 


f) Certified grease collection systems that 
meet the requirements of (d) and (e) above; 


g) A certified grease duct complying with 5.3 
or ductwork complying with 5.4; 


h) A hinged up-blast fan supplied with 
flexible weatherproof electrical cable and 
service hold-open retainer to permit 
inspection and cleaning that is certified for 
commercial cooking equipment with the 
following conditions: 


1) Where the fan attaches to the 
ductwork, the ductwork shall be a 
minimum of 450 mm away from any 
roof surface; and 

2) The fan shall discharge a minimum of 
1 m away from any roof surface. 

j) Other approved fan, provided it satisfies 
both of the following: 

1) The fan meets the requirements of (c) 
above and 5.15; and 

2) Its discharge or its extended duct 


discharge meets the requirements of 
5.14.1 (h) (2) (see also 5.15). 


5.14.2 Fans shall be provided with safe access and a 
work surface for inspection and cleaning. 


5.14.3 Wall Terminations 


Wall terminations shall be arranged with or provided 
with the following properties: 


a) Through a non-combustible wall with a 
minimum of 3 m of clearance from the 
outlet to adjacent buildings, property lines, 


grade level, combustible construction, 
electrical equipment, or lines, and with the 
closest point of any air intake or operable 
door or window at or below the plane of the 
exhaust termination; 


b) The closest point of any air intake or 
operable door or window above the plane 
of the exhaust termination shall be a 
minimum of 3 m in distance, plus 80 mm 
for each 1 degree from horizontal, the angle 
of degree being measured from the centre 
of the exhaust termination to the centre of 
the air intake or operable door or window; 


c) A wall termination in a secured area shall 
be permitted to be at a lower height above 
grade if acceptable to the authority having 
jurisdiction; 

d) The exhaust flow directed perpendicularly 
outward from the wall face or upward; 


e) Allthe ductwork pitched to drain the grease 
back into the hood(s) or with a drain 
provided to bring the grease back into a 
container within the building or into a 
remote grease trap; 


f) A certified grease duct complying with 
5.15 or other ducts complying with 5.11; 
and 


g) An approved fan, provided it meets the 
requirements of 5.15. 


5.14.4 Rooftop Terminations through Combustible 
or Limited-Combustible Walls 


5.14.4.1 Ductwork that exits a building through a 
combustible or limited-combustible wall to 
terminate above the roof line shall have wall 
protection provided in accordance with 5.2.6. 


5.14.4.2 Where the ductwork exits the building, the 
opening shall be sealed and shall include a weather- 
protected vented opening. 


5.14.4.3 Where the ductwork exits through a rated 
wall, the penetration shall be protected in 
accordance with 5.11.2. 


5.15 Exhaust Fans 
5.15.1 Up-blast Exhaust Fans 


5.15.1.1 Approved up-blast fans with motors 
surrounded by the airstream shall be hinged, 
supplied with flexible weatherproof electrical cable 
and service hold-open retainers, and certified for this 
use. Their Installation shall conform to the 
requirements of 5.12 and 5.13. Up-blast fans shall 
have a drain directed to a readily accessible and 
visible grease receptacle not to exceed 4 litres. 


5.15.1.2 Up-blast fans shall be supplied with an 
access opening of a minimum 80 mm x 125 mm or 


a circular diameter of 100 mm on the curvature of 
the outer fan housing to allow for cleaning and 
inspection of the fan blades. 


5.15.1.3 On existing up-blast fans where sufficient 
access is not available to allow for the removal of 
grease contamination, an approved hinge 
mechanism or access panel shall be installed. 


5.15.2 In-line Exhaust Fans 


In-line fans shall be of the type with the motor 
located outside the airstream and with belts and 
pulleys protected from the airstream by a grease 
tight housing. Such fans shall be connected to the 
exhaust duct by flanges securely bolted. Flexible 
connectors shall not be used. If the design or 
positioning of the fan allows grease to be trapped, a 
drain directed to a readily accessible and visible 
grease receptacle not exceeding 4 litres shall be 
provided. In-line exhaust fans shall be located in 
easily accessible areas of adequate size to allow for 
service or removal. Where the duct system 
connected to the fan is in an enclosure, the space or 
room in which the exhaust fan is located shall have 
the same fire resistance rating as the enclosure. 


5.15.3 Utility Set Exhaust Fans 


Utility set exhaust fans, if installed at the rooftop 
termination point, shall meet the requirements of 
5.14. Fans installed within the building shall be 
located in an accessible area of adequate size to 
allow for service or removal. Where the duct system 
connected to the fan is in an enclosure, the space or 
room in which the exhaust fan is located shall have 
the same fire resistance rating as the enclosure. The 
fan shall be connected to the exhaust duct by flanges 
securely bolted or by a system specifically certified 
for such use. Flexible connectors shall not be used. 
Exhaust fans shall have a drain directed to a readily 
accessible and visible grease receptacle not to 
exceed 4 litres. 


5.16 Exhaust Fan Housings 


Exhaust fan housings shall be constructed of carbon 
steel not less than 1.6 mm in thickness, of stainless 
steel not less than 1.2 mm in thickness, or, if 
certified, in accordance with the relevant standards. 


5.17 Openings for Cleaning, Servicing, and 
Inspection 


5.17.1 Openings for cleaning, servicing, and 
inspection shall conform to the requirements of 5.9.3 
and 5.9.4. 


5.17.2 Clearances shall conform to the requirements 
of 5.1.4 or, if installed within an enclosure, to the 
requirements of 5.13. 


IS 18271 : 2023 


5.18 Airflow 
5.18.1 Air Velocity 


5.18.1.1 The air velocity through any duct shall not 
be less than 150 m/min. 


5.18.1.2 Transition duct sections that do not exceed 
1 m in length and do not contain grease traps shall 
be permitted to be connected to hoods and exhaust 
fans that do not meet this velocity. 


5.19 Air Volume 


5.19.1 Exhaust air volumes for hoods shall be of a 
sufficient level to provide for capture and removal 
of grease-laden cooking vapours. 


5.19.2 Test data, performance tests acceptable to the 
authority having jurisdiction, or both shall be 
displayed, provided on request, or both. 


5.19.3 Lower exhaust air volumes shall be permitted 
during no-load cooking conditions provided they are 
sufficient to capture and remove flue gases and 
residual vapours from cooking equipment. 


5.20 Exhaust Fan Operation 


5.20.1 A hood exhaust fan(s) shall continue to 
operate after the extinguishing system has been 
activated unless fan shutdown is required by a 
certified component of the ventilation system or by 
the design of the extinguishing system. 


5.20.2 The hood exhaust fan shall not be required to 
start upon activation of the extinguishing system if 
the exhaust fan and all cooking equipment served by 
the fan have been shut down. 


5.21 Replacement Air 


5.21.1 Replacement air quantity shall be adequate to 
prevent negative pressures in the commercial 
cooking area(s) from exceeding 5 Pa. 


5.21.2 When the fire-extinguishing system activates, 
makeup air supplied internally to a hood shall be 
shut off. 


5.22 Common Duct (Manifold) Systems 


5.22.1 Master kitchen exhaust ducts that serve 
multiple tenants shall include provision to bleed air 
from outdoors or from adjacent spaces into the 
master exhaust duct where required to maintain the 
necessary minimum air velocity in the master 
exhaust duct. 


5.22.2 Bleed air ducts shall connect to the top or side 
of the master exhaust duct. 


5.22.3 The bleed air duct shall have a fire damper at 
least 300 mm from the exhaust duct connection. 


IS 18271 : 2023 


5.22.4 The bleed air duct shall have the same 
construction and clearance requirements as the main 
exhaust duct from the connection to the exhaust duct 
to at least 30 mm on both sides of the fire damper. 


5.22.5 Each bleed air duct shall have a means of 
adjusting (for example, by using volume dampers) 
the bleed air quantity. 


5.22.6 Means to adjust the bleed air quantity shall be 
installed between the fire damper and the source of 
bleed air. 


5.22.7 A bleed air duct shall not be used for the 
exhaust of grease-laden vapours and shall be so 
labelled. 


5.22.8 Unused tenant exhaust connections to the 
master exhaust duct that are not used as bleed air 
connections shall be disconnected and sealed at the 
main duct. 


6 INSPECTION, TESTING 
MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT 


AND 


6.1 Operating Procedures 


6.1.1 Exhaust systems shall be operated whenever 
cooking equipment is turned on. 


6.1.2 Filter-equipped exhaust systems shall not be 
operated with filters removed. 


6.1.3 Openings provided for replacing air exhausted 
through ventilating equipment shall not be restricted 
by covers, dampers, or any other means that would 
reduce the operating efficiency of the exhaust 
system. 


6.1.4 Instructions for manually operating the fire 
extinguishing system shall be posted conspicuously 
in the kitchen and shall be reviewed with employees 
by the management. 


6.1.5 Certified exhaust hoods shall be operated in 
accordance with the terms of their listings and the 
manufacturer’s instructions. 


6.1.6 Cooking equipment shall not be operated while 
its fire-extinguishing system or exhaust system is 
non-operational or impaired. Where the fire 
extinguishing system or exhaust system is 
non-operational or impaired, the systems shall be 
tagged as non-compliant, and the owner or owner’s 
representative shall be notified in writing of the 
impairment. 


6.1.7 Secondary filtration and pollution control 
equipment shall be operated in accordance with the 
terms of its listing and the manufacturer’s 
recommendations. 


6.1.8 Inspection and maintenance of ‘other equipment’ 


shall be conducted by properly trained and qualified 
persons acceptable to the authority having 
jurisdiction at a frequency determined by the 
manufacturer’s instructions or certificate of 
conformity of equipment. 


6.2 Inspection, Testing, and Maintenance of Fire- 
Extinguishing Systems 


6.2.1 Maintenance of the fire-extinguishing systems 

and certified exhaust hoods containing a constant or 

fire-activated water system that is certified to 

extinguish a fire in the grease removal devices, hood 

exhaust plenums, and exhaust ducts shall be made 

by properly trained, qualified, and certified person(s) 
acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction at 
least every four months in case of starred hotels and 
six months in case of other hotels. 


6.2.2 All actuation and control components, 
including remote manual pull stations, mechanical, 
pneumatic and electrical devices, detectors, and 
actuators, shall be tested for proper operation during 
the inspection in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s procedures. 


6.2.3 The specific inspection and maintenance 
requirements of the extinguishing system standards 
as well as the applicable installation and 
maintenance manuals for the certified system and 
service bulletins shall be followed. 


6.2.4 Fusible links of the metal alloy type and 
automatic sprinklers of the metal alloy type shall be 
replaced at least semi-annually except as 6.2.7. 


6.2.5 The year of manufacture and the date of 
installation of the fusible links shall be marked on 
the system inspection tag. 


6.2.5.1 The tag shall be signed or initialled by the 
installer. 


6.2.5.2 The fusible links shall be destroyed when 
removed. 


6.2.6 Detection devices, bulb-type automatic 
sprinklers and fusible links other than the metal 
alloy type (see IS 9972) shall be examined and 
cleaned or replaced annually. 


6.2.7 Fixed temperature-sensing elements other than 
the fusible metal alloy type shall be permitted to 
remain continuously in service, provided they are 
inspected and cleaned or replaced, if necessary, in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, 
every twelve months or more frequently to ensure 
proper operation of the system. 


6.2.8 Where required, certificates of inspection and 
maintenance shall be forwarded to the authority 
having jurisdiction. 


6.3 Inspection of Fire Dampers 


6.3.1 Actuation components for fire dampers shall 
be inspected for proper operation in accordance with 
the manufacturer’s certified procedures. 


6.3.2 Replacement of Fusible Links 


Fusible links on fire damper assemblies shall be 
replaced at least semi-annually or more frequently 
as necessary. Replacement shall be made by a 
certified person acceptable to the authority having 
jurisdiction. 


6.4 Documentation Tag 


The year of manufacture and the date of installation 
of the fusible links shall be documented. The tag 
shall be signed or initialled by the installer. 


6.5 Inspection for Grease Build-up 


The entire exhaust system shall be inspected for 
grease build-up by a properly trained, qualified, and 
certified person(s) acceptable to the authority having 
jurisdiction and in accordance with Table 1. 


Table 1 Schedule of Inspection for Grease 


Build-up 
(Clause 6.5) 
SI No. Type or Volume of Inspection 
Cooking Frequency 
Q) 2) (3) 
i) Systems serving solid Monthly 
fuel cooking operations 
ii) Systems serving high- Quarterly 
volume cooking operations, 
such as 24 h cooking, 
charbroiling, or wok 
cooking 
iii) | Systems serving moderate- Semi- 
volume cooking operations annually 
iv) Systems serving low- Annually 


volume cooking operations 
such as day camps, seasonal 
businesses, or senior centres 


6.6 Inspection, testing, and maintenance of certified 
hoods containing mechanical or fire-actuated 
dampers, internal washing components, or other 
mechanically operated devices shall be inspected 
and tested by properly trained, qualified, and 
certified persons acceptable to the authority having 
jurisdiction every 4 months or at frequencies 
recommended by the manufacturer in accordance 
with their certificate of conformity. 


6.7 Cleaning of Exhaust Systems 


6.7.1 Upon inspection, if the exhaust system is found 


IS 18271 : 2023 


to be contaminated with deposits from grease-laden 
vapours, the contaminated portions of the exhaust 
system shall be cleaned by a properly trained, 
qualified, and certified person(s) acceptable to the 
authority having jurisdiction. 


6.7.2 Hoods, grease removal devices, fans, ducts, 
and other appurtenances shall be cleaned to remove 
combustible contaminants prior to surfaces 
becoming heavily contaminated with grease or oily 
sludge. 


6.7.3 At the start of the cleaning process, electrical 
switches that could be activated accidentally shall be 
locked out. 


6.7.4 Fire-extinguishing systems including their 
components shall not be rendered inoperable during 
the cleaning process or maintenance thereof unless 
such work is carried out by a trained technician(s) 
acceptable to authority having jurisdiction. 
Adequate care shall be taken to prevent accidental 
discharge of the system during cleaning/maintenance 
or testing. 


6.7.5 Flammable solvents or other flammable 
cleaning aids shall not be used. 


6.7.6 Cleaning chemicals shall not be applied on 
fusible links or other detection devices of the 
automatic extinguishing system. 


6.7.7 After the exhaust system is cleaned, it shall not 
be coated with powder or other substance. 


6.7.8 When cleaning procedures are completed, all 
access panels (doors) and cover plates shall be 
restored to their normal operational condition. 


6.7.9 When an access panel is removed, a service 
company label or tag pre-printed with the name of 
the company and giving the date of inspection or 
cleaning shall be affixed near the affected access 
panels. 


6.7.10 Dampers and diffusers shall be positioned for 
proper airflow. 


6.7.11 When cleaning procedures are completed, all 
electrical switches and system components shall be 
returned to an operable state. 


6.7.12 When an exhaust cleaning service is used, a 
certificate showing the name of the servicing 
company, the name of the person performing the 
work, and the date of inspection or cleaning shall be 
maintained on the premises. 


6.7.13 After cleaning or inspection is completed, the 
exhaust cleaning company and the person 
performing the work at the location shall provide the 
owner of the system with a written report that also 
specifies areas that were inaccessible or not cleaned. 


IS 18271 : 2023 


6.7.14 Where required, certificates of inspection and 
cleaning and reports of areas not cleaned shall be 
submitted to the authority having jurisdiction. 


6.8 Cooking Equipment Maintenance 


6.8.1 Inspection and servicing of the cooking 
equipment shall be made at least annually by 
properly trained and qualified persons acceptable to 
the authority having jurisdiction. 


6.8.2 Cooking equipment that collects grease below 
the surface, behind the equipment, or in cooking 
equipment flue gas exhaust, such as griddles or char 
broilers, shall be inspected and, if found with grease 
accumulation, cleaned by a properly trained, 
qualified, and certified person acceptable to the 
authority having jurisdiction. 


7 FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 
7.1 General 


An automatic fixed suppression system shall be 
installed to protect all cooking equipment producing 
grease laden vapours and that might be a source of 


ignition of grease in the hood, grease removal device. 


Fire-suppression equipment shall be provided for 
the protection of grease removal devices, hood 
exhaust plenums, and exhaust duct systems. Once a 
fire has propagated to the hood and duct, fire 
suppression is absolutely necessary to protect the 
building and its occupants. All fire suppression 
systems and components installed shall be in 
accordance with respective Indian Standards as 
indicated in 7.2.1. 


7.2 Cooking Equipment (General) 
Cooking equipment shall be protected with: 


a) wet chemical suppression system; 


b) automatic sprinkler system (not in the 
vicinity of cooking areas or inside 
hoods/ducts) (see IS 15105); and 


c) other equivalent systems like water mist 
applications (see IS 15519) for kitchen 
fires. 


7.2.1 Fire Suppression Systems 


a) Wet chemical fire-extinguishing systems 
and components thereof used in cooking 
operations shall be in accordance with 
respective applicable Indian Standards as 
indicated in Annex A; and 


b) Various fire suppression systems like 
sprinklers, water mist, foam, etc shall be in 
accordance with respective applicable 
standards as indicated in Annex A. 


7.2.1.1 Hazards and equipment that can be protected 
using wet chemical extinguishing systems shall 


include the following: 


a) Restaurant, commercial, and institutional 
hoods; 

b) Plenums, ducts, and filters with their 
associated cooking appliances; 

c) Special grease removal devices; 

d) Odour control devices; and 

e) Energy recovery devices installed in the 
exhaust system. 


7.2.1.2 Manufacturer’s design, installation, and 
maintenance manual shall be consulted for system 
limitations and applications for which wet chemical 
extinguishing systems for commercial cooking 
operations are considered satisfactory protection. 


7.2.2 Methodology 


7.2.2.1 Equipment certified or otherwise, that 
provides secondary filtration or air pollution control 
and that is installed in the path of travel of exhaust 
products shall be provided with an approved 
automatic fire suppression system, installed in 
accordance with the automatic fire suppression 
system manufacturer’s instructions. 


Exhaust products shall be provided with an 
approved automatic fire suppression system or 
installed in accordance with the automatic fire 
suppression system manufacturer’s instructions. 


7.2.2.2 Each protected cooking appliance, individual 
hood, and branch exhaust duct directly connected to 
the hood shall be protected by a system or systems 
designed and installed for simultaneous operation. 


7.2.2.3 Where two or more hazards can be 
simultaneously involved in fire by reason of their 
proximity, the hazards shall be protected by either of 
the following: 


a) Individual systems installed on each hazard 
to operate simultaneously; and 

b) A single system designed and installed to 
protect all hazards that can be 
simultaneously involved. 


7.2.2.4 Hoods installed end-to-end, back-to-back, 
or both, or sharing a common ductwork, and 
having a grease-producing appliance(s) located 
under one or more of the hoods shall be considered 
a single hazard area requiring simultaneous 
automatic fire protection in all hoods and ducts. 


7.2.3 System Actuation 


7.2.3.1 All systems shall have both automatic and 
manual methods of actuation. 


7.2.3.2 The automatic and manual means of system 
actuation (exception for pneumatic tube detection), 
external to the control head or releasing device, shall 
be separate and independent of each other so that a 


failure of one will not impair the operation of the 
other. 


7.2.3.3 When a certified releasing mechanism is 
used employing a single line for mechanical 
detection and remote manual control, the remote 
manual control shall be installed inline, prior to all 
detection devices, so malfunction of one does not 
impede operation of the other. 


7.2.3.4 Automatic detection and system actuation 
shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
design, installation, and maintenance manual. 


7.2.3.5 All devices necessary for proper operation of 
the system shall function simultaneously with the 
system operation. 


7.2.3.6 Operation of any manual actuator shall be all 
that is required to bring about the full operation of 
the system. 


7.2.3.7 At least one manual actuator shall be 
provided for each system. 


7.2.3.8 All operating devices shall be designed, 
located, installed, or protected so that they are not 
subject to mechanical, environmental, or other 
conditions that could render them inoperative or 
cause inadvertent operation of the system. 


7.2.3.9 An audible or visual indicator shall be 
provided to show that the system has operated, that 
personnel response is needed, and that the system is 
in need of recharge. 


7.2.3.10 The extinguishing system shall be 
connected to the fire alarm system, if provided, in 
accordance with the requirements of IS 2189, so 
that the actuation of the extinguishing system will 
sound the fire alarm. 


7.2.3.11 A readily accessible means for manual 
actuation shall be located in the path of egress. When 
manual actuation is used for cooking related 
protection, the manual actuation device shall be 
installed no more than 1 200 mm and no less than 
1 050 mm above the floor. The manual actuation 
device shall clearly identify the hazard protected. 


7.2.3.12 At least one manual actuation device shall 
be located as directed by the authority having 


jurisdiction, within the limitations of the 
manufacturer’s design, installation, and 
maintenance manual. 

7.2.3.13 Automatic systems protecting only 


common exhaust ducts shall not require a manual 
actuator. 


7.2.3.14 The means for manual actuation shall be 
mechanical and shall not rely on electrical power for 
actuation. 


IS 18271 : 2023 


7.2.3.15 Electrical power shall be permitted to be 
used for manual actuation if electrical supervision 
and a reserve power supply are provided (see 3.4.6.2 
of Part 4 of SP 7). 


7.2.3.16 These kitchen hoods independent 
suppression systems shall discharge wet chemicals 
to all areas of a kitchen range extract hood that is 
potentially coated in grease. The system shall also 
discharge over deep fat cooking pans or other 
potential fire source. The system can be activated 
by detectors above the appliances and in the 
entrance of the duct. Additional detector behind 
equipment in the duct may be necessary or fusible 
links, or manually by an actuation device easily 
accessible in the path of egress. 


7.2.3.17 The following shall be the operational 
sequence: 


a) Upon actuation of fire suppression system, 
any power or gas supplies serving the 
kitchen equipment shall be cut-off and 
isolated; 


b) The fire suppression agent shall be 
automatically released to the hood filter 
and into the connecting ductwork and over 
kitchen appliances; 


c) The exhaust fan shall not stop and continue 
operating, even after activation of the 
system; and the supply fan shall be cut off; 


d) Detectors of appropriate types shall also be 
provided behind filters and over deep fat 
fryers but shall be carefully set to prevent 
false alarm from cooking that use flames; 


e) Gas detectors shall be fitted to all kitchens 
that link to a gas solenoid valve for 
emergency shut off; and suitable gas 
detection system (based on type of gas used 
LPG or CNG) integrated with fire detection 
and alarm system shall be provided in 
addition to heat/multi detectors and 
sprinklers; 


f) Manual shut off devices shall activate the 
fire suppression system, which in turn shall 
stop other systems like fuel supply, power 
supply, etc, this shall operate mechanically 
and not rely on electrical power for 
activation, unless this is from an 
emergency power source; 


g) In the event of the kitchen hood system 
being activated, an alarm shall be sounded, 
the system shall be interfaced with the fire 
detection and alarm system; and 


h) It is strongly recommended to provide 
remote monitoring for the health of kitchen 
fire safety equipment and interface the 
same with building management system. 


IS 18271 : 2023 


7.2.4 System Location 


7.2.4.1 Wet chemical containers and expellant gas 
assemblies shall be located within the temperature 
range specified in the manufacturer’s design, 
installation, and maintenance manual. 


7.2.4.2 If ambient temperatures outside the 
manufacturer’s operating temperature range are 
expected, protection shall be provided to maintain 
the temperature within the certified range. 


7.2.4.3 Wet chemical containers and expellant gas 
assemblies shall not be located where they could be 
subjected to mechanical, chemical, or other damage. 


7.2.4.4 Where damage due to chemical or 
mechanical exposure is expected, protective devices 
such as enclosures or guards acceptable to the 
authority having jurisdiction shall be provided. 


7.2.4.5 Wet chemical containers and expellant gas 
assemblies shall be accessible for inspection, 
maintenance, and recharge. 


7.2.4.6 Wet chemical containers and expellant gas 
assemblies shall be located as per the manufacturer’s 
limitations but not where they will be exposed to the 
fire. 


7.2.4.7 Discharge nozzles 


All discharge nozzles shall be located to minimize 
damage or misalignment and be within the 
limitations and constraints of the manufacturer’s 
design, installation, and maintenance manual. 


7.2.5 Special Requirements 


7.2.5.1 Systems protecting two or more hoods or 
plenums, or both, that meet the requirements 
of 7.2.2.3 shall be installed to ensure the 
simultaneous operation of all systems protecting 
the hoods, plenums, and associated cooking 
appliances located below the hoods. Also: 


a) The building owner(s) or the owner’s agent 
shall be responsible for the protection of 
any common exhaust ducts used by more 
than one tenant; 


b) The tenant shall be responsible for the 
protection of common exhaust duct(s) 
serving hoods located within the tenant’s 
space and up to the point of connection to 
the building owner’s common exhaust duct; 


c) The tenant’s common duct shall be 
considered a branch duct to the building 
owner’s common duct; 


d) At least one fusible link or heat detector 
shall be installed within each exhaust duct 
opening in accordance with the certificate 
of conformity; 


18 


e) A fusible link or heat detector shall be 
provided above each protected cooking 
appliance and in accordance with the 
extinguishing system manufacturer’s 
design, installation, and maintenance 
manual; further: 


1) Fusible links or heat detectors located 
at or within 300 mm into the exhaust 
duct opening and above the protected 
appliance shall be permitted to meet 
the requirements of 7.2.5.1 (e); and 


2) A single certified detection device 
shall be permitted for more than one 
appliance when installed in 
accordance with the system’s 
conformity criteria. 


f) Where the pipe or other conduit penetrates 
a duct or hood, the penetration shall have 
a liquid tight continuous external weld or 
shall be sealed by a certified device. 


7.2.5.2 Protection of common exhaust duct 


The common exhaust ducts shall be protected by one 
of the following methods: 


a) Simultaneous operation of all independent 
hood, duct, and appliance protection 
systems; and 


b) Simultaneous operation of any hood, duct, 
and appliance protection system and the 
system(s) protecting the entire common 
exhaust duct: 


1) A fusible link or other mechanically 
operated heat detection device from 
the common duct fire-extinguishing 
system shall be located at each branch- 
duct to common-duct connection 
where electrical operation of the 
common duct fire extinguishing 
system does not meet the requirements 
of 7.3.1; and 


2) Where a fusible link or mechanically 
operated heat detector is located 
at a branch-duct to common-duct 
connection, an access panel shall be 
installed in accordance with specialist 
literature like NFPA 96 may be 
referred. Necessary provisions should 
be made available to enable servicing 
of the detector where the detector is 
not accessible from the branch duct 
connection to the exhaust hood. 


All sources of fuel or heat to appliances served by 
the common exhaust duct shall be shut down upon 


actuation of any protection system in accordance 
with 6.7.4. 


Ignition sources contained within any exhaust 
system shall be protected and have a separate 
detection system that is in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s specifications and that is approved 
by the authority having jurisdiction. Either a 
common extinguishing system shall be provided to 
protect both the ignition source(s) contained within 
an exhaust system and the exhaust system itself, or 
separate extinguishing systems shall be provided to 
protect the exhaust system and the ignition sources 
which shall be arranged for simultaneous automatic 
operation upon actuation of any one of those 
systems. A secondary filtration or air pollution 
control unit, whether or not it includes an ignition 
source, shall be protected either with a separate 
automatic fire suppression system designed to 
operate simultaneously with the activation of the 
automatic fire suppression system protecting the 
ventilation hood(s) being served or with a single 
automatic fire suppression system that protects both 
the secondary filtration or air pollution control unit 
and the hood(s) being served. 


Movable cooking equipment shall be provided with 
a means to ensure that it is correctly positioned in 
relation to the appliance discharge nozzle during 
cooking operations. 


7.3 Automatic Sprinkler Installation 


7.3.1 Due diligence shall be exercised before 
considering protection with sprinkler/water mist 
installation particularly for the protection of fryers. 
No sprinklers shall be provided within 5 m of 
cooking equipment and kitchen hoods. An audit and 
analysis will be required before installing sprinklers 
within commercial cooking areas. Area sensitive 
to sprinklers shall be omitted but these areas shall 
be protected with wet chemical suppression 
systems or other systems tested and approved by 
competent bodies for the type of protection. Water 
mist systems conforming to IS 15519, if approved 
for use for the type of application (that is, 
commercial cooking equipment) by fire tests 
carried out by approved laboratories, can also be 
considered. When sprinkler/ water mist suppression 
systems are used for fire protection, those systems 
shall be tested and approved by NABL approved 
laboratories. 


7.3.2 Requirements for Cooking Equipment 


In cooking areas protected by automatic sprinklers, 
additional sprinklers or automatic spray nozzles 
shall be provided to protect commercial-type 
cooking equipment and ventilation systems that are 
designed to carry away grease-laden vapours unless 
otherwise protected. The additional sprinklers or 
automatic spray nozzles shall be approved for 
specific application. 


19 


IS 18271 : 2023 


7.3.3 Sprinklers and Automatic Spray Nozzles 


7.3.3.1 Unless the requirements of 7.3.3.2 are met, 
standard sprinklers or automatic spray nozzles shall 
be so located as to provide for the protection of 
exhaust ducts, hood exhaust duct collars, and hood 
exhaust plenum chambers. 


7.3.3.2 Sprinklers or automatic spray nozzles in 
ducts, duct collars, and plenum chambers shall not 
be required where all cooking equipment is served 
by certified grease extractors. 


7.3.3.3 Unless the requirements of 7.3.3.5 are met, 
standard sprinklers or automatic spray nozzles shall 
be so located as to provide for the protection of 
cooking equipment and cooking surfaces. 


7.3.3.4 Hoods containing automatic fire- 
extinguishing systems are protected areas; however, 
these hoods can be considered as obstructions to 
overhead sprinkler systems and shall require floor 
coverage underneath in accordance with 9.12.3 of 
IS 15105. 


7.3.3.5 Cooking equipment below hoods that 
contain automatic fire-extinguishing equipment is 
protected and shall not require protection from the 
overhead sprinkler system. 


7.3.4 Sprinkler and Automatic Spray Nozzle 
Location — Ducts 


7.3.4.1 Unless the requirements of 7.3.4.2 or 7.3.4.4 
are met, exhaust ducts shall have one sprinkler or 
automatic spray nozzle located at the top of each 
vertical riser and at the midpoint of each offset. 


7.3.4.2 Sprinklers or automatic spray nozzles shall 
not be required in a vertical riser located outside of 
a building, provided the riser does not expose 
combustible material or provided the interior of the 
building and the horizontal distance between the 
hood outlet and the vertical riser is at least 7.6 m. 


7.3.4.3 Unless the requirements of 7.3.4.4 are met, 
horizontal exhaust ducts shall have sprinklers or 
automatic spray nozzle devices located on 3 m 
centres beginning no more than 1.5 m from the duct 
entrance. 


7.3.4.4 Sprinklers or automatic spray nozzles shall 
be required in ducts. 


7.3.4.5 A sprinkler(s) or an automatic spray 
nozzle(s) in exhaust ducts subject to freezing shall 
be properly protected against freezing by approved 
means. 


IS 18271 : 2023 


7.3.5 Sprinkler and Automatic Spray Nozzle 
Location — Duct Collar 


7.3.5.1 Each hood exhaust duct collar shall have one 
sprinkler or automatic spray nozzle located 25 mm 
minimum to 300 mm maximum above the point of 
duct collar connection in the hood plenum. 


7.3.5.2 Hoods that have certified fire dampers 
located in the duct collar shall be protected with a 
sprinkler or automatic spray nozzle located on the 
discharge side of the damper and shall be so 
positioned as not to interfere with damper operation. 
If the damper is less than 100 mm into the duct from 
the duct collar, only duct nozzle or automatic spray 
nozzles are acceptable. 


7.3.6 Sprinkler and Automatic Spray Nozzle 
Location — Exhaust Plenum Chambers 


7.3.6.1 Hood exhaust plenum chambers shall have 
one sprinkler or automatic spray nozzle centred in 
each chamber not exceeding 3 m in length. 


7.3.6.2 Plenum chambers greater than 3 m in length 
shall have two sprinklers or automatic spray nozzles 
evenly spaced, with the maximum distance between 
the two sprinklers not to exceed 3 m. 


7.3.7 Sprinkler and Automatic Spray Nozzle 
Temperature Ratings and Orifice Sizes 


7.3.7.1 Where the exposed temperature is expected 
to be 150 °C or less, sprinklers, or automatic spray 
nozzles being used in duct, duct collar, and plenum 
areas shall be of the extra high temperature 
classification (163 °C to 191 °C). 


7.3.7.2 When use of a temperature-measuring device 
indicates temperatures above 150 °C, a sprinkler or 
automatic spray nozzle of higher classification shall 
be used. 


7.3.7.3 Sprinklers or automatic spray nozzles being 
used in duct, duct collar, and plenum areas shall 
have orifice with K-factors not less than 21 and not 
more than 80. 


7.3.7.4 Access shall be provided to all sprinklers or 
automatic spray nozzles for examination and 
replacement. 


7.3.8 Cooking Equipment 


7.3.8.1 General cooking equipment (such as deep fat 
fryers, ranges, griddles, and broilers) that is 
considered to be a source of ignition shall be 
protected in accordance with the provisions of 7.3.2. 


7.3.8.2 Deep fat fryers 


A sprinkler or automatic spray nozzle used for 


20 


protection of deep fat fryers shall be certified for 
that application. The position, arrangement, 
location, and water supply for each sprinkler or 
automatic spray nozzle shall be in accordance with 
its respective Indian Standard. 


7.3.8.3 Fuel and heat shutoff 


The operation of any cooking equipment sprinkler 
or automatic spray nozzle shall automatically shut 
off all sources of fuel and heat to all equipment 
requiring protection. Any gas appliance not 
requiring protection but located under ventilating 
equipment shall also be shut off. All shutdown 
devices shall be of the type that requires manual 
resetting prior to fuel or power being restored. 


7.3.9 Indicating Valves 


A certified indicating valve shall be installed in the 
water supply line to the sprinklers and spray nozzles 
protecting the cooking and ventilating system. 


7.3.10 Strainers 


A certified line strainer shall be installed in the main 
water supply preceding sprinklers or automatic 
spray nozzles having nominal K-factors smaller than 
K-40. 


7.3.11 Test Connection 


A system test connection shall be provided to verify 
proper operation of equipment specified in 7.3.8.3. 


7.3.12 Sprinkler and Automatic Spray Nozzle 
Replacement 


7.3.12.1 Unless the requirements of 7.3.12.2 are 
met, sprinklers and automatic spray nozzles used 
for protecting commercial-type cooking equipment 
and ventilating systems shall be replaced annually. 


7.3.12.2 Where automatic bulb-type sprinklers or 
spray nozzles are used and annual examination 
should show no build-up of grease or other material 
on the sprinklers or spray nozzles, such sprinklers 
and spray nozzles shall not be required to be 
replaced annually. 


7.3.13 Sprinklers protecting commercial-type 
cooking equipment and ventilation systems shall be 
of the high or extra high-temperature classification 
as determined by use of a temperature-measuring 
device. 


7.3.14 Other Requirements 


7.3.14.1 An approved indicating valve shall be 
installed in the main water supply preceding 
sprinklers having nominal orifice sizes smaller than 
9.5 mm. 


7.3.14.2 A system test connection shall be 
provided to verify proper operation of equipment. 


7.3.14.3 The kitchen hoods shall be provided with 
hot water spray nozzle system or steam system to 
ensure that after kitchen closes down the hood is 
cleaned with one of the systems mentioned above, 
so that grease stuck in the hoods can be safely 
drained out. 


7.4 Fire Separation Requirements 


7.4.1 Where a kitchen is required for the preparation 
of food and/or where ‘open flame’ cooking 
appliances are used and/or where fryers (with no 
open flames) are used, the kitchen shall be 
separated from other parts of the same building by 
compartment wall and floor having fire resistance of 
at least 120 min. 


7.4.2 Food serving areas shall be fire separated from 
the kitchens/cooking areas by fire rated elements 
having a resistance of 120 min. Doors shall have 
fire resistance of 120 min (see IS 3614) rating and 
fitted with automatic self-closing device. 


NOTE — If the kitchen area is protected by an approved 
fire suppression system, fire rating of fire door as stated 
above can be reduced to half an hour. 


7.4.3 In the open type of kitchen cooking area and 
sitting area needs to be segregated by 120 min rated 
glass and such glass partitions shall be protected 
with window sprinklers. 


7.4.4 Separation requirement for kitchen may be 
waived: 


a) if all the cooking facilities in the kitchen are 
fitted with an approved suppression system; 
or 


b) if the entire occupancy (kitchen and 
dining/serving area) is fire separated from 
other parts of the same building with all 
elements having fire resistance of at least 
120 min. 


7.4.5 Where the flue or duct passes through the 
compartment wall or floor, the flue or duct shall be 
encased by non-combustible construction and no 
damper shall be permitted to be installed in such flue 
or duct. Also, such flue or ductwork shall be clear 
from combustible materials by at least 450 mm, and 
from non-combustibles by at least 150 mm. 


7.4.6 If the commercial kitchen/cooking area is 
situated in a building that is not sprinkler protected, 
the floor area of the kitchen/cooking area shall not 


21 


IS 18271 : 2023 


exceed 150 m?. 


7.4.7 LPG cylinders provided for the ‘open flame’ 
cooking activities are not allowed to be located at 
the basement. As regards LPG cylinder storage, 
attention is drawn to IS 15493, IS 15497, IS 15501, 
IS 15505, IS 15506, IS 15517, IS 15525, and 
SP 7 (Part 9/Sec 4) for compliance requirements. 


7.4.8 Kitchen occupancy (even if with electrical 
ovens) shall not be allowed below ground level 
under any circumstances. 


7.4.9 It is advisable to locate the kitchen/cooking 
operations located on the external periphery of the 
building so that in the event of mechanical 
ventilation failure, it can be naturally ventilated. 


7.4.10 Show kitchens, live kitchen with or without 
live counters are increasingly resorted to. As 
conditions may vary for different locations, suitable 
additional separation arrangements like fire/smoke 
curtains, fire doors (see IS 3614) and other types of 
passive protection shall be insisted by the authorities 
if required. 


7.5 Other Requirements 


7.5.1 Life safety and egress requirements shall be 
governed by the requirements under SP 7 (Part 4). 
In case any requirements under this standard differ 
from those under SP 7 (Part 4), the provisions of this 
standard shall take precedence. 


7.5.2 Extinguishers in the vicinity of cooking area 
and the hoods shall be suitable for the type of fire 
(class F type). 


7.5.3 Any penetrations to the outside of a hood, be 
either welded or fit with a sealing device (certified 
by approval bodies) to not allow cooking grease, oil 
to migrate to the outer portion of the hood. The 
fitment arrangements shall be approved by 
competent bodies. Gaskets for the panels shall be 
certified to withstand a temperature of 800 °C. 


7.5.4 Grease strip shall be readily available for 
efficient and regular cleaning of concrete or paved 
floors of kitchen and restaurant and also the drainage 
areas. 


7.5.5 Provision of cleaning of the kitchen exhaust 
every six months to ensure that the carbon soot 
accumulated in the exhaust duct is cleaned to avoid 
the chances of outbreak of fire. 


IS 18271 : 2023 


IS No./Other 
Standard 


IS 2189 : 2008 


IS 3614 : 2021 


IS 8757 : 2021 


IS 9972 : 2023 


IS 12458 : 2019 


IS 15105 : 2021 


IS 15493 


: 2021 


IS 15497 : 2004 


IS 15501 : 2004 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 


Selection, installation and 
maintenance of automatic fire 
detection and alarm system 
(fourth revision) 

Fire doors and doorsets — 
Specification (first revision) 
Glossary of terms associated 
with fire safety (second 
revision) 

Automatic sprinkler heads for 
fire protection service (first 
revision) 

Fire resistance of through 
penetration _firestops 
Method of test (first revision) 


Design, 


installation and 
maintenance of fixed 
automatic sprinkler fire 
extinguishing systems (first 
revision) 

Gaseous fire extinguishing 
systems General 
requirements (first revision) 


Gaseous fire extinguishing 
systems IG 01 
extinguishing systems 


Gaseous fire extinguishing 
systems IG 541 
extinguishing system 


22 


IS No./Other 
Standard 


IS 15505 : 2004 


IS 15506 : 2004 


IS 15517 : 2004 


IS 15519 : 2020 


IS 15525 : 2004 


IS 15683 : 2018 


SP 7 : 2016 


Part 4 
Part 9/Sec 4 


SP 30 : 2023 


Title 


Gaseous fire extinguishing 
systems — HCFC blend A 
extinguishing systems 
Gaseous fire extinguishing 
systems IG 55 
extinguishing systems 


Gaseous fire extinguishing 
systems — HFC 227ea (hepta 
fluoro propane) extinguishing 
systems 

Water mist fire protection 
systems — system design, 
installation and 
commissioning (first revision) 


Gaseous fire extinguishing 
systems IG 100 
extinguishing systems 


Portable fire extinguishers — 
Performance and construction 
(first revision) 

National building code of 
India 2016 

Part 4: Fire and life safety 
Part 9: Plumbing services 
(including solid waste 
management), Section 4 Gas 
supply 

National electrical code 2023 
(second revision) 


IS 18271 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
DETECTION TYPES AND ACTUATION UNITS 


B-1 DETECTION 
There are three types of detection: 


a) Mechanical detection — Fusible links 
with melting metal elements or glass 
bulbs placed on a tensioned wire under 
hood, which are activated by heat, 
releases the tension wire, and activates the 
fire extinguishing system; 

b) Pressure detection — Specially designed 
polyamide heat sensing tube or fusible 
plugs installed under the hood. In case of 
fire tube/ fusible plug will burst releasing 
the pressure and actuating the system; and 


c) Linear heat detection cable (LHDC) — 
The LHDC consist of a_heat-sensitive 
cable that can detect changes in 
temperature and trigger an alarm when a 
specific temperature threshold is reached. 
Optical fibre, pneumatic tube, and electric 
sensor cable are some instances of 
technology used in LHDC. 


Selection of detection system type is dependent on 
the client’s requirements and technical conditions, 
that is, number and size of equipment under hood, 
number and location of air vents/ducts, hood’s 
length and shape, distance between hood and supply 
unit, kitchen working temperature (fryers, grills). 


Fire detection provides signal actuating 
extinguishing system. There are four types of 
detection systems, depending on customer 


requirements, technical solutions etc: 


B-1.2 Mechanical Detection System with Fusible 
Links or Heat Sensitive Glass Bulbs 


After melting of the link or bursting of glass bulb 
sensor the wire gets loose, this causes actuation of 
the supply unit. The sensors are placed behind 
filters in critical locations. Fusible links are selected 
after measuring operational temperature under the 
hood in places where detectors will be placed. It is 
recommended to choose melting temperature of 
fusible links at least 30 °C higher than the measured 
temperature. This detection system can work with 
fusible links or heat sensitive glass bulbs. If 
detection bulbs are used it is required to clean 
thoroughly the kitchen from pieces of glass after the 
system actuation (see Fig. 1). 


B-1.3 Pressure Fusible Plug Detection System 


This detection system consists of piping under 
constant pressure, with fusible plugs mounted along 
its length. Melting of a plug causes pressure drop 
and actuation of the system. Selection method of the 
detectors is the same as for fusible links. Detectors 
are placed behind filters and in every ventilation 
duct (see Fig. 2). 


Key 

1 Kitchen hood 
2 Wire 

3 Wire casing 
4 Scissors 

5 Fusible link 


FIG. 1 EXAMPLE OF MECHANICAL DETECTION SYSTEM WITH FUSIBLE LINKS 


23 


IS 18271 : 2023 


Key 

1 Kitchen hood 
2 Fittings 

3 Steel tube 

4 Fusible plugs 


FIG. 2 FUSIBLE PLUG DETECTION SYSTEM 


B-1.4 Pneumatic Polyamide Heat Sensing Tube 
Detection System 


This system is based on specially designed 
polyamide pneumatic heat sensing tube, which melts 
at designated temperature causing pressure drop and 
actuation of the system. Pneumatic tube is placed 
behind filters (see Fig. 3). 


B-1.5 Linear Heat Detection Cable — Digital 
Detection System 


This detection is based on a special sensing cable — 
local temperature rise causes melting of insulation 
and closing of electric circuit. The resulting signal 
opens a small solenoid valve which provides 
pressure to the main pneumatic valve (see Fig. 4). 


Key 

1 Kitchen hood 

2 Pressure detection tube 

3 Cable tie 

4 Wire supporting detection tube 
5 Detection tube end (plug) 


FIG. 3 PNEUMATIC TUBE DETECTION SYSTEM 


24 


Key 

1 Interposing line enclosure 

2 Connecting cable 

3 Cable tie and piece of neoprene rubber between tie and table 
4 Detection cable 

5 Wire supporting detection cable 

6 Hood 

7 End of line enclosure 


IS 18271 : 2023 


R 


FIG. 4 DIGITAL DETECTION CABLE 


B-2 ACTUATION UNITS 


The task of the actuation units is to automatically 
(after receiving signal from detection) open the main 
valve. The system can be equipped with an 
actuation sensor, which can give a signal to an 
outside mechanism, such as alarm, gas cut-off valve 
etc. There is always a manual actuation button as 
well. Depending on the chosen detection system 
you may use different actuation unit. The systems 
are: 


a) Mechanical actuation unit with gas 
cartridge — Used with fusible link 
detection. The mechanical actuation unit 
is used in conjunction with the fusible link 
detection system. Signal from the 
detection system is changed into a 
pneumatic signal (from the gas cartridge), 
which then opens the supply unit’s main 
valve; 


25 


b) 


d) 


Pneumatic actuation unit with auxiliary 
cylinder — Used with pressure detection. 
Pneumatic actuation unit with pilot 
cylinder is used for pressure detection — 
fusible plug or pneumatic heat sensing 
tube detections. Pressure drop in the 
system opens the main valve; 


Indirect valve actuation unit — Used with 
single cylinder supply units with pressure 
detection. Pressure drop in the system 
opens the valve; and 


Solenoid valve or valves with electric 
controlling — Works with thermo-electric 
wire. While using linear heat detection 
system, an electrical signal from the 
detection cable opens the auxiliary 
solenoid valve, which causes pressure 
from the manifold to open the main 
pneumatic ball valve. 


IS 18271 : 2023 


ANNEX C 


(Foreword) 


REQUIREMENTS AND TEST PROCEDURES FOR FIXED KITCHEN FIRE EXTINGUISHING 


SYSTEMS 


C-0 This Annex identifies the evaluation and testing 
practices for the purposes of approval and 
certification of products based on evidence 
acceptable to NABL accredited labs. This Annex 
specifies the requirements and test procedures for 
approval of fixed fire extinguishing systems 
designed for the protection of kitchen equipment, 
such as deep fat fryers, other cooking appliances and 
extracts systems. 


C-1 The objective of the approval procedure is to 
evaluate the effectiveness and reliability of a system 
in extinguishing fires in catering equipment, 
initiated in the cooking appliance. The evaluation of 
a system is essentially a verification of the 
parameters specified in the system manual and 
design. 


C-2 FIRE EXTINGUISHMENT TESTS 


C-2.1 Each type of cooking equipment must be 
tested separately for its unique fire hazard 
characteristics. The fire extinguishment tests are 
drawn up according to the general principle that the 
test conditions shall be those which give rise to the 
most onerous extinguishing situations for the system. 
One of the tests investigates the possibility of system 
discharge causing burning fat to splash out of the 
cooking appliance. As regards the choice of test 
cooking appliance, in order to minimise the number 
of fire tests, the deep fat fryer is selected to represent 
the range specified in the system manual. 


C-2.2 Test Catering Equipment 


a) The catering equipment used for the tests 


FAN 


>2m 


EXTRACT 
SYSTEM 


PLENIUM 


DEEP FAT 
FRYER 


Fic. 5 TEST CATERING EQUIPMENT 


26 


b) 


shall comprise a deep fat fryer and extract 
system (see Fig. 5); and 


The dimensions and arrangement of the 
catering equipment shall be based on the 
system manual, according to the following 
criteria: 


1) 


2) 


3) 


4) 


5) 


6) 


7) 


The deep fat fryer pan shall have the 
maximum surface area that may be 
protected by one discharge nozzle; 


The deep fat fryer pan shall be marked 
with a maximum operating level 
which shall ensure an effective depth 
of cooking oil at least 150 mm; 


The width of the extract hood shall be 
the maximum that may be protected by 
one discharge nozzle. The length shall 
be based on the number of discharge 
nozzles that are to be sited in it, so that 
the maximum linear spacing for the 
nozzles is achieved; 


The extract ductwork shall have the 
maximum perimeter or diameter that 
may be protected by one nozzle; 


The length and arrangement of the 
extract system shall be as per Fig. 5; 


The deep fat fryer shall be placed 
directly beneath the entrance to the 
extract duct; and 


The vertical separation between the 
top surface of the deep fat fryer and the 
lowest surface of the extract hood shall 
not be greater than 1 m. 


C-2.3 Test System Designs 
C-2.3.1 Minimum Agent Flow Conditions Test 


The test shall be based on the system manual, 
according to the following criteria: 


a) The system shall use the maximum number 
of discharge nozzles (or their equivalent in 
terms of agent discharge rate) for which it 
is designed; 

b) The deep fat fryer protection nozzle shall 
be sited at the maximum height above the 
surface of the cooking oil; 


c) The hood protection nozzles shall be sited 
at the maximum linear separation; 


d) The discharge nozzles which are not placed 
to protect the deep fat fryer, hood and 
ductwork shall discharge to waste 
simulating protection of other appliances 
under the hood; 


e) The manufacturer shall design the system 
such that the deep fat fryer protection 
nozzle is hydraulically the least favourable 
of the appliance protection nozzles. This 
shall be checked by the distribution test; 


f) The maximum length and minimum 
diameter of agent supply piping shall be 
used; 


g) The maximum number of branches and 
bends in the supply piping or the maximum 
equivalent length shall be used; 


h) For stored pressure/gas cartridge type 
systems the minimum storage pressure of 
expellant and minimum charge of agent 
shall be used; 


j) For pumped systems, the smallest diameter 
water supply pipe and minimum water 
supply pressure shall be used; and 


k) For mechanical detection systems, the 
maximum length of line and maximum 
number of pulleys shall be used. 


C-2.3.2 Maximum Agent Flow Conditions Test 


The test shall be based on the system manual, 
according to the following criteria: 


a) The system shall use the minimum number 
of discharge nozzles (or their equivalent in 
terms of agent discharge rate) that will 
protect the test catering equipment; 


b) The deep fat fryer protection nozzle shall 
be sited at the minimum height above the 
surface of the cooking oil; 


c) The minimum length and maximum 
diameter of agent supply piping shall be 
used; 


27 


IS 18271 : 2023 


d) The minimum number of branches and 
bends in the supply piping or the minimum 
equivalent length shall be used; 


e) For stored pressure/gas cartridge type 
systems the maximum storage pressure of 
expellant and maximum charge of agent 
shall be used; and 


f) For pumped systems, the maximum water 
supply pipe diameter with maximum water 
supply pressure shall be used. 


C-2.4 Instrumentation 


Thermocouples shall be placed in the following 
positions on each test set-up: 


a) In the pan of the deep fat fryer, 50 mm 
below the surface of the cooking oil; 


b) Centrally at the mid-point of the horizontal 
section of ductwork and at its exit; and 


c) At the point where each detector is placed. 


The thermocouples shall be monitored throughout 
the tests. 


C-2.5 Test Procedures 
C-2.5.1 General 


A total of four separate fire extinguishment tests 
shall be carried out. Three tests shall employ the 
system designed to produce minimum agent flow 
conditions, the fourth shall employ the maximum 
agent flow conditions. The first test shall be carried 
out with maximum air-flow conditions through the 
extract system that is, with the extract fan operating 
and the filters removed from the hood. The second 
test is also conducted with the extract fan in 
operation, but with the filters fitted to investigate 
their influence on the development and 
extinguishment of the fire. For the third test, 
minimum air-flow conditions shall be achieved by 
having no forced ventilation and fitting the filters in 
the hood. The fourth test, using the maximum agent 
flow conditions, shall be carried out with no forced 
ventilation in operation and with the hood filters 
removed. This test may yield the most onerous 
conditions from the aspect of system discharge 


causing splashing of the burning fat. The test 
programme is given in Table 2. 
Table 2 Test Programme 

(Clause C-2.5.1) 
SINo. Test Agent Extractor Filters 

Flow Fan 

0) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) 1 Minimum On Removed 
ii) 2 Minimum On Fitted 
iii) 3 Minimum Off Fitted 
iv) 4 Maximum Off Removed 


IS 18271 : 2023 


C-2.5.2 Preparation 


The arrangement shall be prepared for each test as 
follows: 


a) Specified areas of the interior surfaces of 
the hood and ductwork, the discharge 
nozzles and detectors shall be coated with 
an average of 1.5 kg/m? of solid unused 
cooking fat. This may be applied by means 
of spraying the heated fat onto the surface 
of the component to be prepared; and 


b) The filters when fitted shall be evenly 
loaded with an average of 3 kg/m? of solid 
unused cooking fat, applied by means of 
spraying, dipping, or spreading the fat onto 
each filter. 


The detection system shall be set up to operate as 
normal with the exception that it shall be prevented 
from actuating the system. Where more than one 
type of detection system may be used, each type 
shall be installed in at least one of the test systems. 


C-2.5.3 Method 


a) The fryer shall be filled with unused 
cooking oil to its maximum operating 
level; 


b) The cooking oil shall be pure edible 
vegetable oil, with an auto ignition 
temperature range between 330 °C and 
380 °C; 

c) The heat source shall be applied to the 
cooking fat until auto-ignition occurs. The 
fire shall be allowed to develop with the 
heat source continuing to heat the fat; 


d) The operation time of the detection system 
from auto-ignition shall be recorded; 


e) 30 s after the operation of the detection 
system the system shall be manually 
actuated. Upon system actuation, 
observations shall be made of the shut- 
down of the heat source and where it is 
required, shut-down of the extract fan; 


f) For stored pressure/gas cartridge type 
systems the discharge time for the system 
shall be recorded; and 


g) For pumped systems, the discharge time 
shall be in accordance with the time 
specified in the system manual 
requirements. 


C-2.5.4 Requirements 


The following requirements shall be met in each 
test: 


a) The fire shall be effectively extinguished 
within the system discharge time (as 


28 


previously measured for stored pressure 
systems or as specified for pumped 
systems). One minute after the end of the 
agent discharge there shall be no residual 
flames burning in any part of the test 
catering equipment; 

b) At the end of the system discharge, the 
temperatures recorded throughout the 
equipment shall be lower than those taken 
at the time of system actuation and below 
auto-ignition temperature of the cooking 
fat used; 


c) No re-ignition of the fire in the catering 
equipment shall occur after discharge of 
the agent (to be checked for 10 min after 
the end of agent discharge); 


d) No burning oil shall splash out of the 
cooking appliance as a result of agent 
discharge; 

e) Actuation of the system shall cause 
shutdown of the heat source; and 


f) Where it is a requirement of the system, 
manual actuation of the system shall cause 
shutdown of the extract fan. 


C-3 DISTRIBUTION TESTS 


The distribution tests are intended to investigate 
agent distribution balance in extremes of system 
design. 


C-3.1 Single Container Systems 


The test shall be carried out on the two systems 
designed to produce minimum and maximum agent 
flow conditions as described in the fire 
extinguishment tests. Each test may be conducted 
before a corresponding fire extinguishment test. 


C-3.2 Procedure 


A means of measuring and recording the agent 
discharge through each nozzle shall be set up. The 
system shall then be actuated by operation of a 
detector. The volume or weight of agent discharged 
through each nozzle shall be measured and recorded. 
The discharge time for the system shall be recorded. 


C-4 COMPONENT EXAMINATION AND 
TESTS 


Set out below are those testing methods which are 
applicable in assessing the reliability and suitability 
for use of the major components in a system. The 
test programme required for a particular system will 
depend greatly on its design and method of 
operation as described in the system manual. 


C-4.1 Examination 


Components submitted for test shall be examined 


visually on the following points prior to test: 


a) Finished assembly identification markings, 
pressure strength and fill ratio (where 
applicable) shall be recorded; and 


b) Comparison of specimens with 
manufacturer’s drawings for general form, 
completeness, capacities, and designated 
markings. 


C-5 PRESSURE STRENGTH TESTS 


Components shall be tested to and conform to the 
requirements of pressure and test pressure only as 
per relevant Indian Standards. 


C-6 LEAKAGE TESTS 


Components shall be tested to and conform to the 
requirements of IS 15683. 


C-7 CORROSION TESTS 


C-7.1 For stored pressure/gas cartridge type systems 
components shall be tested to and conform to the 
applicable requirements of IS 15683 for the 
applicable requirements are: 
a) After operation, the pressure gauge if one 
is fitted, shall operate by subsequently 
indicating zero pressure; 


b) There shall be no corrosion of the metal of 
the system likely to impair its operation or 
safety; and 


c) There shall be neither visible signs of 
corrosion of the metal, nor detachment, 
cracking or bubbling of any protective 
coating of the body. 


29 


IS 18271 : 2023 


C-7.2 For pumped systems, components shall be 
tested to and conform to the internal corrosion test 
requirements of IS 15683. The system shall be 
subjected to flow tests before and after the internal 
corrosion test. The results of both flow tests shall be 
within + 10 percent. Following the external 
corrosion test, there shall be no corrosion of the 
metal of the system likely to impair its operation or 
safety. 


C-8 THERMAL SHOCK TEST 


Glass bulb detectors shall not be damaged when 
tested. 


C-9 CLOGGING TEST 


For pumped flow systems components shall be 
tested to the requirements of the clogging test as per 
specialist literature. Flow tests shall be conducted 
before and after the clogging test, the flow rates of 
the before and after tests shall be within + 10 percent 
of the first result. 


NOTE — Special literature could be IMO 1165, 'Revised 
Guidelines for the Approval of Equivalent Water-Based 
Fire-Extinguishing Systems for Machinery Spaces and 
Cargo Pump-Rooms' by International Maritime 
Organization, particularly its 4.20. 


C-10 PUMP RUNNING TEST 


For continuous flow systems, the pump shall be 
subjected to a continuous 10 h running test. For this 
test the system shall discharge for the 10 h duration, 
the water supply pressure shall be set to the 
minimum pressure specified in the system manual 
requirements. 


IS 18271 : 2023 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (K-33A, Green Park, New Delhi) 
3M India Limited, Bengaluru 


Advance Firetec and Research Lab Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


Bennett Coleman and Company Limited, New Delhi 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Fire Explosive & Environment Safety 
(CFEES), Delhi 


City and Industrial Development Corporation, Navi 
Mumbai 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Department of Delhi Fire Services, Government of 
NCT of Delhi, Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Fire and Combustion Research Centre, Jain University, 
Bengaluru 


Fire and Emergency Services, Kolkata 


30 


Representative(s) 


SHRI S. K. DHERI (Chairperson) 
SHRI ASHAVAREE SAHOO 


SHRI S. K. NANDI 
SHRIMATI INDU SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHARUDATTA S. MUKHEDKAR 
SHRI R. D. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


SHRI PURUSHOTAM SINGH 
SHRI A. K. TANDLE 


SHRI RAJNATH SINGH 
SHRI A. K. VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
SHRI M. V. CHALPATI RAO (Alternate) 


DR K. C. WADHWA 


SHRI ARVIND MANDKE 


DR SUVIR SINGH 
SHRI A. A. ANSARI (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI PAPIYA SARKAR 
Ms RASHMI BHARDWAJ (Alternate) 


SHRI ATUL GARG 
SHRI VIRENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI S. RADHA 
LT COL M. S. HAKKAPAKKI (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. NASKAR 
SHRI DINESH DEBBARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI C. S. BHASKAR DIXIT 


SHRI ABHIJIT PANDEY 
SHRI G. K. BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


Organization 


Fire and Security Association of India, Gurugram 


Fire Safe India Foundation, Mumbai 


FM Engineering International Limited, Bengaluru 


Fyrprotek (Fire Engineers & Consultants), New Delhi 
Goa Fire Services, Goa 


Hilti India Private Limited, Gurugram 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Institution of Fire Engineers (India), New Delhi 


Johnson Controls (I) Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Maharashtra Fire Services, Mumbai 


Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 


Mumbai Fire Brigade, Mumbai 


National Association of Fire Officers 
Mumbai 


(NAFO), 


NTPC Ltd, Noida 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate, Noida 


Pacific Fire Controls, New Delhi 


Proion Consultants, New Delhi 


Reliance Refineries Limited, Jamnagar 


31 


IS 18271 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RAJNISH AGARWAL 
SHRI SURESH MENON (Alternate) 


SHRI MILIND KUMAR DESHMUKH 


SHRI SRIKANTH Y AJJALA 
SHRI MANIKANDAN KRISHNAMOORTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI GULSHAN KHURANA 


DIRECTOR 


SHRI ARAVIND CHAKRAVARTHY V. 
SHRI NIKOONJ PANCHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ K. MITTAL 
SHRI SITARAM AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


PROF VISHAL KUMAR 
PROF UMESH KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI U. S. CHILLAR 
SHRI M. S. PATYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH MUZUMDAR 
SHRI ASHISH D. SAWANT (Alternate I) 
SHRI VIJAY VENKATESH (Alternate II) 


SHRI SANTOSH S. WARICK 
SHRI KIRAN HATYAL (Alternate) 


FIRE ADVISOR 
SHRI MORESHWAR KUDKILWAR (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
DEPUTY CHIFF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR JHA 
SHRI DOONDESHWAR V. (Alternate) 


SHRI HARENDRA KUMAR YADAV 


SHRI RAKESH KUMAR ARORA 
SHRI DAKSH ARORA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP GOEL 


SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR 
SHRI MUKESH CHANDRA KUMAR (Alternate) 


IS 18271 : 2023 


Organization 


State Disaster Response and Fire Services Department, 
Government of Telangana, Hyderabad 


Tamil Nadu Fire and Rescue Services Department, 
Chennai 


The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 


UL India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Uttar Pradesh Fire Services, Government of Uttar 
Pradesh, Lucknow 


Vighnaharta Technologies Private Limited, Pune 


In Personal Capacity (27A, Tapovan Senior Citizens 
Foundation, Coimbatore) 


In Personal Capacity (D-317, 2nd Floor, Nirman 
Vihar, New Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI C. LAKSHMI PRASAD 
SHRI G. V. NARAYANA RAO (Alternate) 


SHRI M. SHAHUL HAMEED 
SHRIMATI MEENAKSHI VIJAYAKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY GARG 


SHRIMATI MONALISA DAS 
SHRI V. MANJUNATH (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN SHARMA 


SHRI NITIN JOSHI 


SHRI T. R. A. KRISHNAN 


SHRI R. C. SHARMA 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI RAJESH CHOUDHARY 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


32 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 36 (15755). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


