ARATA HTAR IS 18183 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


writ À arda ht aa ae eq As! 
AT Us er yrfa goe — 
farfsre 


Point of Use Water Purification 
System for Arsenic Reduction — 
Specification 


ICS 130.060.01 


© BIS 2023 


STRE Ash aT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAF, 9 gert SITE HHL AMT, Ay ect - 110002 
‘en’ MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2023 Price Group 6 


Water Purification Systems Sectional Committee, FAD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Water 
Purification Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


Arsenic is a naturally occurring trace element found in rocks, soils and the water in contact with them. Arsenic 
have shown to cause widespread health effects in humans as a consequence of exposure through drinking-water 
when present in excessive quantities. Arsenic in soil is mainly derived from its parent rock material, weathering 
of rocks converting arsenic rich metal sulphides to arsenic trioxides which eventually find its way to into ground 
water. Long-term intake of arsenic contaminated water leads to arsenic poisoning or arsenicosis, skin damage 
including keratosis and skin cancer, internal cancers such as that of the lung and bladder, and diseases of the 
vascular system. 


A significant population of the country faces a major health risk due to arsenic contaminated drinking water as 
many states are reported to be affected by arsenic contamination of groundwater above the permissible level. 


Taking cognizance of this situation, the need was felt for formulation of Indian standard for Point of Use (POU) 
water purifier that reduces Arsenic in water to safe level for potable application. The standard establishes 
minimum requirements for design and construction, performance, and testing of materials that come in contact 
with treated water. 


The composition of the committee responsible for formulation of the standard is listed in Annex B . 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision).’ The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded-off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 18183 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


POINT OF USE WATER PURIFICATION SYSTEM FOR 
ARSENIC REDUCTION — SPECIFICATION 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This Standard prescribes requirements, method 
of sampling and test of media/resin based PoU water 
purifier that reduces Arsenic in water to safe level 
for potable application. 


1.2 This standard does not cover membrane based 
PoU water treatment systems for removal of Arsenic 
in drinking water. A separate Indian Standard 
IS 16240 for RO based PoU water treatment system 
for drinking purposes specifies requirement for 
reduction of arsenic contamination along with other 
contaminants. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions, 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 

IS 302 (Part 1): Safety of household and similar 

2008 electrical appliances: Part 1 
General requirement (sixth 
revision) 

IS 3025 Method of sampling and test 


(Part 37) : 2022 (physical and chemical) for 
water and waste water: Part 37 
Arsenic (second revision) 


IS 9845: 1998 Determination of overall 
migration of constituents of 
plastics material and articles 
intended to come in contact with 
foodstuffs — Method of 
analysis (second revision) 


IS 10500 : 2012 Drinking Water — Specification 
(second revision) 


IS 16240: 2015 Reverse osmosis (RO) based 
point-of-use (PoU) water 
treatment system for drinking 
purposes — Specification 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply: 


3.1 Arsenic — It is a chemical element with symbol 
‘As’ and atomic number 33. Arsenic is notoriously 
poisonous to multicellular life in its inorganic form. 


3.2 Media — Active material used for the removal 
of Arsenic. 


3.3 Resin — The solid resin is typically an elastic 
three-dimensional hydrocarbon network containing 
a large number of ionizable groups electrostatically 
bound to the resin. These groups are exchanged for 
ions of similar charge in solution that have a stronger 
exchange affinity (that is., selectivity) for the resin. 
Arsenic removal may be accomplished by 
continuously passing water under pressure through 
one or more columns packed with strong-base anion 
(SBA) exchange resin. 


3.4 Drinking Water —Water that is intended for 
human consumption for drinking and cooking 
purpose from any source in compliance with the 
acceptable levels specified in the IS 10500 
‘Drinking water — Specification’. 


3.5 Daily Production Rate — The volume of 
product water produced by a system per day. 


3.6 Point-of-use Arsenic Removal System — A 
plumbed-in or faucet-mounted system used to treat 
the feed water containing arsenic from a single tap 
for direct consumption or use, but not used to treat 
the water majority of the facility or for distribution 


3.7 Lifetime Purification Capacity — Total 
volume of drinking water, produced by the purifier, 
that is within safe limits specified for arsenic. 


3.8 Flow Control — A device for controlling the 
flow rate of a specified stream, specified as litres per 
minute (lpm) or litres per hour (Iph). 


3.9 Product Water — Water that has been treated 
by a system. 


3.10 Influent Challenge Level — The standard test 
water containing specified contaminants entering a 
system for evaluation. Competing ions that impair 
arsenic reduction ability of purification system 
should be specified. 


3.11 Chemical Reduction — A reduction in the 
quantity of arsenic in drinking water. 


IS 18183 : 2023 


3.12 Contaminant — An undesirable physical, 
chemical or microbiological substance or parameter 
in water that may have an adverse health effect, 
aesthetic effect or both. 


3.13 Treatment Technique (TT) — A process 
intended to reduce the level of or remove a 
contaminant in drinking water. 


4 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 Inlet Port 


The inlet port shall be so designed that it can be 
connected to the tap, or it can be such that water can 
easily be poured/fed into the system via this inlet 
port. 


4.2 Method of Mounting 


The units for domestic use shall facilitate wall- 
mounting or counter top, under the sink installation 
etc. 


4.3 Main Components and Installation 


4.3.1 Arsenic water purifier shall have the following 
components if it is a stand-alone unit: 


a) Sediment Filter/Clarity Filter: An effective 
filtration system required to remove the 
suspended solids like fine particles from 
water and to remove the turbidity before 
Arsenic treatment; and 


b) Filter or media for the removal of Arsenic 
from water. 


4.3.2 Arsenic water purifier may have regeneration 
option and/or back wash option (flushing 
mechanism) if provided by the manufacturer. 
Arsenic water purifier may have power supply 
depending on the technology. Power Supply may 
not be required in case of Arsenic water purifier 
which are based on media based purification only. 


4.4 Material for Construction 


4.4.1 Materials in contact with water shall comply 
with the overall migration limits of 60 mg/l, max for 
various plastic materials when tested by the method 
prescribed in IS 9845. 


4.4.2 Those surfaces of the components of the 
purifier, which are expected to get wetted by the 
flow of water through the purifier, shall be made of 
corrosion-resistant materials or shall have 
corrosion-resistant treatment or coating of food 
grade quality. The coatings when applied shall not 
be soluble in water and shall not peel off at the 
maximum flow-velocity expected at the surface. 


4.4.3 The materials used for construction of the filter 
chamber shall be pressure resistant to the extent of 
maximum pressure exerted by the booster pressure. 
All the material shall be non-leaching type up to the 
time duration, which is declared by the 
manufacturer. 


4.4.4 All materials which are expected to get wetted 
by the flow of water through the purifier shall be of 
food grade material. 


4.4.5 Process Media 


The manufacturer shall declare the generic 
technology of arsenic removal and chemicals used 
in the same including  regeneration/back 
washing/sludge disposal requirement in the user 
guide of the consumer without compromising their 
right to patent. Used or spent media/filter shall be 
taken back by the manufacturer for disposal in an 
environmentally safe manner, according to 
guidelines specified in the Hazardous and Other 
Wastes (Management | and | Transboundary 
Movement) Rules, 2016. 


5 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 
5.1 General 


A PoU Arsenic water purifier system shall be so 
designed and constructed that its intended purpose is 
accomplished when installed and operated in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 


52 Flow Control 


If the performance of a system or component is 
dependent on a specified flow rate, a pre-set flow 
control shall be provided as an integral part of the 
system to regulate the flow. 


5.3 Arsenic Reduction 


5.3.1 The system shall reduce the Arsenic 
concentration in the influent challenge to less than 
or equal to 0.01mg/l which is as per the maximum 
acceptable limit specified in IS 10500, when tested 
as per IS 3025 (Part 37). For testing, the influent 
challenge water shall have minimum 0.30 mg/l of 
Arsenic. 


5.3.2 There are two forms of arsenic: pentavalent 
arsenic (also called As (V), As (+5), and arsenate) 
and trivalent arsenic (also called As, As (+3), 
and arsenite). Arsenic reduction is often species 
dependent. Trivalent arsenic is generally more 
difficult to reduce from drinking water than 
pentavalent arsenic. Trivalent arsenic, however, can 
be converted to pentavalent arsenic in the presence 
of an effective oxidant such as free chlorine. 


5.3.3 The maximum operating Arsenic level in feed 
water, or the arsenic removal limit, shall be declared 
by the manufacturer. Reduction claims may be made 
for: 
a) Pentavalent arsenic only; and 
b) Total arsenic reduction (trivalent and 
pentavalent both). 


To qualify for total arsenic reduction claim, a water 
treatment system shall pass the test for pentavalent 
arsenic (Arsenate) reduction in accordance with 
5.3.3.1, and also pass a separate test for trivalent 
arsenic (Arsenite) reduction in accordance 5.3.3.2. 


5.3.3.1 Influent challenge water for testing of 
pentavalent arsenic (arsenate) reduction 


To achieve challenge level of 0.30 mg/l of arsenate 
in solution, the test water may be generated by 
adding sodium salt of Arsenic (Na2HAsO4.7H20) to 
demineralized water to achieve a concentration of 
1.28 mg/l of sodium arsenate. This will yield 
pentavalent arsenic solution (also known as 
arsenate, As(V), As (+5)). Apart from Arsenic (V), 
the challenge water shall contain the ions in 


IS 18183 : 2023 


specified concentrations as given in Table 1. 
Alternatively test water may be prepared at 
challenge level specified by manufacturer. The 
pentavalent arsenic reduction test shall be performed 
at pH 6.5 and 8.5. Analysis shall be done on product 
water, only after adequate flushing of the system is 
carried out as specified by manufacturer. 


5.3.2.2. Influent challenge water for testing of total 
Arsenic reduction (Arsenate + Arsenite) 


Dissolve sodium arsenite (NaAsOz) in deionized 
water to achieve the desired challenge 
concentration. For the challenge concentration of 
0.30 mg/l, a concentration of 0.52 mg/l sodium 
arsenite shall be required. Apart from Arsenic (III), 
the challenge water shall contain the ions in 
specified concentrations as given in Table 2. 
Alternatively test water may be prepared at 
challenge level specified by manufacturer. The 
trivalent arsenic reduction test shall be performed at 
pH 6.5 and 8.5. Analysis shall be done on product 
water, only after adequate flushing of the system is 
carried out as specified by manufacturer. 


Table 1 Composition of Challenge Water for Testing of Arsenate [As(V)] Reduction Efficacy 
(Clause 5.3.3.1) 


SI No. Parameter Concentration 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Mg? 12 mg/l 

ii) NO* as N 2 mg/l 
lii) F 1 mg/l 
iv) SiO; 20 mg/l 
v) PO4* as P 0.04 mg/l 
vi) Ca?* 40 mg/l 

vii) As(V) 0.3 mg/l 

viii) Residual Free 0.25 mg/l — 0.75 mg/l 

Chlorine 

ix) pH 6.5 € 0.25 and 8.5 € 0.25 
X) Turbidity < 1 NTU 


Table 2 Composition of Challenge Water for Testing of Arsenite [As(III)] Reduction Efficacy 
(Clause 5.3.3.2) 


SI No. Parameter Concentration 
(1) (2) (3) 

i) Mg? 12 mg/l 

ii) NO* as N 2 mg/l 

iii) F 1 mg/l 

iv) SiO» 20 mg/l 


IS 18183 : 2023 


Table 2 (Concluded) 


SI No. Parameter Concentration 

(1) (2) (3) 
v) PO4* as P 0.04 mg/l 
vi) Ca?* 40 mg/l 

vii) As(III) 0.3 mg/l 

viii) pH 6.5 + 0.25 and 8.5 + 0.25 
ix) Dissolved oxygen «0.5 mg/l 
X) Turbidity < 1 NTU 


5.4 Daily Production and Life of the Filter Media 


5.4.1 Daily production capacity for the purified 
water should not be less than 40 litres and 
manufacturer should declare the minimum flowrate. 


5.4.2 The manufacturer shall declare the life of the 
cartridge used for Arsenic removal in terms of litres 
of water purified, calculated at the level of 
maximum contaminant level claimed by the 
manufacturer. There should be mechanism to ensure 
the flow of water does not exceed maximum flow 
supported for purification. There can be an 
additional provision for automatic cut-off when the 
flow is exceeded. If manufacturer suggests the 
regeneration of the media, a detailed procedure and 
the required attachments are to be provided by the 
manufacturer. 


5.5 Electrical Safety 


5.5.1 If the system works on electricity, the entire 
electrical circuit shall be insulated from the purifier 
such that the system shall not have excessive 
leakage current when tested in accordance with 13 
of IS 302 (Part 1). 


5.5.2 The system shall be able to withstand high 
voltage test when tested in accordance with 13 of IS 
302 (Part 1). 


5.5.3 The system shall have provision for earthing in 
accordance with 27.5 of IS 302 (Part 1). AII parts of 
metallic construction shall be permanently and 
reliably connected to an earthing termination within 
the purifier and shall be free of rough or sharp edges 
or other hazards that may cause injury to persons 
adjusting, servicing, or using the system. 


NOTE — Class II appliances and Class III appliances shall 
have no provision of earthing. 


5.6 Power Supply 


The system shall work on electrical supply up to and 
including 250 V, 50 Hz for Single Phase and up to 
and including 440 V, 50 Hz for Three Phase. 


5.7 Hydrostatic Pressure Test 


5.7.1 Systems designed for working at atmospheric 
pressure shall be exempted from hydrostatic 
pressure test, but should be water tight under normal 
use. 


5.7.2 Pressurized water treatment systems shall be 
tested by hydrostatic test at pressure of 294.24 kPa, 
or recommended working pressure, whichever is 
higher. 


5.7.3 Leakage of the unit to be tested by closing the 
outlet of the purifier. There shall not be any leakage 
from any of the joints, bowls, connectors etc when 
the pressurized unit is held for 15 min. Initially, 
hydrostatic pressure to be raised slowly so that the 
required pressure is reached within 5 min. 


5.7.4 The pressurization to be done on the entire unit 
from the Inlet port till the outlet port at 196.16 kPa 
pressure. 


5.7.5 Manufacturer should specify pressure head 
required for pushing water through the system, for 
units not running on electrical power. 


6 MAINTENANCE OF THE PRODUCT 


6.1 Most of the Arsenic removal systems contain a 
replaceable treatment component critical for 
effective reduction of Arsenic. The product water 
shall be tested periodically by maintenance service 
provider to verify that the system is performing 
satisfactorily. Alternatively, there can be mechanism 
to indicate the consumer about the performance of 
filter or media periodically and when the filter life is 
exhausted an indicator or such mechanism which 
can communicate to consumer about filter or media 
replacement or regeneration can be given. 


6.2 For all filtration components such as sediment 
filter (1f present), activated carbon filter (if present) 
and arsenic removal cartridge, manufacturer shall 
declare the maximum possible life in terms of liters 
of water, which can be processed through each filter. 


Factors affecting the performance of the filters shall 
be mentioned. All this information shall be provided 
in the user manual. 


6.3 Leaving the media/resin dry could impair its 
arsenic reduction capability. The design should 
provide for the water lock system to retain water for 
up to about a month in case filter is unused for some 
time. 


6.4 The manufacturer shall give explicit instructions 
in the user manual about the cleaning or back 
flushing of the unit. 


7 CAUTION 


The manufacturer shall explicitly state the following 
caution on the label of the Arsenic removal system 


“Arsenic removal system is not recommended for 
water containing arsenic above 0.30 mg/l 
concentration." 


8 MARKING 


8.1 A name plate shall be fixed on the body of the 
purifier, at a conspicuous location. The name plate 
shall be marked with the following details: 


a) Brand name; 

b) Production serial number; 
c) Model name or code; 

d) Maximum flow-rate in l/h; 
e) Life of the cartridges; 


IS 18183 : 2023 


f) Arsenic reduction percent; and 

g) Supply voltage whether single or three- 
phase, frequency, volts and wattage (if 
electrically operated). 


8.2 BIS CERTIFICATION MARKING 


The product may also be marked with the BIS 
Standard Mark. The use of the Standard Mark 1s 
governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and Regulations 
framed thereunder. The details of conditions under 
which the license for the use of the Standard Mark 
may be granted to manufacturers or producers may 
be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 


9 PACKING 


The packing of purifiers shall be as agreed to 
between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 


10 INSTRUCTION MANUAL 


An instruction manual for the proper method of 
operation and use of the purifier shall be supplied 
along with the purifier. It shall also include the life 
and specification of all the filters/consumables. 


11 SAMPLING 


Representative samples of the arsenic removal 
systems shall be drawn and the criteria of 
conformity to this standard shall be established 
according to the method described in Annex A. 


IS 18183 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 11) 


SAMPLING PLAN FOR POU ARSENIC REMOVER 


A-1 Samples of Product water shall be collected 
after emptying the storage tank (if available). Allow 
at least 1 litre of product water to flow and collect 
sample. While collecting challenge test water, care 
must be taken that the sampling point is just before 
the entry into the product When the Arsenic 
remover is new, follow manufacturer's instruction 
for flushing before initiating any tests. Use 
challenge water for this purpose. 


A-2 Arsenic Removal Efficiency Testing 


Conduct Arsenic reduction tests on 3 different 
products independently. Challenge water shall be 
made in accordance to claims of Arsenate or Total 
Arsenic reduction as per levels given in Tables 1 and 
2 respectively. Make sure Arsenic solution do not 
precipitate while preparing challenge water. 
Challenge water is to be prepared in chlorine-free 
deionized water. Testing Laboratories shall 
standardize the sequence of addition of Arsenic salts 
into Challenge water to avoid precipitation. 


Three units shall be conditioned in accordance with 


the manufacturer's instruction using test waters 
specified in the above table. The Units shall be tested 
using the appropriate influent challenge water at the 
maximum input water pressure prescribed by the 
manufacturer. 


A- 3 Sampling Frequency 


The samples are to be collected at O percent, 
25 percent, 50 percent, 75 percent, 100 percent and 
120 percent of the life claimed by the manufacturer. 
Both challenge water and the post water is to be 
collected at the same time and is to be analyzed. 
Initial sampling is to be done after conditioning of 
the unit as specified by the manufacturer. 


A-4 Summary of Method 


To check the Arsenic reduction claim, the system 
shall reduce the level of the Arsenic concentration 
from the influent challenge level to less than or equal 
to the maximum acceptable limit of 0.010 mg/l in all 
product water samples. 


IS 18183 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Water Purification Systems Sectional Committee, FAD 30 


Organization 


CSIR - National Environmental Engineering Research 
Institute, Nagpur 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Bhavan's Research Center (Microbiology), Mumbai 


CSIR - Central Food Technological Research Institute, 
Mysore 


CSIR - Institute of Minerals and Materials 
Technology, Bhubaneswar 


CSIR - Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research 
Institute, Bhavnagar 


CSIR - National Environmental Engineering Research 
Institute, Nagpur 


Christian Medical College, Vellore 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Consumer Education and Research 


Ahmedabad 


Centre, 


Consumer Electronics and Appliances Manufacturers 
Association, Noida 


Department of Science and Technology, New Mehrauli 
Road, New Delhi 


Development Alternatives, New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Plumbing Association, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


DR P.K. LABHASETWAR (Chairperson) 


DR S. T. PANICKER 
SHRI T. K. DEY (Alternate) 


DR SANDHYA SHRIVASTAVA 
DR NISHITH DESAI (Alternate) 


DR UMESH HEBBAR 
SHRI KESHAVA MURTHY. P. (Alternate) 


DR JAYANT KUMAR POTHAL 
SHRI DEBABRATA SINGH (Alternate) 


DR V. K. SHAHI 


DR NOOR AFSHAN KHAN 
SHRI PRANAV NAGARNAIK (Alternate) 


PROF VENKATA RAGHAVA MOHAN 
DR DILIP ABRAHAM (Alternate) 


SHRI J. S. K. SRINIVASAN 
Ms MAMTA ARORA BUDHIRAJA (Alternate) 


MS ANINDITA MEHTA 
MS KARUNA CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SRINIVASAN MOTURI 
SHRI ADITYA ANIL (Alternate) 


DR RAJIV K. TAYAL 
DR NEELIMA ALAM (Alternate) 


DR K. VIJAYA LAKSHMI 
MS NEHA AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


MS KIRTIKA ARORA 


PROF SHAIKH ZIAUDDIN AGAMMAD 


PROF T. PRADEEP 
DR LiGY PHILIP (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKESH ASIJA 


IS 18183 : 2023 
Organization 


Indian Water Works Association, Mumbai 


Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Jal Shakti, New Delhi 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 


National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases, 
Kolkata 


National Institute of Virology, Pune 


Safe Water Network, New Delhi 


Water Quality India Association, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity (Villa#69, Skanda Avani Layout, 
Hadosiddapura, off Sarjapur Road -560035) 


In Personal Capacity (534, 29th Main, 11th cross, HSR 
layout Ist sector, 560102) 


In Personal Capacity (ICMR NIRTH Complex - 
482003) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


DR M. S. SATYANARAYANA 
SHRI ANIL KUMAR GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR SONU SINGH 
SHRI P. K. MISHRA (Alternate) 


DR D. RAJASHEKHAR 


DR ULHAS KHARUL 


DR SHANTA DUTTA 
SHRI ASISH K. MUKHOPADHY AY (Alternate) 


DR KAVITA LOLE 
DR SHAILESH PAWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVINDRA SEWAK 


SHRIMATI POONAM SEWAK (Alternate I) 
DR SHVETA MAHAJAN (Alternate ID) 


DR NEERAJ GUPTA 


DRT. N. V. V. RAO 


DR S. MURALIDHARA RAO 


DR TAPAS CHAKMA 


SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRIMATI NITASHA DOGER 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(FOOD AND AGRICULTURE), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:FAD 30 (16541). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central | : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


