IS 6466 ( Part 1 ) : 1880

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MODULAR CO-ORDINATION IN BUILDING 1NDUSTRY:TOLERANCES
PART 1 GLOSSARY OF TERMS

( First Revision )

UDC

621'753'1 : 721'013 [ 389'63 ]

BUREAU
MANAK

CjF

INDIA/%

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

December

1990

Price Group 3

Planning Bye-Laws and Dimensional Co-ordination

Sectional Committee, CED 10

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 25 April 1990 after the draft finalized by the Planning Bye-Laws and Dimensional Co-ordination Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. One of the aims of modular co-ordination is to provide compatibility and inter-changeability of components. In earlier days a practical system of tolerance was derived as clearance fit, prescribing minus tolerance on each component without any allowance to the space in which it is to be placed. The extensive use of prefabricated elements and components in building construction have provoked the concept of tolerances in recent years. The concept of tolerance is indeed a tool td be used for dimensional control of the component which can fit without any problem for size, squareness, bow, plumbness, posit on and appearance. In order to ensure clarity and unambiguous expression in tolerance principles, it is necessary to adopt the internationally agreed glossary of terms. This standard, therefore, has been prepared giving the definitions of these terms which are specially used in relation to principles and applications of tolerances. This standard was originally published as IS 6408 : 1971 `Recommendations for modular co-ordination: Application of tolerances in building industry', In the usage of this standard, a need was felt to cover the terminology in a comprehensive manner in addition to effecting the other technical changes deemed necessary on the basis of the experience gained over the years. As a result the standard is being bifurcated into two parts as follows: Part I Glossary of terms, and Part 2 Principles and applications. This, the first part provides a glossary of terms applicable to principles and applications of tolerances for modular co-ordination in building industry. The definitions of general terms relating to modular co-ordination are covered in IS 4993 : 1983 `Glossary of terms relating to modular co-ordination ( second revision )`. tn the preparation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the pratices in the field in this country. This has been met by deriving assistance from the following documents: a) Industrialised building ind modular design. Henrik Nissen. Cement and Concrete Association, London 1972 b) The principles of modular co-ordination in building ( revised ) CIB W24. The International Modular Group 1982. c). Modular co-ordination of low cost housing. United Nations Publication. 1972. d) Dimensional co-ordination for building. DC 12. HMSO Publication 1972. e) PC1 Committee report on tolerances for precast and prestressed concrete. PC1 Journal. Vol 30, No. 1, Jan/Feb 1985 f) DS/R 1050-1982 Application of dimensional tolerances in building. Dansk Standardiseringsraad. g) IS0 4464-1980 Tolerances for building - Relationship between the different types of deviations and tolerances used for specification. International Organization for Standardization.

IS 6408 ( Part 1 ) : 1990

Indian Standard

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MODULAR CO-ORDIN,ATION IN Bt_JILDING INDUSTRY : TOLERANCES
PART

1

GLOSSARY

OF TERMS

( 1 SCOPE

First Revision )
2.7 Deviation of Form The difference between actual form and the corresponding basic form.
2.8 Feature Tolerance

1.1 This standard ( Part 1 ) defines the terms used in the principles and applications of tolerances used in the study, planning, design and construction of buildings carried out in accordance with the principles of modular co-ordination. 2 TERMINOLOGY ( See Also FIG. 1)

The location or dimensional tolerance of feature, such as a corbel or a blockout with respect to the overall member dimensions. 2.9 Grid Reference Lines These represent the co-ordinating modular components. 2.10 Joint Space between the adjacent component, irrespective use of jointing material, for filling up space. 2.11 Joint Reference Plane The position of the joint represented co-ordinating reference plane. ' 2.12 Jointing Component Size planes between

2.1 Actual Dimensions The measured dimensions of the elements or components after casting or fabrication. This dimension may differ from the working dimensions due to construction and material induced variation. This is also known as actual measurement. 2.2 Alignment Face The face of precast element which is to be set in alignment with the face of adjacent elements or features. 2.3 Average Joint Width The difference between the work size and modular size. 2.4 Basic Dimension The dimension shown on the contract drawing or called for the specifications. The basic dimension shall apply to size, location and relative location. This shall also be called the normal or `nominal' dimension. 2.5 Basic Line An imaginary line with reference to which the actual location of component at site is determined. 2.6 Component Reference Plane The alignment of component reference point, line or plane with the joint reference plane. 1

The dimension which ensures shape, size and position of the linkage components such that all joint widths from maximum to minimum are acceptable when the jointing components are in position. 2.13 Joint Width The maximum and minimum limits of joint dimension in width. 2.14 Linear Deviation The difference between an actual line measurement and the corresponding basic size. 2.15 Maximum Joint Widtb The largest size specified to take account of the minimum component size.

IS 6408 ( Part 1 ) : 1990

COMPONENT

K I`
1

MODULAR

SPACE

`I

Y
I

MODULAR

DIMENSION I

-+!I+
9

MINIMUM

GAP f

I

MAXIMUM

SIZE

I I I I ,

POSITION AL. TOLERANCE

I

MAXIMUM

SIZE

MINtMUM DEDUCTIOhk+ MAX IMUM SIZE

ACTUAL
I

DIMENSION

'

I
IA Terms Relating to Size and Dimension

I
Contd

IN MODULAR CO-ORDINATIONFIG. 1 TERMSRELATING TO TOLERANCES

2

IS 6408 ( Part 1 ) : 1990

JOINT REFERENCE
maximum

PLANE

WIDTH
minimum

COMPONENT REFERENCE

PLANE

POSITION OF CO ORDINATING
maximum minimum

FACE

POSITION

OF GROOVE

SIZE OF JOINTING COMP3NENT
maximum minimum

1B

Terms Relating to Joint

IN MODULAR CO-ORDINATIONFIG. 1 TERMSRELATINGTO TOLERANCES

Contd

IS 6408 ( Part 1 ) : 1990

Ii-1

GRID REFERENCE LINES MODULAR SPACE

i;,1

M:p:;AR.
MAXIMUM SIZE

I

MINI MUM JOINT WIDTH (y )

%Lff~%S;%ITION I TOLEhllNCES'lI DEFORMATION MINIMUM SIZE

1

MAXIMUM WIDTH

JOINT

WORK SIZE (MANUFACTURED AVERAGE WIDTH JOINT

SIZE 1

1C

Terms Relating

to Telerances

with

Respect to Sizes and Dimensions

FIG. 1 TERMSRELATING TO TOLERANCES IN MODULAR CO-ORDINATION

4

2.16 Minimum Joint Width

2.27 Sum Tokrance ( Total Tolerance `) Tolerance applicable to the sum ( total ) dimension of elements .or components. 2.28 Tolerance The definition shall include the following: a) The permitted variation from a basic dimension or quantity as in the length or width of a member. b) The range of variation permitted in maintaining a basic dimension as in an alignment tolerance. c) A permitted variation from location or alignment. d) The difference between the permissible limits of size or between the permissible limits of position. 2.29 Tolerance `T' Tolerance for deformation, thermal movement, etc. and these are combined algebraically. 2.30 Tolerance `P' Tolerance allocated for size, shape-and position and these are combined statistically. 2.31 Manufacturing Tolerance An allowance for the lack of accuracy ,permittod for the production of a component. 2.32 Variation The difference between the actual and the basic dimension. Variation may be either negative ( lesser ) or positive ( greater ). 2.33 Working Dimension The planned dimension of the member obtained from both its basic dimension and joint or clearance dimensions. It is to this planned dimension that the product tolerance is applied.
Example

The minimum size specified to take account of the maximum size of component. 2.17 Minimum Gap The minimum distance between the co-ordinating face of a component and a modular plane, it is equal to half the minimum joint thickness. 2.18 Modular Size The basic size of the component which is the same size as the modular space.
2.19 Modular Space

The basic space allocated to a component and sized in accordance with the rules of modular coordination. 2.20 Part Tolerance Tolerance applicable element or component. to part dimension of an

2.21 Position of Co-ordinatiug Face

The space for the co-ordinating face of a component to Ii6 between the maximum and minimum gap. 2.22 Position of Groove The position of the groove in the co-ordinating face of a component. 2.23 Positional Variation The distance between the basic line, point orplane and a reference line, point or plane on the component. 2.24 Primary Control Surface
A surface on a precast element, the dimensional location of which is specifically set and controlled in the erection process. Clearance is generally allowed to vary so that the primary control surface can be set within tolerance.

2.25 Secondary Control Surface A surface on a precast element, location of which is dependent tolerance of the member primary in addition to the member feature the dimensional on the location `control surfaces tolerances.

Example The elevation of a second storey corbel on a

If a nominal 2 400 mm wide component is designed to have nominal 20 mm joint width on either side, the working dimension for component would be 2 380 mm. 2.34 Work Size The definition shall include:

multistoreyed column whose first storey corbel is selected as the primary elevational control surface. 2.26 Shape of Groove The shape and size of groove in the co-ordinating face of a component. 5

a) A size which is specified for the manufac-

tured component. This shall also be called a manufacturing size.

IS 6408(Part 1 ):l%JO
b) The size given with its permissible deviations, specified for manufacturing a component the actual size of which would be within these deviations under reference condition. 2.35 construction Tolerance The width of the space on the site, related to reference points or lines, within the limits of which a point, a line or a surface of a component shall be situated.
NOTE - Manufacturing tolerance, setting-out tolerance and erection tolerance together shall comprise the construction tolerance. Construction tolerances are determined by the requirements of the construction for satisfactory performance.

for reference "points or lines, within the limits of which a point, a line or a surface of a component shall be situated.
position -For each component there shall be a reference position determined by reference points or lines set-out on the site and by the actual form of the component. This position also gives the reference position for each point, line or surface of the component. From these positions, the erection tolerance determines the width of the space within the limits of which a given point, line or surface of the component shall be situated. The positional and oriention tolerances for erection together shall compose the erection tolerance
NOTE

2.39 Dimensional Tolerances The tolerance width governing the size of a dimension in a given direction of the component concerned; that is length, width, thickness, height, depth or diameter. 2.40 Orientation facture ) Tolerance ( Angularity Manu-

2.36 Manufacturing Tolerance The width of the space related to the reference form, within the limits of which a point, a line or a surface of a component shall be situated after manufacture.
NOTE-Dimensional tolerance, orientation tolerance and form tolerance together shall comprise the manufacturing tolerance. The latter is not related to any reference object on the site.

The tolerance width governing the relative orientation of straight lines or planes of a component. 2.41 Form Tolerance The tolerance width governing the form of a line or a surface C such as of a component ) relative to a reference form. 2.42 Positional Tolerance The tolerance width governing the position of a point, a line, a plane or a surface relative to a reference position. 2.43 Orientation Tolerance ( Erection Settingaut ) The tolerance width after setting-out or erection, governing the orientation of a straight line or plane surface relative to a reference orientation.

2.3% Setting Out Tolerance The width of the space on the site within the limits of which a setting-out point or line shall be situated.
NOTE -The positional for setting out together out tolerance. and orientation tolerance shall compose the setting-

2.38 Erection Tolerance The width of the space on the site, related to the actual form of a component and the actual

Standard Mark The USCof the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licencc for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country, Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the
course of implementing designations. Enquiries the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS.

Revision of Indian Standards
Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. CED
10 ( 4296 1

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters

:

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ..* * `. Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Babadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : 1114 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Telegrams ; Manaksanstha ( Common to all Ofices ) Tzephooc 331 01 31 I 331 13 75 37 86 62 2 1843 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE,. $&AL .&HWBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAlPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM
k&d

at

Printwell

Printers.

Delhi.

India

