amid hr HIAF IS 17848 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


areka йаг бат 
cifre Rng — Af дат 


Confined Masonry for Earthquake 
Resistance — Code of Practice 


ICS 91.080.30; 91.120.25 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM эъ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH AMT, +ç Reef - 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2022 Price Group 11 


Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 39 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Earthquake 
Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

This standard is primarily concerned with the use of confined masonry for low-rise buildings for high seismic 
performance. The provisions of special considerations in earthquake zones relating to confined masonry building 
construction were briefly introduced in the National Building Code of India 2016. This standard provides detailed 
guidelines on design of confined masonry under different loads, such as gravity, earthquake and winds. 

The standard addresses the requirements related to the design of load bearing masonry and confining element 
reinforcement. Also, the detailing of confined masonry walls for various level of seismic performance are 
enlisted. 

It is assumed and expected that design of masonry work is done by qualified engineer and that execution is 
carried out (according to the recommendations of this standard read with other cross referred standards) under 
the directions of an experienced supervisor. 


In the development of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publications: 


a) EERI (2011). Seismic Design Guide for Low-Rise Confined Masonry Buildings. Earthquake 
Engineering Research Institute and International Association for Earthquake Engineering, USA. 

b) Eurocode 6 (2005). Design of Masonry Buildings — Part 1-1: Common Rules for Reinforced and 
Unreinforced Masonry Structures, EN 1996-1-1: 2005, CEN, Belgium. 

c) Eurocode 8 (2004). Design Procedures for Earthquake Resistance of Structures, Part 1-1: General 
Rules, Seismic Actions and Rules for Buildings. EN1998-1-1: 2004, European Committee for 
Standardization (CEN), Belgium. 

d) NCh2123 (2003). Albañilería Confinada — Requisitos para el diseño y cálculo (NCh 2123.0f97). 

Instituto Nacional de Normalizacion (Confined Masonry — Requirements for Structural Design), 

Chile (in Spanish). 

е) NTC-M (2017). Normas Técnicas Complementarias para Diseño y Construcción de Estructuras de 

Mampostería (Technical Norms for Design and Construction of Masonry Structures), Mexico D.F. 

(іп Spanish and English). 

f) NT E.070 (2006). Reglamento Nacional de Edificaciones, Norma Técnica E.070 Albañilería (National 
Building Code, Technical Standard E.070 Masonry), Peru (in Spanish). 

g) IITK-GSDMA (2007). IITK-GSDMA Proposed Draft Provisions and Commentary on Structural Use 
of Unreinforced Masonry, National Information Centre for Earthquake Engineering, Indian Institute 
of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur, India. 

h) HTK-GSDMA (2005). IITK-GSDMA Guidelines for Structural use of Reinforced Masonry, National 
Information Centre for Earthquake Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur, 
India. 

j) Brzev, S. (2008). Earthquake-Resistant Confined Masonry Construction, National Information 
Centre for Earthquake Engineering, Kanpur, India (www.nicee.org/confinedmasonry.php). 

k) Brzev,S. and Mitra,K. (2018). Earthquake-Resistant Confined Masonry Construction, Third Edition, 
National Information Centre for Earthquake Engineering, Kanpur, India. 

m) Chourasia, A. (2017). Design Guidelines for Confined Masonry Buildings, CSIR-CBRI, Roorkee, 
India. 

Also, considerable assistance was given by the Indian Institute of Technology located at Kanpur, Gandhinagar, 

and Patna; and several other organizations CSIR (CBRI), Roorkee. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 *Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision) . The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17848 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


CONFINED MASONRY FOR EARTHQUAKE 
RESISTANCE — CODE OF PRACTICE 


1SCOPE 


This standard contains provisions for structural design 
of confined masonry, constructed with solid burnt clay 
bricks, fly ash bricks, solid or hollow concrete blocks, 
or burnt clay hollow blocks in regard to the type of 
materials to be used, material properties, and methods 
of design. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed in Annex A contain 
provisions, which, through reference in the text, 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time 
of publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
АП standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions and those given in IS 2212 and IS 1905 shall 


apply: 


3.1 Confined Masonry Wall — А construction 
consisting of masonry wall and horizontal and vertical 
RC confining members built on all four sides of a 
masonry wall panel. 


3.2 Confining Elements — Nominally reinforced small 
concrete elements built at key locations in confined 
masonry walls which provide deformability to masonry 
walls and protect them from complete disintegration 
even in major earthquakes. 


3.3 Hollow Unit — А masonry unit with net 
cross-sectional area in any plane parallel to the bearing 
surface not less than 50 and not more than 75 percent of 
its gross cross-sectional area in its most unfavourable 
cross-section. 
NOTE — Hollow masonry units should have exterior face 
shell thickness of not less than 15 mm. For hollow units with 


two to four cells, the minimum thickness of the interior webs 
should be 13 mm. 


3.4 Horizontal Bands — A reinforced concrete runner 
provided in the walls to tie them together and to impart 
horizontal bending strength in them. 


3.5 Net and Gross Area of a Masonry Unit — Net 
cross-sectional area of a masonry unit shall be taken as 


the gross cross-sectional area minus the area of holes. 
Gross cross-sectional area of hollow masonry units 
shall be determined based on the outside dimensions 
of the unit. 


3.6 Pier — An isolated vertical member whose 
horizontal dimension measured at right angles to its 
thickness is not less than 4 times its thickness and 
whose height is less than 5 times its length. 


3.7 Prism — An assemblage of masonry units bonded 
by mortar used as a test specimen for determining 
masonry properties. 


3.8 Solid Unit — А masonry unit whose пей 
cross-sectional area in any plane parallel to the bearing 
surface is 75 percent ог more of the gross cross-sectional 
area in the same plane. 


3.9 Shear Strength of Masonry — Shear force, у, 
resisted per unit of net cross-sectional area of masonry 
determined by diagonal compression test of masonry 
specimen (see Annex B) or a function of compressive 
strength of masonry f. . 


3.10 Specified Compressive Strength of Masonry — 
Compressive strength of masonry, /, expressed as 
force per unit of net cross-sectional area, required 
of the masonry used in construction by the contract 
document, and upon which the project design is based. 
Whenever the quantity f. is under the radical sign, the 
square root of numerical value only is intended and the 
result has units of MPa. 


3.11 Tie-beam — Horizontal confining members 
which resemble beams in RC frame construction and 
have same thickness as that of masonry wall. 


3.12 Tie-column — Vertical confining members which 
resemble columns in RC frame construction except that 
they have smaller cross-section and thickness same as 
that of masonry wall. 


3.13 Toothing — Good bonding between a masonry wall 
and adjacent RC tie-columns is achieved by toothing 
of walls by projecting bricks at the wall-to-tie-column 
interface. 


3.14 Wall Index — The total cross-sectional area of all 
confined masonry walls in one direction divided by the 
total plan area (see Annex C). 


IS 17848 : 2022 


4SYMBOLS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
symbols shall have the meaning as indicated below. 
Where other symbols are used, they are explained at 
the appropriate place: 

А, = Cross-sectional area of concrete excluding 
reinforcing steel. 


A — Net area of masonry. 


A, - Area of opening. 
А, = Area of longitudinal reinforcement. 
А. - Area of transverse reinforcement. 
A,— Area of cross-section of confined masonry 
wall including tie-columns. 
а- Effective depth of the wall section. 
а, = Diameter of ties that is, both tie column and tie 
beam. 
E, — Young's modulus of concrete. 
Е, - Young's modulus of masonry. 
f- Correction factor depending upon aspect ratio. 
J, - Allowable axial compressive stress. 
f,- Permissible stress in concrete in direct 
compression. 
fa = Characteristic cube compressive strength of 
concrete. 
F, — Design loads. 
J, = Design strength of material. 


Ж, = Compressive strength of masonry. 
Permissible steel tensile stress. 


— Flexural tensile strength of masonry normal to 
bed joints. 


Characteristic yield strength of the reinforcing 
steel. 


G — Shear modulus of masonry. 


h — Clear wall height between floors. 

H’ — Unsupported wall height between horizontal 
bands. 

h,— Dimension of tie-column or tie-beam. 

h — Clear floor height of tie-column. 

k = Stress reduction factor. 

L- Actual length, unsupported length, length 
centre-to-centre distance of the intersecting 
member. 

I — Length of web. 

M — Factored bending moment. 

m — Modular ratio. 

M, — Moment of resistance of confined masonry 
wall. 
М. = Bending moment corresponding to pure 


bending load condition. 


P — Factored gravity load. 
P — Permissible axial compressive force іп 
confined masonry. 
P, — Factored gravity load contributed by column. 
Р,- Design compressive axial load. 
Р „— Factored gravity load contributed by masonry 
wall. 
P, — Ultimate axial compressive force in confined 
masonry. 
s— Tie spacing. 
S — Section modulus of wall section. 


t — Thickness of wall. 
yz 
v, — Allowable masonry shear strength. 


Factored applied shear force. 


v — Masonry shear strength. 

V — Shear resistance of confined masonry wall. 
or Wall index per floor. 

é,— Maximum compressive strain in concrete. 
&,- Maximum compressive strain in masonry. 
у, = Partial safety factor for load. 

y, = Partial safety factor for material. 


5 MATERIALS 


5.1 Masonry Units 
5.1.1 General 


Masonry units shall meet the requirements of relevant 
standards. Masonry units that have been previously 
used shall not be reused in brickwork or blockwork 
construction, unless they have been thoroughly cleaned 
and conform to the standard for similar new masonry 
units. Further, masonry units shall be strong enough so 
that they do not undergo local brittle failure. 


5.1.2 Types of Units 


The following types of masonry units are acceptable for 
confined masonry construction: solid burnt clay bricks, 
solid fly ash bricks, hollow concrete blocks, and solid 
concrete blocks. Masonry units used in construction 
shall comply with the following standards: 


Burnt clay building IS 1077, IS 2180 or 
bricks IS 2222 
Concrete blocks IS 2185 (Part 1) 
(solid and hollow) 

Burnt clay hollow bricks IS 3952 
Other solid bricks IS 16720 


The following types of units are not permitted for 
confined masonry construction: masonry units with 
horizontal perforations, and natural stone masonry and 
adobe (sun-dried earthen units). 


5.1.3 Compressive Strength 


The minimum compressive strength of masonry units 
used for confined masonry buildings upto 2-storey 
shall be 3.5 MPa and for more than 2-storey it shall be 
7.0 MPa. For concrete blocks, minimum compressive 
strength shall be 7.0 MPa. 


NOTE — The compressive strength is determined based on the 
net area. 


5.2 Mortar 


Mortar for masonry shall comply with the requirements 
of IS 2250. Types M1, M2, H1 and H2 mortars as per 
IS 1905 shall beused for confined masonry construction. 


Requirements of a good mortar for masonry structures 
are workability, flow, water retentivity in the plastic 
state and bond, extensibility, compressive strength, 
and durability in the hardened state. Compressive 
strength of mortar, in general, should not be greater 
than masonry unit. 


Compressive strength shall not be sole-criterion for the 
selection of mortar. Bond strength, in general, is more 
important, as is good workability and water retentivity, 
which are required for maximum bond. Lime-based 
mortars should be preferred, it is desirable to sacrifice 
some compressive strength of the mortar in favour of 
improved bond. 


5.3 Concrete 


A minimum grade of concrete shall be М15 as 
per IS 456, however, higher grade of concrete can 
be used. The chosen concrete mix should provide 
adequate workability required for casting the small 
cross-sections of the reinforced concrete tie-columns 
and tie-beams. The suggested range of workability 
of concrete measured in accordance with IS 1199 
(Part 2) is medium workability with 75-100 mm slump. 
The size of the coarse aggregate as per IS 383 used in 
construction should not be more than 12.5 mm. 


5.4 Reinforcement 


Steel reinforcement of grade Fe 415/500/550 
(see IS 1786) shall be used for construction of reinforced 
concrete tie-columns and tie-beams. 


5.5 Masonry Properties 


5.5.1 Specified Compressive Strength 


The specified compressive strength (f) for the 
combination of typical masonry units and mortar used 
for construction should preferably be determined by 
testing prism specimens according to the procedure 
outlined in Annex B of IS 1905. In the absence of test 
data, values for the specified compressive strength 
of masonry (f.) should be obtained by multiplying 
permissible compressive stress (see 5.4.1 of IS 1905) 
for the combination of masonry unit strength and 
mortar type by a factor of 4.0 (see B-2.1 of IS 1905). 


IS 17848 : 2022 


5.5.2 Elastic Modulus 


Elastic modulus of masonry, Е, shall be determined 
according to one of the procedures outlined in 5.5.2.1 
and 5.5.2.2. 


5.5.2.1 Prism testing 


The elastic modulus shall be determined from testing of 
masonry prisms subjected to compression as the chord 
modulus of elasticity taken between 0.05 and 0.33 
of the maximum compressive strength of each prism 
(see Fig. 1). 


5.5.2.2 Empirical equations 


In the absence of test data, the following empirical 
equations shall be used: 


a) For clay masonry: E =550/. 


b) For concrete masonry: E -850/ 


5.5.3 Shear Modulus 


The shear modulus, G, shall be determined from the 
following empirical equation: 


G, = 0.2 E. 
6 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 


6.1 General 


Design considerations stipulated in 4 of IS 1905 shall 
apply along with those given under 6.2 to 6.6. 


6.2 Structural Integrity 


Intersecting walls shall be joined together to resist the 
effect of gravity and lateral loads. The walls shall be 
adequately bonded to elements which provide lateral 
support, such as floors and roof. 


6.3 Building Configuration 


A regular building configuration is one of the key 
requirements for satisfactory earthquake performance 
(as per IS 4326). The following recommendations 
related to building plan shape shall be followed: 


a) The building plan should be of a regular shape. 

b) The building's length-to-width ratio in plan 
shall not exceed 4 and storey height shall be less 
than 4 m. 


The walls should be built in a symmetrical manner 
with regards to the horizontal axes through the 
centre of the building plan. The walls should be 
placed as far apart as possible, preferably at the 
facade, to avoid twisting (torsion) of the building 
in an earthquake. 


с 


— 


d) There are at least two lines of walls in each 
orthogonal direction of the building plan, and the 
walls along each line extend over at least 50 percent 
ofthe building dimension in the direction of analysis 
at each storey level (see Fig. 2). 


IS 17848 : 2022 


COMPRESSIVE 
STRENGTH 


к, = Д STRESS 
m^ A STRAIN 


STRESS 


0.33 x COMPRESSIVE 
STRENGTH 


A STRESS 


0.05 x COMPRESSIVE 


IA STRAIN STRENGTH 


STRAIN 


Fic. 1 CHORD MODULUS OF ELASTICITY OF MASONRY 


ANALYSIS 


DIRECTION 


L4* Lo > 05L L3 >0.51 


Fic. 2 ATLEAST TWO PARALLEL LINES OF WALLS ARE REQUIRED IN EACH PLAN DIRECTION 


e) The walls should always be continuous up the 
building height — vertical offsets are not permitted. 


f) Openings (doors and windows) should be placed 
in the same position on each floor. 


g) The total cross-sectional area of all walls at two 
adjacent floors should not be different by more 
than 30 percent. 


h) It is not permitted to have a moment resisting 
frame system at the ground floor and confined 
masonry wall construction at the upper floors. 


6.4 Minimum Design Dimensions and Placements of 
Confining Elements 


Requirements regarding spacing of tie-columns and 
tie-beams are presented in Fig. 3. Minimum tie-column 
and tie-beam dimensions (depth х width) shall be 
150 mm x ¢, where f is the wall thickness. 


6.4.1 Placement of Reinforced Concrete Tie-Columns 
and Tie-Beams 


Tie-columns should be provided at the following locations: 
a) wall intersections; 


b) intermediate locations in longer walls, where 
spacing should not exceed lesser than 1.5 A 
(h = clear wall height between floors) or 4 m; and 
с) at free ends of wall panels that provide lateral load 
resistance to the building (see Fig. 4). 
Also, reinforced concrete tie-beams must be provided 
at the top of each wall and spacing between tie-beams 
should be preferably less than 4 m. 


6.4.2 Horizontal Lintel Bands 


When the unsupported height of the wall Л is greater 
than 2.5 m, continuous horizontal lintel band shall 
be provided over the openings. However, continuous 
horizontal band is not essential for h < 2.5 m but lintel 
beam shall be provided above the openings. 


6.5 Minimum Dimensions of Masonry Walls 
The following dimensions shall be applicable 
a) Wall thickness (7) should not be less than 110 mm; 
and 


b) The maximum wall height/thickness (h/t) ratio 
shall not exceed 25, where Л is the wall height 
between floors. 


6.5.1 Aspect Ratio of Confined Masonry Walls 


The height-to-width ratio of a wall should be kept less 
than 2 for the better lateral load transfer, otherwise a 
wall should not be considered in seismic design. 


6.5.2 Parapets 


RC tie-columns and tie-beams should extend to the top 
of the parapet, as shown in Fig. 3. When a parapet is not 
confined by tie-beams, height should not exceed 3 times 
the thickness, otherwise the height limit shall be 1.2 m. 


IS 17848 : 2022 


6.5.3 Gable Walls 


The top of gable should be confined with reinforced 
concrete tie-beams, and tie-columns located at the 
middle of the gable wall should be extended from 
the lower floor to the top of gable wall (whenever 
applicable), as shown in Fig. 5A. Alternatively, a gable 
portion of the wall can be made of timber or other 
light-weight material (see Fig. 5B). 


6.6 Walls with Openings 
6.6.1 Size of Opening 


Presence of large openings may have a negative effect 
on seismic performance of confined masonry buildings, 
especially if openings are not confined. A large opening 
has a total area greater than 10 percent of the wall panel 
area, while a small opening has a total area less than or 
equal to 10 percent of the wall panel area. 


6.6.2 Walls with Large Openings 


The following three approaches shall be followed in 
walls with large openings: 


a) When reinforced concrete tie-columns are not 
provided at the ends of an opening, the panel is 
not considered as confined and its contribution 
to seismic resistance of the building should be 
disregarded but should be strengthened as per 
IS 4326, see Fig. 6A. 


b) When reinforced concrete tie-columns аге 
provided at the opening, the confined masonry 
panels are considered to contribute to seismic 
resistance of the building but the aspect ratio H/L 
of these panels should be less than 2.0 as shown 
in Fig. 6B. Better performance can be achieved 
by providing both sill and lintel bands below and 
above the openings, respectively. 


с 


ме 


If total area of openings is greater than 25 percent, 
both openings and masonry piers must be confined 
with horizontal and vertical confining elements, 
see Fig. 6C. 


6.6.3 Walls with Small and Single Openings 


The following three approaches shall be followed in 
walls with small openings: 


а) The opening can be ignored when it is located 
outside the diagonals (Fig. 7A). The entire wall 
cross-sectional area can be considered for seismic 
resistance. 

b) When an opening 15 located at the intersection 
of the panel diagonals (Fig. 7B), the panel 
cross-sectional area (4,) considered for seismic 
resistance should exclude the opening length. 


с 


— 


When an opening is located close to one end of 
the panel, the panel cross-sectional area (A) 
considered in seismic resistance should use a 
larger pier length, as shown in (Fig. 7C). 


IS 17848 : 2022 


TIE-BEAM IN 
PARAPETS 


2 500mm 
TIE COLUMN IN PARAPETS 


TIE-BEAM 
SPACING 
« 40 


h/t < 25 
t 2110mm 


CONFINING ELEMENTS 
AROUND OPENINGS 


TIE-COLUMNS AT 
WALL INTERSECTIONS 


Fic. 3 REQUIREMENTS REGARDING CONFINING ELEMENTS 


TIE-COLUMN 
THICKNESS 2 110 mm 


SPACING < “т ОК 1.5h, 
WHICHEVER IS SMALLER 


ASPECT RATIO OF 
INDIVIDUAL CONFINED TIE-COLUMN AT WALL 
WALL, h/L < 2.0 ENDS AND INTERSECTIONS 


TIE-COLUMNS 
AT OPENINGS WINDOW 


L 


Fic. 4 TYPICAL FLOOR PLAN ILLUSTRATING THE PLACEMENT OF RC TIE-COLUMNS 


6 


IS 17848 : 2022 


GABLE LIGHT-WEIGHT 
GABLE PANEL ROOF 


ROOF 
TIE-BEAM 


TIE-COLUMN 


5A RC Confining Elements 5B Light-Weight Gable Panels 


Fic. 5 GABLE WALLS 


| 
— Ly > BS 


-- 


ELEVATION ELEVATION 
i ELEVATION E 
t EÉ %2 228 t EA: 177743 t ËLCc C A E777 ZA: 
г Ar=0 аты Атат Lt Атл= хі Ar2= Lo xt 
— SECTION SECTION 
А> 0.1(L xh) Agp> 0.1 (L xh) Ag? 0.25 (L xh) 
6A UNCONFINED PANEL TO BE 6B RC TIE-COLUMNS ARE PROVIDED AT THE 6C PROVISION OF CONTINUOUS HORIZONTAL 
DISREGARDED IN THE SIMPLIFIED OPENING AND WALL PANELS CAN BE BANDS FOR CONFINING BOTH OPENINGS 
METHOD CALCULATIONS CONSIDERED IN THE SIMPLIFIED METHOD AND MASONRY PIERS 
CALCULATIONS 


Fic. 6 MASONRY WALL WITH A LARGE OPENING 


IS 17848 : 2022 


7A OPENINGS OUTSIDE THE DIAGONALS 


s] 
pe 1 ЕН 
L 


х | 
leis 1 "- 


Аор< O.1L xh 
Ат= хі 


CAN BE NEGLECTED 
ACCOUNT 


h 
25 
Ao < O.1L xh 
AT7L,xt*Loxt 


7B OPENING AT INTERSECTION OF 
DIAGONALS MUST BE TAKEN INTO 


BE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT 


FIG. 7 CONFINED MASONRY WALL PANEL WITH A SMALL OPENING 


7 STRUCTURAL DESIGN 


7.1 Design Criteria 


Design of structural elements should be performed 
according to either the working stress design method or 
the limit states design method. 


7.2 Structural Design According to the Working 
Stress Design Method 


7.2.1 Load Combinations 


When the working stress design method is followed for 
the structural design of confined masonry structures, 
adequacy of the structure and member shall be 
investigated for the following load combinations: 


a) DL +IL 
b) DL + IL + (WL or EL) 
с) DL- WL 

d) 0.9 DL + EL 


Permissible stresses and loads for load cases (b), (c), 
and (d) may be increased by one-third when wind or 
earthquake loads are considered in load combinations. 


7.2.2 Transformed Section Properties 


Confined masonry wall panel is a composite structural 
element which consists ofa masonry wall and reinforced 
concrete tie-columns, and it shall be designed as a 
transformed section. Modular ratio (т) represents the 
ratio of elastic modulus for concrete and masonry. 
The modulus of elasticity of concrete can be assumed 
as per IS 456, that is, Е = 5000 V(f,) and modulus of 
elasticity of masonry can be taken as given in 5.5.2. 
Transformed section properties of a confined masonry 
panel used in design are illustrated in Fig. 8. 


7.2.3 Permissible Compressive Force 


Compressive force in confined masonry due to axial 
load shall not exceed that given by following equation: 


P = (0.25 f, A, +7 A, 0.65 A, f) К, 


where 
A „= net area of masonry; 
A, = cross-sectional area of concrete excluding 
reinforcing steel; 
A = area of steel; 
J.= permissible steel tensile stress (Table 22 of 
IS 456); 
Ja = permissible stress in concrete in direct 
compression (Table 21 of IS 456); and 
k = stress reduction factor as in Table 9 of IS 1905. 


7.2.4 Combined Permissible Axial and Flexural 
Compressive Stress 


For walls subjected to combined axial load and flexure, 
the compressive stress in masonry due to combined 
action of axial load and bending shall not exceed 
1.25 / and compressive stress in masonry due to axial 
load only shall not exceed /. 


7.2.5 Permissible Tensile Stress 
Provisions of 5.4.2 of IS 1905 shall apply. 


7.2.6 Permissible Shear Stress 


The allowable shear stress for confined masonry walls 
shall be according to Table 1. If there is tension in any 
part of a section of masonry, the area under tension 
shall be ignored while working out shear stress on the 
section. 


7C OPENING ALONG A DIAGONAL MUST 


A m 
(ШЕН | | | | | БЕН | | ` 
ШЕН | | ШЕН ШЕН БЕН ШЕ БЕН БЕН 


IS 17848 : 2022 


MASONRY WALL 


RC TIE - COLUMN 


pus 
I 


| 


Fic. 8 TRANSFORMED SECTION PROPERTIES OF A CONFINED MASONRY PANEL 


Table 1 Shear Stress for Confined Masonry, v 


a 


(Clause 7.2.6) 
M/Vd Í. Maximum Allowable Shear 
Strength 
MPa MPa 
«I 
E Ел coa. 
36 Vi, Vis, 
2 0.0834/7.. ii 


7.3 Structural Design According to the Limit State 
Design Method 


7.3.1 General 


In the method of design based on limit state concept, the 
structure shall be designed to withstand safely all loads 
liable to act on it throughout its life; it shall also satisfy 
the serviceability requirements, such as limitations on 
deflections and cracking. The following three limit 
states shall be considered in the design of confined 
masonry buildings: ultimate limit state (limit state of 
collapse), serviceability limit state, and durability limit 
state. 


7.3.2 Ultimate Limit State 


Structures and structural elements should be designed 
such that the design strength at any section of a 
structural element shall be at least equal to the design 
value of internal force. 


Design loads (F ) are obtained when partial safety factors 
(y,) are applied to characteristic loads (F), as follows: 
F,-Fy 

The partial safety factors y, given in Table 2 shall be 
applied to various loads. The loads and load effects shall 
be multiplied by the relevant y, factors, given in Table 2, 
to get the design loads or design load effects for confined 
masonry structures. 


The design strength of material (f,) is obtained when 
partial safety factor (y,) is applied to strength of the 
material (f), that is: 


The value of partial safety factor, ү, should be taken as 
2.0 for masonry, 1.5 for concrete and 1.15 for steel. 


7.3.3 Serviceability Limit State 


Design according to the serviceability limit state must 
ensure that the structural responses (displacements, 
cracking and vibrations) shall be limited such that the 
building function is maintained and uninterrupted. 


7.3.4 Durability Limit State 


Confined masonry buildings shall be designed and 
constructed to ensure durability corresponding to a 
useful lifetime of the structure of 50 years. Durability 
shall be ensured by following provisions of applicable 
Indian Standards related to masonry and reinforced 
concrete construction. 


IS 17848 : 2022 


Table 2 Values of Partial Safety Factor, y, for Loads 


(Clause 7.3.2) 
SI No. Load Combination Limit State of Collapse Limit State of Serviceability 
— =ч 
DL IL WL ог EL DL IL WL or EL 
() (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
i) DL+IL 1.5 1.5 - 1.0 1.0 - 
ii) DL * (WL or EL) 1.5 or 0.9* - 1.5 1.0 - 1.0 
iii) DL + IL + (WL or EL) 1:2 1.2 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.8 
NOTES 


1 While considering the earthquake effects, substitute EL for WL. 


2 For the limit state of serviceability, the values of y, given in this table are applicable for short-term effects. While assessing the 
long-term effects due to creep the dead load and that part of the live load likely to be permanent may only be considered. 


* This value is to be considered when stability against overturning or stress reversal is crucial. 


7.3.5 Design Assumptions 


The following assumptions shall be taken in design of 
confined masonry wall panels subjected to axial and/or 
flexural loads: 


a) Masonry behaves like a homogeneous material. 


b) The strain distribution along the wall length is 
based on the assumption that the wall section 
remains plane. 


Tensile stresses are resisted only by reinforcing 
steel (masonry and concrete tensile resistance 1s 
ignored). 

There is a perfect bond between steel reinforcement 
and adjacent concrete. 


The maximum compressive strains in masonry 
(=) and concrete (e) shall be taken equal to 
0.004 0 and 0.003 respectively. 


Linear stress-strain relationship for masonry shall 
be considered for the design, unless more accurate 
relationship is determined from experimental 
testing of masonry prisms. 


7.3.6 Stress-Strain Curves for Concrete, Masonry and 
Steel 


The relationship between the compressive stress 
distribution in concrete and the strain in concrete may 
be assumed to be rectangle, trapezoid, parabola or any 
other shape which results in prediction of strength 
in substantial agreement with the results of test. 
An acceptable stress-strain curve is given in IS 456 
(see Fig. 21 of IS 456). However, the ultimate strain 
in concrete should be taken as 0.003 0 in place of 
0.003 5. For design purposes, the compressive strength 
of concrete in the structure shall be assumed to be 
0.67 times the characteristic strength. The partial safety 
factor, y, = 1.5 shall be applied in addition to this. 


10 


The stresses in the reinforcement are derived from 
representative stress-strain curve for the type of steel 
used. Typical curves are given in IS 456 (see Fig. 23 of 
IS 456). For design purposes, the partial safety factor, 
Y, = 1.15 shall be applied. 


The relationship between the compressive stress-strain 
in masonry may be assumed to be rectangle, trapezoid, 
parabola or any other shape which results in prediction 
of strength in substantial agreement with the results 
of test. An acceptable stress-strain curve is given in 
Fig. 9. For design purposes the partial safety factor, 
Ym = 2.0 shall be applied. 


7.3.7 Axial Load Resistance 


Axial load resistance of a confined masonry wall 
(P.) shall be determined considering the contribution 
of masonry and longitudinal steel reinforcement in 
tie-columns assuming that the steel has yielded in 
compression, that is: 


P =k (04f A. +0.45 f, AL 0.75 f. A) 
where 


A," Net area of masonry; 

А = cross-sectional area of concrete excluding 
reinforcing steel; 

А, = Area of steel; 

f= characteristic cube compressive strength of 
concrete; 

ҒА — characteristic yield strength of the reinforcing 
steel; 

У, = compressive strength of masonry; and 

k — stress reduction factor as in Table 9 of 


IS 1905. 


IS 17848 : 2022 


0.75 fm 


COMPRESSIVE STRESS ( f. ) 


0.0015 


0.0030 0.0040 


STRAIN ( £ m) 


Fic. 9 ACCEPTABLE STRESS-STRAIN CURVE FOR MASONRY 


7.3.8 Design of Confined Masonry Walls for Combined 
Axial Load and Out-of-Plane Bending 


Confined masonry walls need to be designed for 
combined effects of axial load and out-of-plane 
bending (bending perpendicular to the wall surface). 
Bending moments may be due to eccentric gravity 
loads or lateral loads acting perpendicular to wall plane 
(wind and earthquake). Generally, confined masonry 
walls have sufficient resistance for earthquake force 
acting in out-of-plane direction, if slenderness limits 
in 6.5 are satisfied. For out-of-plane forces, only 
one-way bending may be considered that is, bending in 
the vertical direction as shown in Fig. 10. 


The interaction of compression due to axial stresses and 
bending stresses should be within the following limits: 
P М 
—+—<1.0 


u u 


Factored bending moment, M due to design factored 
wind pressure p, [see IS 875 (Part 3)] acting out-of-plane 
over unit length 5 can be calculated as follows: 


м=р 
8 
where Л is floor-to-floor height. The axial resistance 
P, shall be calculated as in 7.3.7 by ignoring the 
contribution of concrete and reinforcement in 


tie-column and considering 4°. The moment of 
resistance M, per unit length shall be estimated for 
bending in vertical direction as follows: 


M, Ls. 
A' 


Ym 
axial load P, should not exceed self-weight 
of the unit length of panel plus 4’ times 
0.15 MPa; 


net area of masonry per unit length, b (mm?); 


where 


section modulus per unit length, b (mm?); and 
flexural tensile strength normal to bed joints, 
which may be taken as 0.30 N/mm? for Grade 
МІ or better mortar and 0.20 N/mm? for Grade 
M2 mortar. 


7.3.9 Moment Resistance of Confined Masonry Walls 
due to Combined Axial Load and in-Plane Bending 


7.3.9.1 General approach 


Moment resistance (М) for a section of a confined 
masonry wall subjected to the design axial load (P) 
shall be determined from equilibrium of internal forces 
acting on the section, by following the assumptions 
stated in 7.3.5. 


IS 17848 : 2022 


RC FLOOR 


Fic. 10 UNIT LENGTH, b oF MASONRY WALL CONSIDERED FOR 
OuT-OF-PLANE BENDING IN THE VERTICAL DIRECTION 


"| 


Pu LD 


ә) 


MASONRY WALL TIE-COLUMN A 


Fic. 11 SIMPLIFIED INTERACTION DIAGRAM FoR DESIGN OF CONFINED MASONRY WALLS 


12 


7.3.9.2 Simplified axial load and bending moment 
interaction diagram 


For walls with longitudinal bars placed symmetrically 
in tie-columns, the following equations define a 
simplified axial load-bending moment interaction 
diagram (Fig. 11): 


a) Part А-В: when 0 < P < P /3 
M -03Pd * M, 


where, M, = 0.87 f A (l, — b) is moment resistance 
corresponding to pure bending load condition, and d is 
effective depth of the wall section. 


b) When P = P /3 
Point B: M - 0.1] Pd t M, 


Point C: M, = 20.05 P,-d+15M,,) 
3 


c) Part C-D: when P > P /3 


pt. 


2 


u 


M, =[0.15 БЕЛІ 


7.3.9.3 Alternate method 


The P-M interaction curve for the confined masonry 
section can also be determined by considering the 
incremental values of neutral axis across the section. 
However, this will involve lengthy calculation by 
trial and error. The P-M interaction curve can also be 
obtained by using sectional analysis programs available 
for reinforced concrete members. 


7.3.10 Design for Shear 
7.3.10.1 General 


Shear resistance of a confined masonry wall is due 
to combined contribution of masonry and horizontal 
wall reinforcement. Although reinforced concrete 
tie-columns contribute to shear resistance of a confined 
masonry wall, their contribution is not considered in 
the design to increase a safety margin in a confined 
masonry structure. 


7.3.10.2 Masonry shear resistance 


Shear resistance provided by masonry shall be 
determined from the following equation: 


V. = 0.8(0.5у A, + 0.4P )/ 
but 
V Sl1.5v A. 
where P, is the design compressive axial load which 
shall include permanent loads only and with the partial 
safety factor of 1.0, A, is the area of cross-section of 


confined masonry wall including tie-columns and v, is 
masonry shear strength and can be assumed as follows: 


IS 17848 : 2022 


у 7 0.16 V£) MPa but not more than 0.6 MPa 


Alternatively, v can be obtained from the standard 
test method for diagonal tension (shear) in masonry 
assemblages as per Annex B. 


fis the corrected factor for the aspect ratio H/L of the 
wall and can be obtained from the following equations: 


f= 1.55, if HIL < 0.2 
f=1.7-0.7-HIL, if 0.2 < HIL < 1.0 
f= 1.0,Ё H/L > 1.0 


7.3.10.3 Alternate method (Strut-and-Tie method) 


Strut-and-Tie method can be used for determining the 
shear capacity of confined masonry walls. This method 
provides a rational and consistent design approach 
by idealizing complex structural member with an 
appropriate simplified truss model. According to this 
procedure, based on the knowledge of direction of 
principal stresses, load paths are drawn through the 
wall in form of a truss which is analyzed for the design 
loads. A possible strut-and-tie model for the confined 
masonry wall based on its load resisting mechanism 
18 illustrated in Fig. 12. The broken and solid lines 
in Fig. 12 represent the strut and tie, respectively. If 
the opening distribution is irregular or complex in 
elevation, strut and tie method can be used to estimate 
the in-plane resistance of the confined masonry wall. 


The basic prerequisites for the strut-and-tie model are 
as follows: 


a) The equilibrium of forces at nodes should be 
maintained for a given set of loads. 


b) Tension in concrete and masonry is neglected 
and adequate detailing of anchorage should be 
provided for tie reinforcement. 


c) The member forces in the struts and ties are uniaxial 
which should not exceed the corresponding 
member strength at every section. 


d) Sufficient ductility should be available to make 
transition from elastic to plastic behaviour which 
will enable redistribution of internal forces in the 
members. 


7.3.11 Design of Tie-Columns and Tie-Beams 


7.3.11.1 Minimum amount of longitudinal reinforcement 


Longitudinal reinforcement in tie-columns апа 
tie-beams shall be proportioned to resist the 
corresponding vertical and horizontal components of 
the compression strut that develops in masonry when 
resisting combined gravity and lateral loads. The 
total area of reinforcement should be not less than 
0.8 percent of the gross cross-section area of the 
column. For 2-storey height, the minimum area of 
reinforcement can be 0.6 percent. 


13 


IS 17848 : 2022 


Fic. 12 STRUT-AND-TIE MODEL FOR CONFINED MASONRY WALL 


7.3.11.2 Minimum amount of transverse reinforcement 
(ties) 


Tie-columns and tie-beams shall have transverse 
reinforcement in the form of closed stirrups (ties) with 
the minimum area equal to: 


A. = 0.00125 x h, 


where A. is the total cross-sectional area, іп mm’, of 
stirrup legs effective in shear, Л is the dimension of 
tie-column or tie-beam in the wall plane, in mm, and s 
is the tie spacing in mm. 


7.3.11.3 Spacing of transverse reinforcement 


Tie spacing (s) should not exceed the lesser of 200 mm 
and 1.54. 


7.4 Foundations and Plinth Construction 


The foundation should be constructed in the similar 
manner as for traditional masonry construction. Either 
a brick masonry footing or an RC strip footing can 
be used. An RC plinth band should be constructed 
on top of the foundation. A plinth band is essential 
to fully confine wall panels along their bases and 
prevent excessive wall damage due to building 
settlement in soft soil areas. Note that the longitudinal 
reinforcement should be extended from a RC 
tie-column into the plinth band, and whenever possible, 
into the foundation. 


14 


8 SEISMIC DESIGN 


8.1 Basis 


Structure should be designed for seismic forces 
determined as per IS 1893 (Part 1). 


8.2 Methods of Analysis 


8.2.1 General Considerations 


For determining internal forces and moments acting 
on confined masonry walls, the structures may be 
analyzed either using the simplified method of seismic 
analysis, or advanced analysis methods (static and/or 
dynamic analysis). The simplified method can be used 
for buildings up to three storey high (G + 2), provided 
that the requirements stipulated in 8.2.2 have been met. 
The effect of openings shall be considered in lateral 
stiffness and strength calculations. The structure shall 
be modelled to adequately simulate behaviour of its 
critical structural elements. Elastic and shear modulus 
of masonry, Е and С, shall be used to reflect the axial 
and shear stiffness expected in the structure. 


Design forces and moments shall be obtained from the 
analysis using design loads and the corresponding load 
factors. А confined masonry wall shall be designed for 
the effects of gravity loads, and the effects of lateral 
loads, including shear force, in-plane bending, and 
out-of-plane bending moments. When the simplified 


method is used, design for lateral loads may be limited 
to the effects of shear force. 


8.2.2 Simplified Method 


The simplified method is based on an idealized 
distribution of lateral seismic forces in regular 
bearing wall structures with rigid diaphragms. The 
method compares the shear capacity of all walls at 
the base of the building and the seismic base shear 
force determined from IS 1893 (Part 1). It 1s suitable 
for verifying seismic adequacy of regular buildings 
with symmetrical wall layout and predominant shear 
behaviour. The method does not take into account 
torsional effects. Due to its assumptions, application of 
this method is restricted to buildings with a height not 
exceeding three storeys (С + 2). 


The design can be further simplified for small buildings 
by applying the concept of wall index according to the 
procedure presented in Annex C, which can be used for 
the design of buildings with the total ground plan area 
not exceeding 200 m? and the height not exceeding two 
storeys or 7 m. 


8.2.3 Advanced Analysis Methods 


Seismic analysis of confined masonry buildings 
four-storey or higher and buildings up to three-storey 
high that do not meet requirements for the application 
of simplified method shall be performed using 
dynamic or static methods according to IS 1893 (Part 1). 
Lateral load effects induced by earthquake shall be 
determined based on the relative stiffness of walls 
and wall segments, by considering the effect of both 
shear and flexure in stiffness calculations. The analysis 
model shall take into account stiffness of floor and roof 
systems, and any other restraints that may influence 
wall rotations. 


8.3 Other Seismic Design Requirements 


8.3.1 Wall Spacing 


Maximum spacing of transverse walls in buildings 
with flexible diaphragms should not exceed 4 m. For 
spacing more than 4 m, the tie-beam at roof level 
should have a width of L/20. 


8.3.2 Spacing of Transverse Reinforcement (Ties) in 
Tie-columns 


For seismic zones IV and V, reduced tie spacing (5/2) 
is required at the ends of tie-columns, as shown in 
Fig. 13. The length over which the reduced tie spacing 
is used should not exceed the largest of the following 
values: twice the column dimension (2h, or 2t), or h /6, 
where h is the tie-column clear floor height. 


15 


IS 17848 : 2022 


9 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


9.1 Reinforcement Detailing 


9.1.1 Concrete Cover 


Minimum concrete cover to ties (transverse 
reinforcement) in tie-columns and tie-beams should not 
be less than 20 mm. 


When horizontal wall reinforcement is provided, 
minimum clear distance between a horizontal bar and 
the exterior wall surface should not be less than 20 mm. 


9.1.2 Bar Size and Number 
Tie-beams 


in Tie-columns and 


Longitudinal reinforcement іп tie-columns апа 
tie-beams should consist of minimum 4 reinforcing 
bars with the minimum 10 mm diameter. 


9.1.3 Ties in Tie-columns and Tie-beams 


Minimum 6 mm diameter bars should be used for ties 
in tie-columns and tie-beams (Fig. 14). Ties should 
have 135? hooked ends. Hooks should be staggered, as 
shown in Fig. 14. 


9.1.4 Anchorage of Longitudinal Bars 


Longitudinal reinforcement in tie-columns апа 
tie-beams should be anchored to develop the full 
specified steel yield stress. Longitudinal bars in 
tie-columns and tie-beams should have a 90? hooked 
anchorage at intersections. The lap length of the hook 
tails should be the largest of 20 times the bar diameter 
or 500 mm (Fig. 15). 


Tie-column longitudinal bars at the roof level should 
be bent by 90 degrees and lapped with the tie-beam 
longitudinal reinforcement (Fig. 16). 


9.1.5 Lap Splices for Longitudinal Reinforcement 


Lap splices for longitudinal reinforcement should 
be at least 40 times the bar diameter. Longitudinal 
reinforcing bars should be spliced within the middle 
third of the column height or beam span. The splices 
should be staggered so that not more than 2 bars are 
spliced at any one location. 


9.1.6 Tie-Column-to-Tie-Beam Joints 


Continuity of longitudinal tie-beam reinforcement 
through the joint must be ensured. An example of a 
continuous longitudinal reinforcement is shown in 
Fig. 17. First tie at the ends of tie-columns (top and 
bottom) shall be placed as close to the joint as possible. 
When tie-beam depth exceeds 300 mm, vertical 
reinforcement in an RC tie-column must be confined 
by the ties, below and above the joint. An additional 
U-shaped stirrup must be placed at the tie-beam 
mid-height (Fig. 18). 


IS 17848 : 2022 


OPENING WINDOW 


REDUCED TIE 
SPACING 


Fic. 13 Trg-COLUMN TRANSVERSE REINFORCEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR SEISMIC ZONES IV AND V 


6 d, 


135% HOOK 


— 
o 
| 
e 
| 
IV 
Š 
3 
3 


90* HOOK 


NO 


Fic. 14 LAYOUT AND DETAILING FOR TIE-COLUMNS AND TIE-BEAMS 


IS 17848 : 2022 


15A WALL INTERSECTIONS 


15B HOOKED ANCHORAGE FOR LONGITUDINAL REINFORCEMENT AT WALL INTERSECTIONS 


Fic. 15 TIE-BEAM CONSTRUCTION 


IS 17848 : 2022 


TIE-BEAM <> 


TIE-COLUMN 


REINFORCEMENT DETAILS 


Fic. 16 ANCHORAGE OF ТІЕ-ВЕАМ AND TIE-COLUMN LONGITUDINAL REINFORCEMENT 


Reinforced concrete tie-columns should be provided 
at the openings as shown in Fig. 6B and Fig. 6C. A 
nominal reinforcement around openings as detailed in 
Fig. 13 shall be provided. When reinforced concrete 
tie-columns are not provided at the ends of an opening 
then they should be strengthened as per IS 4326 or 
minimum two vertical bars of 10 mm diameter with 
6 mm ties at 150 mm spacing should be provided. 


9.2 Construction 


Construction of confined masonry buildings shall 
satisfy the conditions specified in the applicable Indian 
Standards. 


9.2.1 Masonry Wall Construction 
9.2.1.1 General 


During construction, in addition to the requirements of 
the sections above, the following shall be complied: 


a) All intersecting walls shall be connected, unless 
measures to assure stability and good performance 
are taken. 


b) Surfaces of construction joints shall be clean 
and rough. The joint shall be moistened before 
construction when clay units are used. 


c) To fulfill the requirements of excellent masonry 
work, Flemish bond or English bond in brickwork 
shall be adopted. 


d) During construction, necessary caution to assure 
wall stability at the job, shall be taken, possible 
horizontal pressure and loads, including wind and 
earthquake shall be considered. 


9.2.1.2 Masonry units 


The shape and dimension of masonry units, construction 
practices, including methods of positioning of 
reinforcement, placing and compacting of grout, as well 


18 


as design and detailing should be, such as to promote 
homogeneity of structural members, development of 
the bond between the grout to both reinforcement 
and masonry units and avoidance of corrosion of 
reinforcement. 


9.2.1.3 Mortar joint thickness 


Joint mortar shall totally cover the horizontal and 
vertical sides of the masonry unit. Joint thickness 
shall be the minimum to get a uniform layer of mortar 
and good alignment of the units. If industrialized 
units are used, the thickness of the horizontal joints 
shall not exceed 12 mm if horizontal reinforcement 
is placed in the joints, and 10 mm without horizontal 
reinforcement. Minimum thickness shall be 6 mm. 


9.2.1.4 Toothing 


The vertical interface of masonry with adjacent 
tie-columns shall be detailed to transfer shear forces. 
It shall be accepted to indent the masonry (referred to 
as toothing) or else, to place steel dowels or horizontal 
reinforcement as shown in Fig. 19. 


Toothed edges should be left on each side of the wall 
at the interface with the tie-columns. Toothing length 
should be equal to one-quarter of the masonry unit 
length, but not less than 50 mm, as shown in Fig. 19A. 
When hand-made bricks are used, it is desirable to 
cut the brick edges, as shown in Fig. 19B. It is very 
important to clean the surfaces of “toothed” masonry 
units before the concrete has been poured. 


Horizontal reinforcement anchored into RC 
tie-columns, also known as dowels, can be used as an 
alternative to toothing, as shown in Fig. 19C. Note 
that the dowels are not necessary when toothed edges 
are used. Six mm diameter bars shall be preferably 
used as dowels. 


IS 17848 : 2022 


U - SHAPED BAR 


TIE-BEAM 


z 
= 
5 
ER] 
О 
Q 
u 
= 


ELEVATION 


U-SHAPED BAR 


la 
PLAN VIEW 


FiG. 18 ADDITIONAL CONFINEMENT FOR VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT IN THE TIE-BEAM 
AND TIE-COLUMN END JoINT REGION 


20 


Ic 


19 A MACHINE MADE HOLLOW UNITS 


19 B HANDE- MADE SOLID UNITS 


Fic. 19 TOOTHING IN CONFINED MASONRY WALLS 


SHEAR CONNECTORS OR DOWELS 


19 C PROVISION OF HORIZONTAL REINFORCEMENT WHEN 
TOOTHING IS NOT POSSIBLE 


CCOT · SPELT SI 


IS 17848 : 2022 


9.2.2 Reinforcement 


Reinforcement shall be tightly secured before casting. 


9.2.3 Concrete 


Casting of tie-columns shall be made once the masonry 
wall or the corresponding part has been constructed. 
The masonry around the tie-columns should be 
saturated before the concrete has been poured. 


9.2.4 Piping and Ducts 


Piping and ducts shall be installed without damaging 
the masonry. If solid or grouted hollow units are used, 
grooves in the wall shall be permitted to embed piping 
and ducts, but the following shall need to be satisfied: 


22 


a) Groove depth shall not exceed one fourth the 
thickness of the masonry wall (1/4); 


b) Groove shall be vertical; and 


c) Groove shall not be longer than one half the free 
height of the wall (5/2). If hollow units are used, 
pipes or ducts shall not be placed in cells with 
reinforcement. Cells with pipes and ducts shall be 
grouted. 

It shall not be permitted to place piping and ducts in 
tie-columns with a structural function, whether external 
or internal. 


IS No. 


383 : 2016 


456 : 2000 


875 


(Part 3) : 2015 
1077 : 1992 


1786 : 2008 


1199 
(Part 2 : 2018) 


1893 
(Part 1 : 2016) 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Coarse and fine 
for concrete 
(third revision) 


aggregates 
Specification 


Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 


Code of practice for design 
loads (other than earthquake) for 
building and structures 


Wind loads (third revision) 


Common burnt 
bricks 
(fifth revision) 


High strength deformed steel 
bars and wires for concrete 
reinforcement — Specification 
(fourth revision) 


clay building 
Specification 


Fresh concrete — Methods of 
sampling, testing and analysis: 
Part 2 Determination of 
consistency of fresh concrete 
(first revision) 


Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures: Part 1 
General provisions and buildings 
(sixth revision) 


23 


IS No. 


1905 : 1987 


2180 : 1988 


2185 


(Part 1 : 2005) 


2212: 1991 


2222 : 1991 


2250 : 1981 


3952 : 2013 


4326 : 2013 


16720 : 2018 


IS 17848 : 2022 


Title 


Code of practice for structural 
use of unreinforced masonry 
(third revision) 


Specification for heavy duty 
burnt clay building bricks 
(third revision) 


Concrete masonry units 
Specification 


Part 1 Hollow and solid concrete 
blocks (third revision) 


Code of practice for brick works 
(first revision) 


Specification for burnt 
perforated building 
(third revision) 


clay 
bricks 


Code of practice for preparation 
and use of masonry mortars 
(first revision) 


Burnt clay hollow bricks for walls 
and partitions — Specification 
(third revision) 

Earthquake resistant design and 


construction of buildings — Code 
of practice (third revision) 


Pulverized fuel ash-cement 
bricks — Specification 


IS 17848 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 3.9, and 7.3.10.2) 
DETERMINATION OF SHEAR STRENGTH OF MASONRY BY DIAGONAL COMPRESSION TEST 


B-1 When shear strength of masonry (у) is to be 
established by tests, it shall be done in advance of the 
construction, using masonry specimens built of similar 
materials under the same conditions with the same 
bonding arrangement as for the structure. In making 
the specimens, moisture content of the units at the time 
of laying, the consistency of the mortar, the thickness 
of mortar joints and workmanship shall be the same as 
will be used in the structure. 


The walls specimens (Fig. 20) shall have a length at 
least two and a half times the length of the masonry 
unit in one direction and adequate number of courses 
in perpendicular direction so that the specimen has 
approximately square shape. The sides of the specimen 
may not be less than 600 mm. The walls specimens 
shall be tested by loading them in compression along 
one diagonal. Tests shall be conducted on at least three 
specimens constructed with the same size and type of 
masonry units, mortar, and workmanship. 


Specimens shall be tested after 28 days and two steel 
loading shoes (see Fig. 20) shall be used to apply the 
machine load to the specimen. For the distribution of 


24 


the applied load Р, the ratio of the length of bearing, /, 
and the width or height of specimen must be equal to 
or greater than 0.2. The load shall be applied at the rate 
of 50 to 100 kN/min and the load at failure should be 
recorded. Load should be applied at a uniform rate so 
that the maximum load is reached in not less than 1 min 
nor more than 2 min. Minimum thickness of steel plate 
used for loading shoe shall be 12 mm. 


B-2 Calculate the shear stress, у of the specimen as 
follows: 
0.707 P, 
Va = —— 
4, 
where, P. is the applied load (N) and А is the net area 
of the specimen (mm), calculated as follows: 


РИ (5 +h, 7 
2 


where, w. = width of specimen (mm), л, = height of 
specimen (mm) and / = total thickness of specimen 
(mm). 


IS 17848 : 2022 


P 
S 


MASONRY 
SPECIMEN 


LOADING 
SHOE 


Fic. 20 WALL SPECIMEN FOR DIAGONAL COMPRESSION TEST 


25 


IS 17848 : 2022 


ANNEX C 
(Clauses 3.14 and 8.2.2) 
SIMPLIFIED METHOD FOR SEISMIC DESIGN OF CONFINED MASONRY BUILDINGS 


C-1 Wall Index (WI), also known as wall density, is an 
indicator of seismic load-resisting capacity ofa masonry 
building and can be used for seismic design of low-rise 
buildings with regular plan shape and elevation. The 
design according to the simplified method is deemed 
satisfactory provided that the actual wall index in each 
direction of the building plan is greater than or equal 
to the required wall index (WI...) for specific building. 
NOTE — The concept of wall index and illustrative examples 
are presented in specialist literature; Brzev and Mitra (2018). 
Wall index per floor, WI, , is ratio of the sum of 
cross-sectional areas of all confined masonry walls in 
the direction considered for seismic load relative to the 


ground floor plan area, that 18: 


Where A. is the cross-sectional area of all confined 
walls in one direction at the ground floor level. The 
cross-sectional area of a confined masonry wall is the 
product of its length (including the reinforced concrete 
tie-columns and the masonry wall) and thickness. 4 is 
the plan area of the floor diaphragm (floor slab) at the 
ground floor level. The area ofany cutouts (openings) in 
the floor slab should be deducted in the А calculation. 


Parameters for wall index calculations are illustrated 
in Fig. 21. The wall index shall be calculated for each 
principal direction of the building plan (X and Y). Only 
confined masonry walls aligned in the direction under 
consideration (shown shaded in Fig. 21) should be 
taken into account in the 4 calculations for the specific 
direction. 


C-2 The required wall index for a building, WI. must 
account for the building height in terms of the number 
of floors, as follows: 


WI. = п, 


req floor 
Where n is the number of floor levels in a building, 
for example, n = 3 for a G + 2 building. It can be seen 
from the above equation that the Um increases in 
direct proportion with the number of floor levels in a 
building, and its value for a specific building depends 
on the following parameters: 


a) seismic zone of India (HI, IV or V) and soil 
type — expressed through seismic coefficient 4, 
determined from IS 1893 (Part 1); 


26 


b) number of floor levels in a building, л; 


с) compressive strength of bricks/blocks and 
mortar mix; and 


d) average floor weight, w in kN/m?, which 
includes the self-weight of floor slab, flooring, 
and walls, plus 25 percent of the imposed load. 

The required WI, — values for different seismic zones 
of India are given in Table 3. The values in Table 3 
were obtained based on the ultimate limit states design 
method, and assuming masonry unit compressive 
strength of 5.0 MPa, mortar type МІ as per IS 1905, 
and average floor weight, w = 12 kN/m?. 


Table 3 WT, for Different Seismic Zones 
(Clause C-2) 


Seismic Zone HI IV V 
WI. ( percent) 1.1 1.6 2.4 


floor 


Alternatively, the values of WI, can be calculated 
from as follows: 


1.5A,w 


WI — 
Val Aa 


floor — 


Where v is masonry shear strength as in 7.3.10.2, w is 
the average floor weight, А is the seismic coefficient, y. 
Is the partial safety factor for masonry as given in 7.3.2 
and Wis the seismic weight that is used to determine the 
seismic base shear force V, as per IS 1893 (Part 1), that 
is, V, = A, X Wp where A, is determined from IS 1893 
(Part 1) as follows: 


^) 
A2ARAg 

Z — the zone factor [see Table 3 of IS 1893 (Part 1)], 
equal to 0.16, 0.24, and 0.36 for seismic zones III, IV, 
and V of India respectively, Z = the importance factor 
[see Table 8 of IS 1893 (Part 1)], R = the response 
reduction factor, equal to 3.0 for confined masonry 
(VR < 1.0), and 5 /g = the average response acceleration 
[see 6.4.2 of IS 1893 (Part 1)], based on natural period 
of the structure, equal to 2.5 for buildings with the 
period of less than 0.4 s. 


Different masonry properties (masonry unit 
compressive strength and mortar type) can be used, and 
the corresponding masonry shear strength, у,, сап be 
determined from 7.3.10.2. 


IS 17848 : 2022 


N 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 


д 
4 
; 
j 
А 


FIG. 21 PARAMETERS FOR THE WALL INDEX CALCULATIONS FOR THE PRINCIPAL DIRECTIONS OF A BUILDING PLAN (X AND Y) 


N 
N 
\ 
N 


халал ANWAMWANTMANMAN MANNA WAKAY аласа ааа 


SEISMIC LOAD 
N 
x 


27 


IS 17848 : 2022 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 39 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Association of Consulting Engineers (India), 
Bengaluru 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 
B & S Engineering Consultants Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, New Delhi 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion 
Council, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soils and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants Private Limited, 
Ghaziabad 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-National Geophysical Research Institute, 
Hyderabad 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


D-CAD Technologies, New Delhi 
DDF Consultants Private Limited, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, Lucknow 

Indian Association of Structural Engineers, 
New Delhi 

Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar, 
Bhubaneswar 


Representative(s) 


Pror C. V. R. Murty (Chairman) 


SHRI SANDEEP SHIRKHEDKAR 
SHRI AswATH M. U. (Alternate) 


SHRI L. R. BISHNOI 
DR RosHAN A. D. (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK BHOWMICK 
SHRI SANJAY KUMAR JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAvI KUMAR 


Dr SHAILESH KUMAR AGRAWAL 

SHRI SHARAD GUPTA (Alternate) 
CHIEF ENGINEER (D & DM) 

SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (CIVIL) (Alternate) 
DR N. P. HONKANDAVAR 

DR Мамівн GUPTA (Alternate) 
DIRECTOR Смрр (E & NE) 

DIRECTOR EMBANKMENT (NW & S) (Alternate) 
SHRI AMANDEEP GARG 

ӛнкі BARJINDER SINGH (Alternate) 
DR NAVJEEV SAXENA 

DR AJAY CHOURASIA (Alternate) 


DR SIMANCHAL PADHY 


SHRIMATI R. SREEKALA 
Dn K. SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


Dn K. G. BHATIA 


DR PRATIMA К. ВО$Е 
SHRI SADANAND OJHA (Alternate) 


DR G. G. SRINIVAS ACHARY 
DR SupiP PauL (Alternate) 
Ms Divya KHULLAR (Young Professional) 


Dr SANDEEP KUMAR 
DR RAMJIVAN SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI VIPUL AHUJA 
ӛнкі КАЛУ AHUJA (Alternate) 


DR A. R. SANTHAKUMAR 
DR K. P. Java (Alternate) 


PRor Ravi SINHA 
PROF ALOK GOoyvAL (Alternate) 


DR SURESH RANJAN DASH 


28 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, 
Gandhinagar 


Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Information Technology, 
Hyderabad 


Indian Society of Earthquake Technology, Roorkee 


Ministry of Earth Sciences, National Centre for 
Seismology, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building, 
Ballabgarh 


National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi 
NTPC Limited, New Delhi 

Nuclear Power Corporation India Limited, Mumbai 
Power Grid Corporation of India, Gurgaon 


Research Designs and Standards Organization, 
Lucknow 


Risk Management Solutions Inc, Noida 
SD Engineering Consultants LLP, New Delhi 


Tandon Consultants Private Limited, New Delhi 


Tata Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 
Vakil Mehta Sheth Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 


Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, 
Nagpur 


Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun 


In personal capacity (/74/2 Е Solanipuram, Roorkee) 


In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha 
Raod, Nagpur) 


IS 17848 : 2022 


Representative(s) 


Dr Dipti RANJAN SAHOO 
DR VASANT MATSAGAR (Alternate) 


DR Ѕорнік К. JAIN 
DR Аміт PRASHANT (Alternate) 
DR HEMANT B. KAUSHIK 
ProF DURGESH C. RAI 
Рвов A. MEHER PRASAD 


DR КОРЕМ GoswaMI (Alternate I) 
Dr ARUN MENON (Alternate ЇЇ) 


Рков YoGENDRA SINGH 
PROF MANISH SHRIKHANDE (Alternate I) 
Pror B. K. MAHESHWARI (Alternate П) 
Dn P. C. ASHWIN Kumar (Young Professional) 


PROF PRADEEP KUMAR RAMANCHARLA 


PRESIDENT 
VICE PRESIDENT (EDITOR) (Alternate) 


DR O. P. MISHRA 
Dr H. S. MANDAL (Alternate) 


SHRI P. М. OJHA 
SHRI BRIJESH SINGH (Alternate) 
ӛнкі AjAY KUMAR (Young Professional) 


JOINT ADVISOR (MP & P) 
Монр JAVED (Alternate) 


DR PRAVEEN KHANDELWAL 
SHRI SAURABH GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
SHRI RAGHUPATI Roy (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. V. M. PRAKASH 
SHRI AKASH SHRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (B & S) 
DIRECTOR (В & S) SB-I (Alternate) 


DR SUSHIL GUPTA 
Ms SANGEETA WIJ 


PROF MAHESH TANDON 
SHRI VINAY K. GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARJUN C. R. 


Ms Агра R. SHETH 
SHRI R. D. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


PRor O. R. JAISWAL 
ProF R. K. INGLE (Alternate) 


DR RAJESH SHARMA 
DR VIKRAM GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR S. K. THAKKAR 
SHRI L. K. JAIN 


29 


IS 17848 : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 


In personal capacity (H-102, VVIP Addresses, Dn A. K. Міттлі. 
Rajnagar Extn, Ghaziabad) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Row House 4, Sun City Housing DRI. D. GUPTA 
Society, Vadgaon Budruk, Pune 411051) 


In personal capacity, Noida Suri A. K. SINGH 


BIS Directorate General SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretaries 


SHRI ARUN KUMAR S. 
SCIENTIST ‘E’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


& 


SHRI JITENDRA KUMAR CHAUDHARY 
SCIENTIST “В” (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Composition of the Working Group for Confined Masonry 


Organization Representative(s) 
Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, PROF SUDHIR K. JAIN 
Gandhinagar Dr SVETLANA BRZEV (Alternate) 
Indian Institute of Technology Patna, Patna Dr VAIBHAV SINGHAL 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur Рков DURGESH C. RAI 


30 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: СЕР 39 (16890). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6^ Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western У Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


