**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  7347  (1974) :  Performance  of  Small  Size  Spark  Ignition 
Engines  for  agricultural  sprayers  and  similar  applications 
;tED  2:  Automotive  Primemovers] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


(Including  Amendment  No.  1 )  (Reaffirmed  2006) 


Ind/an  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 

PERFORMANCE  OF  SMALL  SIZE  SPARK  IGNITION   ENGINES 


1.  Scope  —  Covers  the  test  procedure  for  naturally  aspirated  spark  ignition  engines  up  to  20  kW, 
generally  used  for  Industrial  and  agricultural  purposes  and  also  for  motive  power. 

1.1   It  excludes  engines  for  road-going  vehicles  and  those  operating  on  gas  or  dual  fuels. 

2.  Terminology  —  Following  definitions  shall  apply. 

2.1  Spark  Ignition  Engine  —  An  engine  in  which  ignition  occurs  by  means  of  an  electric  spark. 

2.2  Auxiliary  —  Items  of  equipment  fitted  to  the  engines  which  affect  its  declared  power. 

2.2.1  Dependent  auxiliary  ~  An  item  of  equipment,  presence  of  which  affects  the  final  output  of  the 
engine. 

2.2.2  Independent  auxiliary  —  An  item  of  equipment,  which  uses  power  supplied  from  a  source,  other 
than  engine. 

2.2.3  Essential  auxiliary  —  An  item  of  equipment,  which  is  essential  for  the  continued  or  repeated 
use  of  the  engine. 

2.2.4  Non-essential  auxiliary  —  An  item  of  equipment,  which  is  not  essential  for  the  continued  or 
repeated  use  of  the  engine. 

Note  —  Items  of  equipments  fitted  to  the  engine  and  without  which  the  engine  could  not  In  any  circumstances 
operate  at  Its  declared  power  are  considered  to  be  engine  components  and  are  not,  therefore,  classed  as  auxiliaries. 
Examples  of  typical  auxiliaries  are.given  in  Appendix  A  for  guidance  only. 

2.3  Speech  — The  speed  of  an  engine  is  the  mean  speed  of  its  crank  shaft  or  the  crank  shafts  In  revolu- 
tions per  minute  (  rpm  ). 

2.4  Power  — For  the  engines  delivering  power  by  shaft  or  shafts,  any  power  in  this  standard  is  a 
quantity  proportional  to  the  mean  torque  calculated  or  measured,  and  to  the  mean  speed  of  the  shaft 
or  shafts  transmitting  this  torque.  The  power  shall  be  declared  in  kilowatts;  a  kilowatt  being  the 
rate  of  doing  work  at  one  kilo  joule  per  second. 

2.4.1  Continuous  power  (  rated  power  or  continuous  rating  )  ~  Power  which  the  engine  is  capable  of 
delivering  continuoLsIy,  between  the  normal  maintenance  intervals  stated  by  the  manufacturer,  at  rated 
speed  and  under  stcndard  reference  conditions. 

2.4.2  Indicated  power  —  Total  power  developed  in  the  working  cylinder  by  the  gases  on  the 
combustion  side  of  the  working  pistons. 

2.4.3  Brake  power  —  The  sum  of  the  powers  measured  at  the  driving  shaft  or  shafts. 

2.5  Fuel  Consumption  ^The  quantity  of  fuel  consumed  by  engine  per  unit  of  time  at  a  stated  power 
and  under  stated  operating  conditions.     The  quantity  of  liquid  fuels  should  be  expressed  in  mass  units 

(kg). 

2.5.1  Specific  fuel  consumption  -  -Fuel  consumption  per  unit  of  power,  expressed  in  grams 
per  kilowatt  hour. 

2.6  Full  Throttle  —  Throttle  opening  corresponding  to  rated  power. 

3.  Standard  Reference  Conditions  — Standard  reference  conditions  are: 

a)  Mean  barometric  pressure  100  kN/m^  (  750  mm  Hg  ) 

b)  Intake  air  temperature  300  K  (  27**C  ) 

fijote  —  Intake  air  temperature  shall  be  i;neasured  at  a  distance  of  150  mm  from  the  air  intake.  If  a  filter  Is  provided, 
the  temperature  shall  be  measured  at  a  distance  of  150  mm  from  the  filter.  Where  air  Intake  Into  the  filter  Is  from 
various  directions,  the  mean  of  four  readings  taken  from  geometrically  opposite  points  at  equal  distance  shall  be 
used.    It  shall  be  measured  by  a  thermometer  shielded  from  radiant  heat. 


Adopted  17  July  1974 


©  February  1975,  BIS 


Gr4 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARADS 

MANAK  HHAVAN,  9   BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NLW  DELHI    110002 


AMENDMENT  NO.  3  SEPTEMBER  2011 

TO 

IS  7347  :  1974  SPECIFICATION  FOR  PERFORMANCE  OF 

SMALL  SIZE  SPARK  IGNITION  ENGINES  FOR 

AGRICULTURAL  WATER  PUMPS,  SPRAYERS,  TILLERS, 

REAPERS  AND  OTHER  SIMILAR  APPLICATIONS 


[Page  1,  clause  1.1  (see  also  Amendments  No.  1  and  2)]  —  Substitute  the 
following  for  the  existing: 

'1.1  It  covers  spark  ignition  engines  that  start  on  petrol  and  subsequently  run  on 
kerosene  or  any  other  liquid  fuel.' 

{Page  5,  clause  10.1)  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing: 

'10.1  The  engine  shall  be  marked  with  the  following: 

a)  Manufacturer's  name  or  trade-mark; 

b)  Serial  Number  of  the  engine; 

c)  Rated  power; 

d)  Rated  speed;  and 

e)  Type  of  fuel  used,  for  example,  Petrol;  Petrol  start  kerosene  run  or 
Petrol  start  diesel  run.' 


(TED  2) 


Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


AMENDMENT  NO.  2  OCTOBER  2008 

TO 

IS  7347  :  1974  SPECIFICATION  FOR  PERFORMANCE 

OF  SMALL  SIZE  SPARK  IGNITION  ENGINES  FOR 

AGRICULTURAL  SPRAYERS  AND  SIMILAR 

APPLICATIONS 

[Page  I ,  Title  {see  also  Amendment  No.  1)]  —  Substitute  the  following  for 
the  existing  title: 

SPECIFICATION  FOR  PERFORMANCE  OF  SMALL  SIZE  SPARK 

IGNITION  ENGINES  FOR  AGRICULTURAL  WATER  PUMPS, 

SPRAYERS,  TILLERS,  REAPERS  AND  OTHER  SIMILAR 

APPLICATIONS' 

[Page  1 ,  clause  1  (see  also  Amendment  No.  1 )]  —  Substitute  the  following 
for  the  existing  clause: 

'1  SCOPE  —  Covers  the  performance  requirements  and  test  procedure  for 
naturally  aspirated  spark  ignition  engines  for  agricultural  water  pumps,  sprayers, 
tilleni,  reapers  and  other  similar  applications.' 

[Page   1,   clause  1.1   (see  also  Amendment  No.    1)]   —  Substitute  the 
following  for  the  existing  clause: 

'l.I  It  covers  spark  ignition  engines  that  run  on  kerosene  or  petrol.' 


(TED  2) 


Reprography  Unit,  BiS,  New  Delhi,  India 


AMENDMENT  NO.  1         JULY  1983 
TO 
IS  :  7347-1974     SPECIFICATION  FOR  PERFORMANCE  OF  SMALL  SIZE 
SPARK  IGNITION  ENGINES 

Alterations 

(  P(ig(-  1,  Title  )  —  Substitute  tlit"  Ibllowiii!^  lor  the  cxistinf^  title: 
•SPECIFICATION  FOR  PERFORMANCE  OF  SMALL  SIZE  SPARK  IGNITION  ENGINES 
FOR  AGRICULTURAL  SPRAYERS  AND  SIMILAR  APPLICATIONS' 

(  Page  I,  dauu^  1  )  —  Sul)stitiite  (he  Inllowntg  for  tlie  existing  clause: 

'1.  Scope  —  Covers  the  test  procedure  and  perforniance  requirements  for  naturally  aspirated  spark 
ignition  engines  for  agricultural  sprayers  and  other  similar  applications.  ' 

(  Page  1,  clause  1.1  )  --  Substitute  the  loljowing  for  the  existing  clause: 
'  1.1   It  covers  spark  ignition  engines  that  start  on  petrol  and  subsequently  run   on   kerosene  or  any 
other  liquid  fuel.  ' 

(  Page  'i,  claiiSL'  8.2.1  )  —  Sub'-titute  the  following  for  the  existing  clause: 

"8.?.1  Fuel  used  shall  be  petrol,  diesel  oil  or  superior  kerosene  oil  according  to  18:2796-19/1 
'  Spet^ification  for  motor  gaso'ine  (first  revision  )  ',  15:1460-1974  'Specification  for  diesel  fuels 
(  second  revision  )  \  and  IS  :  1459-1974  '  Specification  for  kerosenes  (  second  revision  )  '  respectively. 
The  quantity  or  grade  of  lubricating  oil  shall  be  according  to  the  manufacturer's  recommendations." 

(  EDC  14) 
1—97  BIS/ND/07 


IS:  7347 -1974 

c)  Relative  humidity  60  percent 

d)  Intake  air  depression  and  exhaust  Equal  to  that  obtaining  with  intake  and  exhaust 
back  pressure  systems  normally  fitted   to  engine  or  recom- 
mended by  manufacturer 

e)  Auxiliaries  Engine  shall    be   equipped  with   all    dependent 

essential  auxiliaries  as  defined  In  2.2.3 

4.  Declaration  of  Rated  Power  Output  and  Speed 

4.1  Statement  of  power  is  required  for  two  main  purposes: 

a)  Declaration  by  a  manufacturer  of  the  value  of  the  power  which  the  engine  will  deliver  under 
standard  reference  conditions.     This  declared  value  is  known  as  the  '  rated  power '. 

b)  Verification  by  measurement  that  the  engine  delivers  the  power  which  has  been  declared  In  (a), 
under  the  standard  reference  conditions  or  after  proper  allowance  has  been  made  for  any 
difference  in  conditions. 

4.2  IS  Rating  —  The  power  determined  under  the  site  conditions  of  the  test  bed  and  corrected  to  the 
standard  reference  conditions  specified  in  3  using  power  correction  factor  a  (  see  4.2.1  )  and  is  defined 
as  the  continuous  net  brake  power. 

4.2.1  Power  correction  factor 'oc'  —  It  is  the  ratio  of  power  output  under  the  site  conditions  to  the 
power  output  under  standard  reference  conditions  and  is  given  by: 

a  =  A-0-7  (1  -  A)(    ^    -  1  ) 

where 

7)  =  mechanical  efficiency  of  the  engine  at  rated  load  and  speed  and  standard  reference 
conditions  ( to  be  stated  by  the  manufacturer ).  r)  should  be  taken  as  actual  calculated 
value  or  075  whichever  is  higher. 

._      Px-4>xP»x      (   300  \0-5 
100  -  0-60  Pa,  V     Tx     J 

where 

Px  =  barometric  pressure  at  site,  kiionewtons  per  square  metre; 

tf>^  =  relative  humidity  at  site,  percent; 

Pbx  ~  saturated  vapour  pressure  of  water  vapour  corresponding  to  site  temperature, 
kiionewtons  per  square  metre; 

par  =  saturated  vapour  pressure  of  water  vapour  corresponding  to  standard  reference 
temperature,  kiionewtons  per  square  metre;  and 

Tx  =  absolute  air  intake  temperature  at  site,  kelvin. 

4.2.2  In  deriving  this  factor,  following  assumptions  have  been  made: 

a)  The  air  fuel  ratios  are  the  same  in  both  cases  for  equivalent  engine  performance. 

b)  The  indicated  thermal  efficiencies  are  the  same. 

c)  The  frictional  losses  are  the  same. 

4.3  Where  the  conditions  of  site  are  more  favourable  than  the  standard  reference  conditions  specified 
in  3,  the  rating  of  the  engine  may  be  limited  by  the  manufacturer  to  the  declared  power  at  the  standard 
reference  conditions  specified  in  3. 

5.  Declaration  of  Fuel  Consumption 

5.1  The  engine  manufacturer  shall  state  the  specific  fuel  consumption  at  rated  output  under  the  standard 
reference  conditions  specified  in  3. 

5.2  Unless  otherwise  agreed  to  between  the  manufacturer  and  the  purchaser,  the  specific  fuel  consump- 
tion shall  not  exceed  by  more  than  5  percent  of  that  declared  by  the  manufacturer. 

5.3  The  specific  fuel  consumption  at  the  site  conditions  shall  be  corrected  to  the  standard  reference 
conditions  using  specific  fuel  consumption  correction  factor '  p '  (  see  5.3.1  ). 


IS:  7347-  1974 

5.3.1  Specific  fuel  consumption  correction  factor  '  p  '  is  the  ratio  of  the  specific  fuel   consumption 
under  site  conditions  to  the  specific  fuel  consumption  under  standard  reference  conditions,  that  is, 

a  __    Specific  fuel  consumption  under  site  conditions 


Specific  fuel  consumption  under  standard  reference  conditions 
also  8  =     gj 
Note  —  In  deriving  this  factor,  tho  assumptions  made  in  4.2.2  are  valid. 

6.  Declaration  of  Lubricating  Oil  Consumption 

6.1  The  lubricating  oil  consumption  is  the  quantity  of  lubricating  oil  consumed  by  an  engine  per  unit 
of  time.     It  should  be  expressed  in  litres  per  engine  operating  hour. 

6.1.1  The  lubricating  oil  consumption  declared  by  the  manufacturer  shall  be  taken  as  maximum  for 
the  purpose  of  testing. 

6.1.2  The  oil  discarded  during  an  engine  oil  change  should  not  be  included  in  the  declaration  of 
lubricating  oil  consumption. 

7.  General  Requirements  for  Tests 

7.1  The  manufacturer  shall  supply  the  performance  characteristics  of  the  engine  prior  to  the  commence- 
ment of  tests.     The  performance  characteristics  shall  consist  ol  the  following: 

a)  Rated  continuous  brake  output  at  rated  speed  and  at  standard  reference  conditions  ( in  addition 
to  continuous  rating,  maximum  rating  at  a  specific  speed  may  also  be  given  ). 

b)  Rated  speed. 

c)  Declared  specific  fuel  consumption  at  Mted  output  and  rated  speed. 

d)  Declaied  lubricating  oil  consumption. 

7.2  The  engine  offered  for  testing  shall  bt?  ftofn  regular  production  line.  All  parts  shall  be  in  stock  anc 
all  parts  essential  for  engine  operation  shall  be  iricluded.  Auxiliaries  used  on  the  engine  under  te.>t 
shall  be  listed. 

8.  Preparation  for  Tests 

8.1  Strip  Exam/nation  —  The  engine  shall  ho  dismantled  for  physical  check  of  various  components 
followed  by  dimensional  inspection  of  tfie  following: 

a)  Cylinder  and  cylinder  head. 

b)  Valve  gear. 

c)  Piston  assembly. 

d)  Crank  shaft  journals  and  bearings. 

e)  Connecting  rod,  including  small-end  and  large-end  bearings. 

f )  Governor  springs. 

Note  — In  case  of  built-up  dssemblies  involving  press-fitting  or  shrink-fitting  (  tor  example,  Iwo  crank  sliaft  halves 
joined  by  press-fiMed  crank  pin  or  bill  bcarffujj  pressed  oa  the  shaft)  tho  related  parts  need  not  bo  dismartied. 

8.2  Reassembly  —  After  the  stup  nxattiin.iiioK,  the  engine  sli.il!  be  reassembled  by  the  manufacturer  {  or 
under  the  supervision  of  the  rnanuf<^cturt}r ).  Necessary  ndjuslmonts  sliail  bo  made  according  to  the 
manufacturer's  recommendations.     The  engine  sfiall  bo  mounted  on  surtable  test  bed. 

8.2.1  Hue!  used  shall  be  normal  commercial  gracie  pelro!      Tho  quantity  and  grade  of  the  lubricating 
oil  shall  be  according  to  the  manufactuiot's  rocomniendations 

8.3  Running-in  —The  engine  shall  be  properly  run-in  before  commencing  the  tests.  Procedure  of 
running-in  shall  be  as  recommended  by  the  mnnuiacturet.  After  ruiuuny-in,  all  tho  adjustments  should 
be  checked  and  reset,  if  necessary. 

8.3.1   During   the   running-in,    the    routine    f.orvicing    and    minor    adjustments    as    required    by    the 
manufacturer's  instruction  manual  shall  be  carried  oui. 

8.4  Lubricating  oil  shall  be  changed  and  various  hlttns  cloam^d  as  recommended  by  the  manufacturer. 

9.  Test  Procedure 

9.1  Following  tests  shall  be  carried  oi:{: 

a)   Rating  test,  including  the  fuel  consumj^liop  t'/:,t 

2—97   BIS/ND;C7 


15:7347-1974 

b)  Governing  test  ( for  engines  with  governor ), 

c)  No  load  and  low  speed  test  ( for  engines  without  governor ). 

d)  Starting  test. 

e)  Endurance  test. 

f)  Rating  test  after  endurance  test. 

g)  Strip  examination  for  checking  of  various  components, 
h)  Reassembly,  starting  test  and  no  load  running. 

9.1.1   During  testing,  the  routine  servicing  and  minor  adjustments  as  required  by  the  manufacturer's 
instruction  manual  shall  be  carried  out. 

9.2  Rating  Test  —  The  engine  shall  be  positively  coupled  (  direct  or  by  chain  drive),  preferably  through 
a  flexible  coupling,  to  a  suitable  dynamometer.  Before  starting  the  test,  the  engine  shall  be  allowed  to 
warm  up  to  stabilized  temperature  by  gradually  increasing  the  load  in  the  manner  recommended  by  the 
manufacturer.     The  test  shall  be  carried  out  in  the  following  manner,  at  the  rated  speed: 


Load  (  percent )                       100 
Duration  of  fuel  consump-       1 0 
tion  test,  min 

110 
10 

75 
10 

50 
10 

25 
10 

0 
10 

Duration  of  rating  test       7  h  30  min 

30  min 

10  min 

10  min 

10  min 

10  mi 

Note  1  ~  Hundred  percent  or  '  full  load  '  denotes  the  state  of  the  engine  when  It  Is  developing  the  continuous  rated 
brake  power  at  the  rated  speed. 

Note  2  — One  hundred  ten  percent  load  test  may  be  conducted  during  the  100  percent  load  test  at  any   suitable 
time,  so  that  tho  total  time  of  100  percent  and  110  percent  load  tests  Is  8  hours. 

Note  3 — Engine  fitted  with  governor  shall  be  adjusted  to  rated  output  at  rated  speed.     No  further  governor  adjust- 
ments shall  be  done  for  other  loads.     The  output  is  to  be  calculated  considering  the  torque  and  speed  attained. 

9.2.1  Following  observations  shall  be  made  during  the  rating  test  and  recorded: 

a)  Ambient  conditions,  atmospheric  pressure.  Inlet  air  temperature  [  see  Note  under  3  (b)  ],  and 
relative  humidity. 

Note  —  Inlet  air  temperature  shall  be  measured  a»  In  3  (b),  after  the  engine  has  reached  stabilized  temperature, 
and  shall  be  checked  once  every  two  hours  during  the  full-load  run  so  as  to  obtain  an  average  reading. 

b)  Dynamometer  load. 

c)  Engine  speed. 

d)  Fuel  consumption  shall  be  measured  by  volume  in  litres  per  hour.  Specific  fuel  consumption 
shall  l>e  expressed  in  grams  per  kilowatt  hour.  Duration  of  each  reading  of  fuel  consumption 
should  be  minimum  30  seconds.  During  the  full-load  run.  at  least  four  readings  shall  be 
taken  at  equal  intervals.     Readings  may  betaken  if  necessary  during  part-load  runs  also. 

Note  —  When  lubricating  oil  Is  mixed  with  petrol,  the  quantity  of  oil  mixed  shall  be  deducted  from  the  total 
fuel  consumed  for  determining  the  consumption  value. 

e)  Temperature  of  cooling  water  at  the  outlet  of  the  engine  ( for  water-cooled  engine  ). 

f)  Temperature  of  lubricating  oil  in  the  sump  (wherever  applicable).  The  reading  shall  be 
taken  at  the  end  of  thd  full-load  run, 

g)  Lubricating  oil  pressure  (for  engine  provided  with  forced  lubrication).  Reading  shall  be 
taken  just  at  the  beginning  of  full-load  run  and  shall  be  repeated  twice  during  the  full-load 
run.  This  test  may  be  omitted  If  suitable  outlet  for  connecting  a  pressure  gauge  is  not 
provided  on  the  engine. 

9.2.1.1  Observations  at  (f)  and  (g)  are  not  applicable  to  two-stroke  engines  using  petrol. 

9.3  Governing  Test  —  Applicable  for  engine  fitted  with  governor. 

9.3.1  When  the  engine,  running  at  rated  speed  and  developing  rated  output,  is  suddenly  relieved  of 
the  load,  the  resulting  speed  changes  .shall  be  within  the  values  given  below: 

Governing  Momentary  Change  Permanent  Change 

Class  Percent  of  Rated  Percent  of  Rated 

Speed,  Max  Speed,  Max 

1  12  6 

2  15  10 

For  Class  1  governing,  the  resulting  speed  change  for  20  percent  step  of  rated  load  shall  be 
4  percent  ( Max  )  as  momentary  change  percent  of  rated  speed,  and  3  percent  (  Max  )  as  permanent 
change  percent  of  rated  speed. 


15:7347-1974 

9.4  No  Load  and  Low  Speed  Test  —  Applicable  for  engine  without  governor.  These  tests  shall  be  carried 
out  on  the  engine  without  coupling  it  to  the  dynamometer. 

9.4.1  When  the  engine  is  accelerated  from  an  arbitrary  low  speed,  it  shall  be  able  to  run  up  to 
120  percent  of  rated  speed  and  maintain  it  for  10  seconds.  The  procedure  shall  be  repeated  6  times  at 
intervals  of  10  seconds.     No  failure  shall  be  observed. 

9.4.2  The  engine  shall  run  steadily,  for  at  least  10  minutes,  at  50  percent  of  the  rated  speed. 

9.5  Starting  Test  —  This  test  shall  be  carried  out  on  the  engine  without  coupling  it  to  the  dynamometer. 
The  engine  shall  be  mounted  at  s  convenient  height  for  the  operator  conducting  the  test. 

9.5.1  Engine  designed  for  manual  starting  shall  be  capable  of  being  started  by  hand.  This  test  shall 
be  conducted  when  the  engine  is  cold  (  at  room  temperature )  and  also  when  it  is  hot,  that  is. 
Immediately  after  the  load  test.  The  engine  should  be  started  three  times  in  succession  but  before  each 
starting,  the  engine  should  be  brought  to  room  temperature. 

9.5.2  For  the  starting  test,  the  attempt  to  start  the  engine  shall  be  made  using  the  normal  procedure 
recommended  by  the  manufacturer.  The  starting  shall  be  deemed  successful  when  the  engine  runs  for 
10  seconds.  The  number  of  attempts  made  to  start  the  engine  shall  be  recorded,  if  the  engine  fails  to 
start  within  10  minutes,  the  engine  should  be  considered  as  having  failed  the  starting  test.  Whenever 
possible,  the  reasons  for  failure  to  start  shall  be  determined  and  stated  in  the  test  report. 

9.5.3  In  case  of  engine  fitted  with  electric  starter,  the  starter  shall  be  able  to  start  the  engine  for 
minimum  3  times  in  succession.  The  power  source  used  for  this  test  shall  be  as  recommended  by  the 
manufacturer  for  normal  use  of  the  engine. 

9.6  Endurance  Test 

9.6.1  The  engine  shall  be  subjected  to  an  endurance  test  of  98  hours  duration  in  non-stop  cycles  of 
7  hours  duration  each,  conforming  to  the  following  cycle  pattern: 

Load  on  Engine  (  Percent )  Duration  ( Hours  ) 

100  2  (  including  warm 

up  period  ) 
75  2 

100  2 

50  1 

Note  1  —  During  the  cycle,  ihe  speed  snail  be  maintained  between  90  and  100  percent  of  rated  speed.  In  case  of 
♦wo-stroke  engine,  the  plugs  may  be  cleaned  according  to  the  Instructions  given  by  the  manufacturer. 

Note  2 —  If  the  engine  reeds  to  be  stopped  during  any  cycle  for  any  minor  attention,  the  running  time  of  that  cycle 
shall  not  be  counted  as  part  of  the  test  and  the  cycle  shall  bo  recommenced. 

9.8.2  Lubricating  oil  consumption  —  The  test  shall  be  carried  out  during  the  endurance  test  to 
determine  the  lubricating  oil  consumption  in  g/h.  The  consumption  shall  be  measured  by  noting  the 
amount  of  oil  required  to  bring  back  the  level  in  sump  or  oil  tank  to  the  Initial  level,  over  a  definite 
period  of  engine  operation.  Before  taking  the  reading,  the  temperature  of  the  engine  sump  oil  shall 
have  reached  within  5°C  of  the  room  temperature. 

Note  —  The  determination  of  lubricating  oil  consumption  is  not  applicable  to  the  two-stroke  engine  using  petrol. 

9.7  Rating  Test  After  Endurance  Test  —  Shall  be  carried  out  after  the  endurance  test.  The  procedure 
outlined  in  9.2  shall  be  adopted.  The  percentage  increase  In  specific  fuel  consumption  and  decrease 
in  power  shall  be  as  agreed  to  between  the  manufacturer  and  the  purchaser. 

9.8  Strip  Examination  —  The  engine  shall  be  dismantled  and  dimensional  and  ptiysical  Inspection  shall 
be  carried  out  for  components  checked  during  initial  examination  ( see  8.1  )  to  find  out  whether  any 
undue  wear  has  taken  place  (  see  Appendix  B  ). 

9.9  Reassembfy  —  The  engine  shall  be  reassembled,  adjusted  arid  run  for  five  minutes  at  no  load  to 
ensure  that  reassembly  is  properly  done. 

10.  Marking 

10.1  The  engine  shall  be  marked  appropriately  with  the  following: 

a)  Manufacturer's  name,  trade-mark  and  number; 

b)  Rated  power;  and 

c)  Rated  speed. 

10.1.1  IS!  Certification  Marliing  —  Details  available  with  the  Indian  Standards  Institution. 

5 


IS:  7347-  1974 

APPENDIX     A 

{Clause  2.2.4  ) 
EXAMPLES  OF  AUXILIARIES  WHICH  MAY  BE  FITTED 

Note  —  These  lists  are  given  for  guidance  only  and  are  not  necessarily  complete. 

List  A    Essential,  Dependent  Auxiliaries  (  see  2.2.1  and  2.2.3) 

1  Engine-driven  lubricating  oil  pressure  pump 

2  Engine-driven  lubricating  oil  scavenge  pump  for  dry  sump  engines 

3  Engine-driven  engine  cooling  water  pump 

4  Engine-driven  radiator  cooling  fan 

5  Engine-driven  engine  cooling  fan  for  air-cooled  engines 

6  Engine-driven  fuel  feed  pump 

7  Engine-driven  generator,  air  compressor  or  hydraulic  pump  when  supplying  power  to  items 

in  List  B 

8  Engine-driven  cylinder  lubricating  pump 

9  Air  cleaner  or  air  silencer  (  normal  or  special  ) 
10     Exhaust  silencer  (  normal  or  special ) 

List  B     Essential,  Independent  Auxiliaries  (  see  2.2.2  and  2.2.3  ) 

1  Spparately-driven  lubricating  oil  pressure  pump 

2  Separately-driven  lubricating  oil  scavenge  pump  for  dry  sump  engines 

3  Separately-driven  engine  cooling  water  pump 

4  Separately-driven  radiator  cooling  fan 

5  Separately-driven  engine  cooling  fan  for  air-cooled  engines 

6  Separately-driven  fuel  feed  pump 

7  Separately-driven  cylinder  lubricating  pump 

8  Governing  or  control  system  using  power  from  an  external  source 

List  C     Non-essential,  Dependent  Auxiliaries  (  see  2-2.1  and  2.2.4  ) 

1  Enginc-driven  starting  air  compressor 

2  Engine-driven  generator,  air  compressor  or  hydraulic  pump  when  supplying  power  to  items 

not  in  List  B 

3  Engine-driven  fire  pump 

4  Engine-driven  ventilation  fan 

5  Engine-driven  fuel  transfer  pump 


APPENDIX     6 

(  Clause  9.8  ) 
ACCEPTANCE  STANDARDS  FOR  TESTS 

B-1.  Overloaij  Test  —  During  the  overload  lest  f  110  percent  load  ).  the  engine  shall  hv)i  tai'  as 
rj5;ul{  of  ;:vci-ivrt[ng.  nor  shoi.?;d  thoru  bt"  tjny  umiUfi  nuise  o:  dotk  t'xl-iaust- 


15:7347-1974 

B-2.  Fuel  Consumption  —  For  specific  fuel  consumption,  measured  at  rated  output  and  rated  speed, 
5  percent  tolerance  above  that  of  declared  specific  fuel  consumption  shall  be  acceptable. 

B-2.1  If  the  engine  is  being  tested  with  reduction  gear  box  (  as  an  auxiliary  ),  a  value  of  up  to  3  percent 
o\/eT  and  above  the  permissible  limit  mentioned  in  B-2  shall  be  allowed. 

B-3.  Rating  for  Engine  with  Auxiliaries  —  If  the  engine  is  offered  for  test  along  with  power- 
consuming  auxiliaries,  such  as  gear  box,  the  corresponding  values  of  the  rated  output  and  the  specific 
fuel  consumption  shall  be  declared  by  the  manufacturer. 

B-4.  Carburettor —  During  the  entire  test,  the  carburettor  shall  be  free  from  any  manufacturing  defect 
affecting  the  smooth  running  of  the  engine.  For  engine  fitted  with  governor,  no  adj'ustment  should  be 
necessary  once  the  governor  is  set  for  rated  output  and  rated  speed  at  the  beginning  of  the  load  test. 

B-5,  Ignition  System  —  During  the  entire  test,  the  ignition  system  shall  be  free  from  any  manufactur- 
ing defect  affecting  the  engine  starting  or  running  performance.  However,  cleaning  or  adjustment  of 
spark  plug  and  contact  breaker  shall  be  carried  out  as  recommended  by  the  manufacturer. 


EXPLANATORY     NOTE 

This  Institution  having  agreed  to  adopt,  along  with  other  standards  organizations,  the  SI  units 
based  on  ISO/R  1  000  '  Rules  for  the  use  of  units  of  the  international  system  of  units  and  a  selection  of 
the  decimal  multiples  and  sub-multiples  of  the  SI  units  ',  issued  by  the  International  Organization  for 
Standardization,  all  values  in  this  standard  have  been  given  in  SI  units. 

In  this  standard,  following  units  have  been  used: 

a)  Pressure  —  Kilonewtons  per  square  metre  (  kN/m'^ ) 

100kN/m-*-  750mmHg 

b)  Power  — Kilowatts  (  kW  ) 

1  kW  =-~^  1  36  metric  horse  power 

Standard  reference  conditions,  correction  factors  for  power  and  specific  fuel  consumption  given 
in  this  standard  are  in  entire  agreement  with  those  given  in  ISO/DIS  3046  'Reciprocating  internal 
combustion  engines  —  Standard  reference  conditions  and  declarations  of  power,  fuel  consumption  and 
lubricating  oil  consumption  '  issued  by  the  International  Organization  for  Standardization. 


PRINTED   BY  THE  GENERAL    MANAGER    GOVERNMENT    OF    INDIA    PRESS,    NASHIK 


