IS 15496:2004

+TTF'E%7 W73

+R?m 3TI%-YI-W Td?Rit m fwRiQT3?l-?Y-w wm-afa+lRm
Indian Standard INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF GASEOUS FIRE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS -- CODE OF PRACTICE

lCS 13.220.10

C) BIS2004

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI 110002 August 2004 Price Group 4

Fire Fighting Sectional Committee,

CED 22

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, Fighting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering after the draft finalized Division Council. by the Fire

This standard sets out requirements for the regular Inspection and _Maintenance Extinguishing Systems designed and installed in accordance with the appropriate installation of respective extinguishing systems. Regular maintenance includes inspection, procedures also.

of Gaseous Fire standards for the testing and training

The purpose of the maintenance is to maintain the system in full operating condition at all times and also to ensure that the system would operate to the expected level of efficiency at any given time. Actuation, impairment and restoration of the protection shall be promptly recorded and also reported to the concerned authorities. Any troubles or impairments shall be rectified in a timely manner consistent with the hazard protected. shall be efficiently sealed back. in inadequate protection.

Enclosure penetrations Unless this is attended

caused after the installations of the gaseous systems to, the integrity of the enclosure will change, resulting

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 1S 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1S 15496:2004

Indian Standard INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF GASEOUS FIRE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS -- CODE OF PRACTICE
1 SCOPE This standard lays down recommendations for inspection and maintenance of gaseous fire extinguishing systems like HFC227ea, HCFC Blend A,lGO1,lG 55,1 GIOO,lG 541. 2 REFERENCES The standards given below contain provisions which through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: [S No, 2189:1999 Title Code of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of automatic fire detection and alarm system ( second revision ) Gaseous fire systems -- General extinguishing requirements c) 3 INSPECTION, ASPECTS 3.1 Inspection IS No. 15528:2004 Title fire extinguishing Gaseous systems -- Carbondioxide total flooding and local application ( sub-floor and in-cabinet ), high and low pressure ( refrigerated ) systems TESTING AND TRAINING

and Tests

A well planned and approved schedule is essential for the inspection and testing of systems, keeping in view the following: a) At least once a year, all systems shall be thoroughly inspected and tested for proper operation by competent personnel. Discharge tests are not necessary. The inspection report along with recommendations shall be filed and always available with the owner and the same shall be produced to the authorities concerned when demanded. At least once in six months, the agent quantity and pressure of the containers shall be checked and details logged in a register. For Halocarbon clean agents that are vaporizing liquids, if a container shows a loss in agent quantity of more than 5 percent or a loss in pressure ( adjusted for room temperature ) of more than 10 percent, it shall be refilled or replaced. For Inert gas clean agents that are not liquefied, pressure is an indication of If a container shows a agent quantity. loss "in pressure ( adjusted for room temperature ) of more than 5 percent, it shall be refilled or replaced. In either case above, where container pressure gauges are used for checking pressure, they shall be compared to a separate calibrated device at least once a year.

b)

15493:2004

15517:2004

Gaseous extinguishing fire systems -- HFC 227ea ( Hepta Fluoro Propare ) extinguishing systems extinguishing Gaseous fire systems -- HCFC blend A extinguishing systems Gaseous systems systems extinguishing fire -- IG 55 extinguishing

15505:2004

d)

15506:2004

e) 15501:2004 Gaseous fire extinguishing systems -- IG 541 extinguishing systems Gaseous fire extinguishing systems -- lG 100 extinguishing systems Gaseous systems systems extinguishing fire -- IG 01 extinguishing

15525:2004

0

15497:2004

1S 15496:2004 g) Where the amount of agent in the container is determined by special measuring devices, these devices shall be approved. All halocarbon clean agents removed from refillable containers during service or maintenance procedures shall be collected and recycled or disposed of in an environmentally sound manner and in accordance with existing laws and regulations. Factory-charged, non-refillable containers that do not have a means of pressure indication shall have the agent quantity checked at least semiannually. If a container shows a loss in agent quantity of more than 5 percent, it shall be replaced. All factory-charged, non-refillable containers removed from useful service shall be returned for recycling of the agent or disposed of in an environmentally sound manner and in accordance with existing laws and regulations. For halocarbon clean agents, the date of inspection, gross weight of cylinder plus agent or net weight of agent, type of agent, person performing the inspection, and, where applicable, the pressure at a recorded temperature shall be recorded on a tag attached to the container. For inert gas clean agents, the date of inspection, type of agent, person performing the inspection, and the pressure at a recorded temperature shall be recorded on a tag attached to the container. Test discharging shall be given a complete external visual inspection every 5 years or more frequently if required. The visual inspection shall be in accordance with the guidelines of Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur except that the cylinders need not be emptied or stamped while under pressure. Inspections shall be made only by competent personnel and the results recorded on both of the following: 1) 2) c) A record tag permanently each cylinder, and A suitable inspection attached to

h)

j)

report.

A completed copy of the inspection report shall be furnished to the owner of the system or an authorized representative. These records shall be retained by the owner for the life of the system. Potentially the most serious hazard of defective container is the sudden uncontrolled release of pressure or ejection of parts. It could be caused due to any one of the following causes: 1) 2) Corrosion, wear or damage to threads of any pressure retaining parts; and Extensive pitting. general corrosion or severe

d)

k)

Where external visual inspection indicates that the container has been damaged, the same shall be sent for hydraulic testing. However, hydraulic test shall be carried out after five years or after discharge by the authorized agency. 3.3 -Hose Test 3.3.1 All system hose shall be examined annually for damage. If visual examinat ion shows any deficiency, the hose shall be immediately replaced or tested as specified in 3.3.2 below. 3.3.2 a) b) Testing All hoses shall be tested every 5 years.

3.2 Container

The gaseous agent containers covered under IS 15517:2004, IS 15505:2004, IS 15506:2004, IS 15501:2004, IS 15525:2004, IS 15497:2004 and IS 15528:2004 shall be inspected, keeping in view the following: a) Clean agent containers as approved by Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur shall not be recharged without retesting if more than 5 years have elapsed since the date of the last test and inspection. For halocarbon agent storage containers, the retest shall be permitted to consist of a complete visual inspection. Transporting charged containers that have not been tested within 5 years shall not be allowed. Guidelines of Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur shall be followed in this regard. b) Cylinders continuously in service without 2

All hoses shall be tested at 1% times the maximum container pressure at 54.4"C. The testing procedure shall be as follows: 1) 2) The hose attachment. is removed from any

The hose assembly is then placed in a protective enclosure designed to permit visual observation of the test. The hose must be completely with water before testing. Pressure pressure filled

3) 4)

then is applied at a rate-ofrise to reach the test pressure

IS 15496:2004 within a minimum of 1 min. The test pressure is maintained for 1 full min. Observations are then made to note any distortion or leakage. 5) If the test pressure has not dropped or if the couplings have not moved, the pressure is released. The hose assembly is then considered to have passed the hydrostatic test if no permanent distortion has taken place. Hose assembly passing the test must be completely dried internally. If heat is used for drying, the temperature must not exceed the manufacturer's specifications. Hose assemblies failing a hydrostatic test must be marked and destroyed and be replaced with new assemblies. Each hose assembly passing the hydrostatic test is marked to show the date of test. Inspection a) b) c) Weekly, authority Monthly only deems where the it necessary; systems; systems that do to determine and appropriate

on complete

Six-monthly on complete not incorporate means container contents; Yearly on complete Container
NOTES

d) e)

systems;

test after 5 years.

6)

1 Maintenance should be carried out only by persons having qualifications and experience suitable for the particular work in which they are engaged.
2 The manufacturer requirements beyond standard. may have additional that specified in this

7)

8)

3 The arrangements for maintenance should ensure that a person is available on call at all times to provide service in the event of any fault developing at the installation.

4.2 Records All system attendance, for example, inspection, testing, service and maintenance procedures, shall be systematically recorded by date with signed entries in the logbook maintained on the site ( see 6.2 ). In addition, a copy of all attendance records should be forwarded to the owner. The property owner or occupier shall maintain a record of maintenance carried out on the gaseous systems. The maintenance record system shall contain the classification ( weekly, monthly, six-monthly or yearly ) and date of maintenance, any defec~ and any consequent remedial action or advice given by the service person, with any additional action or advice by the service person. The maintenance record system shall be available for the property at all times and produce-d to the authorities concerned when demanded.
NOTE -- The maintenance record system may be in the form of a logbook or a computer based record system or other appropriate permanent record system,

3.4 Enclosure

At least every 12 months, the enclosure protected by these agents shall be thoroughly inspected to determine if penetrations or other changes have occurred that could adversely affect agent leakage or change volume of hazard or both. Where the inspection indicates conditions that could result maintain the clean agent in inability to they shall be corrected. If concentration, uncertainty still exists, the enclosures shall be retested for integrity. 3.5 Training All persons who could be expected to inspect, test, maintain, or operate fire extinguishing systems shall be thoroughly trained and kept thoroughly trained in the functions they are expected to perform. Personnel working in an enclosure protected by these agents shall receive training regarding agent safety issues. 4 MAINTENANCE 4.1 Maintenance OF INSTALLED SYSTEMS

4.3 Precautions Prior to commencing any inspection, testing or maintenance procedures, the service person shall carry out the following precautionary procedures as applicable: a) b) Inform the building maintenance is to be carried Inform the testing will ( where fire control panel owner out. that

of Installation of an or

4.1.1 It is essential that regular maintenance gaseous systems is undertaken to ensure operational conditicm and to prevent leakage inadvertent discharge. 4.1.2 Calibrated test equipment procedures shall be used.

and recognized

4.1.3 Regular maintenance is classified into four levels which shall be performed as follows: 3

fire control station, where transmit a fire alarm signal stations are hooked with the ).

IS 15496:2004 c) Where fitted, close lock-off valve and in addition ensure that all extinguish ant actuating circuits are isolated or firing mechanisms are removed to ensure that testing or that other maintenance procedures cannot cause discharge of any extinguishant. Set the detection and alarm system in the appropriate test mode and ensure that ancillary facilities, systems and airhandling plant ( including smoke exhaust and stairwell pressurization systems, evacuation warning systems, and the like ), where they are not to be tested, are isolated to a void inadvertent operation. On completion of any inspection, testing or maintenance procedure, the service person shall ensure that all controls are returned to the normal condition and reestablish the systems integrity.
NOTE -- The action to be taken when any function is isolated should be covered by the maintenance contract. When any section of an installation is to be isolated, the owner should be notified and in turn should advise the appropriate authority.

5.2 Monthly The monthly maintenance performed as follows: a) b) [solate ancillaries procedure shall be

extinguishant in accordance

supply with 4.3.

and

d)

initiate a simulated fire alarm on an alarm zone facility so as to transmit an alarm to the fire control station. Check the proper operation of all associated visual alarm indicators. Check that the alarm was correctly received at the fire control station. This test shall be carried out in a manner acceptable to the tire control station. Check the satisfactory fire alarm bell. operation of the

c) d) e) 9

e)

Reset alarm zone facility to normal. Test each aIarm zone facility to confirm its ability to operate the master alarm facility. Check that all visual land indicators are operating correctly. Check that all control equipment is in a clean cmdition, and effectively audible

g) h)

5 MAINTENANCE 5.1 Weekly

PROCEDURES h) maintenance shall be

and indicating and operational dust sealed.

Where required, the weekly performed as follows: a) b) Isolate ancillaries

Ensure that all fire indicator panels, extinguishant local control stations ( LCS ), repeater panels and mimic panel are clearly visible and readily accessible. Simulate fault conditions on all alarm zones to ensure that fault indicators, both audible and visual, where applicable, are operating correctly from each alarm zone facility. Check the battery condition by operating the battery test facility for 1 rein, and record the battery condition in the log. Inspect all extinguishant containers, manual mechanical release mechanisms and all other ancillary equipment to ensure they are secure, undamaged and unobstructed. Where applicable, check and record the container gauge pressures. Any container showing a loss in pressure exceeding 10 percent of the nominal filling yressure, adjusted for temperature change from initial fill at the applicable reference temperature, shall be reported to the owner or agent for corrective action. Check the function of all extinguishant manual initiate switches and the extinguishant inhibit switch on each LCS.

extinguishant in accordance

supply with 4.3.

and j)

Check the proper operation of all associated visual alarm indicators by initiating a simulated fire alarm on an alarm zone facility. The above test shall be carried out in a manner acceptable.to the tire control station if connected.

k)

m)

c) d) e)

Check the satisfactory alarm bell.

operation

of the fire

Reset alarm zone facility. On corqpletion of testing, to re-establish the system's integrity, ensure that all switches are in the correct operating position. inform the building owner or agent of any items requiring corrective action. Record the results of weekly maintenance procedures in the log, including whether the fire alarm signal from the alarm zone facility was received at the fire control station ( see 6.2 ). 4 n)

f)

P)

IS 15496:2004

0

Ensure that all discharge nozzles are not obstructed andare correctly aligned. Carry out a visual inspection on all exposed pipe work, support and mechanical controls. Ensure that all warning and instruction signs, as required, are correctly displayed and unobstructed and that all controls, valves, switches, and the like, are properly identified. On completion of testing, to re-establish the system's integrity, ensure that all controls are returned to the normal condition. Record the results of monthly maintenance procedures in the log, including all items requiring corrective action, adjustment and the like ( see 6.2). Check that items previously recorded as requiring attention have been attended to, or record the reasons why corrective actions have not been completed. [nform the building owner or agent that maintenance is completed and of any items requiring corrective action, obtain ail necessary signatures in the logbook. f) d)

sampling points for any condition, which is likely to adversely affect their operation, such as deposition of dust or coating of paint. Remove at least one detector on each alarm zone circuit and confirm that the fault signal is registered at the appropriate alarm zone facility. Determine the sensitivity of all detectors. This may take the form of either: 1) 2) testing of a detector in-situ; or

r)

e)

s)

t)

removal of a detector and its replacement by a detector which has been checked and calibrated by the supplier.

u)

Check that an alarm on each detector registers on the correct alarm zone facility. NOTE -- This may require the owner or agent
to provide other personnel ancillary facilities. to reset or restart

v)

@

Measure and record the time delay between any detector circuit's initiation of extinguishant release and receipt of the operation signal at the actuators. Check the operation of all remote ancillary control facilities, including door closers, evacuation warning systems, airhandling systems and the like, and ensure that each controlled device can be correctly act ivated. Check release the operation devices. of all mechanical

5.3 Six-Monthly The six-monthly maintenance performed as follows: a) b) procedure shall be

h)

Isolate extinguishant supply and ancillaries in accordance with 4.3. Check and record the amount of extinguishant in each container by weight or liquid level.
NOTE -- Pressures and liquid levels in extinguishant container can vary considerably There may be a with temperature change. considerable time delay between changes in ambient temperature and the corresponding changes in the extinguishant container pressure or level. Any liquid level measurement should be reference to a datum, established at a known temperature.

j) k)

Check the operation of all illuminated signs and audible indicators.

m) Check the correct operation of the power supply supervision alarm, if applicable, by disconnecting all power supplies to the fire indicator panel. n) Inspect control and indicating equipment component for evidence of deterioration. Check and record all container details for compliance with requirements for periodic inspection and pressure testing in accordance with the standard appropriate to the container used. Ensure that all discharge nozzles are not obstructed and are correctly aligned. Carry out a visual inspection on all accessible pipe work, supports and mechanical controls. Non-electrical detection devices and manually operated devices shall be verified in accordance with the manufacturer's

c)

Perform

monthly

maintenance

procedures

in accordance inclusive. 5.4 Yea rly The yearly maintenance as follows: a) b) Isolate ancillaries

with 5.2, items

(b) to (v)

P)

procedure

shall be performed q) and

extinguish ant supply in accordance with 4.3.

Perform monthly maintenance in accordance with 5.2(b) inclusive. Inspect all detectors

procedures to 5.2(r), and 5

r)

c)

as per 1S 2189

1S 15496:2004 procedure. -s) Where applicable, check the electrical resistance of actuators and insulation of actuators to earth and replace them where appropriate. Pyrotechnic actuators shall be replaced in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. operation of directional 6 MAINTENANCE 6.1 General Maintenance documentation shall be provided for each gaseous system and shall include the following: a) b) Installer's appropriate report as specified installation standard. in the DOCUMENTATION

t) Check for correct valves.
u)

Perform a full system function check by initiating detector alarms and checking the response of container valve actuating circuits at the extinguishant containers. This check shall include the operation of the valve actuators, where this can be done without discharging extinguishant or damaging the actuator in which case the test shall be carried out using a device to simulate actuation. Where various combinations of detector circuits can initiate an extinguishant discharge, each combination shall be checked.

Installer's statement, as-installed diagrams, and commissioning test report as specif~ed in IS 15493 : 2004 for the control and indicating equipment. The installer's statement, as-installed diagrams, and commissioning test report shall be prepared on durable, good quality paper, clearly legible and contained in a plastic cover or, alternatively, bound into the operator's manual.

c)

Log -- The maintenance documentation given above shall be housed in a secure location at the fire indicator panel, or as otherwise approved by the appropriate authority.

v) w)

Verify enclosure

volume.

Check for building alterations, changes in the environment, openings or other factors that could: 1) 2) 3) inadvertent cause extinguishant, discharge of

The documentation shall describe the state of the installation, as it currently exists. If any changes are made to the installation, the relevant records shall be updated, that is, installer's statement, as-installed diagrams, operator's manual, and the like. 6.2 Record System

allow leakage ofextinguishant protected area, and require modification

from the

to the system.

Where the building has been altered, conduct an additional check for compliance with design concentration and, if necessary, conduct a full discharge test. NOTE -- Leakage rate may be obtained by the
fan pressurization Y) On completion the systems returned z) Record technique. of testing ensure to re-establish all controls are

A maintenance record system shall be provided to sequentially register all known alarms, faults, disconnections, discharges and all maintenance and inspection procedures carried out so that there is a composite record of all events related to the installation. It shall include the following: a) b) c) d) Name of owner; Name of maintenance hired ); Identification organization ( if

of the system;

integrity

to the normal the results

condition. maintenance

of yearly

Details of weekly, monthly, six-monthly and yearly maintenance procedures ( see Annex A ); Container pressure report; and apart

procedures

in the log, including details for all equipment that does not pass visual inspection or fails to operate satisfactorily. Notify the owner or agent of any deficiencies within the installation and obtain all necessary signatures in the logbook. NOTE -- Prior to yearly maintenance procedures, the maintenance provider should give the owner
or agent sufficient notice of testing to allow time for witnessing to be arranged.

e) f)

A report section from maintenance

for attendance procedures.

Where a logbook is used it shall be substantially bound ( not in loose-leaf format ) and shall have numbered pages in triplicate. The logbook shall include the signatures of the owner and service person. A required distribution of copies printed on each page shall be as follows:

6

IS 15496:2004 a) b) c) Original Dup]icate Triplicate Owner/occupier Service person the property at all times.

.Retain in book record system shall be available for

NOTE -- The maintenance record system may be in the form of a logbook or a computer-based record system or other appropriate permanent record system.

The maintenance

ANNEX A ( Clause 6.2)
SYSTEM Month ....................................... Inspection, Testing, and Maintenance Procedures Premises ........................................................................ Address ........................................................................
NOTES I Give details of all unsatisfactory items in report section. Refer to operations manual for commissioning test report.

-- LOGBOOK

REPORT

MainteIlance Organization

..........................................

2 Place a ( ~ ) in box where item is satisfactory. 3 Place a ( x ) in box where item is unsatisfactory. 4 Tests not applicable where shaded.

S[ No.

Item
r

Periodical
A

Check
>

Weekly (1) 1) 2) ~) (2) Fully isolate extinguishant Fire alarm signal simulation Fire alarm operation bell or warning device supply (3)

Monthly (4)

Six-monthly (5)

Yearly (6)

4)

Fire alarm signal received at fire control station ( if applicable ) Alarm zone facility operation Indicate lights correct operation devices

5)

9 7)
8) 9) 1(1)

All alarm bells and signaling operation Battery condition and clean

CIE operational

All FIP, LCS and other panels clearly visible and readily accessible Fault conditions simulation on all

11)

alarm zones and ensure: i) ii) fault annunciators audible/visual operative, and

indication

operative. 7

IS 15496:2004 ,Tl No. [ten? ,Weekly (1)
Iq

Periodical Monthly (4)

Check Six-monthly (5) > Yearly (6)

(2) Extinguishant containers, equipment secure, undamaged Container gauge ( Refer report) Discharge nozzles pressures other

(3)

13)

recorded

14) 15) I6) 17)

LCS unit operational Signs and controls checked amount container of by

Check and record extinguish ant in each weight or liquid level

18)

Inspect all detectors and sampling points ( fault signal registration for each alarm zone ) Detector and sampling as appropriate Correct operation control facilities Operation point testing,

19)

20)

of all

ancillary

21) ~~) 23) 24)

of all manual release points of signs alarm

Check operation

Power supply supervision

Control and indicating equipment component inspection for deterioration Container Controller Actuators compliance of Explosives, checked operated with Chief Nagpur

25)

26) 27)

Non-electrical and manually detection devices Directional Full function All controls extinguishant Building identified Leakage Correction valves operational test

28) 29) 30)

returned to normal, sup~ly reconnected modifications, opening

31)

32) 33) 34)

test conducted of items ( Refer report) informed, corrective

Building owner action identified

35)

Time delay recorded 8

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian ,Vlandardf Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright 91S has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), 91S. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referringto the latest issue and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. of '91S Catalogue' This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. CED 22 ( 7087 ). Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

.

Amendments Amend No.

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF INDIAN STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 23230131,23233575,2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in Regional Central Offices : Telephones 23237617 { 23233841 ~3378499,23378561 { 23378626,2 J379120 2603843 { 260.9285 { Western : Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 22541216,22541442 2254 25] 9,22542315 ~ 28329295,28327858 ~ 28327891,28327892

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahaciur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VIIM, V. 1. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Eastern Northern: Southern:

C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNA1 600113

Branches

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOr. THIRUVANANrHAPURAM. VI SAKHAPATNAM.
Prinkxl at New Indin Printing Press, Murja, India

