IS : 6667 - 1972 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN SYNTHETIC 
-= RESIN INDUSTRY 


Raw Material for Paint Industry Sectional Committee, CDC 50 


Chairman Representing 
Dr R. J. RATHI Sudarshan Chemical Industries Pvt Ltd, Poona 
Members 


Suri K. L. Rarut ( Alternate to 
Dr R. J. Rathi) 


Suri S. C. ARCHIC Indian Paint Association, Calcutta 
Dr P. K. BHANDARI ( Alternate ) 
Suri C. J. BHUMKAR Asian Paints (India) Pvt Ltd, Bombay 
Suri S. K. Bose National Test House, Calcutta 
Suri K. N. CHowDHrY Ministry of Defence ( DGI) 
Suri G. C. DESAI Goodlass Nerolac Paints Ltd, Bombay 
Suri M. VAITHYANATHAN ( Alternate ) 
Suri S. H. Desar Blundell Eomite Paints Ltd, Bombay 
Joint Director (M&C) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 


ASSISTANT RESEARCH OFFICER 
(CM) ( Alternate ) 


Suri K. V. KRISHNAN Colour-Chem Ltd. Bombay 
Surı R. M. Tiu ( Alternate ) 
Suri T. K., S. Mani Addisons Paints & Chemicals Ltd, Madras 
Surı M. B. SATYANARAYANA ( Alternate ) 
Suri V. M. NACHANE Chowgule & Co ( Hind ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay 
Suri J. P. NARAIN Associated Pigments Ltd, Calcutta 
Suri Kumunp NANDAN SAHAYA ( Alternate) 
Suri V. C. PANCHAMIYA Kamani Metallic Oxides Pvt Ltd, Bombay 
Simi B. Rama Murti Travancore Titanium Products Ltd, Trivandrum 
Dr V. S. Vijayan Naver ( Alternate ) 
Suri P. C. Reppy Union Carbide India Ltd. Calcutta 
REPRESENTATIVE Jenson & Nicholson ' India) Ltd, Calcutta 
Dr B. SANYAL Ministry of Defence (R & D) 
Suri K. K. Cuoupary ( Alternate ) 
Suri K. N. R. SHARMA Pits General of Technical Development, New 
elhi 
SHRIS. N. AGARWAL ( Alternate ) 
Suri P. K. Suungiu The ste Trading Corporation of India Ltd, New 
elni 
Suri Y. S. Swamy The Alkali and Chemicals Corporation of India 
Calcutta 


( Continued on page 2 ) 
nn nn nn LEE 


INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110092 


IS : 6667 - 1972 


( Continued from page 1) 


Members 


Serr K. S. THAKKAR 
Sur: D. Dass GUPTA, 
Director ( Chem ) 


Members 


Suri S. K. ASTHANA 
Suri C. J. BHUMKAR 
Dr R. B. MITRA 

Suri M. R. RAJAMANI 
SHRI A. RAMAMURTY 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Representing 
Esso Standard Eastern Inc, Bombay 
Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member.) 


Secretary 
Suri S, ARAVAMUDHAN 
Assistant Director ( Chem ), ISI 


Resin Subcommittee, CDC 50:4 


Convener 
Suri V. V, DESHPANDE 
Block No. 7, Madhav Niwas, 
Madhav Co-op Housing Society, 
Ram Murti Road, Cross Lane No. 4, 
Ghantali, Thana ( Maharashtra ) 


Ministry of Defence ( DGI) 

Asian Paints (India ) Pvi Ltd, Bombay 
National Chemical Laboratory, Poona 
Reichold Chemicals India, Madras 
Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 
Jenson & Nicholson (India ), Calcutta 


IS : 6667 - 1972 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN SYNTHETIC 
RESIN INDUSTRY 


0d FOREWORD 


0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 8 March 1972, after the draft finalized by the Raw Materials for Paint 
Industry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 


0.2 The resin industry is registering rapid development and the need for 
standardization of terminology for avoiding ambiguity and confusion in the 
usage of the terms was felt. The committee responsible for the prepara- 
tion of this standard had felt that glossary of technical terms will help the 
processors, consumers and others connected with this trade in correct 
interpretation of the terms. 


0.3 In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been 
derived from the following: 


1970 Book of ASTM Standards: Part 20. Paint, varnish, lacquer, 
and related products — Materials specifications and tests; Naval 
stores; Aromatic hydrocarbons. American Society for Testing and 
Materials, 


1970 Book of ASTM Standards: Part 21. Paint, varnish, lacquer 
and related products — Tests for formulated products and applied 
coatings; Building joint sealants. American Society for Testing and 
Materials. 


Encyclopedia of polymer science and technology, 1966. Inter- 
science Publishers, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 


0.4 Should any difference exist between the definitions in this standard 
and those in the standard for the individual materials, the later shall 
prevail, 


1. SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the terms and definitions that are prevalent in the 
synthetic resin industry. 


IS : 6667 - 1972 


2. TERMINOLOGY 
A 


Abietic Acid — The main acidic constituent of rosin, commercially known 
as resin acid. 


Acid — Alkali Resistance — Resistance of coating system containing 
synthetic resin to the influence of acids or alkalis, 


Acid Value — Number of milligrams of potassium hydroxide required to 
neutralize free acidity in one gram of resin, 


Acrylic Resin—A polymer produced by addition polymerization 
involving monomers derived from acrylic acid ( see also Resin ). 


Acrylated Alkyd — Alkyd modified with acrylic resins, 


Adhesive Resin — A high molecular mass material compounded from 
products capable of strong adhesion for various applications ( see also 
Resin ). ; 


After-Tack — The tackiness present in the film, after normal drying 
period. 


Ageing — The storage of a synthetic resin either in the solid or liquid 
state or in solution under stated conditions in order to study the change in 
properties. 


Alkyd Styrenated — See Styrenated Alkyd. 


Alkyds — Polymers having a typically large molecular structure and are 
produced by reaction of polybasic acids with polyhydric alcohols and/or 
chemically interacted with natural or synthetic resins, fatty acids, oils 
reactive chemicals, monomers, etc, H i 


Amino Resins — A generic term used to denote the condensation resins 
made by the reaction of amines with aldehydes. 


A-Stage — An early stage in the reaction of certain thermosetting resins in 
which the material is still soluble in certain liquids and fusible. Some- 
times the product of this stage is also known as * Resols ’. i 


Binder — Non-volatile portion of the vehicle of a resin solution which 


binds or cements the pigments, extenders and particles together and the 
film as a whole to the substrate. 


Body — The apparent viscosity of a resin as assessed subjectively when 
applying an undefined shearing force, for instance, when pouring the 


4 


IS : 6667 - 1972 


material from a container, stirring it on brushing or otherwise spreading 
over a surface ( see Consistency ). 


Bodied Oils — Vegetable oils, viscosities of which are higher than that at 
their natural stage. : 


Boiled Oils — Drying oils which are oxidised in presence of catalyst to 
enhance the drying property and are of normally higher viscosity. 


Blown Oil — Drying oils which are polymerized at elevated temperature 
by blowing continuously oxygen in presence of catalyst and are relatively 
of higher viscosity than boiled oils. 


Branched High Polymer — This polymer.is one in which the long chain 
molecule is not uniformly straight like a pencil, but has branches extending 
from its trunk. The long chain molecule, despite these branches, remains 
unattached to other similar molecules surrounding it. (see also High 
Polymers ). 


B-Stage — An intermediate stage in the reaction of certain thermosetting 
resins in which the material swells when in contact with certain liquids and 
softens when heated, but may not entirely dissolve or fuse. The resin in 
an uncured thermosetting compound is usually in this stage. Sometimes 
the product of this stage is referred to as ‘ resitol ’. 


Cc 


Colloid — A stage of subdivision of a substance, when dispersed in a 
liquid characterized by a particle size intermediate between molecular 
solution and dispersion and just visible by Tyndall effect. 


Colour Retention — The resistance of resin or a coating therefrom to 
undergo any colour change during defined exposure conditions, 


Colour Value — These are specified with reference to certain standard 
colour scales, For resins the colour value, number or index should be 
expressed in terms of: 


Gardener colour scale, 
Iodine colour scale, or 
Rosin colour scale. 
Colour value should be determined for 50 percent resin solution in 
specified solvent. 


- Comonomer — A monomer usually polymerized in presence of another 
monomer or comer. 


Condensation — A chemical reaction in which two or more molecules 
combine with the separation of water or some other simple substance. If 
a polymer is formed, the process is known as polycondensation, 


5 


IS : 6667 - 1972 


Consistency — The resistance of a non-newtonian material to deforma- 
tion. 


Copolymer — A long chain polymeric molecule comprised of at least two 
different monomers, 


Cross Linking — The formation of three-dimensional network of bonds 
between similar or dissimilar liner polymers. 


Cross Linked High Polymers — The polymers in which the long chain 
molecules, either straight or branched, have ladder rungs or cross-bridges 
binding them together. In the case of high polymer, all or most of the 
component long chain molecules are rigidly locked to each other laterally 
by primary linkages ( see also High Polymers ). 


C-Stage — The final stage in the reaction of certain thermosetting resins 
in which the material is relatively insoluble and infusible. The resin in a 
fully cured thermoset is in this stage. Sometimes the product of this stage 
is referred to as “ resite’ ( see also A-Stage and B-Stage j 


Cure — To change the physical properties of a resin by chemical action 
which, for example, may be condensation, polymerization or addition 
usually accomplished by the action of either heat or catalyst or both, and 
with or without pressure, 


Cure Time — The time taken to achieve the desired change in physical 
properties of resin or coating by chemical or physico-chemical action. 


D 


Degree of Polymerization (DP )— The average number of repeating 
units in a macromolecule, 


Degradation — A condition in the polymer which detracts from its 
original characteristics, generally due to rupture of primary valence 
linkages or formation of unsaturated linkages or both. 


Dehydrated Castor Oil (DCO) — Castor oil from which hydroxyl 


groups of fatty acids have been removed as water thereby introducing 
unsaturation in the chain. 


Depolymerization — The process of breaking the polymer by thermal or 
chemical means to fragments. 


Deterioration — A permanent change in the physical properties of a 
resin evidenced by impairment of these properties, 


Diluent — A volatile non-solvent for a given resin used in conjunction 
with a true solvent to secure desired objectives in a coating composition, 


6 


IS : 6667 - 1972 


Dilution Ratio — The capacity of an active solvent for a given resin to 
tolerate a non-solvent or blends of non-solvents used as diluents for 
economic considerations, as well as to secure desirable characteristics to the 
resin solutions, Dilution ratio is the ratio by volume of diluent to solvent 
in a mixture of solvent and diluent in such proportions that the mixture 
just fails to be a solvent for a given resin or polymer. 


Dimer Acid — Generally liquid consisting of addition product of two 
units of a fatty acid. 


Dispersion — A suspension of finely divided particles in another sub- 
stance. 


Driers — Substances, when incorporated in small proportions in converti- 
ble resin, accelerate the rate of drying when the composition is applied in 
the form of a film. 


Drying — The process of change in the physico-chemical characteristics of 
the resin system to yield a film of desired characteristics ( see also Drying 
Time). When the drying process takes place during exposure to air at 
normal temperature, it is called air drying; and if it is accelerated by the 
application of a moderate degree of heat (normally not exceeding 80°C ), 
it is termed force-drying as distinct from stoving. 


Drying Oil — Essentially a triglyceride of unsaturated fatty acids having 
iodine value above 150. 


Drying Time — The time which elapses between the application ofa coat 
of resin and the attainment of a specified dry stage ( see Drying). 


Durability — The degree to which resins and resinous materials withstand 
the destructive effect of the conditions to which they are subjected. 


E 


Elastomer (or Rubber )— Elastomer is a term that refers to non- 
crystalline high polymers or rubber that have a three-dimensional space- 
network structure ( vulcanization ) which imparts stability or resistance to 
plastic deformation. Normally, elastomers exhibit long range elasticity 
(rubber band effect ) at ordinary room temperatures. 


Emulsion — A suspension of extremely fine droplets of one liquid in 
another immiscible liquid. 


Emulsion Polymerization — Two-phase polymerization of the free 
radical type in which organic monomers are emulsified in a liquid medium 
and wherein the initiators are soluble in a continuous phase and are 
capable of diffusing into emulsified monomer droplets, 


7 


IS : 6667 - 1972 


Epoxide Equivalent — This is the mass of resin in grams which contains 
one gram chemical equivalent of epoxy. Epoxide equivalent is determined 
by reacting a known quantity of resin with a known quantity of hydro- 
chloric acid and back titrating the remaining acid to determine its 
consumption. 


Epoxy Resin — Reaction product generally of epichlorohydrin and 
bisphenol A. Certain special types of epoxy resins are produced by addi- 
tion polymerization of monomers, namely, glycidyl acrylates (see also 
Kesin ). 


Epoxy Esters — Fatty acid esters of epoxy resins. 


Epoxy Value — This represents the fractional number of epoxy groups 
contained in 100 grams of resin. 


Etherified ( Alkoxylated ) Amino Resin — Etherified reaction product 
of methylols of amino resins and alcohols. 


F 


False Body — The apparently full-bodied condition of a resin or its 
solution which undergoes a marked reduction in viscosity when agitated, 
and returns to its former condition either immediately or subsequently 
when allowed to remain at rest ( see also Thixotropy ). 


Fatty Acid — An organic acid derived from vegetable oil. 


Film — A film is relatively thin skin, membrance, or pellicle less than 
0:25 mm thick which usually is transparent or translucent. 


Flat (Matt ) — The description of a coated surface film which scatters or 
absorbs the light falling on it, so as to be substantially free from gloss or 
sheen ( see also Gloss ). i 


Flash Point — The lowest temperature at which a combustible liquid will 
give off sufficient vapours that will burn momentarily. 


Flexibility — The degree to which a coated film, after drying, is able to 
conform to movement or deformation of its supporting surface, without 
cracking or flaking. 


Flexibilizer — An additive that makes a coating or rubber more flexible 
(also called as * plasticizer ° ), 


Free Radical — An unsaturated electrically neutral molecular fragment 


formed by homolytic fission of a covalent bond in which the resultin 
unpaired electron takes no part in bonding. 8 


8 


IS : 6667 - 1972 


Free Radical Polymerization — An addition polymerization induced by 
the presence or formation of free radicals due to a peroxideinitiator or 
light, radiation, etc ( see also Polymerization ). 


Functionality — Number of active group available for polymerization. 


G 


Gas Checking — The development of wrinkles, often in a well-defined 
pattern in the surface of a resin system during drying. This condition 
results from the irreversible swelling of a partially dried surface skin, and 
may be aggravated by impure gas fumes during stoving in a gas oven in 
which case it is termed gas checking ( see also Webbing ). 


Gel — It generally refers to a product which has a three-dimensional 
cross-linked network, not soluble in solvents, but swells, and is a system 
consisting of a network of solid aggregates in which liquid may be held. 


Gelling — A specific term in usage indicating extent of reaction to a stage 
when the resin becomes unusable due to formation of a three-dimensional 
network, j 


Gel Time — The time required to convert a liquid composition into a gel 
under specified conditions. 


Gloss — The degree to which a coated surface possesses the property of 
reflecting light in a mirror-like manner (specular reflection), The extent 
to which this property is developed depends mainly on the composition of 
the coated surface ranging from dead flat to full gloss being obtainable. 
The following stages in increasing order of gloss are normally recognized: 


a) Flat (or matt) — practically free from sheen even when viewed 
from oblique angles, 

b) Eggshell flat, 

c) Eggshell gloss, 

d) Semi-gloss, and 

e) Full gloss — smooth and almost mirror-like surface when viewed 
from all angles, 


Gum Resin — Resinous exudate distinguished by its solubility in water 
and charring on heating. 


H 


Hardness — It is a measure of resistance the cured resin film offers to 
deformation under stated condition. Generally it is expressed in seconds, 
using an oscillating technique for determining time, a film lasts without 
deformation. 


IS : 6667 - 1972 


Haze — Indefinite cloudy appearance within or on the surface of a resin 
or resin film. 


Heat Resistance — The ability of the coating system to resist degradation 
by heat under specified conditions. : 


Heavy Bodied — Having a thick consistency or high viscosity. In case of 
resins or their solution, it is also associated with the ability to leave, after 
drying, a substantial coating ( see also Body ). 


High Polymer — A macromolecule usually having molecular mass above 
5 000 ( see also Polymers ). 


Homopolymer — Polymers of which the molecule consists of only one 
type of structural unit repeated indefinitely ( see also Polymer). 


Hydrocarbon Resin — Resin derived from unsaturated hydrocarbons. 
Resins derived from petroleum sources are important subclass of this group 
and also known as ‘ petroleum resins’ ( see also Resin ). 


I 
oe 
Impact Resistance — The ability of a film derived from a resin system 
to resist a sudden blow ( see Hardness ). 


Initiator — Generally a reactive that can give rise to a free radical 
polymerization. 


Iodine Value — The number of grams of iodine absorbed per 100 g of the 
oil or the resin, which is the percent iodine absorbed. The iodine number 
or value of the oil or the resin gives an indication of the degree of 
unsaturation of the constituent fatty glyceride or the resin in its form of 
delivery. It is customary to give the method employed for its determina- 
tion. Wijs method is applicable to all normal oils and fats not containing 
conjugated systems. For conjugated oiis, Woburn’s method is used. 
Inhibitor — A substance when present in small percentage prevents or 
retards the rate of chemical reaction, 


K 


Ketone Resin — A product of reaction between a ketone and formalde- 
hyde and/or other aldehydes ( see also Resin ). 


M 
Malamine Resin — See Amino Resins. 


Monomer — The term is used both specifically and generically. Generi- 
cally, it is a term applied to any of the various types of reactants, namely, 
true monomers, comers, etc, in the sense that they are the original reactants, 


10 


+ 


IS : 6667 - 1972 


N 
Natural Resin — See Resin, Natural. 


Non-drying Oil — An oil which does not of itself possess to a perceptible 
degree the power to take up oxygen from air and lose its liquid character- 
istics. 


Non-volatile Matter — The ingredients of a resin or coating composition 
which after drying, are left behind on the material to which it has been 
applied, and which constitute the dry film, 


Non-yellowing — Resistance to the development of yellowing tinge 
during exposure for a period of time under stated conditions. 


Oo 
Oils ( Fatty ) — Triglyceride of fatty acid(s). 


Oligomer — The chain consisting of only a few monomer units and a low 
molecular mass product. 


Organosol — A suspension of a finely divided resin in a plasticizer, 
together with a volatile organic liquid. ° 


P 


Phenolic Resin — A generic term to denote a class of synthetic resins 
obtained by the reaction of phenol, alkyl and ary] phenols, with aldehydes, 
namely, formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, etc. 

Plasticizer — A material incorporated in a resin. to improve flexibility of 
a cured or a dried film (see also Flexibilizer). A plasticizer is generally 
regarded as non-reactive with the resin even in the cured stage. 

Plastisol — A suspension of finely divided resin in plasticizer. 


Polyamide Resin — A product of reaction generally between a diamine 
and a dibasic acid. Also a polymer derived by ring chain polymerization, 
for example, caprolactum ( see also Resin ). 


Polyester — Polycondensation product of polybasic acid with polyol. 
a) Saturated — Product of saturated polybasic acids with polyols, 
b) Unsaturated — Product of unsaturated polybasic acids with polyols. 


Polymer — A substance composed of molecules characterized by regular 
or irregular repetition ( end, branch, functions, and other minor irregulari- 
ties being neglected ) of one or more types of chemical units. 


Polymerization — A reaction in which related polyfunctional molecules 
combine to form a product of higher molecular mass without necessarily 
changing the primary chemical composition of the original constituents, 


y 


IS : 6667 - 1972 


Polymerization, Emulsion — See Emulsion Polymerization. 
Polymerization, Free Radical — See Free Radical Polymerization. 
Polymerization, Solution — See Solution Polymerization. 


Polyol — A chemical compound having two or more of hydroxyl groups 
bonded to carbon atoms in the molecule. 


Polyurethane Resins — Synthetic resin obtained by the reaction of 
polyisocyanates with polyhydroxy compounds, such as polyesters, castor oil 
or glycols. 


Pot Life — A maximum time for which a resin composition when prepar- 
ed can be stored in usable conditions under specified conditions, 


Precondensate — An intermediate stage in the process of condensation of 
suitable reactants which will permit of further reaction under stated condi- 
tions to achieve a practically useful resinous compound. 


R 


Reactive Diluent — A compound, usually a monoepoxide, when added 
to liquid epoxy resins reduces the initial viscosity of the resin system with- 
out impairing the desirable properties of the cured resin. 


Residual Tack — Is defined as tack persisting in the resin film after 
complete evaporation of volatiles in the resin solutions, 3 


Resin — Non-crystalline organic substance of varying molecular mass 
convertible or non-convertible type, having a softening range, possessing 
distinct clarity, normally soluble in organic solvents and having a character- 
istic to form a continuous film in a suitable form. 


Resin, Acrylic — See Acrylic Resin. 

Resin, Adhesive — See Adhesive Resin, 

Resin, Amino, Etherified — See Etherified Amino Resin. 
Resin, Epoxy — See Epoxy Resin. 

Resin, Hydrocarbon — See Hydrocarbon Resin. 

Resin, Ketone — See Ketone Resin. 


Resin, Natural — Resin produced either in the metabolism of free growth 
or by insects. It also includes resins occurring in fossil form, 


Resin, Phenolic — See Phenolic Resin, 
Resin, Polyamide — See Polyamide Resin. 


12 


IS : 6667 - 1972 


Resin, Sulphonamide — See Sulphonamide Resin. 
Resin, Synthetic — See Synthetic Resin. 
Resins, Amino — See Amino Resins. 


Resins, Terpene — See Terpene Resins. 


S 


Saturated Fatty Acids — Principal component of non-drying oils charac- 
terized by carbon to carbon linkage without any ethylenic or methalinic 
group interspersed, E 


Saturated Polyester — See Polyester. 
Segmar — The repeating or middle unit of the polymer. 


Semi-Drying — Generally attributed to oils having iodine value or num- 
ber in the range of 125 to 150. 


Shelf Life — The period of time during which a packed resin or its 
solution may be stored under specified temperature condition and remains 
suitable for use. 


Solid Contents — The residue left over after evaporation of the volatile 
matter without affecting any appreciable change in the physico-chemical 
characteristics of the resin, under stated conditions. 


Solvent, Tolerance — The capacity of a resin in solution in a stated 
solvent to undergo dilution by a solvent without causing any precipitation 
or haziness or increase in viscosity. Solvent tolerance is generally stated 
as parts by volume or mass of the resin that can remain in solution in a 
stated solvent without undergoing any of the above stated changes, 


Solution Polymerization — Polymerization in presence of a solvent 
where the polymer is in solution. 


Softening Point — When the primary thermodynamic properties of a 
polymer are plotted against temperature, a change in the thermodynamic 
properties, such as volume or heat content, becomes apparent at some’ 
temperature. This is a discontinuity of the first derivative of the 
property, Hence this is considered a second order phase transition. This 
transition occurs at a characteristic temperature for all high: polymeric 
materials and known as second order phase transition temperature or 
generally softening point. 


Space-Network High Polymer — When there are two or more reactive 
functional groups in the monomer or mer building block, the growth of 
the polymer in three dimensions is possible during the course of the 


13 


ÍS : 6667 - 1972 


polymerization. Such a process gives rise to a space-network high 
polymer. A good illustration is the reaction between glycerol and 
phthalic anhydride, which yields a three-dimensional network polymer. 
Other examples are thermosetting resin, such as the phenol formaldehyde 
and the urea-formaldehyde ( see also Polymer ). 


Stand Oil — Heat polymerized drying oils are known as stand oils. 


Stereoregular High Polymer (Atactic Polymer )— When the 
R-groups or substituted groups are positioned on all sides of the main 
backbone of a long chain molecule in a completely random manner, an 
atactic polymer results. Such molecules can not pack tightly together 
because of steric hindrance and result in soft, non-crystalline and rather 
gummy products ( see also Polymer ). 


Styrenated Alkyd— An oil-modified alkyd resin in which styrene has 
been already linked and does not exist as a monomer in the form in which 
the styrenated alkyd is delivered. 


Sulphonamide Resin — These are condensation products of formaldehyde 
and aryl sulphonamides ( see Resin ). 


Syndiotactic (or Syndyotactic ) Polymer — When the R-groups or 
substituted groups occupy position that alternate regularly and in sequence 
above and below the main backbone of a long chain molecule, a 
syndiotactic polymer results, , 


Synthetic Resins — Resins obtained from low molecular mass compounds 
by condensation or polymerization, 


T 


Terpene Resins — Resins derived from terpene, based on « or ß pinenes, 
etc (see also Resin ). 


Thermosetting — Having the property of becoming a thermoset on the 
application of sufficient heat ( curing ). 


Thinners — Volatile liquids added to resins and varnishes to facilitate 
application and to aid penetration by lowering the viscosity. They. should 
be completely miscrible with the resins or varnish at ordinary temperature 
and should not cause precipitation of the non-volatile portion either in the 
container or in the film during drying. For some purposes, thinners 
containing a small proportion of non-volatile material may be used. 


Thixotrophy — Reduction in consistency of the material on the applica- 
tion of shear stress and the recovery of the original consistency when the 
stress is removed, 


14 


1S : 6667 - 1972 
U 


Undercure — A condition of the coating of film in the process of change 
in the physico-chemical characteristics which arises when insufficient time 
and/or temperature has been allowed for adequate development of film 
properties, 


Unsaturated Polyester — See Polyester, 
Urea-Formaldehyde Resin — See Amino Resins. 

v | 
Vehicle — The liquid portion of coating composition in which the pigment 


is dispersed. 


Viscosity — Internal resistance to flow possessed by a liquid at stated 
temperature. 


Volatiles — The liquid portion of the composition which is capable of 
evaporation. 


w 
Webbing — Webbing is generally regarded as a paint defect but is made 


use of in some paint finishes to give a textured coating which obscures 
minor fault and indentions in the surface to be coated. 


15 


