INA WAP IS 8800 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


good ees Hl ardht aaor 
(Sate Segal H Ble) 


( HT gier) 


Technical Delivery Conditions for 
Steel Casting (Excluding Investment 
Castings) 


( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 77.140.80 
© BIS 2023 
ARAA HAR ST 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SERME TH AM, Ag Reet - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


Ne TES = 


August 2023 Price Group 8 


Foundry and Steel Castings Sectional Committee, MTD 14 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Foundry Steel Casting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division 
Council. 


This standard was first published in 1978 and subsequently revise on 1985, 1986 and 1997. This revision has been 
brought out to bring the standard in the latest style and format of the Indian Standards. It also incorporates 
1 amendment issued to the last version of the standard. 


In addition, the following changes have been made: 


a) Reference clause is modified; 

b) Editorial mistakes were corrected in 4.1.17.3; 

c) IS 1586 (Part 1) method to determine hardness is included in 6.2.6; and 
d) Hot isostatic pressing (HIP) is included in 7.2.2. 


In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following publication: 


ISO 4990 : 2015 Steel castings, general technical requirements steel castings — General technical 
delivery requirements 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 8800 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


TECHNICAL DELIVERY CONDITIONS FOR STEEL CASTINGS 
(EXCLUDING INVESTMENT CASTINGS) 


( Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard outlines technical conditions for 
supply of steel castings and conditions for selection 
and preparation of samples and test pieces. 


1.2 Where a material of product specification lays 
down different conditions, those conditions shall 
apply. In special cases, variations on these 
conditions may be agreed upon at the time of 
enquiry and order. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through references in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of these standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 Cast (Melt) — The product of any of the 
following: 


a) One furnace heat; 

b) One crucible heat; and 

c) A number of furnace or crucible heats of 
similar composition mixed in a ladle or 
tapped in separate ladles and poured 
simultaneously for making a casting. 


3.2 Batch — A group of castings of one grade of 
material cast from the same melt and heat treated 
together under identical conditions. 


4 WORKING OF ENQUIRIES AND ORDERS 


4.1 Each enquiry and order shall provide the 
information given in 4.1.1 to 4.1.17. 


4.1.1 Designation and, where necessary, 
identification number of the casting. 


4.1.2 The quantity, rate of delivery and plus or minus 
tolerance on the quantity of castings. 


4.1.3 The numbers of the drawings provided. 


4.1.4 If the pattern is supplied by the purchaser, its 
design, its condition, its number and the inspection 
to be carried out. 


NOTE — Where a pattern is supplied by the purchaser, the 
manufacturer would not ordinarily be held responsible for 
the dimensional accuracy or the castings unless otherwise 
agreed. 


4.1.5 The reference numbers of all standards or 
specifications concerned. 


4.1.6 The method of inspection, especially in the 
case of non-destructive tests in accordance with 
7.2.1.4. 


4.1.7 Indication of the special requirements, in 
accordance with 7.2. 


4.1.8 Grade and quality of the steel and, if 
appropriate, the method of melting and additional 
properties. 


4.1.9 Important dimensions with indication of their 
detum points for marking out of machining. 


4.1.10 Class of deviations on dimensions and mass 
chosen in accordance with IS 4897 (see 7.2.1.1). 


4.1.11 Submission, where appropriate, of sample 
castings for approval before bulk manufacture. 


4.1.12 Place of purchaser’s inspection when the tests 
cannot be carried out in the manufacturer’s works. 


4.1.13 Method of batching. 


4.1.14 Methods of statistical control to be used 
(if used). 


4.1.15 Restrictive clauses on repairs by welding 
(if any). 


4.1.16 Procedures for marking, in accordance with 
8, machining, loading, despatching and the 
destination. 


4.1.17 Type of Inspection 


4.1.17.1 With no certificate of compliance, no 
statement of routine control test results and no works 
certificate. 


4.1.17.2 Non-specific inspection 


Non-specific inspection is carried out by the 
manufacturer on a cast resulting from the same 
production process but not necessarily on the 
products supplied. 


IS 8800 : 2023 


a) Documents 


1) Statements of compliance with the 
order — A document by which the 
founder states that the castings 
supplied comply with the requirements 
of the order without giving any test 
results; and 


2) Statement of routine control test 
results — A document by which the 
founder states that the casting supplied 
comply with the requirements of the 
order and in which he supplies the 
results of routine control tests of the 
foundry carried out on products 
obtained by the same method of 
manufacturer as those supplied, but 
not necessarily on the castings 
delivered. 


4.1.17.3 Specific inspection 


Specific inspection means the acceptance procedure 
carried out on the products to be delivered in order 
to check whether these products comply with the 
requirements of the order. 


a) Documents 


1) Certificate of acceptance — The 
certificate of acceptance contains the 
result of all prescribed tests carried out 
on samples taken from products 
(see Note 1) which are themselves 
delivered in the conditions specified 
for the forming of batches. 


The acceptance procedures may be 
carried out by one of the following 
methods as agreed at the time of 
enquiry and order. 


i) By the competent department 
(see Note 2) at the works; and 


ii) In the presence of the purchaser or 
of an organization appointed by 
him. 


In case (i), the acceptance 
certificate is signed by the 
representative of the competent 
department, and in case (ii) by the 
purchaser or the representative of 
the organizations appointed. In 
some special cases the acceptance 
procedure may also be carried out 
by an organization which is 
independent of the purchaser and 
the manufacturer, the test being 
carried out outside the 
manufacturing works. In this case, 
representative of this organization 
has to sign the acceptance 
certificate. If there is no specific 
stipulation from the purchaser or an 
agreement to the contrary, the 
supplier can presume that the 
acceptance procedures may be 
carried out by the competent 
department (see Note 2) at the 
works (see Table 1). 


2) Acceptance report — When it has 


been agreed that the certificate of 
acceptance specified in 4.1.17.3 (a) (1) 
shall also be signed by the purchaser or 
his representative, it is called the 
acceptance report. 


NOTES 


1 Both the castings and the test blocks used for 
inspection are known as the product. 

2 The competent department at the works means 
the inspection department, which is different 
from the production department. In certain 
cases, this department may be the subject of 
approval by the purchaser. 


IS 8800 : 2023 


Table 1 Type of Document Required for Various Types of Inspection and Testing 
(Clause 4.1.17.3) 


SI No. Type of Inspection and Testing Type of Document Symbol 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Non-specific inspection and testing No document — 
or 
Statement of compliance SC 
or 
Test report TR 
ii) Specific inspection and testing carried Inspections certificate signed by the IC 
out by the qualified department representative of the qualified department 
(see Note 2) of the manufacturer’s of the works 
factory 
iii) Specific inspection and testing carried Inspection certificate signed by the ICP 
out in the presence of the purchaser orof purchaser or the representative of the body 
a body named by him named by him 
or 
Inspection report signed by the IR 
manufacturer and the purchaser or his 
representative 
iv) Specific inspection and testing carried Inspection certificate signed by the ICP 
out by an independent body, the test independent body 
being carried out outside the production 
works 
v) Continuous inspection By agreement between the — 
interested parties 
5 MANUFACTURE 5.4 Repair and Fabrication Welding 
5.1 Steel Making The repair and fabrication welds required by the 


Except where stipulated to the contrary, the steel 
making process is left to the discretion of the 
foundry, it shall, however, be indicated to the 
purchaser if the latter so specifics in the enquiry and 
order. 


5.2 Unless otherwise specified in the enquiry and 
order or mutually agreed upon, the choice of the 
methods of moulding, running, heat treatment, etc, 
is left to the discretion of the foundry. 


5.3 Cleaning and Dressing 


All the castings shall be cleaned, have the sand 
removed, and be dressed sufficiently to allow them 
to respond to heat treatment and to be adequately 
examined. 


nature of the steel casting shall be carried out in 
accordance to IS 5530. Unless any restrictive clauses 
specify to the contrary at the time of the enquiry and 
order, the castings may be finished by means of 
welding without the previous approval of the 
purchaser. 


6 SELECTION OF SAMPLES AND 


PREPARATION OF TEST PIECES 
6.1 Test Blocks 


Except for routine control tests or where otherwise 
agreed upon, the test blocks whether cast separately 
or attached to the castings, are produced from the 
same cast and are heat treated along with the 
castings they represent. In case of classification by 
batch, same test blocks shall be put with each batch 
for heat treatment. 


IS 8800 : 2023 


6.1.1 Unless otherwise specified, the test blocks may 
be cast separately from the castings. 


6.1.2 The test pieces used for the mechanical tests 
are selected from the test blocks with their axes at 
least 12 mm from the surface. 


6.1.3 In the absence of a specific agreement when 
ordering, the thickness of the test block shall be 
30 mm + 23 mm. 


6.1.4 Test bars with different thicknesses and 
corresponding mechanical properties as well as the 
conditions under which they are to be used (location 
in the case of attached blocks, method of removal, 
etc) may form the subject of agreement when 
ordering. In such a case the thickness of the test bar 
may be maintained nearly equal to the ruling section 
thickness of the casting concerned. However, when 
the ruling section thickness is 50 mm or more the 
height and length of the test bar shall be each kept at 
least 3 times its thickness. The ruling section 
thickness shall be indicated by the purchaser in the 
enquiry and the order. The test pieces should be 
taken as shown in the Fig. 1. Attached test pieces 
should preferably have independent risers so that 
solidity of mother casting is not jeopardized in any 
manner. 


NOTE — In the case of large casting where the ruling 
section thickness is more than the thickness of the test block 
to be provided it may be advisable to heat treat such test 
blocks separately, giving a similar heat treatment cycle as 
recommended for the parent castings, subject to agreement 
between the purchaser and the supplier. By similar heat 
treatment cycle it is generally meant that the temperature 
range, rate of heating and cooling, etc, will be the same as 
those of the parent castings but the soaking time and method 
of cooling may be different depending on the ruling section 
thickness. 


6.2 Mechanical Tests 


6.2.1 Unless otherwise specified the mechanical 


properties specified are those which are to be 
obtained when tested at 30 °C + 10 °C from test bars 
cast either separately from or attached to the casting 
to which they refer. The test values so exhibited 
represent, therefore, the quality of steel from which 
the castings have been poured; they do not 
necessarily represent the properties of the castings 
themselves. 


6.2.2 Tensile Test at Ambient Temperature 


The shape and the dimensions, as well as the test 
method, shall comply with IS 1608 (Part 1). Unless 
otherwise specified, the dimeter of machined test 
bars shall be 14 mm. 


6.2.3 Tensile Test at Elevated Temperature 


A test piece of the same dimeter as for the test at 
ambient temperature shall be used. 


6.2.3.1 The proof stress at elevated temperature shall 
be determined in conformity with IS 1608 (Part 2). 
The temperature specified in the product standard is 
used. 


6.2.4 Creep Testing and Stress Rupture Testing at 
Elevated Temperature 


The dimension of the test pieces and the test methods 
shall comply with the requirements in IS 3407 
(Parts 1 and 2). The choice of method and the testing 
conditions shall be the subject of agreement between 
the purchaser and the manufacturer. 


6.2.5 Impact Test 


This shall be carried out on V-notch Charpy test 
pieces in accordance with IS 1757 (Part 1). 


SECTION XX 


d is the thickness of the ruling section. 


FIG. 1 POSITION OF THE TEST PIECE AND SIZE OF THE SAMPLE 


6.2.6 Hardness Test 


Hardness test on steel castings shall be conducted in 
accordance to IS 1586 (Part 1). This test shall be 
carried out after removal of surface layer in order to 
eliminate de-carburized zones. 


6.2.7 Bend Test 


This test shall be carried in accordance with the 
procedure given in IS 1599. 


6.3 Chemical Test 


Samples for chemical analysis are obtained either 
from the test block or more generally from the ladle. 
The sample shall be sufficient to allow three 
determinations. 


6.3.1 The quantitative analysis of the elements is 
determined by spectrography or any other method 
specified in the standards in force, on samples, the 
shape and dimensions of which are suitable for the 
method used. When the analysis is carried out by 
spectrography, measurement is effected on a point 
of the sample which represents its means chemical 
composition. In the case of dis-agreement about the 
results, only those obtained by chemical analysis in 
accordance with the relevant parts of IS 228 shall be 
taken as being reliable. When the determination is 
made chemically, the analysis shall be made on 
chips taken at least 6 mm beneath the surface. 


6.3.1.1 The permissible variation in product analysis 
from the limits specified for the ladle analysis shall 
be as given in IS 6601. 


6.3.2 Residual Elements 


Elements not specified in the required chemical 
composition of the respective standard shall not 
ordinarily be added to the steel and all reasonable 
precautions shall be taken to prevent contamination 
from the scarp, etc, to keep them as low as 
practicable. Analysis and reporting of the analysis in 
the test certificate for residual elements shall be done 
only when so specified by the purchaser in the 
enquiry and order. However, the manufacturer shall 
ensure that the residual elements are within the 
limits, when such limits are specified by the 
purchaser in the enquiry and order. 


6.3.3 Inter-Granular Corrosion Test 


This test is normally reserved for stainless steels. 
The test shall be carried out in conformity with 
IS 10641 (Part 1) or IS 10461 (Part 2) or otherwise 
by agreement between the parties. 


6.4 Magnetic Test 


6.4.1 The specified characteristic is normally 
magnetic induction. The choice of other properties 


IS 8800 : 2023 


shall be subject to agreement between the parties. 


6.4.2 In order to determine the magnetic induction, 
unless there are special indications, the measuring 
procedure to be used, and the shape of the test piece 
shall comply with IS 10181. 


7 INSPECTION 
7.1 General Requirement 


The general requirements give the normal general 
Supply conditions for steel castings. The condition 
of inspection is specified on the order in accordance 
with 4.1.17, 4.1.17.2, or 4.1.17.3. 


7.1.1 Visual Examination of the Casting 
7.1.1.1 Shape and dimensions 


The shape and dimensions of the castings shall 
comply with the requirements of the order whether 
in the form of drawing, pattern of template. All 
modifications to be made to the drawings, or 
patterns for the technical requirements of the 
manufacturer, shall form the subject of an agreement 
between the purchaser and the manufacturer. The 
founder shall then verify by suitable means that the 
shape and dimensions correspond to those specified 
on the order, if he is responsible for producing the 
pattern or, unless otherwise specified, to those of the 
pattern, after adjusting for contraction allowance, if 
it is supplied by the purchaser. 


7.1.1.2 Surface condition 


The surface of the castings shall be free from defects 
that will adversely affect the utility and mechanic of 
the castings. Surface affects which are not 
prejudicial to the proper use of the castings cannot 
be a reason for rejection. Unless specified otherwise 
at the time of enquiry and order, the castings are 
delivered in the unmachined condition but duly 
dressed and cleaned of all moulding: material and 
heat treatment scale. 


7.1.1.3 The castings shall not be painted unless so 
indicated at the time of enquiry and order. 


7.1.2 Examination of the Material 


The material is characterized by its mechanical 
properties and/or when required by the product 
standards, by its chemical composition. For special 
steels the properties below may be supplemented by 
their own particular basic properties. 


7.1.2.1 Mechanical properties 


a) Tensile test at ambient temperature: 
1) Tensile strength; 
2) Yield stress; and 
3) Elongation. 


IS 8800 : 2023 


NOTE — In the event of non-availability of a 
test bar for any reason, the purchaser may at his 
discretion agree to have the tensile test 
conducted on the test piece taken from a casting. 
In that case, it may be stated for information that 
the properties so obtained may go down to as 
low as 80 percent of those obtainable from test 
bars. 


b) Hardness test (specific to certain products) 
— Following agreement between the 
parties, the tensile test may be replaced by 
a hardness test, however, this test may also 
be used concurrently with the tensile test to 
check the homogeneity of a supply; 

NOTE — Due to variation of sectional thickness in 
actual castings, the hardness is measured on the 


castings, may deviate from that specified for the test 
bars by + 20 percent. 


c) Reduction of area or impact test (Charpy 
V) at ambient temperature — One of the 
properties shall be applicable. However, 
the purchaser, if he so desires, may ask for 
both the properties at the time of enquiry 
and order; and 


d) Bend test — The test piece shall be capable 
of being bent to the stipulated angle. In 
order to meet the requirements of this test, 
the guided bend specimens shall have no 
cracks or other open defects each 
exceeding 3 mm measured in any direction 
on the convex surface or at the corner of the 
specimen after bending. 


7.1.2.2 Chemical analysis (specific to certain 
products) 


The chemical purity and composition limits are 
given in the product standards. The specified ranges 
of chemical composition are based on the results of 
the cast analysis and if so specified at the time of 
enquiry and order the manufacturer shall provide a 
certificate indicating the content for each element 
specified in the standard for the product. Any 
deviation from the specification in 6.3 shall be 
notified in writing. 


7.2 Special Requirements 


The purchaser shall specify the special requirements, 
if any, like microstructure, intergranular corrosion 
test, etc, to supplement the general requirements on 
the enquiry and order. The condition of inspection 
are specified on the order in accordance with 
4.1.17.1, 4.1.17.2 or 4.1.17.3. 


7.2.1 Inspection of the Castings 


The purchaser shall in all cases specify on the 
enquiry and order or through a subsequently issued 
mutually accepted/approved quality plan the 
inspection which he has decided to carry out in 
relation to the service conditions of the castings and 


specifically the non-destructive tests together with 
their severity levels as defined in 7.2.1.4. In 
addition, if he proposes to make the founder 
responsible for these inspection procedures, he shall 
clearly state this on the order. In the absence of such 
a statement, or otherwise, in the absence of the 
contractual agreement subsequent to the founder’s 
quotation for the inspection methods, the founder 
need only check for dimensions, shape and surface 
appearance, in accordance with 7.1.1.1 and 7.1.1.2. 


7.2.1.1 Machining allowances and tolerances on 
dimensions and mass 


a) Machining allowances and tolerances on 
dimensions and mass shall be as specified 
on the drawing supplied; otherwise they 
shall conform to IS 4897. Verification of 
the dimensions is carried out on castings in 
the state of delivery, at the reference 
temperature of 30 °C + 10 °C. The 
dimensions of machined and unmachined 
parts are measured by mean of instruments 
which allow a precision compatible with 
the required tolerances. The purchaser shall 
indicate the detum points for machining 
and marking out. It is desirable for him to 
supply the drawings of the finished 
component; 


b) Proof machining — Proof machining is an 
operation sometimes carried out on 
castings in order to ensure, before supply, 
that a castings is free of surface and 
near-surface defects that may otherwise 
appear in the course of final machining, 
causing downtime and delays during such 
a final machining operation, which often 
involves expensive machine tools. When 
proof machining is done, it is carried out as 
preliminary coarse machining operation 
on a few important surfaces that will, 
thereafter, undergo the final finish 
machining. The permissible deviations on 
untoleranced proof machined dimensions, 
unless otherwise agreed shall be as per the 
class ‘Extra Coarse’ specified in IS 2102 
(Part 1); and 


NOTES 


1 Where such proof machining is done not merely on 
a few important surfaces but on all the surfaces that 
are ultimately finish machine, then such an operation 
is called ‘Rough Machining’. 

2 Proof machining and rough machining is sometimes 
also carried out to improve the ‘as cast’ dimensional 
accuracy of castings so as to make them fit to be 
loaded, with appropriate fixtures, on to the machine 
tools used for finish machining. 


c) Mass — The mass of the castings shall be 
taken to mean the mass after all normal 


fettling operations are carried out but prior 
to doing any machining or drilling that is 
the mass shall include any stock kept for 
any machining operation, unless otherwise 
agreed to. 


7.2.1.2 Surface inspection 


The examination of the surface is ordinarily carried 
out visually in adequate lighting in the state of 


delivery, 


without optical aids. The surface 


conditions and the method of examination thereof 
may be the subject of a special agreement between 
the purchaser and the manufacturer. Method of 
sampling, if sampling technique is agreed to, shall 
be as per IS 6907. 


7.2.1.3 Repair of castings 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


Unless otherwise specified by the 
purchaser on the enquiry and order, 
castings may be rectified by welding. All 
repairs by welding shall be carried out in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in 
IS 5530. If castings have been subjected to 


non-destructive testing by agreement 
between the purchaser and the 
manufacturer, the castings shall be 


re-examined in the area of repair following 
any rectifying operation performed on the 
castings; 


Major repair welds shall be documented on 
drawing or photographs showing location 
and extent of weld and welding procedure 
followed. Documentation shall be 
submitted to the purchaser at the time of 
despatch of particular casting if so 
specified and the time of enquiry and order; 


To form the basis of an agreement between 
the purchaser and the supplier in this 
respect, the following classification shall 
apply concerning to the extent of repair; 
and 


1) Weld repair involving a depth not 
exceeding 20 percent of the wall 
thickness or 25 mm, whichever is 
lower, shall be termed as a minor 
repair; and 


2) Any weld repair exceeding the above 
shall be term as a major repair. Also 
any single repair having an area 
exceeding 250 mm? for every 
millimetre of wall thickness shall also 
be deemed to be a major repair, 
regardless of the considerations 
mentioned in (1) above. 


Carbon equivalent — unless otherwise 
specified in the enquiry and order, or 
otherwise agreed to, the carbon equivalent 


IS 8800 : 2023 


(C.E.) for the purpose of guidance in 
determination of the pre and post weld 
treatment applicable to carbon and low 
alloy steels shall be computed as follows: 


Mn Cr+Mo+V Ni + Cu 
C. E.=C+— + ——— 
6 5 15 


In case of high alloy steels, the definition of C. E. 
shall be subject to agreement between the parties. 


7.2.1.4 Non-destructive test 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Under this heading are grouped the test 
which aim at revealing defects which 
cannot be revealed by a simple visual 
examination, such a penetrant, magnetic 
particle, ultrasonic, X-radiographic, or 
gamma- radiographic inspection also 
included under this heading are tests on the 
surface condition by visual or visual- 
tactile examination. In application of the 
principle started in 7.2.1, the purchaser 
shall specify in the enquiry and order; 


1) The type of non-destructive testing 
which he intends to carry out or to 
have carried out; 

2) The area or areas of the castings to 
which these tests apply and types of 
discontinuity; where relevant; 

3) Whether all, or what proportion, of the 
castings are to be tested; 

4) The defining the 
acceptability or non-acceptability of 


severity levels 


defects which may be revealed; and 
5) Whether the manufacturer is or not 
contractually responsible for carrying 
out the tests. 
Unless otherwise agreed upon, when non- 


destructive testing is to be done the 
castings shall be examined as follows: and 


1) Ultrasonic examination as per IS 7666; 

2) Magnetic particle examination as per 
IS 3707; 

3) Liquid penetrant examination as per 
IS 3658; and 

4) Radiographic examination as per 
IS 2595. 

Unless otherwise agreed upon the 

following shall be the acceptance standards: 

1) IS 9565 for ultrasonic inspection; 


2) IS 10724 for magnetic particle 
inspection; 
3) IS 11732 for liquid penetrant 


inspection; and 
4) IS 12938 for radiographic inspection; 


IS 8800 : 2023 


NOTE — In case of austenitic grades, ultrasonic 
inspection and magnetic particle inspection may not 
ordinarily be feasible. 


7.2.1.5 Pressure tightness 


Pressure tightness tests are carried out on machined 
or unmachined castings. 


a) The pressure tightness test conditions 
(test pressure, fluid, temperature and time), 
as well as the interpretation of the results, 
are as defined in existing standards, 
otherwise by agreement or as stipulated in 
the enquiry and order. The castings which 
are required to be leak proof to a fluid (air, 
water, oil petroleum, vapour, etc), under 
pressure indicated on the enquiry or order 
are tested with that fluid at the specified 
pressure for the test time indicated; 


b) If these castings are only intended to 
contain a liquid at atmospheric pressure, 
they are filled with the liquid stated on the 
order for the time necessary to verify 
freedom from leakage. The castings 
submitted to the test shall not be oxidized 
and shall not receive any protective casting 
or covering before the test. In the castings 
for pressure vessels, reference shall be 
made to the test standard relating to these 
vessels; and 


c) The castings shall not be peened, plugged 
or impregnated, to stop leakages. However, 
unless otherwise specified at the time of 
enquiry and order, rectification and 
upgradation of a castings by welding may 
be carried out in accordance with the 
approved procedures as laid down in the 
relevant clause of the standard. 


7.2.2 Hot Isostatic Pressing (HIP) 


The castings shall be processed by hot isostatic 
pressing (HIP) when specified in the order. Unless 
specified by the purchaser in the purchase order or 
contract, the HIP time, temperature, pressure, and 
other parameters shall be at the discretion of the 
manufacturer. 


8 PURCHASER’S INSPECTION 
8.1 General 


If the supply is subject to the purchaser’s inspection, 
this shall be stated on the enquiry and order, and the 
correspondingly increased cost of manufacturer, 
tests, etc, if any, may be implicitly included in the 
quotation. The purchaser’s inspection may be 
carried out by the representative of the foundry, or 
by the representative of the purchaser; the inspection 
by the representative of the purchaser shall, 


however, be specified in the enquiry and order. In 
the case of inspection by a representative of the 
foundry, the later supplies a certificate of 
acceptance in conformity with 4.1.17.3 (a) (1) (i). 
In the case of inspection by a representative of the 
purchaser in the presence 01 a representative of the 
foundry, an acceptance report is drawn up, in 
conformity with 4.1.17.3 (a) (1) (ii). The final 
acceptance is carried out in the foundry by the 
handing over of the certificate of the acceptance, or 
the acceptance report, except for inspections which 
can only take place later at the purchaser’s works 
within limits specified by agreement between the 
parties. selections of samples, preparation of test 
piece and the tests defined in the order shall 
normally be carried out at the foundry. 


8.2 Procedure for Purchaser’s Inspection 
8.2.1 Formation of Lots 


The method of forming lots shall be stated in the 
order. For example, it may be done as follows: 


a) By cast — The products are of the same 
type. They come from the same cast and 
where necessary have undergone the same 
heat treatment procedure; 


b) By lot — The products may come from 
cast of the same grade and/or heat 
treatment having the same cycles, which 
may or may not be identified; in this case, 
the lot is limited to a number of castings or 
a tonnage which is fixed by the parties and 
which constitutes the unit of acceptance; 
the homogeneity of the lot is verified by 
hardness tests carried out on 5 percent of 
the castings (or at least 5 castings) per lot 
or by agreement between the parties; the 
hardness is measured at the same place on 
each castings. Each hardness value 
obtained shall not deviate by more than 
10 percent from the average of the hardness 
value of all the castings representing the 
lot, measured at comparable section 
thicknesses. If this is not the case, the 
manufacturer may either: and 


1) Subject all the castings in the lot of 
testing, to eliminate those which do 
not correspond to the condition of 
homogeneity, in order to subject them 
to a new heat treatment; and 


2) Or subject the whole lot to a new heat 
treatment, before presenting it again 
for purchaser’s inspection; and 


c) In certain cases, when agreed to between 
the parties, other methods for the making 
up of lots by means of statistical control 
may be used. 


8.2.2 Submission for Purchaser’s Inspection 


The manufacturer shall inform the purchaser, at an 
appropriate time the date for submission for 
inspection. The means of communication to be used 
for giving of such an intimation by the manufacturer 
to the purchaser, and the notice period that shall be 
allowed to the purchaser for this purpose shall be as 
may be agreed to between the parties. He shall 
indicate the number of castings to be submitted 
against each melt and the reference of the order of 
which they are the subject; this constitutes a 
certificate stating that the manufacturing conditions 
specified have been complied with and that any 
individual examinations which may have been 
specified, have been carried out. The purchaser’s 
representative who is permitted access to the places 
where the castings are stored, will present himself on 
the day specified by the written notice, or within the 
next five days; otherwise, in order to avoid 
disturbance in the manufacturing cycle, the 
manufacturer may carry out the inspection operation 
himself and deliver to the purchaser the certificate of 
acceptance. 


8.2.2.1 Rights and duties of the accepting agent 


The accepting agent shall have free access at any 
suitable time to the places in which the products to 
be inspected by the purchaser are manufactured and 
stored: He may indicate the parts of the acceptance 
unit or the products from which the samples shall be 
selected in accordance with the specification. He 
shall have the option of attending the selection of 
samples, the preparation (machining and treatment) 
of test pieces and the carrying out of the tests. An 
accepting agent who visits the workshops shall 
respect all the safety regulation in force in the works, 
if possible. The acceptance procedures shall be 
carried out in accordance with normal production 
requirements. 


8.2.3 Validity of Tests 


No account is taken of tests where unsatisfactory 
results are not attributable to the quality of steel, but 
are the results of: 
a) Either incorrect mounting of the test piece, 
or the abnormal operation of the test 
machine; 


b) Or defective preparation of the test piece; 

c) Or fracture of the tensile test piece, outside 
the gauge length; and 

d) Casting defects observed in the test piece. 


In the above casts, a new test piece may be selected 
from the test block, or from another test block 
belonging to the same lot and the results obtained 
may be substituted for those corresponding to the 
defective test piece. 


IS 8800 : 2023 


8.2.4 Retest 


In casts other than those mentioned in 8.2.3, where 
the results of the mechanical tests carried out on the 
test pieces do not comply with the requirement of the 
products standard, the manufacturer may, unless 
otherwise agreed upon, one of the following 
procedures: 


a) He may repeat the mechanical test 
(including the inter-granular corrosion test 
where applicable) which failed, on two 
additional test pieces. If the results 
obtained from both these test pieces are 
satisfactory, then the material represented 
shall be considered to be satisfying the 
requirements of the products standard. 
Should any of the two new test pieces fail 
to give satisfactory results, the 
manufacturer may follow the procedure 
indicated in c); 


b) In case of the impact tests, if the average 
value obtained from three tests dots not 
reach the specified value, or one of the 
individual values dots not reach two-thirds 
of the specified minimum, three additional 
test pieces selected from a test bar coming 
from the same batch shall be tested and the 
average shall be recalculated. If the new 
average satisfies the specified average 
value, the materials shall be considered to 
be satisfying the requirements of the 
products standard. Should the new mean 
value not satisfy the specified requirements 
or if one of the individual values does not 
reach two-thirds of specified minimum, the 
manufacturer may follow the procedure 
indicated in c); and 


c) He may submit the castings and test bars to 
a new heat treatment, and then carry out all 
the mechanical tests required in the product 
standard on the test bars, including the 
inter-granular corrosion test, if required. 


8.2.4.1 Should they fail again, the castings and test 
bars may be submitted once more to a final heat 
treatment and undergo all the mechanical tests 
required by the product standard once more. In no 
case shall the castings and test bars be submitted to 
more than two additional heat treatments (excluding 
tempering). 


8.2.5 Grading or Reprocessing 


Unless otherwise specified, the manufacturer may 
reserve the right to grade of subject the products to 
heat treatment, either before or after the retest, and 
present these products as a new acceptance unit in 
accordance with the procedures in 8.2.1 and 8.2.2, 
without prejudice to the purchaser. The 
manufacturer shall indicate to the accepting agent 


IS 8800 : 2023 


the method of grading used or the type of heat 
treatment applied. 


8.2.6 Condition of Acceptance 


If all the conditions required in the order are fulfilled 
in accordance with this standard the lot is considered 
to conform and is accepted by the purchaser without 
prejudice to the inspection which can only take place 
later at the purchaser’s works within the time 
specified by agreement between the parties. 


8.3 Rounding off Test Results 
8.3.1 Mechanical and Chemical Properties 


The mechanical and chemical tests shall be rounded 
off, using the rules specified in IS 2. 


8.3.2 Dimension 


Rounding off the results of measured dimensions 
and shape is not required. 


9 AGREED MANUFACTURING PROCEDURE 


Under normal circumstances, the manufacturing 
procedure is to be at the discretion of the 
manufacturer. However, certain supplies, where 
castings are produced in large numbers, the 
purchaser or the manufacturer may request at the 
time of enquiry and order the benefit of a 
manufacturing approval. In this cast, a programme 
of manufacture and inspection is drawn up by 
common agreement. The parties shall agree to a 
certain number of satisfactory preliminary test and 
the manufacturer of pilot series of castings. All these 
conditions taken together constitute approved tests 
of the manufacturer by the purchaser. Where the 
results are satisfactory, the purchaser may place 
subsequent orders with the manufacturer in 
accordance with these programmes of manufacturer 
and inspection. 


10 RECORDS AND COMPLAINTS 


10.1 Unless otherwise specified in the enquiry and 
the order, the manufacturer shall maintain the record 
of results of all the chemical, mechanical and other 
specified tests performed by him for a minimum 


period of two years from the date of supply. 


10.2 If a complaint is made by the purchaser 
concerning a supply, the manufacturer shall be given 
reasonable time to examine merits of the complaint 
and castings in question shall remain available for 
his examination. 


11 PROTECTION 


If the order so specifies, the machined or 
unmachined castings may be submitted to a 
protective treatment otherwise the unmachined 
castings shall ordinarily be supplied unpainted and 
the machined castings be greased in the areas 
machined. 


12 MARKING 


12.1 Each casting shall be legibly marked with the 
following as may be relevant. However, where 
linkage and traceability are required, the relevant 
marking shall be indelible. 


a) The number or identification mark by 
which it is possible to trace the melt and the 
heat treatment batch from which it was 
made; 


b) The manufacturers initials or trade-mark; 
and 


c) Other identification marks in accordance 
with any agreement between the purchaser 
and the manufacturer. 


NOTE — It is recommended that a minimum of 
marking be used. 


12.2 By agreement between the purchaser and the 
manufacturer, castings complying with the 
requirements of this standard may, after inspection, 
be legibly marked with an acceptance mark. 


12.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The products(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provision of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the product 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


IS No. 


IS 228 (all parts) 


IS 1030 : 1998 


IS 1586 (Part 1) : 
2018/ISO 6508-1 : 


2016 
IS 1599 : 2019 


IS 1608 (Part 2) : 
2020/ISO 6892-2 : 


2018 


IS 1757 (Part 1) : 
2020/ISO 148-1 : 


2016 
IS 2595 : 2008 


IS 2644 : 1994/ 
ISO 9477 : 2015 


IS 2708 : 1993 


IS 2762 : 2009 


IS 2787 : 2006 


IS 2985 : 1990 


IS 2986 : 1990 


IS 3038 : 2006 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERED STANDARDS 


Title 
Methods for chemical analysis 
of steels 


Carbon steel castings for 
general engineering purposes 


— Specification (fifth 
revision) 
Metallic materials — 


Rockwell hardness test: Part 1 
Test method (fifth revision) 


Metallic materials — Bend test 
(fourth revision) 


Metallic materials — Tensile 
testing: Part 2 Method of test at 
elevated temperature (fourth 
revision) 


Metallic materials — Charpy 
pendulum impact test: Part 1 
Test method (fourth revision) 


Industrial radiographic testing 
— Code of practice (second 
revision) 


High strength steel castings for 
general engineering and 
structural purposes = 
Specification (fourth revision) 


1.5 percent manganese steel 
castings for general 
engineering purposes — 
Specification (third revision) 


Wire rope slings and sling legs 


— Specification (second 
revision) 
Oil pressure heaters — 


Specification (third revision) 


Steel Castings for Ship's 
Structure — Specification 
(third revision) 

Steel castings for marine 
engines and boilers — 


Specification (second revision) 


Martensitic stainless steel and 
alloy steel castings for 
pressure containing parts 
suitable for high temperature 


IS No. 


IS 3407 


(Part 1) : 1983 


(Part 2) : 1983 


IS 3444 : 


IS 3658 : 


IS 3703 : 


IS 4098 : 


IS 4491 : 


IS 4522 : 


IS 4896 : 


IS 4897 : 


IS 4899 : 


IS 5530 : 


1999 


1999 


2023 


1983 


1994 


1986 


1992 


1994 


2006 


2005 


IS 8800 : 2023 


Title 


service — 
(fourth revision) 


Specification 


Method for creep testing of 
steel at elevated temperatures: 


Tensile creep testing (first 
revision) 


Tensile creep stress rupture 
testing (first revision) 


Corrosion resistant high alloy 
steel and nickel base castings 
for general applications — 
Specification (third revision) 


Code of practice for liquid 
penetrant flaw detection 
(second revision) 


Recommended practice for 


magnetic particle flaw 
detection (third revision) 
Specification for lime- 
pozzolana mixture (first 
revision) 


Steel castings of high magnetic 
permeability — Specification 
(third revision) 


Specification for heat resistant 
alloy steel and nickel base 
castings (second revision) 


One-percent chromium steel 
castings for resistance to 
abrasion — Specification 
(second revision) 


Deviations on untoleranced 
dimensions and mass of steel 
castings (third revision) 


Ferritic and martensitic steel 
castings for use at low 
temperature — Specification 
(third revision) 


Recommendations for 
production, rectification and 
repair of steel castings by 
metal arc welding process 
(second revision) 


IS 8800 : 2023 


IS No. 


IS 6079 : 


IS 6601 : 


IS 6907 : 


IS 7666 : 


IS 7806 : 


IS 7899 : 


IS 8092 : 


IS 9541: 


IS 9565 : 


IS 10181 : 1982 


IS 10461 


1989 


1987 


1992 


1988 


1993 


2006 


1992 


1987 


1995 


Title 


Low alloy cast steel grinding 
media — Specification 
(second revision) 


deviations in 
chemical composition for 
product analysis of steel 
castings (first revision) 


Permissible 


Steel castings — Methods of 
sampling (first revision) 


Ultrasonic examination of 
ferritic castings of carbon and 
low alloy steel — 
Recommended procedure 
(first revision) 


Martensitic steel and austenitic 
high alloy steel castings for 
high temperature corrosion 
services — Specification 
(second revision) 


Alloy steel castings suitable 
for pressure service — 
Specification (third revision) 


Code for inspection of surface 
quality of steel castings for 
valves, fittings and other 
Specification for cast CTC 
segments (first revision) 


Acceptance standards for 
ultrasonic inspection of steel 
castings — Specification 
(second revision) 


Method for determination of 
magnetic permeability of iron 
and steel 


Resistance to inter-granular 
corrosion of austenitic 


IS No. 


(Part 1): 


(Part 2) : 


IS 10724 : 


IS 11166: 


IS 11732: 


IS 11758 : 


IS 12938 : 


IS 12968 : 


IS 13505: 


1994 


1994 


1990 


1993 


1995 


1994 


1990 


1991 


1992 


Title 


stainless steels — Method for 
determination: 


Corrosion test in nitric acid 
medium by measurement of 
loss in mass (huey test) (first 
revision) 


Corrosion test in a sulphuric 
acid/copper sulphate medium 
in the presence of copper 
turnings (monypenny Strauss 
test) (first revision) 


Acceptance standards for 
magnetic particle inspection of 
steel castings — Specification 
(first revision) 


Permissible deviation on 
dimensions, surface roughness 
and mass of steel castings 
made with investment casting 
process (first revision) 


Acceptance standards for 
liguid penetrant inspection of 
steel casting (first revision) 


Precipitation hardening 
Stainless steel castings — 
Specification (first revision) 


standards for 
inspection of 


Acceptance 
radiographic 
steel castings 


Steel castings for crankshafts 
for marine engines — 
Specification 


Centrifugally cast high alloy 
steel and nickel base tubing for 
pressure application at high 
temperature — Specification 


IS 8800 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Foundry and Steel Castings Sectional Committee, MTD 14 


Organization 
BHEL (CFFP), Haridwar 


Bakul Castings Private Limited, Chennai 


BEML Limited, Bengaluru 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi/Haridwar 


Bhilai Engineering Corporation Limited, Bhilai 

CSIR - Central Mechanical Engineering Research 
Institute, Durgapur 

CSIR - National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science 
and Technology (NIIST), Thiruvananthapuram 


CSIR - National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ichhapur 


Disa India Ltd, Bangalore 


Forace Polymers Private Limited, Haridwar 


Hindustan Aeronautics, Foundry and Forge Division, 
Bengaluru 


Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 


Indian Ordnance Factory, Grey Iron Foundry, Jabalpur 


Indian Register of Shipping, New Delhi 


Institute of Technology (BHU), Varanasi 


Ministry of Railway, RDSO, Lucknow 


Ministry of Science & Technology, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


SHRI V. K. RAIZADA (Chairperson) 


SHRI RAKESH NAGER 


SHRI MAHENS KULKARNI 
SHRI A. S. PHANEEDRA (Alternate) 


SHRI A. N. SUDHAKAR 
SHRI RANJITH LAKRA (Alternate I) 
SHRI ABHINAV AGRAWAL (Alternate II) 


SHRI AKHIL DUBEY 
SHRI SHIV DUTT MISHRA (Alternate) 


DR SUDIP SAMANTHA 


DR TPD RAJAN 
DR M. RAVI (Alternate) 


DR D. N. PASWAN 
Ms MINAL SAHA (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR 
SHRI RUPESH BANATT (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KUMAR GHOSH 
SHRI SURESH KUMAR A. (Alternate) 


SHRI D. K. GHOSH 


SHRI K. SATYENDRA KUMAR 


PROF SHIV BRAT SINGH 


PROF DEBALAY CHAKRABARTI (Alternate) 


SHRI M. P. YADAV 
SHRI ARUNANSHU PRAMANIK (Alternate) 


DR K. K. DHAWAN 
SHRI S. VELMURUGAN (Alternate) 


DR INDRAJIT CHAKRABARTY 
DR JAYANT KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI C. SENGUPTA 
SHRI RAJ KISHORE PRASAD (Alternate) 


Ms TAMANNA ARORA 
SHRI K. S. P. RAO (Alternate) 


IS 8800 : 2023 
Organization 


National Institute of Foundry & Forging Technology, 
Ranchi 


NIT Manipur, Langol, Imphal 


Sponge Iron Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Steel Cast Ltd, Bhavnagar 


The Institute of Indian Foundry Men, New Delhi 


The Wesman Engineering Co Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 


Versatile Equipments Pvt Ltd, Kolhapur 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 
SHRI KUNAL KUMAR 


Representative(s) 


DR KAMLESH KUMAR SINGH 
DR AMITESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


PROF (DR) GOUTAM SUTRADHAR 
DR ANIL KUMAR BIRRU (Alternate I) 
DR SABINDRA KACHHAP (Alternate II) 


SHRI D. KASHIVA 
SHRI VIVEK AGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI B. C. ROUTRAY 


SHRI DINESH GUPTA 
SHRI SANJEEV KUMAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI PRADEEP MITTAL (Alternate II) 


SHRI RANJAN GUHA 
SHRI ASHUTOSH MONDAL (Alternate I) 
SHRI PARTHA CHATTERJEE (Alternate II) 


SHRI PUSHKRAJ JANWADKAR 
SHRI PRADEEP PARIT (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIV MAINI, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (METALLURGICAL 
ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(METALLURGICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 14 (21906). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern :C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


