**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10150 (1981) : Guide for sterilization of medical 
products [MHD 12: Hospital Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS s 10150 -IMl 

(Reaffirmed 1996) 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR STERILIZATION OF 
MEDICAL PRODUCTS 

( Second Reprint JAhTUARY 1998 ) 
UDC 615.A6.014.45(026):614.48 



© Copyright 1982 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAK MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 6 September 1982 



AMENDMENT NO. 3 SEPTEMBER 1998 

TO 

IS 10150:1981 GUIDE FOR STERILIZATION OF 

MEDICAL PRODUCTS 

( Page 4, clause 3.2.1 A second line ) — Delete the word 'penonner. 

[ Page 5, clause 3^(iv) } — Substitute 'Posses' for Txoccss*. 

( Page 6, clause 3.6, third sentenct, seventh line ) — Substitute the 
following for the existing sentence: 

'These discs or strips are placed alongside in the packets most difficult to 
sterilize in a sterilization chamber.' 

( Page 7, clause 4.1.4, second line ) — Insert 'ATCC No. 7953 or 
12980/NCTC No. 10007' after ' Bacillus stearothermophilus\ 

( Page 8, clause 4.2.1, second line) — Insert 'ATCC No. 9372' after 
'Bacillus subtilis'. 

( Page 9, clause 4.4.1.1, third line ) — Substitute n.33 MtW for 433'. 

( Page 9, clause 4AAA,fifth line ) — Substitute 'radioisotope' /or 'isotope'. 

( Page 10, clause 4.4.4, last sentence ) — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 

'Duration of radiation sterilization process depends upon the activity of the 
radioisotope source.' 

( Page 10, clause 4.4.4, Note^ second line ) — Delete the word 'tundard'. 

(Page 10,claus€4A J, first line) — Substitute 'kOy'for 'KGy'. 

( Page 10, clause 4.4.6, second sentence ) — Substitute the following with 
the existing: 

^Some suitable systems for routine dosimetry are: 

i) Dyed clear peispex* 

ii) Radiochfomic dye films, 

ill) CeriC"Ceious sulphate solution, and 

iv) Etbanol-cheorobenzene solution'. 



Amend No. 3 to IS 10150:1981 

( Page 10, clause 4AJi, second line ) — Insert VATCC No. 14884 or NCTC 
No. 8241* after 'ATCC No. 27142'. 

(Page 10, clause 4A3, tutuh Une ) — Insert 'suigtcal' after 'as*. 

( Page 17, clause B-2.1, sbcth line ) — Insert 7ATCC No. 9372' after 
•NCTC 10073'. 



(MHD14) 



RsfiMcnpby Uail, BB, New DdU, lodk 



Indian Standard 



IS : 10150 - 1981 

(Rc«mnneill')96) 



GUIDE FOR STERILIZATION OF 
MEDICAL PRODUCTS 

Surgical Instrumeixts Sectional Committee, CPDC 1 1 

Chairman 

Col R. D. Ayyar 
Kalakshetra Colony, Madras 

Members Representing 

Dr J. K. Chaudhry Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Dr S. M. Chaudhary ( Alternate I ) 
Dr R. S. Lakhtakia ( Alternate II ) 
Dr H. K. Chuttani G. B. Pant Hospital, New Delhi 

Dr S. Gnanadesikan Health and Family Welfare Department, Govern- 

ment of Tamil Nadu 
Shri B. N. Haldkr National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Jainshcdpur 
Shrt R. C. Jain Directorate of Industries, Government of Punjab 

SuRi Sher SiXGii ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Kohm Scalpels India, New Delhi 

Dr D. M. Linoayya Health and Family Welfare Department, Govern- 

ment of Tamil Nadu 
Shri D. B. Malik Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri K. Manivannan Directorate of Industries, Government of Haryana 

Shri S. Mitra The Directorate of Industries, Government of West 

Bengal 
Shri S. Senovpta ( Alternate ) 
Shri Mohinder Lal Punjab Surgical Instruments Manufacturers and 

Suppliers Association, Jullundur 
Brio C. L. Piplani Ministry of Defence ( DGAFMS ), New Delhi 

Smt Vimal R. Pure Sushrut Surgicals Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V as ant R. Gore ( Alternate ) 
Dr B. S. Rana Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 

Maj B. Sadanand Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi 

Shri V. K. Bajpai ( Alternate ) 
Dr D. Saiyanano Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 

Shri T. R. Sehoal Small Scale Industries, Ministry of Industry, New 

Delhi 
Shri Mahesh M. Shah Samir Enterprises, Vadodara 

Shri Sudhir Vinubhai Shah Shah Medical and Surgical Company Ltd, Bombay 



Shri Shrikant Vinubhai 
Shah ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on pa^$ 2 ) 



© topyrtght 1982 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

l^hii publication it protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to bf an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



If 1 10150 -1981 

( C9ntinu$d from pag§ 1 } 

Mimbirs Rt^tsmting 

Da E. SwAMiKATBAK Health Department, Government of Kerala 

Shri p. R. T. Thulasinoam Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited, New 

Delhi 
Shri J. Pb^bhakar ( Alitrnatt ) 
Shri A. N. Vio Imperial Surgical Go Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Sh^i R. N. Vio ( Alttrnatt ) 
Skri R. N. Via All India Instruments Manufacturers and Dealers 

Association, Bombay 
Shri P. K. Narula ( Alt9mat9 ) 
Dr a. S. Sbthi, Director General, ISI ( Etc-offUio Mtmkf ) 

Director ( Gonsr Prod & Med Instrs ) 

Suretafy 

Shri D. K. Aorawax. 
Deputy Director ( Gonsr Prod & Med Instrs ), ISI 



IS : lOtSO - IMl 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR STERILIZATION OF 
MEDICAL PRODUCTS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 24 December If 81, after the draft finalized by the Surgical 
Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer 
Products and Medical Instruments Division Council. 

0.2 This guide has been prepared to give knowledge to the manufacturers 
and consumers of surgical items for various methods adopted for sterili- 
zation and tests of sterility. 

0.3 ISOMED Section of Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay has 
considerably helped for preparing this guide. 

0.4 In preparing this standard considerable assistance has been derived 
from ISO document No. ISO/TC 150/SC I N 26 'Sterilization of medical 
devices', issued by the International Organization for Standardization; 
and Indian, US and British pharmacopoeiae. 



1. SCOPE 

1,1 This guide prescribes the guidelines for sterilizations of medical 
products and method of tests for sterility. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 The definitions as given in 2.2 shall apply. 

2*2 Sterilisation — Sterilization is a process by which the probability 
of occurrence of a viable micro-organism in a medical product is re(!uced 
to less than iO~*. The terms partial and complete sterilization are not 
correct. 

3. GENERAL 

3*1 EflDiciency — The efficiency of any given sterilization process is 
influenced by the nature of product, the extent and type of any contami- 
nation present, which depends veiy much on the conditions under which 



IS 1 10150 -MSI 

the product has been prepared. The principles of good manufacturing 
practice should be observed in the manufacturing of products. 

9.2 Bio fcar dte n — The products to be sterilized shall be as free as possible 
from microbial contamination (generally lower the contamination, greater 
is the margin of safety ). No ngures can be attached to this qualitative 
statement as the efforts to reduce the level of bioburden should be a 
continuous process. 

NoTB — Emphasis should be placed on the development of the highest possible 
standards of manufacturing conditions involving clran rooms, filtered air, protective 
clothing for operators and above all, discipline on all hygiene matters and for the 
routine control of raw materials kno%m to be subject to contamination. The 
manufacturer should periodically monitor the products, prior to sterilization, to 
assure that the microbial bbburden. ^tablished on validation has not significantly 
changed. Micro-organisms recovered from the product and the environment shoula 
be characterised, and a record should be mainumed. 

3«2«1 The bioburden determination should be carried out aseptically 
( for example, by working on a laminar air flow bench ) so that the risk of 
laboratory contamination is avoided. For every batch of a product the 
following number of units should be drawn for testing: 

No. of Units in a Batch or Lot SampU Sizt 

100 or less 10 percent and not less than 4 

101 - 1 000 2 percent and not less than 10 
More than 1 000 Not less than 20 

3.2.1.1 The medical products are rinsed with sterile saline contain- 
ing 0*05 percent polysorbate. An aliquot of the solution is then filtered 
through a membrane filter ( 45fim ). The filter is spread on a suit- 
able sterile culture medium in a petri dish and incubated for a minimum 
of 96 hours. Observations are made at the end of every 24 hours. The 
number of growing colonies, multiplied by the dilution factors indicates 
the number of a colony forming units ( CFU ) present in the product. 
The types of micro-organisms isolated should be identified at least up to 
the genus stage. 

3.2.1.2 In evaluating the test results, the average CFU per unit of 
product, known from experience to be attainable in similar articles, shall 
be taken into account. For example, if the average CFU per hypodermic 
needle, syringe and infusion set is 10, 50 and 500 respectively, and if the 
CFU in any later determinations exceeds these figures significantly, the 
manufacturer shall find the cause of this increase, and initiate improve- 
ments in the hygiene of processing, handling and packaging. 

3^1.3 The test shall be carried out by personnel skilled and 
experienced in aseptic working procedures personnel under the supervision 
ofan experienced microbiologist. The tests shall not be carried out 



IS 110150 -1981 

under direct ultraviolet light nor should the products be exposed to 
ultraviolet light. The test shall be carried out by the manufacturer on 
every batch of product and the records on the number of types micro- 
organisms in that batch shall be maintained. 

SJi Requirements of Sterilisation — The following aie the require- 
ments for sterilization process: 

i) Vigilant supervision of equipment, instruments and procedures 
for operation; 

ii) Maintenance and calibration by personnel well trained in devis- 
ing and applying methods for attaining sterility; 

iii) Adequate proof of the effectiveness of the procedures used; 

iv) Decontamination of recirculation products of bacteria and the 
resistance of the contaminant bacteria. Adequate removal of 
substances which may interfere with direct contact of steam or 
other media, for example, oils, greases, protein, soap, blood, tissue 
debris, etc; and 

v) Identification on the primary packing material of adequate 
sterilization by a chemical indicator. The choice of appropriate 
process requires knowledge and experience concerning the 
sterilization process. 

3.4 Process EflTscts -^ The effect of the chosen sterilization procedure 
on the product ( preferably including its primary-package and final con- 
tainer ) shall be validated before that procedure is applied in practice. 
Failure to follow a process meticulously involves the risk of a non-sterile 
or deteriorated product. 

3.5 Pacloiging — Sterilization of medical products in their primary 
packaging and final container is advantageous and beneficial. The 
material employed for packaging the products shall, have the following 
characteristics: 

i) Shall allow penetration of the sterilizing agents; 

ii) Prevent entry of bacteria, during cooling and storage; 

iii) Robust enough to withstand handling, transportation, moisture 
and heat; 

iv) Process adequate bursting strength under conditions of steriliza- 
tion; and 

v) Permit egress of air and filter entering air during and after 
sterilization respectively. 



IltlOlM-1981 

Hard objecu such ai syringe, valves and prostheses shall have rounded 
edges because sharp edges perforate the packaging film under impact. 
The package shall be sealed so that the seal width is 2 to 3 mm. The 
body of the packaging material as well as the seal shall be firee from 
defects and leakage, 

3.5.1 The primary packaging shall be free from defects, such as 
pinholes, leakage, delamination, etc, which shall affect its function. It 
shall also be unaflected when dropped as described in 3.5.2. A method 
for determining the presence of pinholing in plastics film shall be as given 
in Appendix A. The leakage shall be tested as described in SJ3. 

3.5wE Drop Tisi — When dropped from a height of 1 metre on to a 
shock-resistant surface the primary packaging shall be undamaged and 
the sterile conditions of the package unchanged. The primary packag- 
ing shall show no sign of leakage when tested as described in SiS;3. 

Note — The drop teit it only to ensure that the packaging film hat tufficient 
impact ttrength and that the product doct nor have tharp edget or tpiket to damage 
the film. Ai the product may break in the drop tett, it thould not be underttood 
that the plattics primary packaging thould protect the product from mechanical 
damage. 

3.5.3 Leakage Test — Place the product in primary packaging, weighed 
if necessary, under 5-10 cm of water in a vacuum desiccator or any other 
suitable vessel and evacuate the space above the water surface to a 
vacuum level of 250 mm Hg. Closely observe the primary packaging 
for any localized stream(s) of gas bubbles during the next 5 minutes. 
Then restore atmospheric pressure to the space above the water surface 
and, after 2 minutes remove the primary packaging from the water. 
Dry the external surfaces and examine for evidence of water penetra* 
tion. 

Note — As a refinement of this procedure, a tmall amount of fluoretcin may be 
dissolved in the water after which the primary packaging it examined under laltravio- 
let light for evidence of water penetration, 

3.6 Biologlcsil Isidicmtore — Biological indicators are standardised 
preparations of specific microorganisms relatively resistant to the parti- 
cular sterilization process, and are used to demonstrate in a p<Mitive 
manner the adequacy of the sterilization process. An aliquot ( conti^n- 
ing about a million spores ) of a viable culture of a known^. species of 
microorganism is added to disks or strips of filter paper or any other 
suitable carrier. These disks or strips are placed alongside in the packets 
in a sterilization chamber. The preparation of stock suspensions of 
selected microorganism requires competence in the techniques for main- 
taining and standardizing the microbial culturers. Where spore suspen- 
sions are used to prepare a biological indicator, it is important that the 
stock suspension contain predominantly spores that have been held jin 
non«nutritive liquid. Precautions are necessary to ensure that the 



IS t 10150 - 1981 

biological indicator inoculum contains no substances that substantially 
alter the resistance of the indicator organisms to the sterilization process. 
It is important that the biological indicator preparations commercially 
available maintain their label conccntnition of viable spores or cells 
throughout the dating period, since the performance of the biological 
indicator is a function of its initial viable count as well as the resistance 
of each viable unit or cell. Preparations made by the user should have 
equivalent properties. 

4. METHODS OF STERILIZATION 

4.1 Steam Sterilization — This process is ordinarily ca'^ried out in an 
autoclave and employ steam under pressure. The following combina- 
tions of temperature and time are appropriate for ftcrilizing by heating in 
an autoclave: 

Holding Temperature Minimum Holding Time 

( min ) 

115*to lia^C 30 

121* to 124*^0 15 

126* to 129**G 10 

134* to 138*G 3 

4.1.1 The prescribed conditions are those to be maintained throughout 
the bad during the holding period of the sterilization cycle. In as much 
as ihi process depends upon the presence of moisture as well as elevated 
temperature, adequate measures shall be taken to ensvre that all air has 
been removed from the chamber prior to the initiation of the sterilization 
cycle 

4.12 Information on the physical conditions within the autoclave, may 
be oUained by inserting temperature sensitive elements into representa- 
tive container and with additional elements at the previously established 
cool«t part of the loaded chamber. It is desirable that each sterilization 
cych be recorded on a temperature time chart. 

4J.3 Chemical Indicators — The chemical indicators, such as tapes are 
employed to detect the conditions of sterilization in the chamber. 

41.4 Biological Indicator — Disks or strips containing about a million 
spo'es of suitable strains of Bacillus stearothermophilus are utilized as biolo- 
gicil indicators to prove the adequacy of the sterilization process. The 
apjiroximate Di« value may be 1| minutes for saturated steam at 12PC, 

! Nora — Dit value meini, the time in which 90 percent of the orfaaiMBi 
ire expected to be killed. 



IS f lOlSO-1981 

4.2 SterlUamtloa by Dry HMt — The process of sterilizatim it done by 
dry heating in suitable chamber using a suitable temperature, time 
combination, for example, 160'C for 2 hours or 180'C for 30 minutes. 

NoTK — The scerilizacion period is reckoned from the time when all paru of the 
sterilization material have assumed the sterilization temperature. 

4.2.1 The efficiency of the dry heat sterilization procedute shall be 
checked by means of test duration of Bacillus subtilis prepared for the 
purpose of checking the dry heat sterilization procedure. 

4.3 Stcrilismtion by Etbylene Oxide *- The material to be sterilized 
is exposed cither to pure E lOor to a mixture of ETO with an inert gas 
( CO} or suitable fluorinated hydrocarbons ). This process is difficult to 
control, the gas itself l>ein£; toxic and when mixed in certain proportions 
with air, becomes explosive. Careful determination of the appropriate 
cycle parameters must be made as the level of humidification, heat gas 
concentration, and time of exposure relate directly to the product design 
( includini; penetrability, packaging system employed, bioburden of the 
product, and state of hydration of the micro-organisms ). 

4.3.1 Bioburden — A bioburden history of the product should be 
established since this factor influences the effectiveness of the sterilization 
process. 

4«3.2 Packaging Materials — These shall be highly permeable to ITO, 
its diluents and air. Double thickness muslin or paper, or single thidcness 
( up to 75 fATJi ) polyethylene (PE) are materials of choice. Bags of nylon 
film, cellophane, saran, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) film and alumfaium 
foil must not be used because of inadequate permeability. Lamitiates, 
such as cellO'PE, mylar-P£ and fgil-PE may only be used, if theother 
side of the package is either uncoated paper or PE. 

4.3«3 Sterilization Process — ETO sterilization requires specislized 
equipment designed for the particular purpose. The instructions provided 
by the manufacturer of the ETO sterilizer must be closely followed. The 
exposure conditions normally used with ETO mixtures at a tempenture 
of 55^*0 and relative humidity (RH) 60 percent are given in TaUe 1. 
Before using an ETO gas cylinder for routine sterilization, the concentra- 
tion of the gas must be assayed. The procedure and other detail of 
ETO sterilization shall be as given in Appendix B. 

4.4 Sterilisatiosi by lonislnf Radiation 

4.4.1 Electron accelerators and radioisotopes are two practical sources 
of radiation. Electron accelerators produce high energy electrons wip a 
low penetrating ability and their use requires careful control of mmy 
variables affecting sterilization efficiency. Amongst these variables |i« 
electron energy, electron current, scan width, exposure time and product 

8 



IS s 10150 - IMl 

density. Van be g raff machines produce I to 3 MeV electrons. Linear 
accelerators produce 3 to 15 MeV electrons. Beam energies in excess of 
9 MeV are not used as short-lived radioactivity is induced in the material. 
Owing to high dose rate, sterilization is completed in a fraction of a 
minute. The product thickness should be carefully controlled as the 
penetration of electrons is limited. 

TABLE 1 EXPOSURE CONDITIONS USED WITH ETHYLENE OXIDE 

MIXTURE AT A TEMPERATURE OF SS*C, RH 60 PERCENT, AND 

DWELL PERIOD OP 60 MINUTES 

(aoiiifi 4.3.3 indB- 1.1 ) 



MlXTt'llK 
CONTIWT ( PfRCBNT ) 


ETO CONCENTRATIOK 

(nig/L) 


Chamuek 
Pkkahurk 
( KN/m* ) 


Minimum 

EZPOBURB 

Periods (h) 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


lOETO^ 
90 CO, / 


450 


200 


6 


20 E rc)\ 

80CC), / 


670\ 
920/ 


125 
210 


4 
S 


11 ETO 








54 Trichloro-fluoromcthane \ 
35 Dichloro*difluoromethaueJ 


450 \ 
850/ 


35 
125 


5 
S 


12 E10 








88 Dirhloro-difluoromethane 


650 


50 


4 



4.4.1.1 Radioisotope sources — Two radioisotope sources cobalt-60 
( half life = 5'26 years, gamma rays of 1'17 MeV ( 100 percent ) and 
1*33 ( 100 percent ) and Caesium- 1 37 ( half life « 30 years, gamma 
rays of 0*n6 MeV ( 95 percent ), shall be employed for sterilization purpose. 
The cobalt-60 isotope is currently the most widely used source of gamma 
radiation. As these radiations have greater penetrating power than 
electrons, they are useful for bulky products. 

4.4.2 Bioburden — It is desirable to establish the bioburden history of 
the product since this factor influences the eflfectiveness of the sterilization 
process. 

4*4.3 Packaging Materials — A wide variety of reasonably thitk ( more 
than 75 ^m ) packing materials ( polyethylene, po1yvi|iyl.jchloride, 
polystyrene, laminates of paper-PE, cello-PE, mylar-PE^ foil-PE, etc ), 
may be employed. 

4.4*4 Sterilijcation Process t- The radiation sterilizers are operated 
according to the manufacturer's instructions. The process may be a 
batch type ( with radioisotope sources ), or a continuous type ( with 
radioisotope sources or with electron beam generators ). The entire 



I8tl01S0-lMl 

process is automatic and precisely controlled. Owing to a relatively low 
dose rate the sterilization may last from 8 to 100 hours depending on the 
strength of the source. 

NoTS — The greatest advantage of the gamma ray sterilization process is that the 

Eroducts stacked in the final sealed, tamper-proof, sundard, corrugated cartons may 
e steriliced. 

4.4.5 Dosi — A dose of 25 KGy ( 2'5 Mrad ) is generally accepted as 
adequate for the purpose of sterilization, although other dosage levels 
may be employed provided that they have been authorized by the 
appropriate authority. Lower doses can be used only if (i) the products 
have low or susceptible bioburden, (ii) they are radiation sensitive, and 
(iii) additional controls such as microbiological monitoring of the 
product before and after exposure are carried out to assess the adequacy 
of the process. 

4.4.6 Dosimetry — The radiation dose received by an irradiated product 
is measured by means of suitable chemical or physical methods, that are 
independent of dose rate. Some suiuble systems for routine dosimetry 
are: (i) solutions of ferrous sulphate ( up to 0*4 KGy ), and (it) acrylic 
plastics without or with sensitive dyes for example, perspex *HX' and red 
perspex respectively ( up to 40 KGy ). 

4.4«7 Chimcal Indicator — Chemical indicators, such as tapes are 
employed which by change of colour indicates the condition of steriliza- 
tion. 

4»4.8 BiologUat Indicator — Disks or strips containing about a million 
spores of suitable strains of Bacillus pumilus ( for example E60I or ATCC 
27142 ) are utilized as biological indicators to monitor the sterilization 
process using gamma or other ionizing radiation. The approximate Dit 
value may be 0*2 Mrad ( for wet preparations ) and 0*15 Mrad ( for dry 
preparations ). 

4.4.9 Precautions — Repeated exposure to ionizing radiation is likely to 
induce a significant degradation in materials such as natural and 
synthetic fibres and plastics. With some materials, for example, 
cellulosic materials, major degradation occurs if they are autoclaved 
after they have been exposed to a sterilizing dose of gamma radiation. 
There is also the possibility of toxicity developing in certain products 
( fi>r example, PVC ) if they are exposed to ETO after previous irradia- 
tion. Therefore no attempt should be made to resterilize materials, such 
as dressings, plastics, etc, which have been previously sterilized by exposure 
to ionising radiation. 

10 



IS; 10150- 1981 
5, STERILITY TESTS 

5.1 The sterility tests presented herein are suitable for n^vealin^ the 
presence of viable forms of bacteria, fiin>;i and yeasts in or on ai titles 
which have gone through the process of sterilization. Alternative pro- 
cedures or procedural details may be cniploycd to demonstrate »hat an 
article is sterile, provided the results obtained are at least ot equivalent 
reliability, 

NoTB — All trmprraturrs hrrin •p^'cifu'd an* in Crlsiut d«gn«*s and with rpip«*rt t<> 
autoclaves, generally mran tho f'xhaijst-lin«' t« i;<p<Taiur«»s. WIuto a diirinncf 
appears or in tho cvont of a di>put«*, when evidcnrr nf mirrobtal rnntammation in 
obtaini'd tiy the procrdurc given in this text, the retiilt Miohuimd i% < dru I\im\c of 
failure of the article to meet the requirements of the tent. 

5.1.1 Adventitious microbial growth that is transmitted to an article* 
or to inoculated test culture media from the rnvironn^ent <hjrin^ the 
course of a sterility test invalidates the rcsiilts f)r the tost. Heiu<-, li is 
necessary to demonstrate that the proper precautions ha\c hem taken to 
exclude extraneous micro-organisms throughout ttie test period. 

5.1.2 Where a sterility test is applied to di.*crete units drawn from a 
group of similar units, the results obtained, if nc>;ative, indicate, that the 
probability of the presence of contaminated units in the untested ponjon 
is below a level detectable by the sampling plan employed. No sampling 
plan for applying sterility tests to a specified proportion of discrete units 
selected from a sterilization load is capable of demonstrating with com- 
plete assurance that all of the untested units arc in fact sterile. A ftirther 
review of validation of sterilization is presented in the preceding clauses 
on various methods of sterilization. 

5.2 Media — Media for the tests may be prepared as described in 
Appendix C, or dehydrated mixtures yielding similar formulations may 
be used provided that when reconstituted as directed by the manufacturer 
or distributor, they have growtli-promoting properties equal or superior 
to those obtained from the form as given therein. 

5*3 Growth Promotion Test — Test each autoclaved lot of medium 
for its growth promoting qualities, in the following manner. Inoculate 
duplicate test containers of each medium with less than 100 of the micro- 
organisms given in Table 2 and incubate according to the conditions 
specified for it. 

5.3.1 The test media are satisfactory if evidence of growth appears 
within 7 days. The tests may be conducted simultaneoitsly with the use 
of the test media for sterility test purposes, provided however, that the 
sterility test is considered invalid if the test medium shows no growth 
response. 

11 



IS I 10150 . 1981 

5.3.2 Confirm the sterility of each lot of medium by incubations of 
representative containers, at the temperature and for the length of time 
specified in the test. 

5.3.3 If freshly prepared media are not used within two days, store them 
in the dark, preferably at i** to 25*. Finished media may be stored in 
unsciled containers for mor^ than 10 days, provided that they are tested 
weekly for growth promotion. If stored in suitable sealed containers, 
the media may be used for not more than one year, provided they are 
tested for growth promo- ion every three months. 



TABLE 2 DETAILS OF TEST MfGRO-OROANlSMS 

( CUUS9 5.3 ) 



NfBDTUM 

(2) 
Fluid chioglycoUate 



Alternative thioglycol- 
late 



ill) Soyabean casein digest 



Sl 
No. 

(1) 

i) 



ii) 



Tbst MtCRo-OROAMtaica 

(3) 

a) BaciUus subiUis ( ATCX: No. 6633 )• 

b) Candida aUi€*ms ( ATOC No. 10231 ) 

c) Bacttrndts mdgaius ( ATGG 

No. 8482t ) 



•) 



Bacttraidi 
No. 8482 ) 



mdgaius ( ATGC 



a) BadUus subtUis ( ATCC No. 6633 ) 

b) Catukda oMeant ( ATCX: No. lA23l ) 



Incubation 
T«MF ( •€ ) 

(4) 

30^.35» 
30M5* 

30*.35» 



20-.25* 



^If a spore forming organism is not desired, use Mieroeaecus Ivitus ( ATGG No. 9341 ) 
at the incubation temperatures indicated in the table. 

flf a spore forming organism is desired, use CUttridwm sptngmts ( ATGG No. 1 1437 ) 
at the incubation temperature indicated in the uble. 

5.3.4 General Procedure — Because of diversity in the nature of articles 
to be tested and other factors affecting the conduct of the sterility test, it 
is important to observe the considerations in performing sterility tests as 
given in 5.3,5 and 5.3.6. For purified cotton, gauze, surgical dressings and 
related pharmacopoeial arlicles, open the package or container i^ptically» 
and test the articles as described in Appendix D. 

5.3.5 Selection of Test Specimens and Incubation — The quantity of infor- 
mation provided by sterility testing is related to the number of units 
tested. Test 20 units of the article with each medium. Incubate the 
test mixture for 14 days with fluid thioglycollate medium or alternative 
thioglycollate medium where so indicated at 30^ to 35*G, and with soya- 
bean casein digest medium at 20'' to 25^C. 



12 



IS : 10150 - 1981 

5*3*6 Test Procedures for Direct Ttansfer to Test Media — Sterility tests 
are applied to individual discrete units or to composites of such units. 
The number of units specified is chosen only for practical considerations 
of the required laboratory manipulations in performing the referee tests. 
As previously noted in the introductory paragraphs, results obtained in 
examining a discrete unit or imits for sterility cannot be extrapolated 
with complete certainly to characterise the sterility of the untested portion 
of the lot. 

5.4 Test Procedures Using Membrane Filtration Technique — 

Certain devices may be appropriately tested for sterility of the critical 
pathways by the membrane filtration technique. The manipulations 
additional to those employed in conducting the sterility tcit by direct 
transfer may be a potential source of extraneous contamination. The 
frequent use of nagati^e controls is highly recommended. The test 
procedure is described in Appendix E. 

5.5 Observation and Interpretation of Sterility Test Results — 

At intervals during the incubation period and at its conclusion, examine 
the contents of all the vessels for macroscopic evidence of microbial 
growth, such as the development of turbidity. If no evidence of i;iowth 
is found, the material tested meets the requirements of the test for sterility. 
If evidence of microbial growth is found, the material tested fails to 
meet the requirements of the test for sterility, unless it can be demonstrated 
by rctests or by other means that the test was invalid for causes unrelated 
to the article. 

In view of the possibility that microbial growth observed in the test 
was due to inadequate aseptic sampling and testing technique rather 
than to intrinsic contamination of the article, the following,' retests are 
permitted. 

5.5.1 First Retest — The number of specimens selected, the volumes to 
be tested, and the media are the same as those indicated for the original 
sterility test. If no evidence of microbial growth is found, the material 
tested meets the requirements of the te^t for sterility. If micrf>bial growth 
appears in this first retest isoUxte and characterise the microbial contami- 
nate(s) of the first retest and compare with the contaminant(s) of the 
original sterility test. If the contaminant (s) cannot be differentiated 
readily, the material tested fails to meet the requirements of the test for 
sterility. If the contaminant(s) can be differentiated readily, a second 
retest may be performed. 

5.5.2 Second Retest — The number of specimens selected is double the 
number tested in the original sterility test and in the first retest. The 
volumes tested from each specimen and the media are the same as those 
indicated for the original sterility test anci the first retest. 

13 



IS i 10150 • 1981 

5.5.2.1 If no evidence of microbial growth is found, the material 
tested meets the icquiren.ents of the test for Merihty. If growth appears 
in this second letest, the material tested fails to meet the requirements of 
the test for sterility. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 3.5.1 ) 
DETECTION OF PINHOLE IN PACKAGING RLM 

A-1. REAGENTS 

A-1.1 Ammonia Sensitive Solution — Dissolve 100 g of tartaric acid 

in 600 ml of water, add If) ml of fO percent w/v aqueous ferric chloride 
( reCl3,6n.^O ), 120 ml of 10 N ammonium hydroxide and 500 ml of 12 
percent w/v potassium fcrricyanicle. This solution is ftable for ^e\e^al 
weeks when stored in the dark. Sheets of white, semi-absorbent paper 
arc coated on one side with the reagent and then dried in the presence 
of light. 

Norh — I he sheets at first are an olive-green, but upon exposure to light the ferric 
ions are reduced to ferrious whirh then react wiih ferricyanide to give the blue 
piRmrnt ferrous ferric>anide (lurnbullV blue). This pigment is decomposed by 
excess ammonia to white ferrous h>droxide and ammonium ferricyanide. 

A-2- APPARATUS 

A-2.1 The apparatus shall consist of a circular polymethyi methucrylate 
cell divided into two compartments by the test specimen ( see Fig. 1 ). 
The dimensions of the cell shall not be critical. The outlet from the 
top of the cell shall be connected by rubber tubing and glass T-pieces to 
a mercury manometer and a vacuum pump. The vacuum applied 
to the top compartment shall be controlled by an adjustable hose clip 
downstream from the manometer. The bottom compartment of the cell 
shall be connected on one side to a Drechsel bottle partly filled with 
concentrated ammonium hydroxide and on the other side to the vacuum 
line downstream from the hose clip. This flow rate may be achieved 
by adjustment of a second hose clip on the outlet line from the cell, or 
by inserting a capillary of suitable dimensions in the line. 

A-3. PROCEDURE 

A*3.1 The test specimen shall be placed on the flange of the cell and 
covered with the moistened reagent paper so that the reagent coated side 
faces the specimen. With coated materials, the coating on the specimen 

(4 



IS: 10150- 1981 




z 


< 


iU 


tc 


z 


o 

< 




p 


Q. 


Q 


i/> 


p 




< 


►- 


s 


</> 


u 


lAJ 


s 


>- 


o 




c/: 




d 








Ui 



15 



IS : 10150 - 1981 

shall face the reagent paper. A neoprenc gasket shall be positioned 
on the paper, and a n^.ctal screen having a diameter approximately 
2 nun less than the internal diameter of the cell and gasket shall be 
fitted. 

A-3.2 The screen shall be used to prevent the moistened paper sealing 
into the flat si^rface of the cell cover when a vacuum is applied. To 
prevent distortion of the specimen the thickness of the screen and gasket 
should be similar. The cell cover shall then be fitted and clamped by 
four spiing-back papei clips. With the water pump turned on, the hose 
clip is adjusted to give a vacuum of approximately 200 mm Hg shall 
then be in the top of the cell. The tubing to the ammonia supply shall 
be connected and ammonia drawn through the bottom of cell shall 
approxim.ately be 150 m)/min. This flow rate may be achieved by 
adjusting the clip on the outlet line from the cell or by inserting a suit- 
able capillary in the line. At the end of the test period the ammonia line 
shall be disconnected and air shall be drawn through the cell for appro- 
ximately 30 seconds to remove residual ammonia. The cell is then 
dismantled and the sensitized paper examined foi white spots, which 
indicate discontinuities in the test specimen. 

Note — The time required for a test at a specific vacuum level depends on -the 
nature of the film material. *lhc optimum test time is one that gives small, sharply 
defined spots on the sensitized paper, and should be predetermined for each type of 
test material. Test times that are inconveniently short or long may be adjusted by 
decreasing or increasing, respectively, the vacuum on the top of the cell. However, 
when long test times are used, ammonia may permeate through an organic film, free 
of pores by the solution diffusion mechanism, resulting in a uniform discoloration 
of the reagent paper. Permeation of gases by this mechanism is independent of the 
total pressure and dependent only on the* partial pressure difference of gas across the 
ipecimen, whereas diffusion through pores is dependent on total pressure, hence the 
rate of diffusion of ammonia through pores can I)e controlled by the vacuum applied 
on the top of the cell. 



APPENDIX B 

( Clause 4.3.3 ) 
PROCEDURE AND OTHER DETAILS OF ETO STERILIZATION 

B-L PROCEDURE OF STERILIZATION 

B-1.1 It is the general practice to place the material in the chamber 
previously heated to 55*'C. An initial vacuum of approximately 
686 mm Hg is drawn. Since too rapid reduction of pressure within the 
chamber may cause sealed bags to burst, the evacuation is to be carried 
out gradually. Moisture is then introduced to provide relative humidity 
( RH ) of 40 to 60 percent. After a dwell period of 60 minutes to allow 

16 



IS : lOlSO - 1981 

hydration of spores, the ETO mixture is then introduced to the pressure 
required to give the desired concentration of ETO as given in Table 1. 
This pressure is maintained throughout the exposure period. Following 
the exposure period of 6 to 24 hours, depending on the degree of conta- 
mination and the penetrability of the package, the gas is exhausted and 
a vacuum of approximately 635 mm Hg is drawn. Filtered air is then 
introduced into the chamber until atmospheric pressure is attained. At 
temperatures lower than 55*C the exposure period will be much longer. 
Monitoring of the sterilization cycle shall require the employment 
of modern instrumentation to monitor the concentration of ETO, the 
temperature, the time and the moisture content in the sterilizing 
chamber. 

B-2. BIOLOGICAL INDICATOR 

B-2.1 Knowledge of the process may be gained by monitoring the physical 
parameters achieved in the sterilizer, and by the inclusion, in each 
sterilization cycle, of bacteriological test pieces distributed throughout 
the load. These usually consist of aluminium foil or polyethylene film 
or paper disk on which has been dried at least one million viable and 
potentially recoverable spores of Bacillus subtilis Vdit. niger ( NGTG 
10073 ). It is recommended that at least 10 spore strips be used in each 
sterilization cycle. The approximate D^q value at 50 percent RH and 
54**C may be about 3 or 1*7 minutes for ETO concentrations of 600 or 
1 200 mg/L respectively. 

B.3. RETENTION OF ETO 

B-3.1 In ETO sterilization a note should be taken of absorption of the 
gas by some materials. For example, plastics exposed for 4 hours to 
560 mg/L at 50 percent RH and 55^0 may retain ETO as follows: PVC 
( 1-3 percent ), polystyrene ( l'5-2 5 percent ), PE ( 0-5-1 percent ), poly- 
propylene ( 1'5 percent ), natural and synthetic rubber ( 2-3 '5 percent ), 
silicone rubber ( 1 '5-2 percent ). Some plastics ( for example, acrylics, 
polystyrene ) are affected by the fluorinated hydrocarbon mixtures, result- 
ing in a crazing effect, evidenced by a milky discoloration, minute cracks 
or a crystal coating on the plastic. 

B-4. AERATION 

B-4.1 Great care must be taken to remove all traces of ETO after 
sterilization. This can be achieved by drawing sterile air through 
the load, the duration of aeration depending on the type of product ( see 
Table 3 ). 

17 



n 1 10150 - 1901 



TABLE S AERATION TIMES 




(ai«i#B-4.i ) 




PnoDOora 


THUrMHAlVHK 


RKroMMKNnrn 

A Kit \TinM 
TiMK (h. 


(!) 


(2) 


(3) 


GlmM, paper, and thin rubber articles 


Room 


24 


Gum, rubber ( thicker thiin 6 mm ) 


Room 


4n 


AttdPEarticlcf 






Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) 


Room 


IfB 


All other articles except PVC 


Room 


or, 


All of these materials 


50*-C0'C in an 
aerator 


8-12 



B-& RESIDUALS 

B-5wl There is also the possibility of formation of toxic substances ( ethy- 
lene glycol and ethylene chlorohydrin ) rcsuitinfr from tlie exposure to the 
gas. This is particularly true for the U5e of ethylene oxide in sterilizing 
articles that contain moisture and chloride ions ( as in medicated dress- 
ings )• ETO sterilized products must therefore be monitored to assure 
that the residual gas and its reaction products do not exceed recommend- 
ed limits as given in Table 4. 

TABLE 4 MAXIMUM RESIDUE LIMITS FOR ETHYLENE OXIDE ( ETO ) 
ETHYLENE CHLOROHYDRIN ( ETCH ). AND ETHYLENE GLYCOL 

(ETC) 

Mbdical Darxca ETO^ 

(I) (2) 

Small (<10g) 250 

Medhim( 10-100 g) 100 

Large OlOOg) 25 

Intraoccular lenses 25 

Surgical scrub sponges 25 



Contacting mucosa and skin 250 

Contacting blood ( cx»vivo ) 25 

5 



ETCH^ 


ETC 


(ppm) 




W 


(4) 


250 


5000 


100 


2000 


25 


500 


25 


500 


250 


500 


250 


5000 


25 


250 


10 


10 



•laduo* b «w p >ir mbMitittiM araiatioa. 

18 



IS s 10150 - 1981 

APPENDIX G 

( Clause 5.2 ) 
MEDIA FOR TESTS 
CS-L FLUID THIOGLYCOLLATE MEDIUM 
G-Ll Composition 

L-cystine 0-5 g 

Sodium chloride 2*5 g 

Dextrose ( CtHitO«.HiO ) 5-5 g 

Agar granulated 0*75 g 

( moisture contents not in 
excess of 15 percent ) 

Yeast extract 5*0 g 

( water soluble ) 

Pancreatic digest of casein 15*0 g 

Sodium thioglycollate or 0*3 ml 

ThioglycoUic acid 

Resazurin sodium solution 1 ml 

( 1 in 1 000 ) freshly prepared 

Water 1 000 ml 

^H after sterilization 7*1 ± 0*2 

G-1.2 Mix in the order named, the L-cystine, sodium chloride, dextrose, 
agar, water soluble yeast extract, and pancreatic digest of casein, in a 
mortar with thorough grinding. Stir in a small quantity of heated water, 
transfer to a suitable container, with repeated washing of the mortar, add 
the remainder of 1 000 ml of water, and heat until solution is effected. 
Dissolve the sodium thioglycollate or thioglycollic acid in the solution 
and, if necessary, adjust the solution with aqueous sodium hydroxide 
( 4 percent w/v ) so that, after sterilization, it will have a ^H of 
7*1 ± 0*2. If filtration is necessary, heat the solution again without 
boiling, and filter while hot through moistened filter paper. Add the 
resazurine sodium solution, mix, and place the medium in suitable 
vessels which provide a ratio of surface to depth of medium such that 
not more than the upper half of the medium has undergone a colour 
change indicative of oxygen uptake at the end of the incubation period. 
Sterilize in an autoclave (see 4.1 ). Do not use this medium if it is 
evaporated to an extent affecting its fluidity. If more than the upper 

19 



18 1 10150 - 1981 

one third has acquired a pink colour, the medium may be restored once 
by heating on asteam bath or in free flowing steam until the pink colour 
disappears. When ready for use, approximately the upper one-tenth of 
the medium should have a pink colour. Use fluid thioglycoUate medium 
by incubating it under aerobic conditions. 

C-2. ALTERNATIVE THIOGLYCOLLATE MEDIUM FOR 
DEVICES HAVING TUBES WITH SMALL LUMINA 

Ci-2.1 Compositioa 

L-cystine 0.5 g 

Sodium chloride 2'5 g 

Dextrose ( G»HijO«.HiO ) 5-5 g 

Yeast extract ( water soluble ) 5*0 g 

Pancreatic digest of casein 15*0 g 

Sodium thioglycoUate 0*5 g 

or thioglycollic acid 0'3 ml 

Water 1 000 ml 

pH after sterilization 71 ± 0*2 

C*2«2 Heat the ingredients in a suitable container until solution is 
efiected. Mix and, if necessary, adjust the solution with aqueous 
sodium hydroxide ( 4 percent w/v ) so that, after sterilization, it will 
have a ^H of 7*1 ±0*2. Filter, if necessary, place in suitable vessels, 
and sterilize in an autoclave ( see 4*1 ). The medium is freshly prepared 
or heated, in a steam bath and allowed to cool just prior to use. Do not 
repeat. 

C-2.3 Use alternative thioglycoUate medium in a manner that y^ill 
assure anaerobic conditions for the duration of the incubation period. 

G-3. SOYABEAN — CASEIN DIGEST MEDIUM 

G-3.1 Composition 

Pancreatic digest of casein 17*0 g 

Papaic digest of soyabean meal S'O g 

Sodium chloride 5*0 g 

Disable potassium phosphate 2'5 g 

Dextrose ( CtHi,Oi.H,0 ) 2*5 g 

Water 1 000 ml 

pH after sterilisation 7-3 ± 02 

20 



IS : 10190 - 1981 

G-3.2 Dissolve the solids in the water, warming slightly to effect solution. 
Cool the solution to room temperature, and adjust with aqueous sodium 
hydroxide ( 4 percent w/v ), if necessary, and dispense into suitable 
vessels. Sterilize in an autoclave ( see 4,1 ), Use soyabean casein digest 
medium by incubating it under aerobic conditions. 



APPENDIX D 

( Clause 5.3.4 ) 

TEST PROCEDURE FOR PURIFIED COTTON GAUZE, 
SURGICAL DRESSING AND RELATED ARTICLES, SUTURES, 
STERILIZED DEVICES, AND PETROLATUM GAUZE 

D-1. PURIFIED COTTON, GAUZE, SURGICAL DRESSINGS St 
RELATED ARTICLES 

D-1.1 From each packet of cotton, rolled gauze or gauze bandage being 
tested, remove with sterile instruments two or more portions of 100 mg 
to 500 each from the innermost part of the sample. From individually 
packaged single-use materials such as gauze pads, remove a single portion 
of 250 to 500 mg or the entire article in the case of small, that is 
25 X 75 mm or smaller, adhesive absorbent bandages. Aseptically 
transfer these portions of the article to the specified number of containers 
of appropriate media. 

D-2. SUTURES 

D-2«l Place the container in a suitable antimicrobial solution containing 
crystal violet or another suitable dye, for not less than 3 hours. Remove 
with sterile forceps and if the container shows no evidence of leakage, 
hold under aseptic conditions prior to testing. Open the container, 
aseptically, and with sterile instruments transfer sutures to containers of 
appropriate media. 

D-3. STERILIZED DEVICES 

D-3.1 The following considerations apply to sterilized devices manufac- 
tured in lots, each consisting of a number of units. Special considerations 
apply to sterile devices manufactured in small lots or in individual units 
where the self-destructive nature of the sterility test renders the conven- 
tional sterility test impracticable. For these articles appropriate and 
acceptable modifications to the sterility test must be made. 

21 



IS 1 10150 - 1981 

D*3«2 For articles of such sise and shape as to permit complete immer- 
sion is not more than 1 000 ml of culture medium, test the intact article^ 
using the appropriate media, and incubate as directed under 5.4. 

D-3.3 For devices having hollow tubes, such as transfusion or infusion 
assemblies, or where (he size of an item makes immersion impia(:ticable, 
and only the fluid pathway must be sterile, flu^h the lumen of each of 
20 units with a sufficient quantity of fluid thioglycollate medium and the 
lumen of each of 20 units with a sufficient quantity of soyabean casein 
digest mecium to yield a recoveiy oi not less than 15 ml of each medium 
and incubate with not less than 100 ml of each of the two media as 
directed under 5«3.4. For devices in which the lumen is so .^mall that 
fluid thioglycollate rredium will not pass through substitute alternative 
thioglycollate miedium for fluid thioglycollate medium and incubate that 
inoculated medium anaerobically. 

D*3.4 Where the entire intact aiticle cannot be tested for sterility because 
of its size and shape, by impression in not more than 1 000 ml of culture 
medium expose that portion of the article most difficult to sterilize and 
test that portion or where practicable remove two or moie portions each 
from the innermost portion of the article. Ajepticaliy tramfer these 
portions of the article to the specified number of vessels of appropriate 
media in a volume of not mxre than 1 000 ml and incubate as directed 
under 5.4. 

D-3.5 Where the presence of the test specimen in the m.edium interferes 
with the test because of bacteriostatic or fungistatic action, rinse the 
article thoroughly with a minimal amount of rinse fluid ( see diluting and 
rinsing fluids under test procedure using membrane filtration under 
Appendix E ). Recover the rinse fluid, and test as directed for devices 
under test procedures using membrane filtration ( see 5.4 ). 

IM. PETROLATUM GAUZE 

D-4.1 Prepare fluid thioglycollate medium as directed except to use 
1*0 g of agar and to add 50 g of gelatin for each litre of medium and 
test as described under Growth Promotion Test { see 53 ). 

D«4«2 Place 300 ml of medium in suitable wide-mouth containers of 
about 500 ml capacity. Loosely close each jar with an aluminium lid 
without a liner but with a rubber ring gasket fitted to the inside circum- 
ference of the lid, and secure with a muslin cover during sterilization and 
until ready to use. Sterilize in an autoclave ( see 4«1 ). 

D-4.3 To the medium warmed to 52*^ transfer aseptically the entire 
contents of a single package of the petrolatum gauze to be tet^ed. Close 
tightly and shake each container in a reciprocating shaker for 10 
minutes. Cool the container in a slanting position until the petrolatum 

22 



istioise-i9ei 

forms a solid seal over the surface of the medium. Break the petrolatum 
seal by a single quick shake. Incubate at 20^ to 25"" for not less than 7 
days, then shake in a reciprocating shaker for 10 minutes. Transfer 
aseptically 0*5 ml of the product medium mixture to 15 ml of culture 
medium. Incubate at 30' to 35*C for not less than 7 days. 



APPENDIX E 

( Clauses 5.4 and D-3.5 ) 

TEST PROCEDURE USING MEMBRANE FILTRATION 

TECHNIQjUE 

E-1. APPARATUS 

E-1.1 A suitable unit consists of a closed reservoir and a receptacle 
between which a properly supported membrane or membranes of appro- 
prate porosity are placed. A membrane generally suitable for sterility 
testing has a nominal porosity of 0*45 ± 0*02 fimf a diameter of approxi- 
mately 47 mm, and a flowrate of 55 to 75 ml of water per minute at a 
pressure of 70 mm of mercury. The entire unit may be assembled and 
sterilized with the membrane(s) in place prior to use in the t&ht or the 
membranes may be sterilized separately by steam under pressure, or by 
any method ( for example, by radiation if the membrane is radiation 
stable ) that yields proper performance. Where the article to be tested 
is an oil, sterilize the membrane separately, and after thorough drying, 
assemble the unit, using aseptic precautions. 

E-2. DILUTING AND RINSING FLUIDS 

£•2.1 Fluid A — Dissolve I g of peptic digest of animal tissue ( equiva« 
lent to DIFCO grade ) in water to make 1 litre, filter or centrifuge to 
clarify, adjust to a ptl of 7*1 t 0-2, dispense into containers in 100 ml 
quantities and sterilize in an autoclave ( set 4.1 ). 

E-2.2 Fluid D ^ If the test specimen contains lecithin or oil, use 
Fluid A to each litre of which has been added 1 ml of polysorbate 80» 
adjust to ^H 71 J: 0*2, dispense into flaiks and sterilize in an autoclave 
( Sii 4.1 ). 

NoTB — A iterile luid nti'nt a>t hiv j %iti*iic*ef4il or ^mtifui^U properties if it li 
to be coniidered suitable for diisolving, dilutins or rinung an article under ten ' or 
iterility. 

23 



18 s 10150- IMl 

E-3. DEVICaES 

E-3.1 Devices that are required to contain sterile pathways may be 
tested for sterility by the membrane filtration technique as given in 
E-S.1.1. 

E-3.1,1 Aseptically pass a sufficient volume of Fluid D through each 
of not less than 20 devices so that not less than 100 ml is recovered from 
each device. Collect the fluids in aseptic containers and filter the entire 
volume collected through membrane filter funnel(s). One or two 
membranes may be used for the entire number of containers prescribed. 
If the product is bacteriostatic or fungistatic, rinse the membranes with 
three 100 ml portions of Fluid A, Aseptically remove the membrane(s) 
from the holder, cut the membrane in half, if only one is used, immerse 
the membrane or one-half of the membrane, in 100 ml of soyabean 
casein digest medium, and incubate at 20^ to 25''C for not less than 7 
days. Similarly immerse the other membrane or other half of the 
membrane in 100 ml of fluid thioglycoUate medium, and incubate at 
30^ to 35*G for not less than 7 days. Where the devices are large, and lot 
sizes are small test an appropriate number of units as described for 
similar cases under test procedures for direct transfer to test media ( $ii 
also 5.3.6 ). 



24 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 OCTOBER 1983 
TO 

IS: 10150-1981 GUIDE FOR STERILIZATION OF MEDICAL 

PRODUCTS 



Corrigenda 

(Pagg 22, olauM D'$.2): 

a) Una 2 - Substitute 'in' for *is\ 

b) line 3 - Substitute 'J.S.U' for *^.k*^ 

(Page 22, olauae D-'5.4, last Una) - Substitute 
*5.3.U' for 'S."*'. 

(CR)C U) 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi, India 



AMENDI1ENT NO. 2 AUGUST 19^35 
TO 

15:10150-1981 GUIDE FOR STERILIZATION OF 
MEDICAL PRODUCTS 



{Rige 8, clause 4.2.1) - Add the following new 
clauses after U.2.1 and renumber the subsequent clauses 
accordingly: 

•U.3 Steriljhtat JU>n^ b/J^ornm - The materlnl to 

be sterilized is exposed to formaldehyde F,as at low 
temperature (approximately 55 ''C). The process is 
carried out in a specialised vessel. The nroccss donendii 
on four factors^ namely, temperature, relative humidity, 
gas concentration and exposure time. Besides, the 
product design which includes the penetrability, the 
packaging system employed, bioburden of the product and 
the state of hydration of the micro-organisms is also 
important • 

li.3.1 Bioburden - A bioburden history of the pro'luct 
shall be established since this factor influences the 
effectiveness of the sterilization process. 

Ii.3.2 Packaging Syetcm - The packa^^inp; materials shall 
be highly permeable to formaldehyde gas or alternatively, 
a breathing system may be provided which allows the pene- 
tration of the formaldehyde gas into the product. The 
material such as double thicknesn muolin or paper or 
single thickness polyethylene (PE) or polypropylene, 
laminates as cello-PE, mylar--PE, foil-PR may be used. 

•i.B.B Sterilization Proceaa - Formaldehyde, gas 
sterilization requires a specialised equipment designed 
for this particular purpose. The instructions pro- 
vided by the manufacturer of the formaldehyde gas 
sterilizer shall be followed. The following exposure 
conditions shall be achieved for the formaldehyde gas 
sterilization: 



Temperature - 55''C jh^ 2"C 

Vacuum - 700 nun +^ 20 mm before gas entry 

In the chamber and 
600 mm HK^ 20 mm during the 
sterilization process 

Relative humidity - 55 to 60 percent 

Exposure tljne - 10-12 hours 

Gas concentration in the chamber - UOO mg - 500 mg 

per litre 

The above cycle shall be monitored by a recording 
system which may be manual or automatic. 

14,3.1* Biological Indicator - The biological 
indicators are required for the purpose of determi-. 
nation of sterility. Biological indicators shall be 
used to monitor effectiveness of the sterilization of 
the product. At least 10 opore strips shall be used 

of 10 Bacillua eubtilia var niger (NCTC 10073) for 
each sterillcing cycle.' 



(CPDC 11) 



Printed at Simco Pnndng Prc^n, Delhi, Indu 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 

Telephones 323 0131, 323 3375, 323 9402 

Fax • 91 11 3234062, 91 11 3239399, 91 11 3239382 

Telegrams Manaksanstha 

(Common to all Offices) 

Central Laboratory: Telephone 

Plot No 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industnal Area, Sahibabad 201010 8-77 0032 

Regional Offices: 

Central Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELH1 1 1 0002 323 76 1 7 

•Eastern 1/14 CIT Scheme VII M, VI P Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 337 86 62 

Northern SCO 336-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 60 38 43 

Southern : C.I T Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 235 23 15 

tWestern Manakalaya, E9, Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East), 832 92 95 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branch Offices: 

•Pushpak*. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 550 13 48 

t Peenya Industrial Area, 1 st Stage, Bfingalore-Tumkur Road, 839 ^9 55 
BANGALORE 560058 

Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, TT Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 55 40 21 

Plot No 62-63, Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751001 40 36 27 

Kalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 21 01 41 

Rot No 43. Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 8-28 88 01 

Savitn Complex, 1 16 G T Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 8-71 19 96 

53/5 Ward No 29. R G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 54 11 37 

5-8-56C, L N Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road. HYDERABAD 500001 20 10 83 

E-62, Chitaranjan Marg, C-Scheme. JAIPUR 302001 37 29 25 

1 17/418 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 .21 68 76 

Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, 23 89 23 
LUCKNOW 226001 

NIT Building, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010 52 51 71 

Patiiputra Industnal Estate. PATNA 800013 26 23 05 

Institution of Engineers (India) Building 1332 Shivaji Nagar. PUNE 41 1006 32 36 35 

TO. No. 14/1421, University PO. Palayam. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034 6 21 17 



•Sales Office is at 5 Chownnghee Approach, PO. Pnncep Street, 27 10 85 

CALCUTTA 700072 

t Sales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road. MUMBAI 400007 309 65 28 

^Sales Office is at 'F Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja Square, 22^ 39 71 

BANGALORE 560002 



Printed at SImco Printing Press, Delhi 



