INA HS IS 13129 (Part 4) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


vic are — writ i scr breite] werett 
ant 4 RA stk ferre tora at RT 


(TEAM TRUAT ) 


Solar Heating — Domestic Water 
Heating Systems 
Part 4 Determination of Durability and 
Reliability 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 27.160 


© BIS 2023 


ARA Ach aT 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM HAA, 9 SEEL SITE HHL AMT, 78 Reet - 110002 
MA ë MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 5 


Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee, MED 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 4) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 


A wide variety of Solar Domestic Hot Water (SDHW) systems are marketed throughout the world. A natural 
consequence of this highly dispersed activity is the need to understand, predict and compare the performance of 
these systems. Standardized test methods are essential for assessing the performance potential. This standard has 
been developed to facilitate the comparison of these systems. 


Because of the various testing methodologies for determining thermal performance are being followed and 
acceptance in the industry, it was decided to prepare separate parts of this standard each covering a separate 
methodology. 


This standard was first published in 1991. The present revision has been taken up with a view to incorporating the 
modifications found necessary as a result of experience gained on the use of this standard. Also, in this revision, 
the standard has been brought into the latest style and format of Indian Standard, and references to Indian 
Standards, wherever applicable have been updated. 


Other parts of the standard under the general title “Solar heating — domestic water heating system’ are: 


Part 1 Performance rating procedure using indoor test methods 

Part 2 Procedure for system performance characterization and yearly performance predication 

Part 3 Procedures for system component characterization and predication for yearly performance using 
component performance data 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 13129 (Part 4) : 2023 


Indian Standard 
SOLAR HEATING — DOMESTIC WATER HEATING SYSTEMS 
PART 4 DETERMINATION OF DURABILITY AND RELIABILITY 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


1.1This standard establishes uniform methods of 
testing solar domestic water heating systems for 
short term durability and reliability. 


1.2This standard establishes specific safety and 
health requirements. 


1.3This standard applies to solar domestic heating 
systems designed to heat water for domestic usage. 


1.4 This standard does not contain test methods to 
evaluate the reliability and durability of specific 
components or component materials used in solar 
water heating systems. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. AII 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 12933 (Part 5): Solar flat plate collector — 
2003 Specification: Part 5 Test 
methods (second revision) 


3 DEFINITIONS 


3.1 Absorber — Device within a collector for 
absorbing radiant energy and transferring this 
energy as heat into a fluid. 


32 Ambient Air — Air in the space (either indoors 
or outdoors) surrounding the thermal energy storage 
device or solar collectors, whichever is applicable. 


3.3 Angle of Incidence (of Direct Solar Radiation) 
— 'The angle between the solar radiation beam and 
the outward drawn normal from the plane 
considered. 


3.4 Auxiliary Thermal (Heat) Source — A source 
of thermal energy, other than solar, used to 
supplement the output provided by the solar energy 
system; usually in the form of electrical resistance 
heat or thermal energy derived from combustion of 
fossil fuels. 


3.5 Close-Coupled Solar Water Heater — A unit 
where the collector abuts the container on a common 
chassis or cradle. 


3.6 Collector — A device containing an absorber. 


3.7 Components — Parts of the solar hot water 
system including but not limited to collectors, 
storage, pumps, heat exchanges, controls, etc. 


3.8 Control — Any device for regulation of the 
solar thermal system or component in normal 
operation, can be manual or automatic. 


3.9 Domestic — Refers to use in residential and 
small commercial buildings. 


3.10 Emittance — The ratio of the radiant energy 
emitted by a body to the energy emitted by a black 
body at the same temperature. 


3.11 Forced Circulation System — A system 
which utilizes mechanical means requiring external 
power to circulate the heat transfer fluid through the 
collector(s). 


3.12 Heat Exchanger — A device specifically 
designed to transfer heat between two physically 
separated fluids. Heat exchangers can have either 
single or double walls. 


3.13 Heat Sink — A device for absorbing thermal 
and radiant energy. 


3.14 Heat Transfer Fluid — A fluid that is used to 
transfer thermal energy between components in a 
system. 


3.15 Integral Collector-Storage System — A 
system which has the storage within the collector, 
directly exposed to the solar irradiance. 


3.16 Pyranometer — Instrument for measuring the 
radiation on a plane receiver surface which results 
from the radiant fluxes incident from the hemisphere 
above within the wavelength range 0.3 um and 
3 um. 


3.17 Serviceability — The capability of a device or 
system of remaining usable for an intended function. 


3.18 Solar Collector — See 3.19. 


3.19 Solar Thermal Collector — A device 
designed to absorb solar radiation and to transfer the 
thermal energy so gained to a fluid passing through 
it. 


IS 13129 (Part 4) : 2023 


3.20 Solar Radiation — The radiation emitted by 
the sun. Practically all of the solar radiation incident 
at the earth's surface is at wavelengths less than 
3 um and is often termed ‘short wave radiation’. 


3.21 Solar Irradiance Simulator — An artificial 
source of radiant energy simulating the solar 
radiation, usually an electric lamp or an array of such 
lamps. 


3.22 Solar Hot Water System — The complete 
assembly of subsystems and components necessary 
to convert solar energy into thermal energy for the 
heating of water. It may include an auxiliary heat 
source. 


3.23 Storage Device (Thermal) — The container(s) 
plus all contents of the container(s) used for storing 
thermal energy. 


NOTE — The heat transfer fluid and accessories such as 
heat exchangers, flow switching devices, valves, and baffles 
which are firmly fixed to the thermal storage container(s) 
arc considered a part of the storage device. 


3.24 Thermosiphon System — A system which 
utilizes only the change in density of the heat 
transfer fluid in the collector relative to the storage 
or heat exchanger to cause circulation of fluid 
between the collector and storage or heat exchanger. 


3.25 Water Draw Rate — The rate at which the hot 
water is withdrawn from the system at a specified 
time. 


4 FREEZE PROTECTION TESTS 


This freeze protection test is applicable to solar 
water heating systems in which water without 
antifreeze additives circulates through the solar 
collector or other system components that are 
normally exposed to outdoor weather conditions. 


4.1 Purpose 


The purpose of this test is to determine if the solar 
water heating system will withstand freezing 
conditions without damage to the system at the 
minimum ambient air temperature specified by the 
manufacturer. 


4.2 Apparatus 
The following apparatus is required: 


a) An insulated chamber large enough to 
enclose all parts of the system which would 
be exposed outdoors, including a minimum 
of 2 m of water supply piping and 2 m of 
return water piping; 

b) Astand on which collectors of the maximum 
area recommended by the manufacturer (or 
the complete unit in the case of a close 
coupled solar water heater) can be installed 
at the recommended angle of inclination; 


C) A heat sink of a minimum area equal to the 
maximum collector array area that can be 


tested mounted horizontally at least 1 m 
above the highest point of the collector 
array. The temperature of the heat sink shall 
be controlled independently of the chamber. 
The underside of the heat sink shall have an 
emittance of not less than 0.95 and the top 
surface shall be insulated so as to minimize 
its air temperature cooling effect; 

d) A means of cooling the air in the chamber at 
a controlled rate to the minimum required 
temperature and maintaining a uniform 
temperature within 3 °C around the four 
sides, the top and the bottom of the collector 
and other components; 


e) A means of heating the air in the chamber at 
a controlled rate to a maximum temperature 
of 30 °C; 

f) Temperature measuring devices to measure 
the ambient air temperature on the four 
sides, the top and the bottom of the collector 
and other components, the temperature of 
the heat sink and the temperature of the 
water at the inlet and outlet of the collector 
array, or that portion of the system within 
the chamber; 


g) A temperature and pressure controlled water 
supply within the range of 5 °C to 25 °C and 
200 kPa to 600 kPa or the manufacturer’s 
maximum working pressure whichever is 
less; and 

h) A means of measuring the volume of any 
water discharged from freeze protection 
valves. 


4.3 Procedure 
The procedure shall be as follows: 


a) Install the solar water heating system 
according to manufacturer’s instructions 
such that the collectors and other 
components normally exposed to the 
outdoors are inside the insulated chamber. 
Unless otherwise specified in the 
installation instructions, install a minimum 
of 2 m of water supply piping and 2 m of 
return water piping inside the insulated 
chamber; 


b) Charge the system with cold water and for 
pressurized storage tanks maintain the water 
supply pressure; 


c) Energize the system as specified by the 
manufacturer, including any freeze 
protection equipment, but not including any 
auxiliary thermal sources; 

d) Reduce the ambient air temperature in the 
chamber to 8 °C + 2 °C and maintain this 
temperature for 1 h; 

e) Following this one hour period, 
simultaneously commence cooling the 


chamber at a uniform rate not exceeding 
5 °C per hour down to the manufacturer's 
specified minimum temperature and cooling 
the heat sink to a temperature 20 °C + 2?C 
below the specified minimum temperature; 


f) Maintain the chamber and heat sink at these 


g 


h) 


j 


k) 


minimum temperatures for a period of 
12 hours or until the temperature of the 
water at the inlet and outlet of the collector 
array or that portion of the system within the 
chamber has stabilized to a rate of change 
less than 0.25 ?C for one hour; 


Simultaneously begin raising both the 
temperature of the chamber at a uniform rate 
not exceeding 5 ?C per hour and the heat 
sink to a temperature of 30 °C € 2 °C; 


Maintain the chamber and heat sink at a 
temperature of 30 °C + 2 °C for a period of 
2 hours; 


For those systems that have pumps and/or 
drain-down valve controllers activated by 
solar radiation or a timer, the controls shall 
be activated manually or otherwise for a 
period of 1 h while maintaining the chamber 
and heat sink at a temperature of 
30 °C +2 °C; 

Repeat steps (e) to (j) five times; 


m) Repeat steps (e) and (f) once; 


n) 


For those systems that are seasonally 
operated and must be drained manually 
when ambient air temperatures fall below 
the specified minimum temperature, drain 
the system as specified by the manufacturer 
and, reduce the temperature in the chamber 
to 15 °C + 2 °C below the specified 
minimum temperature and maintain for a 
period of 12 h or until the temperatures at 
the inlet and outlet of the collector array or 
that portion of the system within the 
chamber has stabilized to a rate of change 
less than 0.25 °C for one hour; 


p) Purge the atmosphere within the chamber 


with fresh air at room temperature and open 
the chamber. Examine the system for 
evidence of freeze damage or leakage; 


q) Isolate the water supply and relieve the water 


r) 


pressure in the system as necessary. 
Disconnect the piping connections to the 
Collector, the water supply piping and the 
return water piping and examine the 
pipework, collectors and other components 
inside the chamber for any ice formation; 
and 


If there is no indication of leakage or other 
damage, re-assemble the pipework and 
subject the system to a hydrostatic pressure 
test as per 6. 


IS 13129 (Part 4) : 2023 


4.4 Safety Precaution 


The use of a cryogenic fluid (for example, liquid 
nitrogen) may be a suitable means of providing the 
low temperature conditions necessary for this test. 
However, attention must be given to the safety 
precautions necessary when handling and storing 
cryogenic fluids. 


4.5 Reporting Requirements 
The following results shall be reported: 


a) The make and model identification of the 
system including ancillary freeze protection 
devices fitted; 


b) The inclination of the collector array; 


c) A record of all measured temperatures 
versus time during the test period; 


d) A record of the time of activation of any 
pumps, valves or other electrical or 
mechanical devices; 


e) The volume of water discharged out of the 
system through freeze protection values; 


f) Evidence of any ice formation in the 
collectors, pipework or other components 
inside the chamber; and 


g) Details of the condition of the system 
following the test with particular regard to 
defects which affect the serviceability of the 
system such as the swelling of pipes and 
components or leakages shown by the 
hydrostatic pressure test. 

NOTE — If ice formation is evident in the collectors, 
pipework or other components inside the chamber, 
further testing outside the scope of this standard may be 


necessary to determine the durability of the particular 
components to repeated freezing conditions. 


5 OVER TEMPERATURE AND 
PROTECTION TEST 


This test may be conducted using a solar simulator 
or outdoors. 


SCALD 


5.1 Purpose 


The purpose of this test is to determine whether the 
solar water heating system is adequately protected 
against damage and the user is protected from 
scalding hot water delivery after a period of no hot 
water draw and failure of electrical power. 


5.2 Apparatus 
The following apparatus is required: 


a) A pyranometer to measure the total short 
wave radiation from both the sun and the sky 
or the short wave radiation from a solar 
simulator lamp if the test is to be conducted 
inside a solar simulation chamber; 

b) Equipment to measure the temperature, flow 
rate and volume of hot water drawn from the 
system; 


IS 13129 (Part 4) : 2023 


c) An outdoor or an indoor test stand for 
installing the solar hot water system with the 
collector array at the manufacturer's 
specified angle of inclination; and 


d) A temperature and pressure controlled water 
supply within the range of 5 °C to 25 °C, and 
200 kPa to 600 kPa or the manufacturer's 
maximum working pressure whichever is 
less. 


5.3 Procedure 
The procedure shall be as follows: 


a) Assemble the solar water heating system 
according to the installation instructions 
with the collector array oriented towards 
solar noon for the outdoor test, or the 
simulator lamp may be adjusted to normal 
incidence for the indoor test; 


b 


— 


Charge the system for the water supply and 
for pressurized storage tanks maintain the 
water supply pressure; 


c) Energize the system as per installation 
instructions; 
d) 

1) For the outdoor test, operate the system 
for a minimum of 4 consecutive days 
without any hot water withdrawal and 
until the collector array has been 
subjected to 2 consecutive days in which 
the total solar radiation on the plane of 
the collector array has exceeded 
20 MJ/m? over an 8 h period each day 
and the ambient temperature has 
exceeded 20 °C during solar noon. 


2) For the indoor test, operate the system 
without any hot water withdrawal at a 
minimum ambient temperature of 25 °C 
and a minimum solar lamp intensity of 
1 000 W/m? at the plane of the collector 
array, measured and with a uniformity 
for an 8 h period or until the collector 
array drains; 

e) 

1) For the outdoor test, disconnect all 
electrical power to the system and 
continue to operate the system until the 
total solar radiation on the plane of the 
collector array has exceeded 20 MJ/m? 
over an 8 h period or until the collector 
array drains; and 


2) For the indoor test, disconnect all 
electrical power to the system and 
subject the system to a minimum solar 
lamp intensity of 1 000 W/m? atthe plane 
of the collector array for an additional 
4hor until the collector array drains; and 


f) Immediately begin to withdraw a volume of 
water greater than the total volume of water 
in the system at a rate of 12 litre/min 
+ 2 litre/min. 


5.4 Reporting Requirements 


The following results shall be reported: 


a) The make and model identification of the 
system including ancillary scald and over 
temperature protection devices fitted; 

b 


c 


— 


The inclination of the collector array; 


— 


A record of temperature of the hot water 
withdrawn from the system versus time and 
the total volume of water withdrawn; and 


d 


wm 


Details of the condition of the system and 
individual components following the test or 
any failure modes during the test with 
particular regard to any defects which may 
affect the serviceability of the system such 
as the swelling of pipes and components, or 
fluid leakages. 


6 PRESSURE TEST 
6.1 Purpose 


The purpose of this test is to evaluate hydraulic 
pressure rating of all components and 
interconnections of a solar water heating system 
when installed according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. 


6.2 Apparatus 


The apparatus shall consist of the following: 

a) A suitable platform and support structure for 
installation of the system; 

b) A pressure regulated hydraulic pressure 
source; 

c) A pressure gauge suitable to determine the 
test pressure to within | percent; 

d) A bleed valve; and 

e) An isolation valve. 


6.3 Safety Precaution 


This test procedure requires the use of hydraulic 
pressure up to a possible pressure of 2 000 kPa. An 
explosion safe enclosure is recommended when 
testing systems that have an integral expansion 
space or tank that contains entrapped air. 


6.4 Procedure 


a) Install the solar water heating system on the 
test platform in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions; 


b) Tie down the pressure relief valves to 
prevent their opening during testing; 


c) Connect the pressure gauge and bleed valve 
at the hot water outlet of the system; 


d) Connect the isolation valve and hydraulic 
pressure source, using water as the test fluid, 
to the cold water inlet of the system. The 
water shall be kept at a temperature of 
15'C x26; 

Fill the potable water side of the system 
using the hydraulic pressure source and 
bleed all air, as possible, out of the system 
through the bleed valve at the hot water 
outlet of the system; 


e 


wm 


f) Apply a hydraulic pressure equal to either 
the manufacturer’s stated maximum test 
pressure, or 1.5 times the manufacture’s 
stated maximum working pressure, 
whichever is the lesser; 


— 


Isolate the pressure source by closing the 
isolation valve and record the readings of the 
pressure gauge at the beginning and end of 
the next 15 minute interval; 


g 


h 


= 


Release the system pressure through the 
bleed valve and record any visible 
permanent deformation and water leakage 
from system components and inter 
connections; 


j Disconnect the bleed valve, pressure gauge, 
isolation valve and hydraulic pressure 
source from the system; 

NOTE — For those systems which are not constructed 
with a heat exchanger and a separate pressurized heat 


transfer loop, the following procedural steps are to be 
omitted. 


k 


= 


Connect the bleed valve and pressure gauge 
to the drain port of the system's heat transfer 
loop and connect the isolation valve and 
hydraulic pressure source, using the 
manufacturer’s stated heat transfer fluid, to 
the fill port of the heat transfer loop; 


m) Fill the heat transfer loop of the system using 
the hydraulic pressure source and bleed all 
air, as possible, out of the loop through the 
bleed valve at the drain part of the top of the 
collector array; 


n) Apply a hydraulic pressure equal to either 
the manufacturer’s stated maximum test 
pressure, or 1.5 times the manufacturer's 
stated maximum working pressure for the 
heat transfer loop, whichever is the lesser; 


— 


Isolate the pressure source by closing the 
isolation valve and record the readings of the 
pressure gauge at the beginning and end of 
the next 15 minute interval; and 


P 


— 


Release the system pressure through the 
bleed valve and record any visible 
permanent deformation and heat transfer 


q 


IS 13129 (Part 4) : 2023 


fluid leakage from system components and 
interconnections. 


6.5 Reporting Requirements 


Report the maximum test pressure applied, the 
pressure readings at the beginning and end of the 
15 minute test intervals and any visible permanent 
deformation of leakage from system components 
and interconnections. Note if the applied test 
pressures are lower than 1.5 times the 
manufacturer's stated maximum working pressure. 


7 COLLECTOR QUALIFICATION TESTS 


The collector qualification tests of IS 12933 (Part 5) 
applicable to systems with integral storage or 
close-coupled storage. 


8 HEALTH AND SAFETY REPORTING 
REQUIREMENTS 


8.1 Purpose 


The purpose of the health and safety reporting 
requirements is to provide technical information 
concerning the protection from excessive 
temperatures, pressures and potable water 
contamination. 


8.2 Reporting Requirements 


The following technical information is to be 
reported from the visual observation of the markings 
on the equipment supplied by the manufacturer or 
from the manufacturer's product specification 
documentation: 


a) Pressure relief valves 
1) Location of valve; 
2) Pressure relief rating in kPa; 
3) Thermal discharge rating in kW; and 
4) Certification marks. 
b 


— 


Temperature relief valves 

1) Location of valve; 

2) Temperature relief rating °C; 

3) Thermal discharge rating in kW; and 
4) Certification marks. 


c 


— 


Heat exchangers 

1) Type of heat exchanger that separates the 
potable water from the collector heat 
transfer loop; 

2) Composition of the wall material(s) of 
the heat exchanger; 

3) Composition of the heat transfer fluid(s) 
specified by the manufacturer; and 

4) The maximum working pressure of the 
collector heat transfer loop. 


IS 13129 (Part 4) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee, MED 04 


Organisation 


Ministry of New And Renewable Energy, 
New Delhi 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi 
Biogas Forum India, New Delhi 


Cement Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Central Arid Zone Research Institute, Jodhpur 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Consumer Coordination Council, Noida 


CSIR - Central Leather Research Institute, 
Chennai 


CSIR - Central Mechanical Engineering Research 
Institute, Durgapur 


Emmvee Photovoltaic Power Private Limited, 
Bengaluru 


India Meteorological Department, New Delhi 


Indian Council Research, 


New Delhi 


of Agricultural 

Indian Institute of Technology (BHU), Mechanical 
Engineering Department, Varanasi 

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 

Indian Institute of Technology Delhi 

Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency 
Limited, New Delhi 


International Copper Association India, Mumbai 


Maharashtra Energy Development Agency, Pune 


Representative(s) 


DR A. K. TRIPATHI (Chairperson) 


SHRI AMRISH GUPTA 
SHRI A. R. SHUKLA 


SHRI RAJU GOYAL 
SHRI VAIBHAV GUPTA (Alternate I) 
SHRI MANMOHAN RATHI (Alternate II) 


SHRI ANIL KUMAR SINGH 
DR PRIYABRATA SANTARA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIMAL KUMAR 
SHRI RAJIV GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUN KUMAR MISHRA 
SHRIR. K. KAPLASH (Alternate) 


DR P SHANMUGAM 


DR CHANCHAL LOHA 
SHRI SUBHO SAMANTA 


SHRI VIJAY KUMAR C. R. 
SHRI MANJUNATH ULLUR H. (Alternate) 


SHRI H. S. SAWHNEY 
DR ANIKENDER KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR KANCHAN K. SINGH 
DR PANNA LAL SINGH(Alternate) 


SHRI S. KUMAR SHUKLA 


SHRI J. K. NAYAK 
DR SHIREESH KEDARE (Alternate) 


PROF DIBAKAR RAKSHIT 
PROF K. RAVI KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SOM PAL 
SHRI S. K. DEY (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBDAS GOSWAMI 
SHRI V. K. GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ A. PISE 
SHRI HEMANT MANIK (Alternate I) 
SHRI ANAND V. KULKARNI (Alternate IT) 
SHRI SAMEER GHODAKE (Alternate IIT) 


Organisation 


Ministry of New and Renewable 


New Delhi 


Energy, 


Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, 
New Delhi 
National Institute of Solar Energy, Gurugram 


Nuetech Solar Systems Private Limited, 


Bengaluru 


Rajagiri School of Engineering and Technology, 
Kerala 


Rites Limited, Gurugram 


Regional Test Centre, Pune 


Sardar Patel Renewable Energy Research 
Institute, Mechanical Engineering 
Department, Vallabh Vidyanagar 

Solar Thermal Federation of India, Pune 


The Energy And Resources Institute, New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity, (C-103 A, JVTS Garden 
Chaterpur Extension, New Delhi 110074) 


BIS Directorate General, New Delhi 


IS 13129 (Part 4) : 2023 


Representative(s) 


DR S. R. MEENA 
DR A. K. SINGHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL PRUTHI 


DR CHANDAN BANERJEE 
SHRI KISHORE K. MENON (Alternate) 


SHRI SHRY ANANTH 
DR VARGHESE 
SHRI JOEL GEORGE (Alternate) 


SHRI SHRI RUPESH KUMAR 
SHRIMANISH TIWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI PROF SANDESH R. JADKAR 

DR ANAGHA M. PATHAK (Alternate!) 

PROF KIRAN DESHPANDE (Alternatell) 
SHRI E. R. ASIM KUMAR 

DR SHAISHAV SHARMA (Alternate) 
SHRI JAIDEEP N. MALAVIYA 


SHRI N. K. RAM 


SHRI ATAM KUMAR 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (MECHANICAL ENGINEERING) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI AMAN DHANAWAT 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 04 (21161). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


