1S : 436 ( Part I/Set 2 ) - 1976

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2000 )

METHODS FOR SAMPLING OF COAL AND COKE
PART Section ( Second I SAMPLING 2 Mechanical Reprint MAY OF COAL Sampling 1990 )

UDC

662.66:620.113

@ Cojyrigtd

1!177

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SllAH NEW DEL1 II 116002

Gr 4

March 1977

IS : 436 ( Part I/Set 2 ) - 19?6

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR SAMPLING OF COAL AND CO.KE
PART I SAMPLING OF COAL Section 2 Mechanical Sampling Solid Mineral Fuels Sectional Committee, CDC 14
Chainnan DR M. G. KRISHNA Representing Central Fuel Research Institute ( CSIR ), Dhanbad

Members Coal Controller, Calcutta SHRI A. BANERJEE Coal India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI D. BASIJ National Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. .K. BOSE SHRI N. C. CHATTERJEE ( Alternate ) Ministry of Ra/lways CHIEF M~NINCADVISER,RAILWAY BOARD,DHANBAD JOINT DIRECTOR,MECHANICAL ENOINEERING ( FUEL ), RAILWAY BOARD, NEW DELHI ( Alternate ) Geological Survey of India, Calcutta DR A. N. CHOWDHURY Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI A. K. DAS GUPTA DR S. R. GHOSH ( Alternate ) Central Electricity Authority (Thermal Power DIRFCTOR( TMD ) Division ), New Delhi DEPUTY DIRECTOR( TMD ) ( Alternate ) Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR), Dhanbad DR A. K. GHOSH Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI S. K. MANDAL SHRI S. N. WAZIR ( Alternate ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, New Delhi SHRI D. RAMAMOORTHY SHRI S. SRINIVASAN ( Alternate ) Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), Hyderabad SHRI K. SESHACIRIRAO SHRI L. NARASIMHAN( Alternate ) The Tata Iron'& Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur DR S. M. M. SAPVI Coke Oven Managers Association ( Indian Section ), DR M. L. SAHA Calcutta SHRI R. N. KAUL ( Alternate ) Institute of Fuels (Indian Section ), Calcutta; and SHRI S. B. SARKAR Coal India Ltd, Calcutta Bharat Coking Coal Ltd, Dhanbad SHRI BANAMALI SEN Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd, Neyveli SHRI C. L. SESHADRI ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright OF INDIAN 1977 STANDARDS

BUREAU

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Acf (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the, said Act.

fS : 136 ( Part I/Set i ) - 19%

.

( Continutdfrom pap 1 )
Members SHRI S. S. SUBRAMANIAN SWRIV. V. RAO ( Alternate DR G. M. SAXENA,

Reprumtiq Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Calcutta

)

Director General, IS1 ( Er-oficio

Member)

Director ( Chcm )

scc?k%atirr SHR~G. P. SARA~WAT Deputy Director ( Chem ), ISI SHRl A. K. TALWAR Assistant Director ( Stat ), IS1 Sampling
Convmcr SHRI S. 8. SARKAR Members SHRI S. BAOCHI SHRI S. K. BOSE G H E M I s T & METALLUROIST, EASTERN RAILWAY, JAMALPUR SHRI P. V. DHARMADHIKARI SHRI A. K. MISSER 1 Alternate ) DIRECTOR ( TMD )

of Solid

Mineral Fuels Subcommittee, CDC 14 : 1
Coal India Ltd, Calcutta Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), Dhanbod National Test House, Calcutta Ministry of Railways Associated Cement
Co Ltd, Bombay

Central Electricity Authority ( Thermal Power Division ), New Delhi DEPUTV DIRECTOR( TMD ) ( Alternate) Damodar Valley Corporation, Durgapur SHRI M. W. GOKLANY Hindustan Steel Works Construction Ltd, Calcutta SHRI B. C. MATHUR National Coal Development Corporation, Ranchi SHRI P. D. NATH
S RI D. BASU( Alteraate ) ;y-$&?g$~ SHRI A. G. SAHA ( Alferuute ) SHRI N. C. S~NHA SHRI B. K. SINHA ( Alternate )

Bharat Coking Coal Ltd, Dhanbad Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi Central Fuel Research Institute ( CSIR ), Dhanbad

IS : 436 (Part I/&c 2 ) 1976
l

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR SAMPLING OF COAL AND COKE
PART I SAMPLING Section 2 OF COAL -, Mechanical Sampling

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part I/Set 2 ) was adopted by the Indian. Standards Institution on 30 August 1976, after the draft finalized bj; the Solid Mineral Fuels Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 In view of increasing use of coal as fuel as a substitute `for petroleum products in power generation and transport, and maintaining the tempo of industrialization in the country, it has become necessary to move and handle large quantities of coal. This calls for use of mechanical handling and sampling systems on a wide scale. Accordingly, a new section ( Section 2 ) has been added to Part I which covered only manual procedures, to prescribe procedures for incremental sampling from moving stream of coal. Original Part I has been redesignated as Part I/Section 1. Wherever necessary, this standard should be used in conjunction with its Section 1. 0.3 In view of the possibility of use of various designs of equipment that could be used for the purpose, no specific designs have been recommended in this standard but only a few illustrations of incremmt samplers and sample dividers have been incorporated for the guidance of users. It is, however, felt that widespread USC of mechanical sampling systems in coming years will make it possible to arpve at an ?p.timum design of such ao;fieilipment, which would ensure m-mum preclslon for a given supply . 0.4 In the formulation of this standard assistance has been derived from the following publications: IS0 1988-1975 Sampling of hard coals. tion for Standardization. International Organiza-

Draft BS 1017 : Part 1: Sampling of coal and coke: Part 1 Satrlplillg of coal. British Standards Institution. 3

1$:436(Partf/Sed 2)-19% 0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. with is to be rounded

1.SCOPE 1.1This standard ( Part I/Set 2 ) prescribes the methods of sampling and sample preparation of coal using mechanical systems and lays down a procedure for the reporting of test results.
NOTE - Sampling and sample preparation of coal already been given in IS : 436 ( Part I/Set 1 )-1964t. using manual methods have

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 3810-19772 shall apply. 3. MECHANICAL SAMPLING SYSTEMS

3 .O General - An essential condition of sampling is that the whole bulk of coal to be sampled should be exposed, so that all parts are equally accessible to the sampling implement and have the same chance of being The most favourable situation in which the whole included in the sample. of the coal is exposed for sampling is when it is being conveyed on a belt or similar device so that it passes the sampling point in a stream. If the belt is stopped and a section of adequate length is taken across the whole width of the belt, all the coal particles in this section can be taken so that there will not be any significant bias. Sampling from a stopped belt is therefore the most satisfactory way of ensuring that the sample is free from bias and it is recommended as the reference method. 3.0.1 In many installations it is not possible to stop the belt without considerable interference with the work in the installation and other methods of sampling have therefore to be used. Alternatively, samples from the cross section of a moving stream are collected, to ensure that each increment is a representative of the cross section. It is this principle on which most of the mechanical sampling systems work. 3.1 Requirements of Mechanical Sampling Systems 3.1.1 The design of the systems for sampling and sample preparation should be guided by the type of coal to be sampled, test requirements to be
*Rules for rounding oft' numerical values ( revised ). TMethods for sampling of coal and coke : Part I Sampling of coal, Section 1 Manual sampling ( retied ) . $Glossary of terms relating to solid mineral fuels: Part I Terms relating to coal and its preparation (Jirs: revision) and Part II Terms relating to coal sampling and analysis.

4.

IS : 436 ( Part I/Set

2 ) - 1976

performed by the system, desired precision of test results and absence significant bias.

of

3.1.2 The method of checking results of samples collected by any mechanical installation is by comparing the results of samples taken manually by skilled personnel to ensure freedom from bias. 3.1.3 From the initial stage of designing and constructing the system, due consideration should be given to the safety of the operators. 3.1.4 To maintain good control during the full period of sampling and sample preparation from a consignment, human surveillance should be available at all times. In the case of breakdown of the sampling installation, provision should be made for the mechanical operation to be replaced immediately by an alternate procedure within the framework of relevant methods. 3.1.5 It is recommended that the mechanical installation is arranged in such a way that the principal units may be operated individually. 3.1.6 The mechanical would take care of: installation should be designed in a manner as.

a) spillage of sample material, b) possibility of the sample clogging the equipment, c) possible impedance in the flow of the sample material through the equipment, d) retention of residual material, and e) introduction of materials other than the sample. 3.1.7 Each part of the apparatus with which the sample comes in contact should be designed in such a way that the construction materials do no! change the quality of sample either chemically or physically. 3.2 Working of Mechanical Samplers - Coal from the stockyard or unloading station moves on one or two parallel conveyor lines. At the transfer point prior to a special weighing belt an automatically operated sampler cuts increments from the main flow. This apparatus which collects the increments is called primary sampler and consists generally of automatically operated bucket moving with uniform speed into .the falling coal stream at adjustable intervals of time. The primary sample taken from the passing flow is continuously prepared by crushing and dividing in 3 or 4 stages. The final sample is dried and ground to 21 P-micron size for chemical analysis. Sampling for the purpose of size determination is done by fully automatic equipment in conjunction with primary sampler which supplies batches of coal weighing 200 to 250 kg to the screens. The weighing of the sized fractions is done during no-load times of the screen,

IS~436(PartI/Sec2)-1976 4. SAMPLING EQUIPMENT

4.0 Sampling machine always behaves in the same way and eliminates the subjective influence of the sampler. There are a number of designs for mechanical sampling and sample preparation equipment. It is important that machines have their performance tested against a reference method (stopped belt method in this case ) before they are put to actual use ( see 3.0). 4.1 A composite mechanical sampling equipment consists of appropriate sample collecting and sample preparation machines combined into a single unit by means of which coal increments are collected and prepared into samples as a continuous chain of operations. It is possible to have a large number ofcombinations of such equipment and hence a variety of composite designs. The optimum design has to be decided on the basis of a number of factors, such as cost, space available, volume of coal to be handled and the expected efficiency of the system. 4.2 Automatic Samplers for Collection of Increments 4.2.0 General - It is desirable to use a sampler which cuts through the full width of a falling stream of coal. However, where it is not possible, an alternate method is to scoop the sample from a moving conveyor belt. While using the alternate method it is important to have the sampler properly adjusted to the belt curvature across its width so that true cross section of the conveyed material is removed, including fine particles which segregate to the bottom of the material on the belt while in motion. The cutter employed should. also not cause turbulence while sweeping through the stream of coal pushing aside large coal pieces and thus rejecting them. Therefore, its speed has also to be carefully adjusted to avoid taking a pased sample. 4.2.1 Sampling from Falling Stream - Machines for sampling from falling streams should have a bucket of width equal to the full width of the stream and cutting through it in a direction either parallel or at right angles to the movement of the belt. It is essential that the box passes through the stream at uniform speed and that the slotted width is properly related to the size of coal. Further, in this type of sampling system, the box usually passes through the stream twice to collect an increment ( from front to back and reverse ). Therefore, the container has to be of such a size that it is not completely filled at the end of its travel. The point of travel of the bucket in the reverse should be located where there is no falling coal. In this system the bucket usually tips at the end of each cycle of movement emptying the sample into a chute. Altema$ively, the bucket may fill on one movement and then tip, or close on its return. Some of the common types of devices for sampling from the falling stream are described below, 6

IS : 436 ( Part I/Set 2 ) - 1976 4.2.1.1 Breeches chute tj,pc sampler - This device is designed to collect increments from a falling stream of coal by diverting the whole stream into the one or the other leg of the Breeches chute ( see Fig. 1 ). Movement of the flap governing the direction of flow of coal stream is usually timecontrolled and the ratio of the mass of the sample to that of the consignment depends on the period for which the flap is allowed to remain in a particular position. In the case of erratic rate of flow it may be necessary to control movement of the flap with the help of a belt weighing machine according to the specified masses of coal. In this type of sampler, the flap moves with a rapid ` snap ' action so that the time taken by it to traverse the stream of coal is negligible. Such action is achieved either by the use of compressed air or, for full sized coal, by electromagnetic means.

Fra. i

FALLING STREAMBREECHES CHUTE TYPE SAMPLER

4.2.1.2 Swinging arm tvpc sampler- This device is designed to collect increments from the discharge end of a conveyor and is suitable where In this arrangement ( see Fig. 2 ) vertical height or head room is limited. a heavy bucket is allowed to swing once, like a pendulum, through the full width of the stream of coal. Power for the operation of this type of The device gampler is sometimes derived from the drum of the conveyor, 7

IS I 436 ( Part I/Set 2 ) - 1976 may be set to operate automatically either at equal intervals of time or, if a belt weighing machine is incorporated, after specified masses of coal have passed.

FIG. 2

FALLING STREAM SWINGINGARM TYPE SAMPLER

In another arrangement of this type of device a rectangular frame, with a number of holes of sufficient dimensions, is provided. The arm swings across the full width of the stream and the coal passing through the holes falls on to a small conveyor belt carried with the frame. This belt discharges coal into a chute or storage hopper. This device consists basically of a 4.2.1.3 Chain bucket gpe samplersampling bucket attached to a pair of roller chains ( see Fig. 3 ) and is powered by an electric motor through reduction gears. In its rest position, the sampling bucket is clear of the coal stream at its sample discharge point. When a sample is to be taken, the bucket travels inverted through It then travels the stream of coal on the lower strand of the roller chain. on the upper strand of the chain with cutting edges uppermost thus taking the sample. The sample is automatically emptied into the collecting drum at the end of its run on the top strand of the chain. 4.2.2 Samfiling from Moving Belt - Machines for sampling from moving belt should have a scraper arm which operates by sweeping off increments across the width of a conveyor belt. In this case the mass of the increThe ment depends on the load on the belt and the width of the scraper. device may be set to operate automatically either at equal intervals of time or, if a belt weighing machine is incorporated, after specified masses ofcoal have passed. A suitable device is illustrated in Fig. 4, 8

IS : 436 ( Part I/&c

2 ) - 1976

SAMPLE

FIG. 3

CHAIN BUCKET TYPE

SAMPLER

SAMPLE FIG.

t

4

SCRAPER ARM TYPE SAMPLER

9

IS : 436 ( Part I/See 2 ) - 1976 4.3 Mechanical Equipment for Sample Preparation - Sample pre( excluding dryers ) may be divided into the following

paration equipment three classes:

a) Size reduction apparatus, b) Sample mixing apparatus, and cj Sample dividing apparatus. 4.3.1 Size Reduction ApFaratus - The equipment for reducing size is gcncrally called ` mills `. High speed mills arc desirable to product of specified size even from hard coals of high ash content with slialc. Reduction mills vary in type from jail crushers to roll and from plate mills to high speed impact pulverizers which are larly suitable for the finer milling ( 0.2 mm ). particle ensure a or coals crushers particu-

.

4.3.1.1 All types of mills should be made of heat-resistant material. Those parts of mills coming into contact with coal should be of wear resistant material in order to prevent contamination of the samples and to avoid overheating, which would induce oxidation of the coal or loss of moisture from it. Mills should be easy to clean. High speed mills tend to become heated and samples shall not be allowed to remain in them long enough to be affected. If a mill is used for a series of samples, it should be allowed to cool between samples in order to avoid oxidation and loss of moisture in subsequent samples. Modern high speed mills are likely to be seriously damaged by presence of extraneous iron or other ferrous material in the sample. A magnetic separator placed in the chute leading to the machine is a convenient safeguard against this.

4.3.1.2 Although high speed pulverizers are most efficient with a wide range of coals, they entrain air with the samples due to the fanlike effect of the rotating hammer. To avoid the loss offine coal particles or dust it is essential either to limit the air flowing through the mill by using closed inlet and outlet hoppers or by fitting a breather bag to the mill outlet. 4.3.1.3 The efficiency of mills used for grinding to 0.2 mm should ensure that at least 99 percent of the sample will pass the size. The efficiency of the mills will be hampered if they are not cleaned periodically. It is also desirable to clean mills before use for a different coal. The use of a stream of compressed air or an industrial type vacuum cleaner may be suitable for this purpose. 4.3.2 Sample Mixing Apparatus--The apparatus should neither cause breakage of coal nor produce dust or allow loss of moisture. It should be conditioned with the coal being used or with another coal of similar moisture content. Three types of mixers have been found satisfactory, namely, the paddle mixer, the drum mixer and the double cone mixer. 4.3.3 Sample Dividing Apparatus - Most mechanical sample dividers are of the rotary type in which a receiver is placed on a turntable, so as to

IS : 436 ( Part I/&c 2 ) - 1976
intercept a fhlling stream of coal once or twice in each revolution or, alternatively, to collect a continuous ribbon from a falling stream of coal prnduced by allowing the coal to fall from the hopper on to the vcrtcx of the cone. The slot or dimensions where the coal passes from the reservoir should be at least 2.5 times the upper particle size. Some of the common types of sample dividers are described below. 4.3.3.1 Rotary sample divider - This device consists of a number ( for example 12 ) of containers shaped like segments ( see Fig. 5A ) mounted on a rotating turntable, revolving at about 60 rev/min. The bottom edge of the input reservoir should be large enough to prevent coal bridging the outlet. The minimum size of the opening at the point where it intercepts the coal should be at least 5 times the upper particle size of the coal. Thus a number of separate increments are collected in each revolution and the proportion of the sample retained may be chosen by taking the relevant number of containers. Thus to take 1 /I 2 fraction one container is retained, and for 4 fraction, three containers are retained. 4.3.3.2 An alternative device consists of two circular rotating plates. The feed is introduced on the top plate and spread by a number of baffles and finally discharged by another baffle. The lower plate ( see Fig. 5B ) has segment-shaped apertures cut into it. As the sample falls from the upper plate on to the lower plate, part of it passes through the apertures in the lower plate and .forms the reduced sample and that retained on the lower plate is rejected. The reduced sample is discharged into chutes for further preparation while the remains are carried round on the lower plate to a point diametrically opposite where they are swept by a brush into another chute. 4.3.3.3 Slotted belt sample dividerThis device is suitable for bulk sample reduction at the sampling point. A stream of coal is fed to a conveyor belt at a constant rate. The belt has slotted apertures in it (see Fig. 6 ). The material falls freely for a short distance before it reaches the belt. A complete cross section of the stream of coal passes through the slots in the belt and is collected as reduced sample for further processing. Coal falling on the unslotted part of the belt is conveyed away and rejected. 5. METHODS OF COLLECTING SAMPLES

5.1 Lot - Supply of coal is made either in the form of an isolated consignWhen the nature of coal ment or in a regular series of consignments. supplied is not known or when it is known to be heterogeneous, each consignment should be treated as a lot and should not be mixed with previous or subsequent supplies. However, when coal is supplied in a regular series of consignments from the same source and is moved continuously, it is convenient to define lot in terms of time limit such as the coal moved during a specified period of supply.

IS : 436 ( Part I/See 2 ) - 1976

5 TIMES THE SIZE OF THE LARGEST PARTICLE
LIP PROVIDES

.

SIDE PLATE\ BENT OVER TO FORM CLIP

LARGE DIVIDER

SAMPLE WITH

STAN0 TO ADAPT LARGE TURNTABLE FOR USE WITH MEOIUM SIZED RECEIVER

HIGH SPEED SAMPLE DIVIDER FED FROM CRUSHER VIA A CHUTE

GUIDE TO DIMENSIONS
CAPACITY
kg

'

HEIGHT OF RECEIVER
Ill",

!

DIAMETEROF RECEIVER
mm --

HEIGHT OF
CONTAlNER mm --

35 7 1

450 280 150 5A Rotary F~Q. 5

450 300 130
Sample Divider

4olJ 190 150

SAMPLE DIVINERS (

Contd )

IS : 436 ( Part I/Set 2 ) - 1976

*
-1

--,I_7+--\I

1

`I \

\ 2
Q-i-Q /
\ _L ' 1
r_--

-

1 77

`l-c-= * \ \ ++ , -___.+__4L!y; I

==l

II

--

-

T-- \

I' I

/

Ti&ory

58 Rotary

Sample Divider

FIG. 5

SAMPLE

DIVIDERS

5.2 Sub-lots - For the purpose of sampling, a lot, while it is being discharged over a conveyor shall be divided into a number of sub-lots of approximately equal mass as specified in Table 1. In mechanical system of handling coal, the rate of discharge could be quite high and hence the size of the sub-lot should also be reasonably large to facilitate mechanical sampling. 5.3 Number of Increments - Under mechanical sampling the number of increments is subject to the limitation imposed by the mechanical system in terms of the fast rate of discharge, large increment size and minimum time interval between two consecutive increments. This time limit may vary from system to system. Table 2 gives the number of increments. 13

IS : 436 ( Part I/Set 2 ) - 1976

FIG. 6

SLOTTED BELT SAMPLE DIVIDER

5.4 Mass of the Increments - The mass of increments depends on the type of mechanical sampling system installed at the site of sampling. However, the increment shall not be less than 10 kg in mass for both unwashed and washed coal. Further, the increments shall be taken in such a manner as to ensure that they have an almost uniform mass. A measure of uniformity of mass is CV which is defined as the percentage of standard deviation relative to the mean value of the mass. For routine sampling purpose increments are considered to be uniform if the CV of their mass is less than or equal to 20 percent. It is essential to, check the uniformity of the mass periodically by weighing at least 20 consecutive increments. 5.5 Collection
of Increments by Mechanical Samplers 5.5.1 The most convenient method of taking increments from the flow of coal is by systematic sampling where the increments are spaced evenly in Care has to be taken, however, that time or in position over the sub-lot. periodic variation, if any, in the quality of coal does not coincide with There are two modes of taking systethe frequency of taking increments. matic samples. One is the mass-basiss ampling and the other is time-basis sampling. Under mass-basis sampling, increments are taken at a fixed mass interval and under time-basis sampling, increments are taken at a fixed time interval. 5.5.2 Mass-Basis Sampling - If T denotes the mass interval between two successive increments, the following relationship shall always be satisfied:

k3 : 436 ( Part I/Set 2 ) - 1976 where T = mass-interval between taking and given in Table `2. increments in tonnes,

Q- massof
II = number

the sub-lot, of increments

A consignment of 3 600 tonnes on the mass-basis sampling.

of run-of-mine

coal is to be sampled

According to Table 1 the number of sub-lots should be 6. Hence the consignment should be considered to be made up of 6 sub-lots each For this size of coa!, the number of increments, weighing about 600 tonnes. according to Table 2, should be 35. Hence the sampling interval on mass-basis sampling 600 is 35 = 17

tonnes approximately.
TABLE 1 NUMBER OF SUB-LOTS/GROSS ( Clacucs 5.2 and 5.5.2 ) Mlw OPTHELOT
(1)

SAMPLES

NO.OF SUB-LOT~/GROSS
.S.~~~PLE (2)

tonnes up to 3000
3001 ,, 5ooo 5001 ,) 1oow 10 001 and above

5 6 7 8

TABLE 2

MASS OF GROSS SAMPLE AND NUMBER (Clauses 5.3 and 5.5.2 )

OF INCREMENTS MASS OF NUMBER OF
INORE~~ENT~,

SL

CONIUONMENT

MASS OF
GROSSSAMPLE,

No.
(1) i) ii) iii) iv) (2) Run-of-mine coal Large coal Small coal Washed coal: @75 0 to mm 10 mm

Min (3)

INCREMENTS, Mill

Min (5) 35 18 8

(4) k% 10 10 10

b 350 180 8%

200 50

10

25

15

IS : 436 ( Part I/&c

2 ) - 1976

5.5.3 Time-Basis Sam/ding - If t is the time interval between two increments by mechanical sampler, the following relationship shall be satisfied:

t-POQ 'Gn

where t = time interval between two increments, in minutes; Q- mass of the sub-lot in tonnes; G = maximum flow rate of belt' conveyor in tonnes/hour; and n = the number of increments.

hkamplr 2:
If the consignment given in Example 1 is to be sampled on time-basis, and if the maximum flow rate of coal is known to be 800 tonnes/hour, then the sampling interval on time-basis sampling shall be: t < 60 x 600 - = l-3 minutes .800 x 35 5.5.4 From practical point of view, time-basis sampling is easy to operate and will be adequate if the flow of coal is fairly uniform. If the flow rate is not uniform and is subject to wide fluctuations, the increments collected on time-basis will not be representative and their mass also is likely to be varying. 5.5.5 Increments under either mode of sampling shall be taken from the whole width and thickness of the coal stream. The width of the section of sampler shall be at least 2.5 times the maximum size of the coal. Increments shall be taken while there is a normal load on the belt at the point of sampling. For this reason they shall not be drawn just at the beginning or at the end of the flow. 6. SAMPLE PREPARATION 6.1 The increments collected from a sub-lot as described in 5 shall be dxed together to form the gross sample for the sub-lot. The gross sample so formed may be prepared either manually or mechanically or a combination of these two methods. 6.1.1 For the general procedure for reduction of gross sample and preparation ofmoisture and laboratory samples, IS : 436 ( Part I/Set 1 )-1964* shall be followed. 7. REPORTING OF TEST RESULTS 7.1 For reporting of test results, reference shall be made to IS : 436 ( Part I/ Set 1 )-1964*.
*Methods for samplingof coal sampling ( rvvid 1.

and coke: Part I Sampling 16

of coal, Section

1 Manual

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices) Regional Offices: Telephone Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 *Eastern : l/l 4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola. CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 331 01 31 331 1375 I 36 24 99 18 43 1641 24 42 25 19 2916 92 95

2 I 3 41 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 41 i 41 TWestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6 32 BOMBAY 400093

Branch Offices: `Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 2 63 48 AHMADABAD 380001 I 2 63 49 SPeenya Industrial Area 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road 38 49 55 BANGALORE 560058 38 49 56 I Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 667 16 BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82183. Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 5 36 27 63/6 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, 3 31 77 GUWAHATI 781003 5-B-56(3 L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ). 23 1083 HYDERABAD 500001 6 34 71 R14 Yudhister Marg. C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 { 6 98 32 21 68 76 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KAN'PUR 208005 1 21.82 92 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 6 23 05 T.C. No. 14/l 421. University P.O.. Palayam (6 21 04 TRIVANDRUM 695035 16 21 17 inspection Offices ( With Sale Point )I Pushpanjali, First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, 2 51 71 Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 6 24 36 PUNE 411005 *Sale8 Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chcwringher Approseh, P. 0. Princep 27 68 00 Street. Calcutta 700072 tSalw Office in Bombay is at Novilty `Chambers, &ant Road, 69 66 26 Bombay 400007 #Sales Office in Bangalorr is at Unity Building, Naraoimharajr Square, 22 36 71 Sangslore 660002

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

