iS 8758 :1993 ( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Ivrdian Stand&d

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FIRE PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES IN CONSTRUCTION OF TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND PANDALS
( First Revision )

UDC

69.033 : 614 84

h

@

BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI NEW

STANDARDS
SHAH
110002

ZAFAR

MARG

June 1993

Price Group 2

Fire Safety Sectional Committee,

CED 36

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Fire Safety Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. Temporary structures including large pandals normally erected at fairs, festivals and such other outdoor assembly have not, in general, been subjected to adequate regulations from fire safety point of view though in certain regions certain minimum fire precautionary measures in the construction of such structures are ensured before giving a licence or permission for the erection of such structures. Therefore with a view to giving necessary guidance in regard to fire protection measures to be adopted in the erection of such structures, it has been felt necessary to formulate this standard. This standard was first published in 1978, covering the safety aspects for temporary structures and pandals used by public excluding the temporary structures used for private functions. Since then the number of Indian standards in regard to details of construction, fire safety and equipment have been formulated. This revision has therefore, been prepared so as to keep details Having of construction and use of fire fighting equipment according to the latest standards. seen the more usage of temporary structures for private functions, the scope of this standard has now been enlarged to cover such type of structures also. The committee responsible for the preparation of this standard is given at Annex A.

IS 8758 : 1993

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FIRE PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES IN CONSTRUCTION OF TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND PANDALS ( First Revision )
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the fire safety in respect of construction, location, maintenance including and use of temporary structures pandals used by public for outdoor assembly.
NOTE-Temporary structure shall apply to all structares with roof or walls made of straw, hay, ulu grass, golpatta, hogla, darma, mat, canvas cloth or other like material which is not adopted for permaner t or continuous occupancy.

3.3 The main structure shall be erected with at least 100 mm diameter post of non combustible material or wooden post ( preferably of sal, casurina or bamboo ) and the rest of the structure may be of lighter poles and trusses tied/screwed properly wit!1 steel wire. The poles and trusses shall be nailed/screwed, wherever required. All supporting members shall be of sufficient size and strength to support the structure. 3.4 The height of the ceiling or panda1 from the ground case, be less that 3 m. 3.5 No decorative shall be used structure. of the structure shall not, in any material panda11 used in of the in a fire or pregive a

2 REFERENCE 2.1 The necessary IS No. 1646 : 1982 Indian adjunct siandard listed to this standard: Title below is

Code of practice for fire safety of buildings ( General ) : Electrical installations ( first revision )

paper/synthetic anywhere in the

3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 3.1 The materials, design, construction, fabriof structures or devices within the cation scope of this standard shall meet the requirements for resistance lo fire of a minimum of 10 minutes or total evacuation time whichever is more. 3.1.1 Each temporary structure shall be licented for a specific period only and the licence granted if the provisions of this standard are complied with ( see also 1.1 ). 3.2 The choice of materials for such construction shall preferably be of non-combustible or fire resistance type. Wherever materials of combustible nature are used these shall be retardant solution as treated with a fire mentioned below: 4 parts by mass Ammonium sulphate 2 parts ,, Ammonium carbonate Borax 1 part ,, :I Boric acid 1 part ,, 2 parts ,, :: Alum Water 35 parts ,, ,, 1

3.6 All fabrics, decorative clothings the construction and decoration structure shall before use, be dipped retardant solution as specified in 3.2 treated with other suitable material to class I flame spread factor.

3.7 No nylon or synthetic ropes shall be used any where in the structure. Only ropes made of coir, manila or coconut fibres shall be treated witJ fire retardant solutions in accordance with 3.2 before use. 3.8 Temporary structures shall be adequately guyed/braced and made secure to withstand a wind pressure of 0.98 kN/m" ( 0.01 kgf/cm2 ). 3.9 In no case, the height of way shall be less than 3 m. 4 LOCATION 4.1 There shall be a clear space of 4.5 m on all sides between the structure and the adjacent buildings or other structures. In cases where temporary structures are erected in the lawns which are part of residentia1 premises, the entire frontage shall be kept open. corridor/passage

IS 8758 : 1993 4.2 No temporary structure shah be erected beneath and adjacent to any live electrical line. The gap between the live wires and any part of the structure shall in no case be less than 2 m. 4.3 No temporary structure shall be erected near furnace, railway line, electrical sub-station, chimney or under high tension wire or like hazard unless a safety distance of 15 m is maintained. 5 MEANS OF ACCESS 5.1 All temporary structures shall be approachable and the gate provided shall have a clear opening of 5 m. Arch way shall not be at a height less than 5 m from the ground level. 5.2 The temporary structure shall be approachable to the fire engine. No part of temporary structure shall be more than 45 m away from the motorable road. 6 CAPACITY 6.1 The capacity of any temporary structure or panda1 or enclosure for outdoor assembly shall be the number of fixed seats plus an allowance of one person for each O-50 m2 of floor area designated or used as standing space or for movable seats. A distance of 450 mm along any undivided bench or platform shall one seat in computing capacity. constitute The floor arca or ramps, aisles, passageways or spaces within such structures or enclosures used for access or circulation shall not be considered in computing the capacity of a place of outdoor assembly, and shall not be used for access or circ.ulation shall not be considered in computing the capacity of a place of outdoor assembly, and shall not be used for seats or for standing. 6.2 The number of persons admitted to any place of outdoor assembly shall not exceed lhe capacity as computed in accordance with the provisions of 6.1. 7 ENCLOSIJRE AND EXITS 7.4 The clear width of exits shall be determined on the basis of not less than one unit of 50 cm for each 50 persons to be accommodated. The width of each exit shall not be less than l-5 m. 7.5 The line of travel from any seat to the nearest exit on the seating area shall not be greater than I5 m. 7.6 All exit points shall be clearly indicated with sign `EXIT' ( including in local language ) over each door way or opening in plain legible letters ( not less than 5 cm high and with principal strokes of such letters not less than l-8 cm in width ) enabling everybody in the auditorium to visualize the exit points easily. 7.6.1 Exit light should be adequately illuminated with reliable light source when the structure is occupied by the public. Suitable directions signs shall be displayed in a conspicuous location to indicate the proper direction of egress. Exit and direction signs shall also be painted with fluorescent paint. Doors wherever fitted to exits shall open outwards and shall not be closed or bolted during the presence of persons in the structure. 7.7 Cross gangways shall be provided affording passage after every 10 row of seats, width of such passage being not less than 1.5 m. 7.8 Longitudinal gangways shall be formed at the sides and central portion. The width of side longitudinal gangway shall be not less than I.2 m and central longitudinal gangway shall be not less than l-5 m. Each row ( between side and longitudinal gangway ) shall comprise of not more than 12 seats. The seats shall be tied up together in a bank of not less than 4 seats and secured to the ground. 7.9 The seating arrangement shall be such that the clearance between rearmost point of the immediate front seat and the foremost point of the next rear seat in two successive rows is not less than 55 cm. Where self folding seats are provided, the clearance between the two rows m,ay be reduced, in any case shall be not less than 30 cm. 8 ELECTRICAL ARRANGEMENTS 8.1 The temporary lighting of the structure shall be installed by a competent licenced The load per circuit, electrical engineer. and the installation shall insulation test conform to IS 1646 : 1982. 8.2 All electrical wirings in the structure of panda1 shall be in PVC sheathed conductors or vulcanized rubber cables of tough rubber and all joints shall be made with porcelain insulated connectors. Twisted and tapped joints shall not be permitted. 2

7.1 All sides of the temporary structure shall be left open. If this is not possible for certain reasons, the lower portions of this side walls shall not be fixed. 7.2 Where provisions laid down in 7.1 cannot be adhered to adequate and unrestricted exits shall be provided, depending on the capacity of the assembly, as given in 7.3 to 7.9. 7.3 A minimum of two exits of not less than 2-5 m width separately, located and at extremities from each other, shall be provided for any type of temporary structures.

IS 8758 : 1993 8.3 No part of the electrical circuit, bulbs, tubelights, etc in the structure of panda1 shall be within 15 cm of any decorative or other combustible material. 8.4 In case incandescent gas portable lights instead of electricity are used in the structure or panda& such lights shall not be hung from the ceilings of the main structure or panda1 but shall be placed on separate stands securely fixed. 8.5 No halogen lamps shall inside the pandal/temporary 9 FIRE PROTECTION be used structure, anywhere stating water shall at available for immediate the fires. all times be readily use for dealing with

MEASURES

9.1 The ground enclosed by any temporary structure, panda1 tent or shamiana and a distance of not less than 4.5 m outside of such structure shall be cleared of all combustible vegetation and any materials materials or c bstruci.ing the mcvement. of combustible materials like 9.2 Storage explosive and straw, flammable shavings, chemicals and similar materials shall not be permitted to be stored inside any temporary structure'. 9.3 No fire works or open flame of any kind shall be permitted in any temporary structure or in the immediate vicinity. 9.4 No motion any temporary used. 9.5 Open Fires No open fires except small size controlled fires for religious purposes shall be permitted inside or near the pandals or other temporary structures. 9.6 Kitchen area for cooking of snacks/food shall be totally segregated from the main pandal/temporary structure and preferably made of GI sheets. IO FIRE FIGHTING ARRANGEMENTS pictures structure shall be displayed in unless safety film is

10.2 A minimum number of fire buckets at a rate of two buckets per 50 m2 of floor space and one water type extinguisher, 9 litres capacity, per 100 m2 of floor space shall be provided in all temporary structures. For protection of electric installation, one carbon dioxide or BCF extinguisher of adequate size shall be provided for each switch gear, main meter and stage area. The location of these equipments shall be such that these are easily accessible in the event of a fire. The number of fire buckets and other various type of extinguishers may be provided as stipulated by the local licencing authority/fire authority. 10.3 Advance intimation shall be given to fire service department of the proposed construction of any temporary structure or panda1 for public functions, its location, size and type of temporary structure number of people expected to be accommodated, arrangement of exits, etc. 10.3.1 Local licencing authority may recommend the provision of stand by tire service at any temporary structure if such measure is deemed necessary. In such cases adequate water supply for the fire fighting service shall be ensured. 10.4 A responsible person shall always be made available at the site of the temporary structure to organize prompt evacuation, fire fighting to deal with emergencies at the incipient stage and infarming the fire service. The emergency fire service telephone number shall be dislayed prominently. 11 MAINTENANCE 11.1 All temporary structures shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this standard shall be maintained in good working condition. 11.2 All temporary structures shall be periodically inspected and any deterioration and defect observed shall be brought to the notice of the authority for remedy. 11.3 Particular attention shaI1 be paid to the means of escape and gangways, exits, etc are not obstructed in any way and all buckets and extinguishers are easily visible and accessible before public is admitted at any time.

10.1 Provision

of Water for Fire Fighting

Supply of water shall not be less than 0.75 l/m2 of floor area for each panda1 or other temporary The water shall be stored in structure. buckets/drums and kept in readiness for use. Half quantity may be kept inside the temporary structure and the other half outside in its immediate vicinity. The buckets or receptacles

3

IS 8758 : 1993

ANNEX ( Foreword

A
)

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION Fire Sefety Sectional Committee,
Chairman
SHRI J. N. VAKIL

CED 36
Bombay

Representing
Tariff Advisory to SHRI J. N. Vakil ) Committee,

Members
SHRI K. RAVI ( A/fern&e
DR R. K. BHANDARI SHRI R. P. BHATLA SHRI M. M. KAPOOR (

Institution Engineers

of Engineers India Ltd,

( India ), Calcutta

New Delhi Madras Delhi

Alternate )
Tariff Advisory Committee,

SHRI S. Ni CHAKRAUORTY SHRI P. K. MAJUMDAR ( SHRI P. K. CHATTERJEE SHRI V. K. SHARMA ( CHIEF FIRE OFFICER

Alternate )
Ministry of Defence ( DR & DO ), New of Bombay, Bombay of Railway, New Delhi

Alternnte )
Municipal Corporation Bombay Tata Consulting Engineers, Ministry

SHR~D. PADMANABHA SHRI G. P. MONNAIAH ( Alternate DEPUTY CHIEF ENGINEER( P & D ) EXECUTIVEENGINEER [ ( P & D )
(

)
Northern Railway,

Alternate ) ]

SHRI S. K. DHERI

Municipal

Corporation of Defence

of Delhi,

Delhi Branch ), New Delhi

SHRI R. C. SHARMA ( Alternate

)
Ministry ( Engineer-in-Chief's New Delhi

SHRI S. R. DORAISWAMY .SHRI S. N. LAKSHMANNA ( Alternute FIRE ADVISER SHRI P. N. GHOSH SHRI C. P. Gosain SHRI S. C GUPTA SHRI SANJEFV AN(;RA ( Alternate )

)
Ministry Central Lloyds Mather of Home Affairs, capacity, Public Works Institution In personal ( J-1916 Chittranjan Department,

Park, New Delhi)

New Delhi

( India)

Pvt Ltd, New Delhi

SHRI M. R. KAMA.rH

and Platt Ltd, Bombay Contruction Co Ltd, Bombay

SHRI K. R. EASWARAN ( Alternate

)
The Hindustan

SHRI V. M. MADGE SHRI A. B. PHADKE ( Alternate BIRG MALHOTRA SHRI G. B. MLNON SHRI S. R. NARASWHAN SHKI RAJ~NURA SINGH ( PRESIDENT SHRI V. M. RANALKAR

)
State Ba:!k of India, Bombay In personal Central capacity, ( C-231 Samachar Apartments, New Delhi ( India ), New Delhi Gas, New Delhi Bombay

Mayur Vihar,

Phase-l, Delhi )
Electricity

Authority,

Akwme )
Institution Ministry , Bharat Heavy Central Eleztricals Rescalch Power Ltd, Hyderabad Institute Corporation Consultants (CSIR ), Roorkee of Fire Engineers of Petroleum and Natural

SHRI HARISH R. S `LOT SHRI RAJESHI(. SALOT ( Alterwe SHRI N. L. N. SHARM~ SHRI M. L. KHURANA ( Alfernate) Da T. P. Sharma DR GOPAL KRISHAN ( Alternate

Vijay Fire Profection

Systems Pvt Ltd,

Buildings Thermal

)
National Ltd, New Delhi ( India ) Ltd, Ranchi

SHRI R. SUNDAKARAJAN SHRI S. K. CH..~CUPADHAYAY ( Alternate ) SHRI SUNIL DAS SHRI R. N. CHA~HKA ( Ak-wote SHRI M. S TYAGI SHRI P. K. SAKSEWA ( Alternate
SHRI D. VT.NUGOPAL

Metallurgical

Engineering

1
Ministry of Labour, Kanpur of India Ltd, Bombay

)
Loss Prevention Association

SHRI T. V. MADHUMANI( Alternate

)
Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member )

SHRI Y. R. TANEJA,
DIRECTOR -IN CHARGE ( CIVIL ENGG )

Member Secretary
SHRI HEMANT KUMAR Joint Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS

L

-.--

--

____--

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark IS governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and Standard marked products are also continuously checked by operated by the producer. BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Boreau of lodian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced BIS has the copyright of all Its publications. This does not preclude the free use, in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. such as symbols and sizes, type in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director or grade designations. ( Publications ), RIS. Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook and *Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. CED 36 ( 5214 ) Amendments Amend No Issued Since Publication 1 ext Affected

Date of issue

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telephones:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg,

New Delhi

11(X)1)2 Telegrams ( Common : Manaksanstha to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 ( 331 13 75

Kegtonal Central Eastern

Oiiicrs : Ma!lak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELI-l I 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

*

: i/l4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH Road, Marol, MADRAS Andheri

Maniktola

378499, 1 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 1 53 23 84 235 02 16, I 235 15 19, 632 92 95, 632 78 91,

378561 37 86 62 53 I6 40

Northern Southern Western Branches

160036 6001 I3 )

: C. 1. T. Campus,

IV Cross

235 04 32 235 23 I5 632 78 58 632 78 92

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. BOMBAY 400093

( East

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARTDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GCWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India

