**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12782 (1989) : Guidelines for Using Thermography for 
Monitoring of Industrial Components [MID 21: 
Non-Destructive Testing] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12782 : 1989 
(Reaffirmed 2000) 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR USING THERMOGRAPHY 

FOR MONITORING OF INDUSTRIAL 

COMPONENTS 



UDC 536-5087-6 



(cj BIS 1990 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1!0002 

March 1990 Price Group 1 



Non- destructive Testing Sectional Committee, MTD 21 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 6 September 1989, after 
the draft finalized by the Non-destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. 

This standard is intended to be a guide for using thermography for monitoring of industrial 
components. 



IS 12782 : 1989 



Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR USING THERMOGRAPHY 

FOR MONITORING OF INDUSTRIAL 

COMPONENTS 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers application of heat 
sensing devices to detect non-uniform temperature 
and also to detect undesirable distribution of 
heat during service by mapping of isotherms. 
This standard is applicable for monitoring 
industrial components, such as metal casings, 
and metal composite bonds, and also for monitor- 
ing of furnaces and boilers in power stations for 
detecting hot spots. 

2 METHODS OF TEST 

2.1 The following methods are generally used 
depending on thermally generated electro mag- 
netic energy by infrared radiation : 

a) Direct contact method, and 

b) Non-contact method. 

3 PRINCIPLES OF THERMAL 
INSPECTION 

3.1 Work pieces that are inspected by thermal 
inspection are considered either passive or active. 

3.2 Passive piece artificially heated or cooled 
during inspection to obtain a thermal profile. 
Presence of imperfection is indicated by an 
abnormal temperature in the vicinity of imperfec- 
tion. 

3.3 Greater the impedence of the material to 
heat flow better will be the detection of the 
imperfection present. Higher resistance to heat 
flow changes temperature more slowly under fixed 
thermal input. Greater temperature difference 
is observed near surface imperfection. 

3.4 Work pieces that are inspected using heating 
or cooling effects inherent in normal service are 
considered active The purpose of inspecting 
active work pieces during service usually to detect 
and measure harmful hot spots rather than to 
detect only flaws. 

4 DIRECT CONTACT METHOD 

4.1 The surface is coated with a material that 
react to chaixges in temperature by changes in 
colour. The reaction may be reversible or non- 
reversible. The choice of coating is governed by 



characteristics of work piece. This system enables 
interpreting hidden phenomena through high 
resolution thermal images. 

4.2 Calibration and Checking 

The equipment for direct measurement of tempe- 
rature has to be calibrated with the known 
temperature source for determining exactly the 
temperature of material especially in a process 
plant. 

5 NON-CONTACT METHOD (PULSE VIDEO 
THERMOGRAPHY) 

5.1 Non-contact method (Pulse video thermo- 
graphy) involves the use of TV-video compatible 
infrared imager to continuously monitor the 
temperature distribution in a visible surface, A 
sudden but modest change in temperature of the 
surface (or its opposite face) is induced brief 
exposure to a high power heat source or by 
contact with another material at a different 
temperature. Sub-surface defects such as 
dela minations, inclusions and voids affect the 
diff'usion of the heat through the material, pro- 
ducing the variations in surface temperature. 
The changing surface temperature patterns are 
scanned with the infrared imager and followed on 
a TV display, and the results are recorded on 
video tapes for further analysis or image enhance- 
ment. The technique is rapid with defect detec- 
tion time as short as a few seconds. The deve- 
lopment of FVT inspection technology is under- 
pinned by extensive experimental and theoretical 
work on defect detectability and defect image 
resolution. 

5.2 FVT is developed to detect defects in carbon 
glass or kevlar resins. 

6 APPLICATION 

6.1 Portable equipments are regularly used in 
monitoring electric furnaces used in heat treat- 
ment, and checking water wall and, furnace walls 
in power plants, and in control rooms for check- 
ing control panels for hot spots. The over-head 
transmission lines are checked for power losses. 
This condition-monitoring helps in preventing 
breakdowns and to forecast preventing mainte- 
nance in time. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. ^ 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard^ of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
urade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications)^ BIS, 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they arc in possession 
of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving 
the following reference : 

Doc:No. MTD2l(3363) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



Headquarters: 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31. 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

(Common to all Offices) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f331 01 31 



f331 01 
1331 13 



NEW DELHI 110002 l33l 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. 1. T. Scheme V\\ M, V. I. P, Road, Maniktola 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C. CHANDIGARH 160036 2 18 43 

Southern : C. L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 41 29 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MI DC, Marol, Andheri (East) 6 32 92 9S 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches ; AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZlABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM. 

Printed at Saini Printers, Delhi, India 



