( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 7524 ( Part II ) - 1979

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TEST FOR EYE-PROTECTORS
PART ( II OPTICAL .TESTS

First Revision )
Representing Central Glass and Ceramic ( CSIR ), Calcutta Research Institute

Glassware Sectional Committee, CDC 10
Chairman SHRI K. D.
SHARMA

Members Shri K. D. Sharma ) C. G. AMIN Alembic Glass Industries Ltd, Vadodara SHRI V. R. BHIDE Victory Flask Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. R. DEY Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI L. S. BHARAJ ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR STANDARDS Ministry of Railways DEPUTY ( CARRIAGE), RDSO, LUCKNOW DR B. B. GAITONDE Haffkine Institute, Bombay SHRI Y. S. NIMBKAR (Alternate) SHRI S. P. ~GIJPTA Hindustan Pilkington Glass Works Ltd, Calcutta SHRI D. S. CHABHAL Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi DR V. P. MAHESHWARY Development Commissioner ( Small Scale Industries ), New Delhi \ SHRI K. K. S. AGGARWAL ( A&mare J SHRI C. K. MEHROTRA Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta SHRI 0. P. DHAMIJA (Alternate ) DR A. V. R. RAO National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI G. T. BHIDE (Alternate ) SHRI P. R. RAO Borosil Glass Works Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. K. BANSAL ( Alternate ) SHRI J. R. SACBDEVA Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) DR S. P. SINCH DHAKARAY ( Alternate ) SHRI R. SAHAI Hindustan Vacuum Glass Ltd, Faridabad SHRI VIN~D AHUJA ( Alternate) DR J. M. SEHGAL Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd, New Delhi ( Continued on page 2 )
DR S. KUMAR ( Alternate to

SHRI

INDIAN

STANDARDS

INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyrighf Act (XIV of 1957 j and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 7524 ( Part II ) - 1979
( Continued from page 1 )
Members SnRr V. P. SHARMA SHRX S. K. @UPTA ( Alternate) SHRI K. SHIMIZU SHRI S. B. PRASAD (Alternate) SHRI RAJINDERSINQH SHRXR. C. SINCHAL ( Alternate ) SHRl D. V. SlNGH
SHRI C. K. SOMANY

Representing J. G. Glass Industries~Ltd, Pune Indo-Asahi Glass Co Ltd, Calcutta Co Ltd (Vitrum Glass

Empire Dyeing & Mfg Division ), Bombay Indian Chemical Calcutta Hindustan National Calcutta

Manufacturers, Glass and

Association, Ltd,

Industries

SHRI R. K. GUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRIJ. A. TAKTAWALA Shree Vallabh Glass Works Ltd, Bombay . SHRI C. A TAKTAWALA ( Alternate ) SHRI H. C. PATEL ( Alternate ) DR G. M. SAXENA,. Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ofi& Member ) Director (Chemtcals) Secretary
SHRI G. P. SARASWAT

Deputy Director

( Chem ), IS1

Technical
Convener

and Other Speciality

Glasses

Subcommittee,

CDC

10 : 6

DR K. P. SRIVASTAVA

Central Glass and Ceramic ( CSIR ), Calcutta

Research

Institute

Members Hindustan Safety Glass Works Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI D. N. AQRAWAL SHRI P. N. AGRAWAL ( Alternate ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DR S. R. DAS DR D. SEN ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd (Durgapur Steel SHRI D. M. DHAR Plant ), Durgapur JOINT DIRECTOROF MINES SAFTEY Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad Safety Services, Bombay SH~~~E2_~~~ SHdt M. M. SHAH ( Alternate) Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta SHRI S. S. MAZUMDAR SHRI R. PURKAYASTHA(Alternate)

2

IS : 7524( Part If ) - 1979

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TEST F-OR EYE-PROTECTORS
PA-RT II OPTICAL TESTS

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian

Standard ( Part 11) ( first revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 20 June 1979, after the draft finalized by the Glassware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 Part I of this standard covers methods of non-optical tests. This standard ( Part II ) covers optica! methods of test for eye-protectors used to protect the eyes and eye-sight from various risks, in particular those encountered in industry, with the exception of risks coming from nuclear radiations, X-rays and laser beams. In this standard methods of test for refractive, astigmatic and prismatic powers have been prescribed for both unmounted and mounted oculars. Further, for mounted oculars methods have been prescribed for actual measurement of these powers ( 3.2.1) and also for routine testing ( 3.2.2 ). Similarly, for determination of transmittance two methods have been prescribed - one uses a spectrophotometer and is capable of determining transmittance of non-filter action oculars and also of ultraviolet, infrared, welding and daylight filters; and the other method based on details provided by the Ministry of Defence, Government of India, is suitable only for determining transmittance in the visible and infrared region and is meant for routine testing only. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard assistance has been derived from ISO/DIS 4854 ` Personal eye-protector - Optical test methods ' issued by the International Organizations for Standardization ( IS0 ). 0.4 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960'k.
1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part II) prescribes the followmg methods of optical tests for eye-protectors: a) Refractive, astigmatic and prismatic powers,
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

3

IS : 7524 ( Part II ) - 1979

b) c) d) e)

Diffusion of light, Quality of material and surface, Determination of transmittance, and Measurement of colour chromaticity.

2. SAMPLING
2.1 Representative

samples of eye-protectors the individual material specifications.
POWERS

shall be drawn as specified in

3. TEST FOR REFRACTIVE, ASTIGMATIC AND PRISMATIC 3.0 General- Methods of test have been prescribed separately for unmounted and mounted oculars. For testing unmounted oculars, use is made of a telescope and a target for measuring refractive, astigmatic and prismatic powers. 3.0.1 For testing mounted oculars, two methods have been prescribed. The first ( Method A) is a modification of the method used for testing unmounted oculars and makes use of two telescopes and a double target. In the second ( Method B ) use is made of a rectangle of tolerance alongwith an optical set up. 3.1 Testing Unmounted Oculars 3.1.1 Apparatus between 7.5 and 20 3.1.1.1 Telescope - having a magnification ( recommended magnification 15 ) with an aperture of 15 to 20 mm and an adjustable eye-piece fitted with a graticule, for example, a thiodolite which is adjustable both vertically and laterally.
NOTE- In the event when the telescope shows a doubling of the image or other aberration the ocular to be tested shall be examined with a 5-mm aperture in instrument to locate and qualify the area or areas of observation in the total area of 20-mm diameter. A focometer may be used for this purpose.

3.1.1.2 Adjustable light source with condenser
3.1.1.3 Target - consisting of a black plate with the cut-out pattern shown in Fig. 1. The bars are 2.0 mm wide. The bigger annulus depicted inside the bars has a diameter of 23 mm with an annular aperture of 0.6 mm and the smaller annular has a diameter of 11 mm. The diameter of the central aperture is 0.6 mm. This target is mounted on a glass plate.

3.1.1.4 Interference Jilter - for wavelength 5.55 f 10 mm and a halfband width of approximately 50 nm. 4

IS : 7524 ( Part II ) - 1979

FIG. 1 TARGET 3.1.1.5 Standard lenses -with refractive powers & @I2 m-1 and f 0.25 m-r ( tolerance f 0.01 m-l).

of f 0.6

m-1

3.1.2 Procedure
3.1.2.1 Calibration and test -Place the telescope and the optical system of the target so that they are on the same axis. Trans-illuminate the target ( Fig. 1 ) by means of a parallel beam of monochromatic light of adjustable intensity, using interference filter to reduce chromatic aberrations. Adjust the distance between the telescope and the target at 4.6 f 0'1 m. Focus the reticule and the target aligning the telescope so that a clear image of the pattern is obtained. Regard this setting as the zero point of the dioptre scale of the telescope.
NOTE- The focusing adjusment of the telescope shall be calibrated so that a power of 0.01 m-l can be measured.

3.1.2.2 Insert the standard lenses ( 3.1.1.5 ), one at a time, in the order of ascending refractive powers, normal to the-axis of the telescope, in the path of the rays and adjust the telescope to get a clear image of the target each time. Mark these positions on the dioptre scale of the telescope for the respective refractive powers.

5

IS : 7524 ( Part II ) - 1979 3.1.2.3 Next insert the test lenses in place of the standard lenses as in 3X!.2. Adjust the telescope to get a clear image and note their refractive powers from the dioptre scale of the telescope. 3.1.2.4 Record astigmatism of the lens as the maximum difference between the values of refractive powers obtained in resolving the horizontal and vertical bars (see Fig. 1 ) of the target during rotation of the test lens around its axis. 3.1.2.5 For determining the prismatic power, place the test lens normal to the axis of the telescope, in the path of the rays and adjust the telescope to get a clear image. If on doing so, the point of intersection of the lines of the reticule ~falls outside the image of the bigger annulus the prismatic power of the test lens shall be taken as having exceeded O-25 cmlm. If the permitted limit is 0.12 cm/m, the point of intersection of the lines of the reticule shall fall inside the image of the smaller annulus of the target. 3.2 Testing Mounted Oculars 3.2.1 Method A 3.2.1.1 Apparatus - Apparatus required for testing mounted oculars is as follows: a) Standard support - made of metal or any other rigid material, so that it reproduces the actual position of spectacles in front of the eyes, when worn ( see Fig. 2).
NOTF - Face shields, not having sides-shall be positioned on the support they are normally placed in front of the eyes wben worn. as

b) Telescopes - Two in number, similar to that presented in 3.1.1.1 and fitted with diaphragms 6 mm in diameter. The telescopes shall be fixed on the standard support in alignment with two parallel axes 66 mm apart, this parallelism being nearest to one minute of an arc. c) Double target - as shown in Fig. 3. d) Standard lenses - same as in 3.1.1.5, preferably two sets. 3.2.1.2 ProcedLinre- Place the eye protector to be tested on the standard support with both telescopes, that is, one for each ocular in the case of spectacles and two-piece goggles, or one for each visual centre in the case of face-shields and one-piece goggles, in front of the double target so that they are both on the same axis. Iluminate the double target by a strong light and adjust the distance between the telescopes and the double target to 46 f 0.1 m. Measure the horizontal and vertical prismatic powers by counting (and, if necessary by interpolating between two circles ), the number of circles from which the vertical line and the horizontal line of the reticule have moved. Since each circle represents 0 95 cm/m, the reading may be taken to the nearest f 0.025 cmlm. Measure the 6

Is :7524(PartII)-l!m

VISUAL

AXES-

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG.

2

STANDARD SUPPORT FOR TESTINGMOUNTEDLENSES

refractive power for each ocular or each visual centre according to the procedure given in 3.1.2. Determine the astigmatism by the difference of powers measured in resolving two areas of circles on the target. 3.2.2 MethodB 3.2.2.1 Apparurus - A suitable testing arrangement is illustrated in Fig. 4 and consists of the following: 4 Filament lump - one, of 6V, 5A rating. b) Green $lter - to provide monochromatic light to avoid chromatic dispersion and to have well-defined images. 4OV View Jirrder - to produce image of the lamp filament after C> passing through the green filter, as the luminous focal point S. 4 Pfano-convex lenses - two in number; lens ( 0, ) having focal length ( Fl ) 600 mm; diameter 95 mm, and lens ( OS ), focal length ( Fs ) 1 190 mm, diameter 100 mm. 7

IS :7524(Partn)-1979
e) Diaphragm ( D ) -

pierced with two 5 mm diameter holes, the centres of which are 66 mm apart; for allowing two parallel beams of light to pass through. light beam converges at the focal point S' and at the centre of the rectangle of tolerances superimposed on the screen ( see Fig. 5 ).

f ) Screen ( E ) - located at a distance of 1 190 mm from 0, so that the

All dimensions in millimctres. FIG. 3 DOUBLE TARGET

VIEW-FINDER

All dimensions in millimetres.

FIG. 4

DIAGRAMMATIC ARRANGEMENT FOR APPARATUS FOR ROUTINE
TESTINGOF MOUNTED LENSES

8

IS : 7524~( Part II ) - 1979
E

FIG. 5

RECTANGLE OF TOLERANCE

3.2.2.2 Procedure - Set up the apparatus as illustrated in Fig. 5 so that the whole optical system is on the same axis. Illuminate the filament Iamp and adjust the positions of the lenses O1 and 02 and the screen E so that a sharp image S1 is formed in the centre of the rectangle ABCD ( see Fig. 5 ) superimposed on screen E. Next insert the diaphragm D and the test oculars OD and OG mounted in the spectacle frames so that the spectacles are in t.he path of the rays between the diaphragm ( D ) and the lense ( 0, ). Two sharp images Zd and Zg corresponding to oculars OD and OG are formed on the screen instead of the previous image S' owing to the prismatic effect of the test lenses OD and OG. The lenses shall be considered as having satisfied the requirement of the test if the images Zd and Zg fall The test shall be carried out in within the rectangle ABCD of tolerances. the same manner when the spectacles are replaced by a shield. NOTE - The sides of the rectangle ABCD have measurements corresponding to the

tolerance adopted for the deviations in the material specilication, that is vertical SD, Thus, if F2 is the focal length of the and horizontal ~DH, and focal length of lens 0s. lens 02 in millimetres, and 6Dv and 6DH, tolerances in centimetres per metre, the lengths of the sides a and b of the rectangle ABCD ( see Fig. 5 ) may be calculated from the following : Side a in mm = F,*, Side b in mm = Fa BDH 100 and

4. TEST FOR DIFFUSION OF LIGHT 4.0 General -Most oculars have diffusion properties which are symmetrical about the optical axis. For those oculars the mean value of the reduced luminance factor is constant within an angle limited by the two cones shown in Fig. 6. This mean value depends upon the value CC and nix.

IS : 7524 ( Part II ) - 1979

FIG. 6

VARIATION OF DIFFUSIONWITH OBSERVATION DIRECTION

4.1 Apparatus - A suitable testing arrangement is illustrated in Fig. 7. Tn this arrangement spherical mirror Hl forms an image of light source 1; at diaphragm LB of the same dimensions as L. The concave mirror H3 forms an image of diaphragm LB in the plane of diaphragms BL and BR. The achromatic lens A is positioned immediately behind the diaphragm so that a reduced image of the test sample in position P appears on diffusing screen MS. The image of iris diaphragm ZB, is simultaneously formed on IB,.

H

Hz

FIG. 7

DIAGRAMMATIC ARRANGEMENT FOR APPARATUS FOR DIFFUSIONTEST

4.1.1 This assembly collects all the light originating from the filter between angles u = 1.5" and a+ Aa== 2" in relation to the optical axis. The 10

IS : 7524 (Part 11) - 1979 angular area is important in the case of welding, where a point in the immediate proximity of the weld spot has to-be observed. It is, however, possible to measure scattered light in other angular areas if use is made of an annular diaphragm with suitably modified dimensions. 4.2 Procedure - Set up the apparatus as illustrated in Fig. 7. Switch on the light source L and insert the test lens in the path of the rays in position P and set diaphragm BL in its place. Note the value of flux $1~ falling on to the photomultiplier MS which corresponds to the undiffused light transmitted by the sample and is proportional to the coefficient by illuminance EA. 4.2.1 Then replace diaphragm BL by diaphragm BR sothat flux 41~ falling on to the photomultiplier MS which corresponds to the total diffused light . originating from the filter and from the apparatus. 4.2.2 Next place the test lens at position P and note the value of flux 42~ falling on to the photomultiplier MS which corresponds to the diffused light coming from the apparatus. 4.3 Calculation - Difference +iR - &R is a measure of the light diffused by the filter and is proportional to oLs . The proportionality factor is the same in both cases. Calculate the reduced mean luminance factor ( Im ) for the solid angle w from the preceding fluxes as follows:

where
&R and

o = the solid angle defined by the annular diaphragm d 2R - luminous fluxes with annular diaphragm (see 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 ), and +rr, = luminous flux with circular diaphragm ( see 4.2 ).

5. TEST FOR QUALITY OF MATERIAL AND SURFACE 5.1 Apparatus A suitable set up of apparatus is illustrated in Fig. 8.

5.2 Procedure - Set up the apparatus as shown in Fig. 8. Adjust its luminance using the opaques dull black mask according to the optical density of the filter under test. Then examine the lens holding it before the lamp at a distance of about 300 mm from the eye. 5.2.1 The lens or the filter shall be taken as having satisfied the requirement of the test if no visual defects such as bubbles, inclusions, ~dull spots, holes, mould marks, scourings, scratches, etc, which are likely to impair vision in use, are noted in the material or on the surface. 11

IS : 7524 ( Part II ) - 1979

ADJUSTABLE OUCC BLACK

OPAQUE MASK

-_-_-_

--_---_

__/--OUCL

BLACK

DISTANCE

(ABOUT

300

)

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG.

8 -DIAGRAMMATIC ARRANGEMENT FOR APPARATUSFOR TESTFOR
QUALITY OF MATERIAL AND SURFACE OF TRANSMITTANCE

6. DETERMINATION 6.0 General -

Two methods have been prescribed. Method A is the referee method. Method B is provided for determining transmittances only in the visible and infrared region for routine testing purposes. 6.1.1 Apparatus
6.1.1.1 6.1.1.2 Spectrophotometer Light sources -

6.1 Method A

Light sources, filters and measurement and calculation are given in Table 1.

specifications

for

6.1.2 Procedure - Set up the apparatus in a dark room with appropriate light source. Insert the test filter in the path of the rays so that its surface is perpendicular to the flux. Measure the transmission at intervals of 10 nm wavelengths in the visible region weighting the values in accordance with standard values for the relative luminous efficiency of monochromatic radiation and at intervals of 100 nm wavelengths in the ultra-violet and infrared regions, and calculate transmittance. 6.1.2.1 In the case of a dark filter of higher shade number, grind it to a suitable thickness, polish and measure its transmission value and apply correction for thickness to get transmittance for the filter of original thickness. 6.1.3 Limits of Measuring of Errors - The limits of inherent errors in measuring methods, that is, relative uncertainty of these methods in relation to the measured transmittance is given in Table 2. 12

IS : 7524 ( Part II ) - 1979
TABLE 1 FILTERS, LIGHT SOURCES AND SPECIFICATIONS MEASUREMENT OF TRANSMITTANCE ( Cluusc 6.1.1.2 TYPE OF OCULAR OR FILTER
SOURCES FOR MEASUREMENTOF TRANSMITTANCEINTHE VISIBLESPECTRUM LIGHT

FOR

) SPECIFICATIONS RELATXNCJ TO MEASUREMENTS IN THE INFRARED SPECTRUM

(1) Ocular without action Ultraviolet filter Infrared filter filter

(2) CIE Source A, 2856 K Source D 65 CIE Source A, 2856 K CIE Source P, 1900 K No specification

(3)

No specification Mean values of spectral transmission in near infrared from 780 to 1 300 nm and in mid infrared from 1 300 to 2 000 nm in steps of 100 nm. Same as for infrared filters Values are calculated by using the spectral distribution of solar radiation energy in the infrared spectrum Approximate values can be obtained by using CIE source A and a neutral detector in combination with the filters mentioned in IS : 5983-1980*

Welding filter Filter for daylight

CIE Source A, 2856 K CIE Source C, 6774 K

*Specification

for eye-protectors

(jirsl rczkion ).

TABLE

2

LIMITS

OF INHERENT ( Clause 6.1.3 )

MEASURING

ERRORS

TRANSMITTANCE VALUE (1) PERCENT 100 Above Above Above Above Above 17.9 8.5 0.45 to 17.9 to to to 8-5 0.45 0.023 0.001 2

RELATIVE UNCERTAINTY (2) PERCENT 5 10 10 15 20 30 25

0.023 to

0.001 2 to 0-000 0'3

Reduced luminance factor

13

IS:7524(BartH)-1979 6.2 Method B 6.2.1 Apparatus
6.2.1.1 Detectors - Photo-voltaic infrared regions, respectively.

cells and thermopiles for visible and

6.2.1.2 Light source - Tungsten filament lamp of 100 W rating. 6.2.1.3 Microammeter -having count of 1 micro-ampere. a range of O-250 PA with a least

6.1.2.4 Optical bench - capable of holding the detectors in position in front of the light source. 6.2.3 Procedure - Ensure that the oculars as such or mounted in frame are properly cleaned and are free from dust, greasy material, etc. Mount the photo-voltaic cell and the light source on the optical bench. Connect the photo-voltaic cell to the microammeter. Connect the light source to a constant voltage power supply. 6.2.3.1 Switch on the light source and adjust the detector so that the microammeter shows the reading as 100 +LA. Next insert the cleaned ocular in the ~path of the rays so that its surface is perpendicular to the flux, care being taken that no stray light falls on the detector. Record the reading of the microammeter ( V, ) as the transmittance in the visible region.
NOTE-On removal of the ocular from the path of the rays, the microammeter needle should return to 100 on the scale.

6.2.3.2 Repeat the measurement, next with thermopile as the detector and record the reading of the microammeter ( V, ). Obtain transmittance in the infrared region by subtracting the value V, from V,. 7. MEASU-REMENT OF COLOUR CHROMATICITY

7.1 Measurement of chromaticity shall be made using a calorimeter, by spectrophotometric analysis, by comparison with calibrated colour filters or by any method which gives results in terms of the system recommended by the International Commission on Illumination ( ClE ) in 1931.
certified

The calibrated colour filters for use in the test shall have been tested and for their chromaticity by the National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), New Delhi or any other approved laboratory. NOTE-

14

