IS 14487 : 1997
( Reaffirmed 2003 )

mhlw

3-eh~m-9T+f.mlthr .

Indian Standard

MEASUREMENTOFAREAOFLEATHERGUIDELINE

Its

59.14030

0 BIS 1997

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS h4ANAKBHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG
NEW DELHI 110002 October 1997 PriceGroup 2

Leather Sectional Committee, CHD 017

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Leather Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. Measurement of area of leather through pin-wheel measuring machine is often a matter of dispute in the leather industry. The Committee therefore felt the need for a guideline to measure the area of leather. This standard has been prepared, based on IS0 11646 `Leather - Measurement of area' and the method prescribed by the Physical Test Commission of the International Union of Leather Technologists and Chemists Societies (IUP Commission, IULTCS) IULTCSflUP 32. This standard is therefore technically equivalent with IS0 11646. Indian Standards on atmospheric conditions have been stipulated in this standard in place of the atmospheric conditions stipulated in IS0 11646 for the conditioning of the test pieces. Composition of the committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 14487-t 1997

Indian Standard

MEASUREMENT
1

OF AREA OF LEATHER GUIDELINE
leather to be measured. If this is not possible, feed thesame templet through the machine a number of times (N) without resetting the machine to zero until the total reading is within + 50 percent of the anticipated test-specimen area and this total is treated as a single measurement. When not in use, the templet(s) shall be kept flat in the standard atmosphere defined in LP 0 of IS 5914. The area of the templet(s) shall be verified at least once a year by an independent body using measurement instruments traceable to the national standard calibration procedure. The templct is acceptable if its measured area is within + 0.5 percent of its nominal area.
NOTE - Users of this standard are recommended to keep a record book of the measurements obtained during the daily calibration procedure. It should be inspected at regular intervals to detect any consistent trends towards inaccurate readings, for example, left side of the machine always reads low, right side tends to read high. This gives advancewarning of faults, which can be of use to the maintenance engineer when servicing the machine.

SCOPE

This standard prescribes a method of measuring the area of pieces of leather. It is intended only for the measurement of dressed and other dry flexible leathers with the help of a pin-wheel machine.
2

REFERENCE

The Indian Standard listed below contains provisions which through reference in this text, constitute provision of this Indian Standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this Indian Standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the Indian Standard indicated below:
IS No. 5914 : 1970
3

Title

Methods leather

of physical testing of

PRINCIPLE

The area of the conditioned leather is measured with a mechanical pin-wheel machine. 4 APPARATUS 4.1 Mechanical Machine Pin-Wheel Area-Measurement

4.3 Calibration

Procedure

Before each series of test carry out the following procedure. 43.1 Switch on and run the machine for at least 2 min, then pass an `old' (that is, uncertified) templet through the machine approximately 25 times in a random manner to ensure that all wheels ar_e engaged. Some of the passes shall be cumulative, without resetting the machine to zero, in order to ensure that, all moving parts of the machine are running freely. 4.3.2 Set the zero of the machine and pass a certified templet through the machine N times without cancelling the individual readings. Ensure that all pin wheels which will be actuated by the subsequent pass of the leather test specimen have also been actuated by the tcm let. If the recorded total area is within + 0.01 m P of the theoretical total area, proceed to the next stage. If it is beyond this range adjust the machine and repeat the N passes until the recorded area is within the prescribed tolerance.

The machine used should preferably have a feedroller speed of 20 f 2 m/min. The distance between the centres of the pins on two adjacent pin wheels should preferably be 25.4 f 2.5 mm, when measured parallel to the axis of the pin-wheel roller. Pinwheel machines which do not conform to these recommendations may also be used, but the actual design values shall be stated in the test report. 4.2 Circular Calibration Tem_plet The templet shall be made of flexible reinforced material, for calibrating the pin-wheel machine immediately before the machine is used. The area of the templet shall not be less than 5 percent of the pin-wheel machine capacity, and the width of the templet shall not be greater than 50 percent of the machine's working width. The area of the templet shall, if possible, be within + 50 percent of the anticipated area of the piece of

1

IS 14487 : 1997 4.3.3 Once the machine measures to within the prescribed tolerance, zero the measurement gauge and repeat twice the procedure described in 4.3.2. Record all three total areas to the nearest 0.01 m2. 4.3.4 If all three total areas are higher or lower than N times the theoretical templet area, or if the difference between the maximum and minimum total area is greater than 0.02 m2, repeat the calibration procedure from the beginning of 4.3.2 after making appropriate adjustments to the machine. 5 PROCEDURE 5.1 Conditioning of the Leather 5.1.1 Unless otherwise agreed (see 51.2) expose the leather test specimen to the standard atmos_phere defined in IS 5914 (27+2"C and 6525 percent relative humidity) for at least 48 h. 51.2 For some purposes, it is unnecessary to subject test specimens to a strict conditioning procedure, and measurements may be carried out on leatherwhich has not beenconditioned, or has been conditioned in a way other than that specified in IS 5914. Whenever conditions other than those specified in 5.1.1 are used, the conditioning regime shall be stated-in the test report as a deviation from the method.
NOTE - Generally relative humidity is more important than atmospheric temperature in determining the moisture content and surface area of pieces of leather. Leatherwhich has a moisture content below that which would be obtained by conditioning in accordance with IS 5'914will have a lower measured area. Some leathers, for example chamois, exhibit considerable hysteresis in their regain of moisture from a standard atmosphere. For this reason, and to minimise disputes, it is recommended that in arbitration such leather is conditioned on the descending side of the hysteresis loop, that is, from a moisture content corresponding to a higher relative humidity down to 65 percent relative humidity.

without creases at the moment when it passes between the pin-wheels and the top of the feed-roller. In the case of soft leathers, this smoothing may involve pulling the +hide from edge to edge with sufficient force to prevent the pins pushing the leather into the transport feed-roller slots, the specimen being held in such a manner that it remains flat as it passes through the machine. To ensure this, more than one operator may be needed to feed the specimen into the machine. 5.4 If the specimen has a linear or nearly linear edge, for example, along the sides, it shall be fed through the machine so that the straight edge forms an angle of about 30' to the direction of movement. In any other case, the line of the backbone shall be perpendicular, or almost so, to the axis of the rollers. 5.5 If the area of the test specimen is more than 5 percent of the measurement-machine capacity, measure the area twice. If the readings differ, repeat the minimum number of times required to obtain two equal readings after rounding to the nearest 0.01 m2. If the pointer is exactly in the middle between two scale divisions, round the reading up to the higher of the two divisions. 5.6 If the area of the test specimen is less than 5 percent of the measurement-machine capacity, feed the specimen through the machine repeatedly without zeroing in between until the total measured area exceeds 5 percent of the measurement-machine capacity. Repeat the sequence of measurements to obtain a second reading. If the first reading differs from the second after rounding to the nearest 0.01 m2, repeat the sequence to the minimum number of times required to obtain two equal readings. Calculate the area of the specimen as the total measured area divided by the number of times the specimen was fed through the machine and then round to the nearest 0.01 m2. 6 EXPRESSION OF RESULTS Report the area of the test specimen as the average of two valid measurements in m2, rounded to two places of decimals. 7 TEST REPORT The test report shall included the ~following information: a) A description of type of leather tested; b) A reference to this standard; c) The time of conditioning in hours; d) The result of the arca measurement in m2, rounded to 2 places of decimals; and e) Details of any deviations from the procedure. 2

5.1.3 Support the leather if possible along the backbone in such a way that air has free access to both surfaces, and keep the air in continuous motion by means of a suitably placed fan. 5.1.4 Note the time of conditioning in hours. 5.2 Start of Measurement Carry out the test either in the same atmosphere as used for conditioning or in ambient conditions but within 30 min of removing the test specimen from the conditioning atmosphere. Before each measurement, set the pointer of the measurement gauge to zero. 5.3 Method of Measurement Feed the test specimen into the machine with the higher friction surface in contact with the pinwheels. The specimen shall be absolutely flat and

IS 14487 : 1997

ANNEX
COMMITTEE

A

(Foreword)
COMPOSITION

Leather Sectional Committee. CHD 017
Chainnan Represerhng

DR K V. RAGIIAV,XN
Members

Central Leather Research Institute. Chennai

DRT.RAMASAMI (Alremate to Dr K.V. Raghavan) SHRIAFQLAGARWAL SHRIM.K.AWASTHI( &emate) SHRI MUSHARFZAF ALI SHRIJ. K.MATHUR (Alternate ) SHRISHAFEEQ~EAHMED SHRIV.P.NAIMURREHMAN( Alfemafe) SHRtS.K.B.WJ SHRIO.P.BEHARI DRN.R.MUKHOPADHYAY( Alfemate) SHRI B.B. CHAUDHARY SHRIS.C.Ko~~~(AZternate) SHRI O.P. DHAMIJA SHRIR. BALAWBHUMANIAM( Altcmate) SHRIP.K. GHOSH SHRIN.K_MAZUMDAR (Alternate) SHRIG.GUFTA SHRIG.CKANAUIIYA (Altemafe) SHR~G.S.KALER SHRIR.K.Mh~~e(Akcmate) SHRIO.K.KAUL DRV.NARSIMHAN (Altemate) SHRIP.D.MAYEE SHRIS.C.LAHIKY(Alternate) SHRIB.M.MEHTHANI SHRIS.N.TIWAKI (Altemate) SHRIT.K.NAG [Director(Leather)] SHRIB.AUARPASHA SHRI~AR KH~N( Alternate) SHRIS.RAJA SHRIT.K.RAO SHRIM.MOHAMMEDTHAMEEN( Altemate) SHRIA.A.RASHEED SHRIN.M.ZACHARLW (Altemate) REPRBENTATIVE REPRESENTATIVE SHRID. K. SETH SHRID.K.GuHARAY( Alternate I) SHRIN.N.DEBNATH( Alternate II) SHRIG. M. SHARIP SHRIA.R.~WAMINATHAN SHRIV.P.BA.JPAI( Altemafe) SHRISK WADHWA SHRIK.K.MAHESHWI\RI( Altenzate) DR R. S. RAJAGOPALAN, Director (Chem)

Ministry of Defencc (R & D), Kanpur Ministry of Defence (DGOF), Kanpur Indian Finished Leather Manufacturers and Exporters Association, Chennai Department of Education, Government of West Bengal, Calcutta Directorate of Marketing Inspection (Ministry of Agriculture), Faridabad Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi Bata India Ltd, Calcutta Ministry of Defence, DGQA, Kanpur Pubjab State Leather Development Corporation, Chandigarh Tata Exports Ltd, Dewas Planning Commission, New Delhi Tannety and Footwear Corporation of India Ltd, Kanpur

Khadi and Village Industries Commission, Mumbai Akbar Leather Ltd, Chennai The Leatherware, Bangalore M.A. Khizar Hussain Sr Sons, Chennai All India Skins and Hides Tanners and Merchants Association, Chennai Bihar Finished Leather Ltd, Patna Council for Leather Exports, Chennai Development Commissioner Small Scale Industries, New Delhi

All India Small Scale Tanners and Merchants Association, Chennai Leather Research and Testing Laboratory, Directorate of Industries, Kanpur Department of Industrial Development, Ministry of Industry, New Delhi Director General, BIS (EY-oficio Member)
Member-Secretary

SHRL P. MUKHOPADHYAY Joint Director (Chem), BIS

(Continued on page 4)

IS 14487 : 1997
(Continued fiorn page 3)

Panel for Harmonization of Indian Standards With International Standards, CHD 017 : P2
co?lvcncr Representing

PROF D.N. S~NA
Members

Harcourt Buttler Technical Institute, Kanpur

SHRIS. K. M~SHRA (Alternate to Prof D. N. Saxena) SHKIR. BALASUBHRAMANIAM SHRIB.N.DAS DR R. RAJA RAMAN(Alfemafe ) SHRIK. AMEENUR REHMAN SHRI V. P. NAIMLJR REHMAN(Alternate ) REPRE~ENTATWE REPREGENTATIVE REPRE~ENTATWE REPREXENTATIVE REPRESENTATIVE SHRlD.N.Roy SHRIB.Mow(AZtenate)

Ejrport Inspection Council of India, Chennai Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai Indian Finished Leather Manufacturers and Exporters Association, Chennni All India Skins and Hides Tanners and Merchants Association, Chennai Bata India Ltd, Calcutta College of Leather Technology Tata Expnrts, Dewas Council for Leather Export, Chennai National Test House. Calcutta

Bureati of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indiarz Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright Bl.S has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the bilsis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendment.. or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions' This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. CHD 017 ( 0656 ) Amendments Amend No. Date of Issue Issued Since Publication Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Afar

Marg

32376 17,3233841 337 84 99,337 85 61 337 86 26,337 9120 60 38 43 1 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 { 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 { 832 78 91,832 78 92

NEW DELHI 110002
: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola

CALCU'ITA

700054 160022

: SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, C!IENNAl600113 : Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

: AHMADABAD.

BANGALORE. BHGPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. P&cd rt Simco printing Pnss,
Delhi. India

