IS 13564:1993

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SELECTION OF DIAMOND AND CUBIC BORON NITRIDE GRINDING WHEELS

UDC 621'922'025 : 621'921'34

0

BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 3 ZAF'AR MARG

NEW DELHI April 1993

Abrasive

Sectional

Committee,

PE 09

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted the Abrasive Sectional Committee Council. by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after had been approved by the Production the draft finalized by Engineering Division

It is extremely difficult to make definite recommendations for the selection of diamond/Cubic Boron Nitride wheels for different applications in view of the number of parameters involved such as grit, bond, method of operation, finish and hardness of material to be ground etc. In this standard attempts have been made to provide general information on the major consideration that should The recommendation in respect of a influence selection of grinding wheel for a given application. particular application generally varies from manufacturer to manufacturer, hence the identity of markings between two brands of a grinding wheel may not guarantee identical performance. This standard is based upon the data supplied by leading users/manufacturers of the product.

While preparing this standard assistance has been drawn from IS0 6104-1979 `Abrasive products and multidiamond or cubic boron nitride grinding wheels and saws - General survey designation lingual nomenclature' issued by the International Standards Organization ( IS0 ).

IS 13564 : 1993

'

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SELECTION OF DIAMOND AND CUBIC BORON NITRIDE GRINDING WHEELS
1 SCOPE This standard covers general recommendations _and guidelines for the selection of diamond and cubic boron nitride ( CBN ) grinding wheels. 2 FIELD OF APPLICATION Abrasives 4 SELECTION OF DIAMOND/CBN GRINDING WHEELS
I I .,, .I

4.1 The following factors shall be considered while making selection of diamond/CBN grinding wheels. ,,*v :> t 4.1.1 Grit or Grain Size <\

2.1 Diamond

Diamond abrasives have high hardness and resistance to wear and used in the abrasive machining of hard brittle and short chipping materials like glass, ceramics, quartz, semi-conductor materials wear resistant spray on or weld on metal or alloys, glass fibre reinforced plastics and others. The properties of grinding tools can be modified to make them perform rough, finish and fine grinding. The diamond tools have low wear even at high metal removal rate thereby achieving the required shape, dimensional tolerances even for the material, which are difficult to machine. 2.1.1 Coolant lubricant should be used wherever possible in order to achieve high material removal rate coupled with low wear of diamond wheel. 2.2 Cubic Boron Nitride (CBN ) Abrasives

The grit sizes are as per. IS 10960 ( Part 1,) : 1984 for macro grit sizes ( both narrow as well as wide range of grades) and IS 10960 (Part 2) : 1984 for sieved sizes of abrasives. The tolerancC' for micron grits are smaller than sieved sizes ,with.the same range of grain size distribution, there by resulting in lower stock removal rates and finer surface > finish. When a wheel is in a proper grinding condition the grit point shall project above l/5 to l/3 of the I grain diameter above the bond surface. Themetal removal is not possible without this projection, hence, the grit particle size is the restricting factor for infeed rate in reciprocating grinding and for It concludes to cross feed in creep feed grinding. the following:

Cubic boron nitride abrasives are produced by high pressure high temperature synthesis. It is It is used in the one of the hardest abrasive. grinding of carbide forming material, that is steel in particular, hard to machine steels with large properties of alloy and of hardness 55 HRC and above, that is high speed steels, chromium steels, CBN grinding wheels have lower wear, making it easier to achieve the required shape and dimensional accuracies. 2.2.1 A particular advantage in the grinding of hard-to-machine tool is that CBN grinding wheels cause less disturbance of their surface integrity. 3 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards adjuncts to this standard: IS No. 10960 (Part1):1984 are necessary

a) High b) 4 4

infeed rates with tine grit wheels be avoided;

shall rough

Coarser grit wheels shall be used for grinding;

Excessive infeed rates cause rapid increase in grit projection, weakening of bond forces and grit break out; and All other elements being same, the coarser grit wheel generally have the longer life without additional tool cost since grit size has no effect on the price of a wheel. Bond

4.1.2

Title Grain sizes for diamond or cubic boron nitride : Part 1 Designation and grain size distribution 10960 Grain sizes for diamond or cubic ( Part 2) : 1984 boron nitride : Part 2 Method of test of macro grits General survey, designation and 10986 : 19841 IS0 6104 : 1972 nomenclature of diamond or cubic boron nitrite grinding wheels and saws 1

The retention force of the bond effects the grinding characteristics of the wheel. It is essential for the diamond or CBN particles to be embeded in the bond such that they are retained under the forces and temperatures occurring in the grinding operation, till optimum values are obtained. The bond also provide space for chip removal. The various types of bonds various grinding application used for are: handling of

a) Synthetic

resin bond, bond, and

b) Metal bond, 4 Electrocoated 4
Ceramic bond.

IS 13564: 1993 4.1.2.1 Bond hardness rating .for synthetic resin and ceramic bonds Different bond hardness ratings are available within the individual bond types in order to provide closer adaptation to the specific grinding applications. The hardness rating indicates grinding behaviour or effective hardness of the grinding wheel. Hence it is thus a measure of the cutting forces and temperature occurring during grinding. General features of difirent bond hardness ratings are given below: Sf No. Soft Bond - action Less agressive action Slow grinding action Hotter Greater grinding contact action pressure grinding Hard Bond 4.1.3 Bond Wear and Self Sharpening E#ect

The abrasive particles do not protrude from the bond after manufacture except electroplated bond. The bond has to be broken back by an additional process in order to create a protrusion between the grit points and the bond surface. a) Grinding layer in new condition After being ground over, the abrasive particles protrude above the bond surface by approx 20 to 30 percent of their This protrusion enables them to diameter. penetrate in to the material to be ground and to remove material. Electroplated tools are manufactured in such a way that the bond deposited on the wheel core still leaves 30 to 50 percent of the grit particles and hence the wheel is immediately ready for grinding.

1. Free cutting 2. Fast grinding 3. Cool grinding 4. Lower contact pressure 5. Greater 6. Shorter wear

b) Bond
Efict

wear in operation self-sharpening

Lesser wear Longer Harder for: tool life bond is right

tool life

`7. Softer bond is better for: a) Wide abrasive coatings b) Fine grit sizes c) Lower concentrations d) Harder materials sensitive e) Heat :Ind edge sensitive work piece f) Dry grinding

Narrow abrasive coatings Coarse grit sizes Higher concentrations

If the specification is rightly chosen ( grit size, bond and concentration ) and the operating conditions are well adopted the abrasive particles and bond wear uniformly, so that the wheel remains in constant grinding readiness. This process is known as self-sharpening effect, which describes the condition in which the wheel constantly regenerates itself and releases particles which have became dull.

cl Grinding layer with defective selfsharpening erffcct Jn contrast to the wheel with the free cutting action in its self sharpening zone, insufficient bond wear or excessive grit breakout results in a dull abrasive coating, the particles protrude insufficiently from the bond or do not protrude from it at all. Thiq causes drag, chatter, thermal and consequent with mechanical overload, damage to the wheel.

Softer materials Severe profile requirements Wet grinding stabiIity

4.1.2.2 Bond type selection Bond type selection Borld Grinding Method shall be as given below: SuKface Finish Metal Removal Rate High Low Life of Wheel

4

Exception ( one Iayer efectrocoated tools ) On one layer of electroplated tools, the particles protrude from the bond to different degree within their particle size distribution range and depending on their random position on the core. This means that new wheels have agressive grinding characteristics, but it is reduced in due Since no new course due to natural wear. particles are exposed by bond wear, there is no self-sharpening effect with this type of tools.

Resin Metal

Dry or wet Wet

Fine Rough or medium Rough Rough or medium

Less High

Electracoated Ceramic

Wet Wet or dry

High High

Less Less

For multilayer tools the character that of a wheel with sintered metal sharpening effect is possible. 2

is similar to bond, a self-

IS 13564:1993 41.4 Core Material and Shape which are given below. Advantages

Core material and shape are the decisive factors for static are dynamic strength of the wheel depending upon the type of ab asive impregnation and the desired grinding characteristics, it may be made out of: a) Aluminium, b) Aluminium/Resinoid c) Synthetic resin. composite, and

qf small rim width
free cutting

a) Improved
Easier c>

b) Better chip flow
achievement plain surfaces, and of straight during edges and

4 Lesser heat generation
Disadvantages

grinding.

4.1.4.1 The correct choice of core material enables the wheels with higher manufacturer of cutting speed. Speeds up to 200 m/s may be employed for testing. The core material has a major influence on the vibration and heat characteristics of the wheel. This is indicated qualitatively in Table 1 for Resinoid Bond Wheels. 4.1.5 Rim Width (W) pxformance and

of small rim width

a) Agressive grinding

can cause the operator to loose the feeling of what the wheel can take without sustaining damages. Wider abrasive sections give indication of over straining by noise or smell and in case of st.eel grinding by discoloration of grinding surface. rim produces rougher workpiece surface for the same number of passes and crossfeed. This may require compensation by additional spark out passes at reduced crossfeed rate. the

b) Narrow

The rim width affects economic grinding characteristics.

The stock removal during grinding takes place within the contact area L derived from the rim width W and the workpiece thickness `h' (see Fig. 1 ). In general, the contact area or rim width should be kept as small as possible. The small rim width has advantages and disadvantages
CONTACT AREA `i

The rim width must always be less than width of work piece in the direction of depth

of penetration at the workpiece (see Fig. 2). Otherwise a shoulder is formed in the abrasive section

damaging the cutting width give the operator grinding.

edge although large rim better control for off-hand

FIG. 2

FIG. 1

Rlhl

WIDTH

RIM WIn-rH AND -PENETRATION DEPTH

Table
SI No. 1. 2. 3. 4. Core Material

1

Qualitative

Characteristics of Various ( Clause 4.1.4.1 )
Vibration Damping Medium Poor Good Poor

Core Materials
Heat Dissipation Satisfactory Very good Poor Verv nood Mechanical Strength Good Very good Satisfactory ( not sufficient for thin walled core ) Very good

Identification AL/R A B E

Aluminium Synthetic Resin - Composite Aluminium All Synthetic Resin Steel

IS 13564 : 1993 4.1.6 Coating Depth 4.1.8.1 Selection of Concentration are C 150, C 175 and used for the following for profile and edge

Greater coating depths are more economical since they have comparatively little effect on manufacturing cost. Few examples for depth of diamond/ CBN coating are given below. i) 1'5 mm, ii) 3'0 mm, and iii) 6'0 mm.

The high concentrations C 200. These are mostly applications: a) High requirements stability, b) Small c) Hard abrasive bond, grit, and

coating

thickness,

d) Coarser Dimensions ,,. 2 Special dimensions,. mean special order production thereby increasing manufacturing effort with correspondinglyj,higher costs and longer-delivery period:: 8 : ,*. ., I.. ;.). ". ~`1 41.8 Concentrations Concen'trtition'sljecifies tli2 prbpoition tif diambnd or CBN' i'n the `Abrasive impregnation." As a general `rule'fbr thi`8klectibn of apprdpriatt, concentration, a high concentratibn niay be ikcommended for small contact areas atid `coarser grits and a low concentration is advisable to large., contact areai gnd'fin'e grits,. " ' " * i f ., The commonly given in Table Table 2 us'ed, concentrations 2, /, , ,..`.I Commonly ( Clause 4.1.8 )
Concentration c I . c c 25 50 75
100

4.1.7

Special

e) Creep feed grinding. The lower concentrations are C 25, C 38, C 50. mostly used in the following are These applications: a) Cup wheels with extreme b) Wheels 4.1.9 with extremely rim width, and

fine grit sizes.

Order Data

Shapes of the diamond/CBN grinding wheels are to be selected in accordance with IS 10986 : 1984. A few examples with Illustration ( see Fig. 3 ) are given below. Example: Shapes 6A2 6A2- 125-I S-2-20 6A2-125-15-2-20 D-l 26-C 30-RBV or RBD-A B-126-C 50-R~BW or RBD-A

shall,, bk as , *,,,

Used Concentrations

4.1.10 Parameters to be Taken Simultnneously While Selecting DiamondjCBN Wheels Parametres to be considered while diamond/CBN grinding wheels shall be in Atinex A. 5 DIFFERENTIATING DIAMOND CUBIC BORON NITRIDE selecting as given

Abrasive Coating Carats/cm* 1'1 2'2 3'3
4-4

FROM

I

c

The following methods shall be applicable while distinguishing diamond and CB~N grinding wheels. 5.1 Non-Destructive Method

c 125 c 150 c 175 c 200

5'5 6'6 1'7 8'8

NOTE - The basic value C 100 for diamond/CBN signifies that for every cm8 abrasive coating volume 4'4 carats ( 1 carat = 0'2 g ) of grit are used (corresponding to 25 percent by volume ). This does not apply to electroplated tools.

5.1.1 Some experience is required to recognize the type of wheel. A CBN wheel after sintering turns little blackish while a diamond wheel, becomes greyish. Grinding steel with. ACBN wheel will not be a problem while a diamond wheel if used for steel grinding, gets loaded with steel bits. Also cutting action gets reduced quickly. This phenomenon is applicable to wheels manufactured with impregnation in metal or resin bond. 5.1.2 For grinding types of bonding held. These are: a) Electroplated b) Resin c) Metal 4 bond, bond. wheels there are usually three by which diamond/CBN is bond, and

Concentration is one of the most1 important parameter of a diamond/CBN wheel. It affects stockremoval rate tool life, shape and dimensional accuracy of the workpiece to be ground. The concentration must be suited to other tool parameters, grinding technique and the operational conditions. It defines the diamond/CBN content of the abrasive coating.

IS 13564: 1993
BOND GRINDING GRIN&f$i) GRIT \ D DIAMETER --IN mm SIZE -7 CONCENTRATION (WET OR DRY

\

r---

/

H

BO2'E _--_.--

PiA

IN

mm

FIG. 3

ORDER DATA It is therefore possible to immediately whether the abrasives protruding out wheels are diamond/CBN or not extricating the abrasive from the wheels. 5.2 Destructive Method identify from the without

The diamond/CBN is exposed from the bonding so that the grinding action can take place immediately. As such diamond/CBN is visible over and above the bonding. In electroplated wheels the entire quantity of diamond/CBN is visible while in resin or metal bonding a part of diamond/CBN is visible. 5.1.3 Diamond/CBN is passive to all chemicals including strong acids and looks similar to many other materials such as Zirconia (American Diamond). The only way to identify diamond/ CBN is to measure the refractive index which immediately identifies what the material. This method is extensively used by people in the Jewellery trade and commercial testing apparatus is not available. The device is simply a probe and a meter calibrated on the basis of refractive indices.

In case the entire quantity of abrasive is required to be tested the abrasive could easily by salvaged out of the bonding. In case of resin bonding, the wheel could be burnt at around 400�C where by the resin would burn out leaving the diamond/CBN free from metal bond. In case of metal coated diamond which are widely in use today the nitric acid employed will take the coating off also. 9.3 Non-destructive whether the abrasive test is sufficient is diamond/CBN. to identify

IS 13564~: 1993

ANNEX A ( CZause 4.1.1~0)
PARAMETERS TO BE CONSIDERED WHILE Sl No. Diamond Cubic Boron Nitride SELECTlNG DIAMONDKBN WHEELS

1. Cutting Speeds ( m/s ) Bond Dry Grinding Wet Grinding 18-28 12-20 Process Bond Wet Grinding Dry Grinding

Resin Metal

15-22 8-12

Tool & cutter Sharpening Surface grinding O.D. grinding I.D. grinding Jig grinding

Resin Resin ,, ,, ,,

28-33 28-33 50-60 -

18-22 20-30

2. Coolant

Use water plus rust inhibitor
Or

Oil water emulsion in 1 : 50 ratio

Use straight oil where possible or Heavy duty enriched soluble oil in the ratio of 1 : 10. Never use water

3. Truing

Ensure diamond wheel runout after mounting on the spindle is within 0'02 mm. True the wheel using silicon carbide brake truing device or any other recommended method of truing by the manufacturer
4. Dressing

True the wheel to ensure running with 0'02 mm. Use diamond impregnated dresser of 150 grit.

If the diamond wheel get loaded, dress the wheel using a silicon carbide stick of the same grit size of the wheel
5. Machine

Dress with aluminium or K grade.

oxide stick 220 grits,

Select study machines with higher power and minimum vibration level,

All grinding machines with higher rigidity and drive power than required for corundum level wheels.

6

Standard Mark The xvx of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards A-cl, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity Details of conditions under which a licence for the to that standard as a further safeguard. use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

I

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. This does not preclude the free use, in the any form without the prior-permission in writing of BIS. such as symbols and sizes, type or grade course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications >, BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed. it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by reFerring~to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Jndian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. PE 09 ( 5147) Amendments Amend No. Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

qf

Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg,

New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Othces ) Telephone

Regional Ceutral:

Offices: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

331 01 31 I 331 13 75 Maniktola 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 53 23 84 { 235 02 15 16, 19, 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40

Eastern

: l/14 C. 1. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol, MADRAS Andheri

Northern Southern Western

160036 600113

: C. I. T. Campus,

235 04 23 42 15 632 78 58 92

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

( East ) { 632 92 78 95, 91,

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. FARlDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL HYDERABAD. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

COIMBATORE. JAJPUR. KANPUR.

Printed at Printrade.

New Delhi. India

