HRA 977% IS 4262 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


URN sta — Aran чї т 


( ZRT FAME ) 


Sulphuric Acid — Code of Safety 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 13.300; 71.060.30 


© BIS 2022 


UR AAG = 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAP Чач, 9 96794 Ve WH AMT, 15 Тас - 110002 
S МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2022 Price Group 6 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


FOREWORD 


‘This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on recommendation of the Chemical 
Hazards Sectional Committee and approval of the Chemical Division Council’. 


Sulphuric acid is an important industrial chemical principally used in the manufacture of fertilizers, chemicals, 
explosives, textiles, rayon and petroleum refining. It is unfortunate that coupled with the important and large 
volume use of sulphuric acid, it is also one of the most corrosive and hazardous chemicals. Handling of sulphuric 
acid, therefore presents various hazards which can be better prevented than cured. Working according to a sound 
code of practice will reduce the frequency of hazards and also, in many cases the amount of damage caused by an 
accident. Sulphuric acid which has free sulphur trioxide dissolved in it is known as ‘oleum’ and ‘fuming sulphuric 
acid’ since it fumes copiously in contact with air. 


The properties of sulphuric acid listed in Clause 4 have been taken from literature and have been included for 
information only. Moreover, these properties pertain to pure sulphuric acid. Bureau of indian standards has 
published a separate standard IS 266 : 1993 on the requirements and the methods of sampling and test for sulphuric 
acid intended for industrial purposes. 


This standard was originally published in 1967 and revised in 2002. In this second revision general properties 
have been incorporated and modifications have been made to update toxicological data, health hazard, storage 
and preventive measures based on the currently available data and last two decades experience. 


The various clauses of the standard have also been aligned with the format being applied for all Indian Standards 
on Code of safety of chemicals. 


There is no ISO standard on this subject. In preparation of this code, assistance has been derived from the 
following publications: 


a) Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology — Ulman, 7th Edition. 

b) Sulphuric Acid, Online edition of Encyclopedia of Occupational Health and Safety, 2011. International 
Labour Office, Geneva. 

c) State Factories Rules for Corrosive Substances and Chemical Works, made under Section 87 of the 
Indian Factories Act, 1948. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


IS 4262 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
Sulphuric Acid — Code of Safety 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes a code of safety 
concerning hazards relating to sulphuric acid. It 
describes the properties and essential information 
for safe handling and use of sulphuric acid. 


1.2 The standard does not, however, deal with any 
specification for the design of building, chemical 
engineering plant, and equipment for waste disposal. 
General precautionary measures in these respects 
should be taken. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed below contain 
provisions which through reference in this text, 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
1260 (Part 1): Pictorial marking for handling 


1973 and labelling of goods: Part 1 
Dangerous goods (first revision) 


4155 : 1966 Glossary of terms relating to 
chemical and radiation hazards 
and hazardous chemicals 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, definition of terms 
given in IS 4155 shall apply. 


4 PROPERTIES 
4.1 General Information 


Sulphuric acid is one of the most corrosive and 
hazardous chemicals. Handling of sulphuric acid, 
therefore, presents various hazards which we better 
prevented than cured. Working according to a sound 
code of practice will reduce the frequency of hazards 
and also, in many cases, the amount of damage 
caused by an accident. 


4.1.1 Chemical Name — Sulphuric Acid. 


4.1.2 Common name and Synonym — Oil of Vitriol, 
Battery Acid, Chamber Acid, Spent Sulphuric Acid. 


4.1.3 Uses 

Sulphuric acid is an important industrial chemical 
principally used in the manufacture of fertilizers, 
chemicals, explosives, textiles, rayon and petroleum 
refining. 

4.2 Identification 

4.2.1 Formula — H2SO4 

4.2.2 CAS Number — 7 664-93-9 

4.2.3 UN Number — 1 830 

4.2.4 UN Class — 8, No Subsidiary Risk 

4.2.5 Hazchem Code — 2 P 


4.3 Physical Properties 

4.3.1 General — Clear, Colourless Oily Liquid 
4.3.2 Molecular Mass — 98.1 

4.3.3 Physical State — Liquid 

4.3.4 Colour — Colouless, Clear to Cloudy 


4.3.5 Odour — None (Oleum has а Sharp 
Penetrating Odour) 


4.3.6 Flammability — Non-Flammable 

4.3.7 Hygroscopicity — Very Hygroscopic 

4.3.8 Density (99 Percent Acid) —1.834 

4.3.9 Boiling Point (98 Percent Acid) — 279.6 °C 
4.3.10 Freezing Point — 10.5 °C 

4.3.11 Vapour Density (Air = 1) — 3.4 

4.3.12. Specific Gravity (Water = 1) at 20°C — 1.84 
4.3.13 Viscosity at 30 °C — 20.10 cP 


4.3.14 Vapour Pressure at 20 °C — Less Than 0.001 
mm Hg 


4.3.15 Solubility in Water — Completely Soluble 
with Generation of Heat 


4.3.16 Solubility in Other Solvents — Soluble in 
Ethyl Alcohol in All Proportions 


4.3.17 Polarity — Anhydrous H2SOzis a Very Polar 
Liquid (Dielectric Constant ~ 100) 


IS 4262 : 2022 


4.4 Chemical Properties 
4.4.1 Reactivity 


The acid in concentrated form is a strong oxidizing 
and sulphonating agent. It destroys organic matter 
with evolution of heat and toxic sulphur dioxide and 
carbon monoxide; and attacks many metals with 
evolution of flammable hydrogen gas. Contact with 
such products as nitrates, carbides, chlorates 
fulminates, picrates, etc, may cause fire or 
explosion. Dilution with water evolves considerable 
heat. It also attacks some forms of plastics, rubber 
and coatings. 


4.4.2 Corrosivity 


Highly corrosive to most metals, particularly at 
concentrations below 93 percent, with evolution of 
hydrogen gas. 


4.5 Fire and Explosion Hazard Properties 

4.5.1 Ignition Temperature — Not Available. 
4.5.2 Auto Ignition Temperature — Not Available. 
4.5.3 Flash Point — Not available. 

4.5.4 Upper Explosive Limit — Not available. 
4.5.5 Lower Explosion Limit — Not available. 
4.5.6 Fire Risk 


The acid is non-flammable but in higher 
concentration may cause ignition by contact with 
organic or combustible materials and such products 
as nitrates, carbides, chlorates and metallic powders. 
There is likelihood of highly flammable hydrogen 
gas being generated inside a drum, tank car or a 
metal storage tank containing sulphuric acid. In as 
much as hydrogen gas will form explosive mixtures 
with air under certain conditions, smoking or open 
lights should not be permitted near the open drums 
or tank cars. The acid, in contact with metallic 
sulphides, may cause evolution of hydrogen 
sulphide which may form flammable and toxic 
mixture with air, (inhalation of hydrogen sulphide 
may lead to sudden death). 


5 HEALTH HAZARD AND TOXICITY 
INFORMATION 


5.1 General Information 


Sulphuric acid is rapidly destructive to any tissue of 
the body with which it comes in contact, causing 
severe burns, due to its dehydrating actions which 
may be accompanied by shock and collapse. 
Sulphuric acid causes local effects on the skin and 
eyes and systemic effects. It can cause damage to 
eyes, respiratory tract, skin and mouth on exposure. 
Fatal exposure can occur through routes like 
ingestion. Appropriate precaution in handling is 
essential to prevent exposure. 


5.2 Routes of Entry 
5.2.1 Skin 


Repeated contact with dilute solutions may cause 
dermatitis. The acid mist severely irritates the skin. 
Repeated exposure to sulphuric acid mist causes 
dermatitis. 


5.2.2 Eyes 


Contact with eyes very rapidly causes severe 
damage which may be followed by total loss of 
sight. The acid mist severely irritates the eyes. 
Repeated exposure to sulphuric acid mist causes 
chromic conjunctivitis. 


5.2.3 Ingestion 


Swallowing of the acid may cause severe injury or 
death. Repeated exposure to sulphuric acid mist 
causes stomatitis. 


5.2.4 Inhalation 


The acid mist severely irritates the respiratory tracts. 
Inhalation of concentrated vapour from hot acid or 
oleum may cause rapid loss of consciousness with 
serious damage to lung tissues. Individual sensitivity 
to such vapour is variable, 0.125 to 0.5 ppm may be 
mildly annoying, 1.5 ppm to 2.5 ppm definitely 
unpleasant and 10 ppm to 20 ppm are unbearable. 
Repeated exposure to sulphuric acid mist causes 
tracheobronchitis. Severe exposures may cause 
pneumonitis. Erosion of the teeth also occurs, 
particularly to those accustomed to mouth breathing. 


5.2.5 Toxicity Information 


a) Threshold Limit Value (TLV) — 1 mg/m? 
Б) Lethal concentration -50 (LCs) with 1 mm 
particle size, 8 h exposure. 


For adult guinea pigs — 50 mg/m? 
For young animals — 18 mg/m? 


5.3 Antidote 


There is no antidote for sulfuric acid 
6 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 


6.1 General 


6.1.1 Personal protection scheme depends upon the 
effectiveness of employees education, training and 
supervision. Personal protective equipment and pre- 
placement physical examinations are precautionary 
measures to avoid accidents and not a substitute for 
safe working on the part of the personnel. Prior to 
assignment of processes involving the handling of 
sulphuric acid, all individuals should have a careful 
preplacement physical examination. 


6.1.2 Employees handling sulphuric acid should be 
provided with the following equipment: 


a) Safety helmets, rubber gloves, rubber high 
top safety boots and rubber aprons. A 
rubber acid suit is recommended for tank 
wagon loading or unloading. The trouser 
should not be inserted into the high top 
safety boots (gum boots/knee boots). 
Instead, the openings in gum boots should 
be covered by spreading trousers round the 
gum boots; 


IS 4262 : 2022 


b) Suitable gas-tight chemical safety goggles; 
and 


c) Approved masks and breathing apparatus 
for respiratory protective as given in Table 
1. 


Approved Masks and Breathing Apparatus for Respiratory Protection 
(Clause 6.1.2) 


S No. Concentration Minimum Protection 
mg/m? 

(1) (2) (3) 

1) 1-50 Gas mask with full face-piece with acid gas 
canister and high efficiency particulate filter. 

ii) 51-100 Air respirator with full face-piece operated in 
pressure demand or other positive pressure mode. 

iii) Above 100 or escape from unknown Self-contained breathing apparatus with a till 


concentrated or fire fighting 


6.2 Adequate personal protective equipment shall be 
available for emergency use throughout the plant or 
in an area where sulphuric acid is stored or used. 
Personnel should be trained to appreciate the process 
hazards, and the emergency and routine use of 
personal equipment, Personal protective equipment 
should be frequently examined and maintained in 
good condition. Eye fountains, emergency showers, 
and drench tubs covered with a thin sheet of 
polyethylene to keep the water clean, should be 
located in all areas where there is danger of acid 
splashing. 


7 STORAGE, HANDLING, LABELLING AND 
TRANSPORT 


7.1 Storage and Handling 


7.1.1 Sulphuric acid is highly corrosive to most 
metals. For concentration from 93 percent to 99 
percent, it may be stored satisfactorily in mild steel 
tanks, drums and glass carboys. For concentration 
below 93 percent, it shall be stored in glass carboys, 
earthenware jars or other suitable containers lined 
with acid-resistant materials. Storage should be 
located in the open or in well ventilated buildings or 
sheds. Natural ventilation is sufficient. Sulphuric 
acid stored in any type of metallic container would 
evolve hydrogen which is highly flammable and 
explosive. Pressure inside the container may build 
upon this account. Such pressure should be relieved 


face-piece operated in pressure demand mode or 
other positive pressure mode. 


frequently by opening plugs of the metallic 
containers or alternatively such containers should be 
provided with safety vents. 


7.1.2 Even small quantities of sulphuric acid should 
be stored away from other chemicals, especially 
organic materials, nitrates, cyanides and sulphides, 
chlorates, carbides, metal powders, oxidizing 
chemicals, peroxides and explosives. 


7.1.3 Containers of sulphuric acid should be 
inspected regularly for leaks. Damaged containers 
should be handled with special care. 


7.1.4 Electrical wiring should be made of acid- 
resistant insulation and encased in rigid metal or 
Poly Vinyl Chloride (PVC) conduits. Smoking shall 
be strictly prohibited where sulphuric acid is stored. 


7.1.5 Each storage tank should be provided with a 
vent of sufficient size. The vent should be of a type 
which will maintain the tank at atmospheric pressure 
and which is capable of being cleaned easily. The 
vent should be fitted with a column made of acid 
resistant transparent material packed with granules 
of self-indicating silica-gel with adequate moisture 
holding capacity. The spent silica gel should be 
replaced by regenerated one as soon as colour 
change is noted. Alternatively, a device to scrub the 
entering air by concentrated sulphuric acid may be 
provided. For inspection, the top of the tank should 


IS 4262 : 2022 


be accessible by an independent metallic ladder 
without the use of the top of the tank which is likely 
to be corroded due to action of acid mist. 


7.1.6 All tanks should be placed squarely on good 
foundation and raised off the ground by at least two 
layers of acid-proof bricks. The tanks should be 
mounted with a slight slope towards the sludge hole 
or outlet valve. A plug operated from the top of the 
tank should be provided over the outlet valve. Gauge 
glasses in acid tanks should be avoided. 


7.2 Labelling 


7.2.1 The storage containers shall be labelled or 
marked to identify: 


(a) The contents of the container; 


(b) The name and address of the manufacturer 
or importer of the hazardous chemical; and 


(с) The physical, chemical and toxicological 
data as per the criteria given in the relevant 
Schedule of the Manufacture, Storage and 
Import of Hazardous Chemicals Rules 1989. 
While referring to the statutes, the stipulations 
given in the subsequent amendments of those 
statutes shall be taken into account. 


7.2.2 Each container shall carry an identifying label 
or stencil depicting the symbol given in IS 1260 
(Part 1) and containing the following information: 


SULPHURIC ACID (OR OLEUM) 


DANGER! CAUSES SEVERE BURNS 


Avoid breathing vapour (Oleum). 
Do not get in eyes, on skin, or clothing. In case of contact, flush affected part with water for 


at least 15 min. 


Do not add water to contents. Do not store with oxidizing agents, organic materials, alkalis, 
explosives and metallic powders. Reacts with metal and gives off hydrogen which is 
flammable and explosive. Wash off any spillage of the acid with liberal quantities of water. 


NOTE — For labelling and posting the tank cars carrying 
sulphuric acid, the provisions for transport of dangerous 
materials under Central Motor Vehicle Act and Rules, 1989. 
While referring to the statutes, the stipulations given in the 
subsequent amendments of those statutes shall be taken into 
account. 


7.3 Transport 
7.3.1 General 


Loading, carrying at sea & discharging of Sulphuric 
acid involve high risk and require sophisticated 
handling for safety, health and loss prevention 
reasons. They need careful consideration prior 
loading, tank coating compatibility, cross 
compatibility with other cargoes carried, 
environmental controls if required. 


7.3.1 Ensure that there is on board sufficient acid 
resistant hoses for the cargo transfer. Ensure that 
there is on board sufficient acid spray shields to 
cover flanges on manifold and hose connections. 


NOTE — If transport of the hazardous chemical is involved 
it shall be carried out in accordance with the Central Motor 
Vehicles Rules, 1989. While referring to the statutes, the 
stipulations given in the subsequent amendments of those 
statutes shall be taken into account. 


8 SPILLAGE, LEAKAGE AND WASTE 
DISPOSAL 


8.1 Spillage and Leakage 


Spilled acid should not be left unattended. Wash 
with water or cover with dry sand, ash or gravel, if 
the use of water is impossible. Remaining traces of 
acid should be neutralized with soda ash or lime. Do 
not mop up the acid with cloth or rags. The sand or 
ash absorbed with acid should be disposed off in 
secured sanitary land fill. Diluted acid may be 
neutralized before disposing off in sewerage or 
water. 


8.2 Disposal of used Containers and Waste 
Material 
8.2.1 Disposal of Empty Containers 


8.2.1.1 Before returning, completely drain the 
contents and tightly close all openings. 


8.2.1.2 Do not use sulphuric acid containers for any 
other liquid, especially in case of drums. 


8.2.1.3 Drums should be emptied by gravity only 
with the use of a faucet or safety siphon fabricated 
from the material resistant to sulphuric acid. 


Application of pressure to the drum for this purpose 
is extremely dangerous and should never be 
attempted. 


8.2.2 Waste Disposal 


Sulphuric acid waste should be diluted and 
neutralized before discharge into sewers. Limestone 
or soda ash may be used as neutralizing agents. 


9 PROTECTION OF MAINTENANCE CREW 


9.1 The hazardous nature of tank inspection, 
cleaning or repair requires that the maintenance 
crew be carefully trained for the purpose. All tank 
work should be done under the direct supervision of 
a foreman. The following precautions аге 
recommended. 


9.1.1 Pipelines in or out of the tank or other 
apparatus should be shut off or disconnected 
preferably by removing a complete small section 
and a blank flange should be installed on the open 
end to protect against human error and unsuspected 
leak. 


9.1.2 Before entering a tank, it should be tested 
whether further washing is necessary, and that no 
harmful gas or vapour is present. 


9.1.3 Proper personal protective equipment should 
be worn by any one entering a tank for inspection, 
cleaning or repairs. 


9.1.4 The tools used for working inside plants should 
be of non-sparking type. 


9.1.5 A safety belt and life line for a man entering 
the storage tank should be provided. A man on the 
outside of the tank should keep the men in the tank 
under constant observation and at least two other 
men should be available to help those in the tank in 
case of trouble. Entry into the tank and working on 
acid pipelines may be allowed only with permit to 
work system. If outside person has to enter the tank 
to rescue the affected person inside the tank, the self- 
contained breathing apparatus with full face piece 
and pressure demand or other positive pressure 
mode should be worn. 


10 PREVENTIVE MEASURES AND FIRST 
AID 


10.1 Preventive Measures 


Handling of sulphuric acid presents various hazards, 
which may be avoided from time to time by 
observing the principal precautions set forth below: 


a) Avoid contact of sulphuric acid with eyes, 
skin and clothing. 

b) Wear rubber gloves, goggles, acid-proof 
aprons and boots while handling sulphuric 
acid or oleum. 


IS 4262 : 2022 


c) Never add water or caustic solution to 
sulphuric acid. While diluting always add 
acid to water with constant stirring. 

d) In the event of accidental contact, wash 
affected areas with plenty of water for at 
least 15 minutes. Irrespective of the degree 
of seriousness of an accident, first-aid or 
medical attention, or both, should be 
rendered at the earliest opportunity. 

e) In case of spillage of sulphuric acid, it 
should be first washed down with large 
quantities of water. Mild alkaline solution 
may be used afterwards to neutralize the 
last traces of the acid. 

f) The operations evolving sulphuric acid 
vapour/mist should be enclosed as far as 
possible and minimum required openings 
should be maintained with the adequate 
face velocities with the help of local 
exhaust arrangement. 


10.2 First Aid 


10.2.1 Speed in removing sulphuric acid is of 
primary importance. First-aid should be given in all 
cases of contact with sulphuric acid in any form, as 
delay in initiating treatment may result in serious 
injury. 


10.2.2 General First-Aid 


10.2.2.1 Apply copious quantity of running water. 
This is best provided for by situating readily 
accessible, well-marked, frequently-inspected, 
rapid-action safety showers. If the acid penetrates 
through the clothing, remove the clothing 
immediately and flush the skin with water. 


10.2.2.2 Do not neutralize the acid with alkali. The 
heat of neutralization actually accentuates the burn. 


10.2.2.3 In case of excessive burns, the patient may 
collapse or show shock symptoms, such as rapid 
pulse and sweating. Keep the patient in supine 
position (lying down on his back) and call the 
nearest physician. 


10.2.2.4 No oil or ointment should be applied to 
affected areas without specific orders from the 
physician. 


10.3 Contact with Eyes 


The following precautions should be observed even 
if minute quantities of strong or dilute solutions of 
sulphuric acid enter the eyes: 


a) Immediately irrigate with copious quantity 
of running water for at least 15 minutes. A 
special eye-washing fountain, a ready 
source of running tap water or a hose with 
a soft gentle flow of drinking water should 
be available for eye irrigation. 


IS 4262 : 2022 


b) Тһе eyelid should be held apart during the 
irrigation to ensure contact with eye 
tissues. 

c) A physician preferably an eye specialist 
should be called in without delay. 

d) If pain is still present, the eye irrigation 
should be continued for a second period of 
15 min. After the first phase of eye 
washing, instil drops 2 or 3 drops of 0.5 
percent solution of pontocaine or any 
equally effective aqueous topical 
anesthetic. 

e) No oil or oily ointment should be applied 
unless ordered by the physician. 


10.4 Ingestion 


Ingestion of even dilute solutions of the acid causes 
severe burn of the mucous membrane of the mouth, 
throat and stomach. Observe the following: 


a) Do not attempt to induce vomiting. 

b) Do not give anything oral to an 
unconscious patient. 

c) Ifthe patient is conscious, encourage him 
to wash out his mouth with water and give 
him milk with white of eggs to drink. 

а) Ifthese аге not immediately available, give 
as much water as possible for drinking. 

e) Calla physician as soon as possible. 


10.5 Inhalation 


10.5.1 A worker exposed to sulphuric acid mist or 
oleum vapour should be at once removed to an 
uncontaminated area and a physician called at once. 
Oxygen may be administered but by an authorized 
person only. 


10.5.2 If breathing has apparently ceased, artificial 
respiration should be started immediately. 


11 DISPOSAL OF USED CONTAINERS AND 
WASTE MATERIAL 


11.1 Disposal of Empty Containers 


11.1.1 Before returning, completely drain the 
contents and tightly close all openings. 


11.1.2 Do not use sulphuric acid containers for any 
other liquid, especially in case of drums. 


11.1.3 Drums should be emptied by gravity only 
with the use of a faucet or safety siphon fabricated 
from the material resistant to sulphuric acid. 
Application of pressure to the drum for this purpose 
is extremely dangerous and should never be 
attempted. 


11.2 Disposal of Waste 


Sulphuric acid waste should be diluted and 
neutralized before discharge into sewers. Limestone 
or soda ash may be used as neutralizing agents. 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


IS 4262 : 2022 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity 


Alkali Manufacturers Association of India, Mumbais 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Centre for Fire, Explosives and Environmental Science, 
Gol, Min Of Def 


Crop Care Federation of India, New Delhi 


Defence Research and Establishment, (DRDO), Gwalior 


Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Gol 


Department of Space(ISRO), Bengaluru 

Directorate General Factory Advice Service and 
Labour Institutes, Mumbai 

Gas Industries Association 


Hindustan Unilever Limited, Mumbai 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Representative(s) 


SHRI К. S. RAMPRASAD (Chairperson) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
SHRIH. S. DAS (Alternate) 


MISS GARIMA SINGH 
SHRI NISHITH GOSH (Alternate) 


DR DANDAMUDI USHARANI 
DR PRASANNA VASU (Alternate) 


DR M. SURITYANARAYANAN 


SHRIS. P. DOBHAL 
DR AARTI BHATT (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. KARLEKAR 
DR J. C. MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


DR PRABHAT GARG 
DR VIRENDRA VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


DR VISHAL CHOUDHARY 


SHRI MURALEEKRISHNAN R. 
MIss LAKSHMI V. W. (Alternate) 


SHRI H. M. BHANDARI 
SHRI P. G. SATPUTE (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KHER 
SHRI ANOOP TANDON (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY HARLAKA 
SHRI RAKESH WADALKAR (Alternate) 


DR K. K. SATPATHY 


DR C. NANDI 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR BANKUPALLI SATYAVATHI 
DR SRIPADI PRABHAKARC (Alternate) 


DR NEERAJ ATRAY 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR KANUJIA (Alternate) 


DR SACHIN GUNTE 
PROF SANDIP ROY 


DR D. K. PATEL 
DR SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


IS 4262 : 2022 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


Ministry of Environment and Forest, New Delhi 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 


National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad 


National Institute of Technology, Thrichi 


National Safety Council , Navi Mumbai 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate (Min of Pet and 
Natural Gas), Delhi 


Pesticides Manufacturer and Formulators 

Association of India 
Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation, Nagpur 
Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 
Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 
Tata Chemicals Limited, Mithapur, Distt, Jamnagar 
In personal capacity (/-4/2/6, Parijat C.H.S., Spaghetti, 


Sector-15, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, 410210) 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 


PROF (DR) G. D. YADAV 
DR В. М. BHANAGE (Alternate) 


SHRI VED PRAKASH MISHRA 
DR DINESH RUNIWAL (Alternate) 


DR VIJAY V. BOKADE 
DR M. MUTHUKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR B. RAVICHANDRAN 


PROF S. P. SIVAPIRAKASAM 
SHRI D. SREEJITH MOHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI A. Y. SUNDKAR 
SHRIK. D. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDAR M. MAHAJAN 


DR ARCHANA KUMARI 
DR SANDIP SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI M. К. JHALA 
DR YOGESH KHARE (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAMMAD 
SHRI DEVANG MEHTA (Alternate) 


DR JAGDISH KUMAR 
DR DEEP SHANKAR CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI SNEHASHISH A. CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI D. К. THAKUR (Alternate) 


SHRIS. SOUNDARARAJAN 


SHRI AJAY К. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘Е’ AND HEAD (CHD) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


MISS SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (CHD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:CHD 0 (18575). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : СІ.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


