RAT Alte IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 
Indian Standard (Superseding IS 3960 : 1967) 


CHAM ed ANIA ALU SAH chy 
fat 


WNT 2 Aloe Us anih nagaat 


Specification for Automatic 
Gravimetric Filling Instruments 


Part 2 Metrological and Technical 
Requirements 


ICS 17.100 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2020 Price Group 8 


Weights and Measures Sectional Committee, PGD 26 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft was finalized by the 
Weights and Measures Sectional Committee and had been approved by the Production and General Engineering 
Division Council. 

In the formulation of this Indian Standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the standards of Weights 
and Measures (General) (Third Amendment) Rules, 1997 ‘Specification for Automatic Gravimetric Filling 
Instruments’. OIML Recommendation no. R-61 for Automatic Gravimetric Filling Machines may be referred for 
guidance. 

This Indian Standard supersedes the IS 3960 : 1967 on publication. 


The standard on automatic gravimetric filling instruments is currently being published in two parts. The other part 
of this standard is as follows: 
Part 1 Terminology and definitions 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)’. 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


Indian Standard 


SPECIFICATION FOR AUTOMATIC 
GRAVIMETRIC FILLING INSTRUMENTS 


PART 2 METROLOGICAL AND TECHNICAL 
REQUIREMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 2) specifies the metrological 
and technological requirements for automatic 
gravimetric filling instruments (hereafter called ‘filling 
instruments’) which sub-divided a bulk product into 
fills of predetermined and virtually constant mass by 
automatic weighing, the fills being kept separate. 


NOTES: 


1 This specification places no constraint on the maximum 
or minimum capacities of the instruments for which this 
specification is applicable. 


2 Filling instruments may also be required to comply with 
certain requirements for example, an instrument which 
could operate as a non-automatic instrument will need to 
comply with the specification for non-automatic weighing 
instruments. 


2 METROLOGICAL REQUIREMENTS 


2.1 Accuracy Classes 


The accuracy class and reference value for accuracy 
class shall be specified in accordance with 2.2 and 
marked on the instrument in accordance with 5.10. 


Accuracy class shall be specified for intended usage 
that is, nature of the product to be weighed, type of 
installation, value of the fill, and operating rate. 


NOTE — The limitation of accuracy classes to certain 
application may be determined by these Methods. 


2.2 Limits of Error 


2.2.1 Maximum Permissible Error for Static Texts 


The instrument shall have a reference value of accuracy 
class Ref (x), applicable for static testing only, for 
which maximum permissible error for influence factor 
tests shall be as specified in 2.4, multiply by the class 
designation factor (x). 


2.2.2 Maximum Permissible Deviation of Each Fills 


The instrument shall have a specified accuracy 
class X(x) for which the maximum permissible 
deviation of each fill from the average shall be equal to 
the limits specified in Table 1, multiplied by the class 
designation factor (x). 


(x) > Shall be 1 x 10‘, 2 x 10%, k being a positive or 
negative whole number or zero. 


Table 1 Maximum Permissible Deviation 
of Each Fills 


( Clause 2.2.2, A-7.1.3.1(a) and A-7.1.3.1(b)) 


Value of the Mass of Maximum Permissible Deviation 


the Fill (g) of Each Fill from the Average for 
Class X (1) 
Initial In Service 

Verification Inspection 
M<50 6.3 Percent 9 Percent 
50<M< 100 3.15g 4.5g 
100 < M < 200 3.15 Percent 4.5 Percent 
200 < M < 300 6.3 g 9g 
300 < M < 500 2.1 Percent 3 Percent 
500 < M < 1000 10.5g 15g 
1000 <M < 10 000 1.05 Percent 1.5 Percent 
10000 <M < 15000 10.5g 150g 
M > 15000 0.7 Percent 1 Percent 


(See Table 2 under 8.3 for the number of fills required 
to find the average value). 


For in-service testing, when the reference particle 
mass exceed 0.1 of the maximum permissible in- 
service deviation, the values derived from Table 1 shall 
be increased by 1.5 times the value of the reference 
particle mass. However, the maximum value of the 
maximum permissible deviation shall not exceed (X) 
x 9 percent. 

NOTE — Particle mass correction is not applicable to limits, 


which are derived from Table 1. For example, influence 
quantity tests, zero setting etc. 


2.3 Maximum Permissible Preset Value Error 
(Setting Error) 


For instruments where it is possible to preset a fill 
weight the maximum difference between the preset 
value and the average mass of the fill shall not exceed 
0.25 of the maximum permissible deviation of each fill 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


from the average as specified for in service inspection 
of 2.2. This limit will apply for initial verification and 
for in-service inspection testing. 


2.4 Maximum Permissible Error for Influence 
Factor Tests 


The maximum permissible error for any static test 
load during influence factor tests shall be 0.25 of the 
maximum permissible deviation as specified in 2.2 for 
in-service inspection, corresponding to the value of a 
fill equal to that load. 
NOTE — For instruments where the fill may not be equal to 
one load, the maximum permissible error applicable for a test 
on one static load shall be calculated in accordance with the 
test procedures. Legal Metrology (General Rule) 2011 may be 
referred for guidance. 


3 INFLUENCE FACTORS 


3.1 Static Temperatures 


Instruments shall comply with the appropriate 
metrological and technical requirements at 
temperatures from -10°C to + 40°C. However, for 
special applications the limits of the temperature range 
may differ from those given above but such a range 
shall not be less than 30°C and shall be specified in the 
descriptive markings. 


3.2 Power Supply (a.c.) 


Instruments which are powered by an a.c. electricity 
supply shall comply with the appropriate metrological 
land technical requirements when operated at voltages 
from -15 percentages to + 10 percentage of the reference 
voltage. 


3.3 Tilting 

Instruments which are not intended for installation in a 
fixed position and which do not have a level indicator 
shall comply with the appropriate metrological and 
technical requirements when tilted by 5 percentage. 


Where a level indictor is present it shall enable the 
instrument to be set to a tilt of 1 percentage or less. 
NOTE — Refer to Annex A for test conditions. 


4 UNITS OF MEASUREMENT 


The units of mass to be used on an instrument are the 
milligram (mg), the gram (g), the kilogram (kg) and the 
tonne (t). 


5 TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Stability for Use 


A filling instrument shall be designed to suit the method 
of operation and the products for which it is intended. 
It shall be of adequately robust construction so that it 
maintains its metrological characteristics. 


5.2 Security of Operation 
5.2.1 Accidental Maladjustment 


An instrument shall be so constructed that an accidental 
breakdown or a mal-adjustment of control elements 
likely to disturb its correct functioning cannot take 
place without its effect being evident. 


5.2.2 Use of a Printer 


Any print-out is for information purposes only and not 
for use in a commercial transaction, except for preset 
values and number of weighing. 


5.2.3 Ancillary Devices 


Any ancillary device provided for use with a filling 
instrument shall not affect the correct functioning of 
the instrument. 


5.2.4 Scale Interval (d) 


Scale intervals of all indicating devices associated with 
a weighing unit shall be the same. 


5.3 Fill Setting Device 


5.3.1 If fill setting is by means of a scale, it shall be 
graduated in units of mass. 


5.3.2 If fill setting is by means of weights, they shall 
be either weights in accordance with these rules or 
purpose-designed of any nominal value, distinguishable 
by shape and identified with the filling instrument. 


5.4 Final Feed Cut-Off Device 


The final feed cut-off device shall be clearly 
differentiated from any other device. The direction of 
movement corresponding to the sense of the desired 
result shall be shown, where applicable. 


5.5 Feeding Device 


The feeding device shall be designed to provide 
sufficient and regular flow rates(s). An adjustable 
feeding device shall be fitted with an indication of the 
direction of movement corresponding to the sense of 
the adjustment of the feed where applicable. 


5.6 Load Receptor 


5.6.1 The load receptor and feed and discharge devices 
as appropriate, shall be designed to ensure that residual 
material retained after each discharge is negligible. 


5.6.2 Instruments using the subtractive weighing 
principle shall be designed to ensure that residual 
material retained at feed from the discharge gate is 
negligible. 


5.6.3 The load receptor shall provide access and 
facilities so that where necessary test weights or masses 
up to the maximum capacity can be placed in position, 


in as safe and secure manner. If these facilities are not 
a permanent fixture of the instrument, they should be 
kept in the vicinity for the instrument. 


5.6.4 Manual discharge of the load receptor shall not be 
possible during automatic operation. 


5.7 Zero Setting and Tare Devices 


5.7.1 The filling instrument shall be provided with a 
zero-setting device, which may also be sued for the 
setting of tare. The device may be: 


a) Manual, 

b) Semi-automatic, and 

c) Automatic. 
5.7.2 Zero-setting and tare devices shall be capable of 
setting to less than or equal to 0.25 of the maximum 
permissible deviation for in-service inspection for a fill 
equal to the minimum capacity for instruments weight 


one weighing unit and for a fill equal to the rated 
minimum fill for selective combination weigher. 


5.7.3 Non-automatic or semi-automatic zero-setting 
and tare device should be locked during automatic 
operations. 


5.7.4 The weighing unit shall be in stable equilibrium 
when the zero setting and tare device is being set. 
5.8 Equilibrium Mechanism 


The equilibrium mechanism may be provided with 
detachable masses which shall be either weights 
in accordance with OIML requirements or purpose 
designed masses of any nominal value, distinguishable 
by shape and identified with the filling instruments. 


5.9 Security 

A security means shall be provided for components and 
pre-set controls to which access is prohibited. 

5.10 Descriptive Markings 


Filling instruments shall bear the following markings: 


5.10.1 Marking Shown in Full 
a) Name or identification mark of the manufacturer; 


b) Name or identification mark of the importer (if 
applicable); 


c) Serial number and type designation of the 
instrument; 


d) Product’s designation; 


e) Temperature range; 


f) Electrical supply voltage, in the form saN 
g) Electrical supply frequency, in the form _..... Hz; 
h) Working fluid pressure, inthe form __..... kPa; 


j) Average number of loads/fill 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


k) Maximum fills; 
m) Rated minimum fill; and 


n) Maximum rate of 
operation, in the form 


5.10.2 Marking Shown in Code 


a) Pattern approval sign; 


seas load per minute. 


b) Indication of the accuracy class X(x); 
c) Reference value for accuracy class Ref (x); 


d) Scale interval, in the form d=....... f 
e) Maximum capacity, 

in the form Max = : 

f) Maximum additive tare, 

in the form T=+H...... ; and 
g) Maximum subtractive tare, 

in the form eee 


An instrument may be verified for different materials 
for which different classes shall apply or which 
require different operating parameters to maintain 
limits of error. Marking shall be appropriate material 
designation. 


In the case of subtractive weigher the minimum load to 
be discharged shall be specified. 


5.10.3 Presentation of Descriptive Markings 


The descriptive marking shall be indelible and of 
a size, shape and clarity to enable legibility under 
normal conditions of use of the filling instrument. 
They shall be grouped together in a clearly visible 
place on the filling instrument, either on a date plate 
fixed to the instrument or on the filling instrument 
itself. 


Where the marking are placed on a date plate, it shall be 
possible to seal the plate bearing the markings. Where 
they are marked on the filling instrument itself it shall 
not be possible to remove them without destroying 
them. 


The descriptive markings may be shown on a 
programmable display, which is controlled by software. 
In this case, means shall be provided for any access to 
reprogramming of the markings to be automatically 
and non-erasable, recorded for example, by traceable 
access software when a programmable display is 
used, the plate on the instrument shall bear at least the 
following markings: 

a) Type and designation of the instrument; 

b) Name or identification mark of the manufacturer; 

c) Pattern approval number; 

d) Electrical supply voltage; 

e) Electrical supply frequency; and 


f) Pneumatic pressure. 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


5.11 Verification Marks 
5.11.1 Position 


The filling instruments shall have a place for the 
application of verification marks. This place shall: 


a) be such that the part of which it is located cannot 
be removed from the filling instrument without 
damaging the marks; 


b) allow easy application of the mark without 
changing the metrological qualities of the filling 
instruments; and 


c) be visible without the filling instrument having to 
be move when it is in service. 


5.11.2 Mounting 


Filling instruments required to bear verification marks 
shall have a verification mark support, at the place 
provided for above, which shall ensure the conservation 
of the marks. 


When the mark is made with a stamp, this support may 
consists of a strip of lead or any together material with 
similar qualities, inserted into a plate fixed to the filling 
instrument or a cavity bored in the filling instrument 
itself. 


When the marks consist of an adhesive transfer, a space 
shall be prepared for this purpose. 

5.12 Control Instrument 

The control instrument may be separate from an integral 


part of the filling instrument. 


6 REQUIREMENTS 
INSTRUMENTS 


FOR ELECTRONIC 


Electronic filling instruments shall comply with the 
following requirements, in addition to the applicable 
requirements of all others of this specification. 


6.1 General Requirements 


6.1.1 Rated Operating Conditions 


Electronic instruments shall be so designed and 
manufactured that they do not exceed the maximum 
permissible errors under rated operating conditions. 


6.1.2 Influence Factors 


An electronic instrument shall comply with the 
requirements of 6.2.5 and shall also comply with 
appropriate metrological and technical requirements at 
a relative humidity of 85 percent at the upper limit of 
the temperature range of the instrument. 


6.1.3 Disturbances 


Electronic instruments shall be so designed and 
manufactured that when exposed to disturbances, either: 


a) Significant faults do not occur, that is, the 
difference between the weight indication due to 


the disturbance and the indication without the 
disturbance (intrinsic error) shall not exceed the 
value specified in 5.2(5) of IS 17080 (Part 1) : 
2018; or 


Significant faults are detected and acted upon. 


NOTE — A fault equal to or less than the value in 5.2(5) of 
IS 17080 (Part 1) of t is allowed irrespective of the value of the 
error of indication. 


b 


wm 


6.1.4 Evaluation for Compliance 


The pattern of an electronic instrument is presumed 
to comply with the requirements of 6.1.1, 6.1.2 
and 6.1.3 if it passes the examination and tests specified 
in Annex A. 


6.1.5 Application 

The requirements in 6.1.3 may be applied separately: 
a) Either to each individual cause of significant fault, 
b) To each part of the electronic instrument; or 
c) To both. 


The choice of whether sub-items (a) or sub item (b) 
above should be applied is left to the manufacturer. 


6.2 Functional Requirements 


6.2.1 Indicator Display Tests 


If the failure of an indicator display element can cause 
a false weight indication, then the instrument shall have 
a display test facility which is automatically initiated at 
switch-on of indication for example, indication of all 
the relevant signs of the indicator in the active and non- 
active states for a sufficient time to be easily observed 
by the operator. 


6.2.2 Acting upon a Significant Fault 


When a significant fault has been detected, the 
instrument shall either be automatically made 
inoperative or a visual or audible indication shall be 
provided automatically and shall continue until such 
time as the user takes action or the fault disappears. 


6.2.3 Warm-up Time 


During the warm-up time of an electronic instrument 
there shall be no indication or transmission of the 
result of weighing, and automatic operation shall be 
inhibited. 


6.2.4 Interface 


An instrument may be equipped with an interface 
which allows it to be coupled to external equipment, 
when an interface is used, the instrument shall continue 
to function correctly and its metrological functions 
shall not be influenced. 


6.2.5 Battery Power Supply 


An instrument that operates from a battery power 
supply shall, whenever the voltage drops below the 


manufacturer’s specified minimum value, either 
continue to function correctly in automatically be put 
out of service. 


6.3 Examination and Tests 


The examination and testing of an electronic instrument 
is intended to verify compliance with the applicable 
requirements of this specification and especially with 
the requirements of this paragraph. 


6.3.1 Examinations 


An electronic instrument shall be examined to obtain a 
general appraisal of the design and construction. 


6.3.2 Performance Tests 


An electronic instrument or electronic device, as 
appropriate, shall be tested as specified in Annex A to 
determine the correct functioning of the instrument. 


Tests are to be carried out on the whole instrument 
except when either the size or the configuration or 
both of the instruments does not lend itself to testing 
as a unit. In such cases the electronic devices shall 
be tested, where possible as a simulated instrument 
including all electronic elements of a system 
which can affect the weighing result. In addition, 
an examination shall be carried out on the fully 
operational instrument. 


Susceptibility that would result from the use of 
electronic interfaces to other equipment shall be 
simulated in the tests. 


6.3.3 Span Stability 


When an electronic instrument is subjected to the span 
stability/test specified in A-8 of Annex A, the absolute 
value of the difference between the errors obtained 
for any two measurements shall not exceed half the 
maximum permissible error for influence factor tests 
for a near maximum capacity load. 


7 METROLOGICAL CONTROLS 


7.1 General 


7.1.1 Provision of Means of Testing 


For the purpose of testing, the metrological authority 
may require from the applicant the product (that is, 
the material to be weighed), the handling equipment, 
the appropriately qualified personnel and a control 
instrument. 


7.1.2 Material Tests 


a) For pattern evaluation — The material used 
as the test load for pattern evaluation shall 
be representative of a product for which the 
instrument is designed. The test shall be conducted 
in accordance with the test procedure in A-9.1. 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


b) For initial verification and in-service verification — 
The in-situ material tests shall be done in 
accordance with the descriptive marking under 
the normal conditions for which the instrument is 
intended. The test shall be conducted in accordance 
with the test procedure laid down in A-9.2. 


7.2 Pattern Approval 


7.2.1 Documentation 


The application for pattern approval shall include 
documentation comprising: 


a) Metrological characteristics of the instrument, 
b) A set of specifications for the instrument, 


c) A functional description of the components and 
services, 


d) Drawings, diagrams and general soft ware 
information (if applicable), explaining the 
construction and operation, including interlocks, 
and 


e) Any document or other evidence that the design 
and construction of the instrument complies with 
the requirements of this specification. 


7.2.2 General Requirements 


The pattern evaluation shall be carried out on one or 
more (and normally not more than three) units that 
represent the definitive pattern. One or more of the 
units shall be complete and fully operational of the 
purpose of 7.2.3 (a). One or more of the units shall be 
submitted in a form suitable for simulation testing in a 
laboratory and shall include the whole of the electronics 
which affect the weighing result except in the case of 
an associative weigher where only one representative 
weighing unit may be included. 


The instrument or simulated instrument shall be a load 
indicator, or an interface allowing access to a quantity 
that can be calibrated to provide an indication of load, 
so that the requirements of 2.2.1 (maximum permissible 
errors for static tests) may be tested and so that the 
instrument may be tested for influence quantities. The 
scale interval of the load indicator shall not exceed 
0.125 of the maximum permissible deviation for in- 
service verification for a fill equal to the minimum 
capacity. 


The evaluation shall consist of the tests specified in 
7.1.2 (a) and 7.2.3. 
7.2.3 Pattern Evaluation 


The submitted documents shall be examined and tests 
carried out to verify that the instrument complies with: 


a) The requirements specified for static tests in 2, 
b) The technical requirements in 5, and 


c) The requirements in 6 for electronic instruments, 
where applicable. 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


The appropriate authority shall conduct the test in a 
manner, which prevents an unnecessary commitment 
of resources. 
NOTE — The appropriate metrological authority may accept, 
with the consent of the applicant, equivalent test data obtained 
from other metrological authorities. 

a) Tests for compliance with technical requirements — 
Operational test with material shall be done in 
accordance with the procedure in A-9.1 of Annex 
A on a complete instrument to assess compliance 
with the technical requirements of 5. 


b) Influence factor tests — Influence factors shall be 
applied during simulation tests in a manner that 
will reveal a corruption of the weighing results 
of any weighing process to which the instrument 
should be applied, in accordance with: 


1) 3 for all instruments; and 
2) 6 for electronic instruments. 


c) Apportioning of errors — Where parts of an 
instrument are examined separately in the process 
of pattern approval, the following requirements 
shall apply: 


The error limits applicable in a part which is examined 
separately are equal to a fraction Pi of the maximum 
permissible errors or the allowed variations of the 
indication of the complete instruments. The fractions 
for any part have to be taken for the same accuracy 
class as for the complete instrument incorporating the 
part. 


The fractions Pi shall satisfy the following equation: 
(PEEP ER Foen) 


The fraction P, shall be chosen by the manufacturer 
of the part and shall be verified by an appropriate test. 
However, the fraction shall not exceed 0.8 and shall not 
be less than 0.3 when more than one part contributes to 
the effect in question. 
NOTE — As the requirements of this sub-paragraph only apply 
to the instrument submitted for pattern evaluation and not to 
those subsequently submitted for verification, the means by 
which it will be possible to determine whether the appropriated 
maximum permissible error or maximum allowable variation 
has been exceeded while decided mutually between the 
metrological authority and the applicant. The means may be 
for example: 
a) The provision or adoption of the indicating device to give 
the required resolution, 
b) The use of change point weights, or 
c) Any other means mutually agreed. 


7.2.4 Place to Testing 


Instruments submitted for pattern approval may be 
tested either: 


a) On the premises of the authority to which the 
application has been submitted; or 


b) In any other suitable place agreed to between the 
authority concerned and the applicant. 


7.2.5 Certificate of Approval and Determination as 
per 2.2.1 and A-6 of Annex-A 


The pattern approval certificate shall state the reference 
value for the accuracy class as determined by the static 
tests in A-6 of Annex A and shall state that the actual 
class (equal to the greater than the reference value) shall 
be determined by compliance with the metrological 
requirements at initial verification. 


7.3 Initial Verification 


7.3.1 General Requirements 


Instruments shall be examined for conformity with the 
approved pattern where applicable and shall be tested 
for compliance with 2 (excluding 2.2.1 and 3) for the 
intended products and corresponding accuracy classes 
under normal conditions of use. 


Tests shall be carried out by the appropriate metrological 
authority, in-situ, with the instrument fully assembled 
and fixed in the position in which it is intended to be 
used. The installation of an instrument shall be so 
designed that an automatic weighing operation will be 
the same whether for the purposes of testing or for use 
for a transaction. 


7.3.2 Material Tests 


Material test shall be carried out in compliance with 
7.1.2 using the test methods specified in 8. 


7.3.3 Conduct of the Test 
The appropriate authority: 


a) Shall conduct the test in a manner which prevents 
an unnecessary commitment of resources; and 


b) May, where appropriate and to avoid duplicating 
tests previously done on the instrument for pattern 
evaluation under 7.2.3 (a) use the results of 
observed tests to assess for initial verification. 


7.3.4 Determination of Accuracy Class 


The appropriate authority shall: 


a) Determine the accuracy class for the material used 
in the tests in accordance with 7.2.5 by reference 
to the material test results and the limits of error 
specified in 2.2.2 and 2.3 for initial verification, or 


b) Verify that accuracy classes determined as above. 
7.4 In-service Verification 


In-service verification shall be as specified in 7.3.1 
and 7.3.2. The maximum permissible errors shall be as 
specified in 2.2.2 for in-service verification. 


The appropriate authority shall conduct the test in a 
manner, which prevents an unnecessary commitment 
of resources. 


8 TEST METHODS 


8.1 Determination of the Mass of Individual Fills 


The mass of the individual fills is determined using one 
of the methods specified in 8.5.1 or in 8.5.2. 


8.2 Conduct of Material Tests 


a) The tests shall be carried out on fills using loads 
at or neat to, the maximum capacity and also at, 
or near to, the minimum capacity. Material tests 
should only be carried out with the products the 
instrument is intended to be used for. 


b) Cumulative weighers shall be tested as above with 
the maximum practical number of load per fill and 
also with the minimum number of loads per fill, 
and associative weighers as above the average (or 
optimum) number of loads per fill. 


c) If the minimum capacity is less than one third 
of the maximum capacity then tests shall also be 
carried out near the centre of the load weighing 
range preferably at a value close to, but not above, 
100 g, 300 g, 1 000 g or 15 000 g as appropriate. 


d) All tests shall be conducted with any adjustable 
parameter critical to metrological integrity for 
example, final feed time or rate, set to the most 
onerous conditions allowed by the manufacturer’s 
printed instructions and incorporated in the 
descriptive markings. 


8.2.1 Testing the Effect of a Correction Device 


a) Any correction device for example, in-flight 
correction or automatic zero setting fitted to an 
instrument shall be operated during the tests 
according to the manufacturer’s printed instructions. 


b) Ifthe correction device is not activated during each 
filling operation, then tests at minimum capacity 
shall be arranged to include the effect of one or more 
regular operations of the correction device, buy 
including in the test at least three fills immediately 
before and after the activation of the device. 


c) The initial fills after the charge between maximum 
capacity and minimum capacity shall be included 
in the test unless the instrument bears a clear 
warning to discard the stated number of fills after 
a change to the instrument settings. 


8.3 Number of Fills 


The number of individual tests fill depends upon the 
preset value (m) as specified in Table 2. 


Table 2 Number of Individual Tests Fill 
( Clause 8.3 ) 


m< 10 kg 60 fills 
10 kg < m <25 kg 32 fills 
25 kg <m < 100 kg 20 fills 
100 kg <m 10 fills 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


8.4 Accuracy of Standards 


The control instrument and standard weights used in 
testing shall ensure that checking of the test fills to an 
error not greater than either: 


a) One-third of the maximum permissible deviation 
and maximum permissible preset value error (as 
appropriate) for automatic weighing (2.2 and 2.3 
respectively) ifthe control instrument or the device 
used for control purposes is verified immediately 
prior to the material test; or 


b) One fifth of the maximum permissible deviation 
and maximum permissible preset value error (as 
appropriate) for automatic weighing (2.2 and 2.3 
respectively) in all the other cases. 


8.5 Material Test Methods 


8.5.1 Separate Verification Method 


The separate verification method requires the use of a 
(separate) control instrument to find the conventional 
true value of the mass of the test fill. 


8.5.2 Integral Verification Method 


With this method the instrument being tested is used to 
determine the conventional true value of the mass of 
the test fill. The integral verification method shall be 
conduct using either: 


a) an appropriately designed indicating device, or 


b) an indicating device with standard weights to 
assess the rounding error. 


The total uncertainty of the test method (separate or 
integral verification) shall be not greater than one-third 
of the maximum permissible error for the instrument. 


NOTES: 


1 The integral verification method depends on determining the 
masses of the loads. Limits of error as specified in 2.2 are for 
the mass of the fill. If it is not possible to ensure that in normal 
operation, all load is discharged at each cycle of operation, that 
is, If the sum of the loads is equal to the fill, then the separate 
verification method (8.5.1) should be used. 


2 When using the integral verification method for a cumulative 
weighing instrument a subdivision ofthe test fill is unavoidable. 
When calculating the conventional true value of the mass of 
the test fill, it is necessary to consider the increased uncertainty 
due to the division of the test fill. 

a) Interruption of automatic operation 


An automatic filling operation of a test fill shall be 
initiated as for normal operation. However, the automatic 
operation shall be interrupted twice during each filling 
cycle that is, after the load is assembled and after the 
load is discharged. 


An automatic operation shall not be interrupted during 
consecutive weighing cycles if the speed of operation is 
so high that the interruption would significantly affect 
the mass of the fill. 


1) Pre-discharge (full) interrupt — The automatic 
operation shall be interrupted after the load 
receptor(s) has (have) been loaded and the feed of 
material has ceased. When the load receptor (s) has 
(have) stabilized, the net weight of the fill indicated 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


or determined by balancing with standard weights 
shall be recorded and the instrument switched back 
to automatic operation. 


2 


~S 


Post-discharge (empty) interrupt — The automatic 
operation shall be interrupted after the load(s) has 
(have) been discharged and the load receptor(s) 
is (are) ready to receive a further load. When the 
load receptor(s) has (have) stabilized, the empty 
load receptor weight indicated or determined by 
balancing with standard weights shall be recorded 
and the instrument\switched back to automatic 
operation. 


8.6 Preset Value 

The indicated preset value of the fill shall be noted 
where applicable. 

8.7 Mass and Average Value of the Test Fill 


The test fill shall be weighed on a control instrument and 
the result shall be considered as being the conventional 


true value of the test fill. The average value of all the 
fills in the test shall be calculated and noted. 


8.8 Deviation for Automatic Weighing 


The deviation for automatic weighing used to 
determine compliance of each fill with the maximum 
permissible deviation for automatic weight 2.2 shall be 
the difference between the conventional true value of 
the mass of the test fill as defined in 8.7 and the average 
value of all the fills in the test. 


8.9 Preset Value Error for Automatic Weighing 


The present value error for automatic weighing used to 
determine compliance with 2.3 shall be the difference 
between the average value of the conditional true value 
of the mass of the test fill as defined in 8.7 and the 
present value for the fills. 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


ANNEX A 


TESTING PROCEDURES FOR AUTOMATIC GRAIMETRIC FILLING 


( Mandatory ) 
( Clause 3.3, 6.1.4, 6.3.2, 6.3.3, 7.2.3 and 7.2.5 ) 


A-1 MEANING OF SYMBOLS 


I Indication 

L n" indication 

L Load 

AL Additional load to next changeover point 

P. I+% d- AL= Indication prior to rounding 
(digital indication) 

E P-L = Error 

mpd Maximum permissible deviation of each 


fill from the average 


EUT Equipment under test 
Se Setting error 
mpse Maximum permissible setting error 
md Maximum deviation of each fill from the 
average 
A-2 EXAMINATION FOR PATTERN 
APPROVAL 


A-2.1 Administrative Examination (see 7.2) 


Review the documentation that is submitted to 
determine if it is adequate and correct. For pattern 
approval the documentation shall include: 
a) Metrological characteristics of the instrument, 
b) A set if specifications for the instrument, 
c) A functional description of the components and 
device, and 
d) Drawings, diagrams and general software 
information (if applicable), explaining the 
construction and operation, including interlocks. 


Consider any document or other evidence that the 
design and construction of the instrument complies 
with the requirements of this specification. 


A-2.2 Compare Construction with Documentation 
(see 6.3 and 7.2) 

Examine the various devices of the instrument to ensure 
conformity with the documentation. 

A-2.3 Technical Requirements (see 5) 


Examine the instrument for conformity and technical 
requirements according to the checklist given in the test 
report format. 


A-2.4 Functional Requirements (see 6.2 and 6.3) 


Examine the instrument for conformity with functional 
requirements according to the checklist given in the test 
report format. 


A-3 EXAMINATION 
VERIFICATION 


FOR INITIAL 


A-3.1 Compare Construction with Documentation 
(see 7.3.1) 


Examine the instrument for conformity with the 
approved pattern. 


A-3.2 Description Markings (see 5.10) 


Check the descriptive markings according to the 
checklist given in the test report format. 


A-4 GENRAL TEST REQUIREMENTS 


A-4.1 Power Supply 


Power up the equipment under test (EUT) for a time 
period equal to or greater than the warm-up time 
specified by the manufacturer and maintain the EUT 
energized for the duration of each test. 


A-4.2 Zero-Testing 


Using the manual or semi-automatic zero-setting 
facility, adjust the EUT as closely as practicable to zero 
prior to each test, and do not readjust it at any time 
during the test, except to reset if a significant fault has 
been indicated. 


Status of automatic zero facilities shall be as specified 
for each test. 


A-4.3 Temperature 


The tests shall be performed at a steady ambient 
temperature, usually normal ambient temperature 
unless otherwise specified. The temperature is deemed 
to be steady when the difference between the extreme 
temperatures noted during the test does not exceed one- 
fifth of the temperature range of the instrument without 
being greater than 5°C, and the rate of change does not 
exceed than 5°C per hour. 


The handling of the instrument shall be such that no 
condensation of water occurs on the instrument. 


A-4.4 Control Instruments 


A-4.4.1 Accuracy of Test System (see 8.4) 


The control instrument and standard weights used in 
testing shall ensure the determination of the weight of 
test loads and fills to an error not greater than either. 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


a) One-third of the maximum permissible error of 
the instrument that is, in the case of material tests, 
one-third of the maximum permissible deviation 
and maximum permissible preset value error (as 
appropriate) for automatic weighing, if the control 
instrument or the device used for control purposes 
is verified immediately prior to the material test; 
or 


b 


wm 


One-fifth of the maximum permissible error of 
the instrument that is, in the case of material tests, 
one-fifth of the maximum permissible deviation 
and maximum permissible preset value error (as 
appropriate) for automatic weighing, in all other 
cases. 

NOTE — Accuracy requirements for the test system depend 
on the limits of error which depend on the accuracy class. 
However, the class is determined from the results of the tests. 
It is, therefore, necessary that the metrological authority 
responsible for testing should be informed of the best accuracy 
class that may be achieved, prior to commencement of testing. 


A-4.4.2 Use of Standard Weights to Asses Rounding 
Error 


a) General method to assess error prior to rounding 


For instruments with digital indication having a 
scale interval d, changeover points may be used 
to interpolate between scale intervals, that is, to 
determine the indication of the instrument, prior 
to rounding, as follows. 


At a certain load, L, the indicated value, I, is noted. 
Additional weights of say 0, 1 d are successively 
added until the indication of the instrument is 
increased unambiguously by one scale interval 
(I + d). The additional load AL added to the load 
receptor gives the indication, P, prior to rounding 
by using the following formula: 


P=1+0.5d-AL 
The error prior to rounding is: 
E=P-L=1+0.5d-AL-L 


Example: An instrument with a scale interval, d, 
of 5 g is loaded with 1 kg and thereby indicates 
1000 g. After adding successive weights of 0.5 g, 
the indication changes from 1 000 g to 1 005 g at 
an additional load of 1.5 g. Inserted in the above 
formula these observations give: 


P=(1000+ 2.5 — 1.5) g= 1001 g 


Thus the true indication prior to rounding is 1 001 g, 
and the error prior to rounding is: 


E = (1001 — 1000) g = +1 g 


Correction for error at zero 


b 


wm 


1) Evaluate the error at zero load, (E,) by the 
method specified in A-4.4.2(a); 

2) Evaluate the error at Load L, (E) by the method 
specified in A-4.4.2(a); and 


10 


3) The corrected error prior to rounding, (E,) is: 
E =E-E, 


Example: if, for the example in A-4.4.2(a) the 
error calculated at zero load was: 


E |= +0.5 g, 
The corrected error is: 
E =+1-(40.5)=+0.5 g 


c 


A-5 TEST PROGRAMME 


A-5.1 Pattern Evaluation (see 7.2.3) 


A-5.1.1 For pattern evaluation A-2, A-6, A-7, A-8 and 
A-9.1 shall normally be applied. 


A-5.1.2 For instruments in which the weighing function 
is provided by a non-automatic weighing instrument 
that has been approved of its model, the tests specified 
in 6.1.1 may be omitted. 


A-5.2 Initial Verification (see 7.3) 


A-3 and A-9.2 of this Annex shall be applied for initial 
verification tests. 


Static weighing test method (see A-6.1) may also be 
used if necessary to verify indicator for the integral 
verification method of material tests. 


A-6 STATIC TESTS (PATTERN APPROVAL 
STAGE) 


A-6.1 General (see 7.2.2) 


Electronic instruments or instrument simulators 
are required to have a load indicator or an interface 
allowing access to a quantity that can be calibrated 
to provide an indication of load so that the effect of 
influence quantities may be tested and the reference 
accuracy class determined. This facility also enables 
testing of warm-up time and zero-and tare-setting where 
applicable. The static weighing tests are normally done 
as part of influence quantity testing. 


Limits for warm-up time tests and for accuracy of 
zero-and tare-setting tests are derived from 2.2 and are 
therefore dependent on the reference accuracy class. 
Therefore the results of these tests must be evaluated 
after the reference accuracy class has been determined. 


A-6.2 Warm-up Time (see 6.2.3) 


This test is to verify that in the period immediately 
after switch-on; operation is inhibited until the warm- 
up time is finished, that is, until the metrological 
performance can be maintained. The method is to 
check the automatic operation is inhibited until a stable 
indication is obtained and to verify that zero and span 
errors comply with the specified requirements during 
the first 30 min of operation. If the zero is set as part of 


the normal automatic weighing cycle then this function 
shall be enabled or simulated as part of the test. 


Other test methods which verify that metrological 


performance is maintained during the first 30 min of 
operation may be used. 


A-6.2.1 Disconnect the instrument from the power 
supply for a period of at least 8 h prior to the test. 


A-6.2.2 Reconnect the instrument and switch on while 
observing the load indicator. 


A-6.2.3 Check that it is not possible to initiate automatic 
weighing until the indicator has stabilized. 


A-6.2.4 As soon as the indication has stabilized, set the 
instrument to zero if this is not done automatically. 


A-6.2.5 Determine the error at zero by the method as 
indicated in A-4.4.2(a) of Annex A. 


A-6.2.6 Apply a static load close to Max. Determine 
the error by the method as indicated in A-4.4.2(a) and 
A-4.4.2(b). 


A-6.2.7 Repeat steps mentioned in A-6.2.5 and A-6.2.6 
after 5, 15 and 30 min. 


A-6.2.8 From A-6.2.5 verify that the zero-setting error 
is not greater than the limit specified in 5.7. 


A-6.2.9 From steps A-6.2.6 and A-6.2.7 verify that: 


a) the error (corrected for zero error) for a static load 
close to Max is not greater than the limit specified 
in 2.4. 


after each time interval the error at zero is not 
greater than twice the time specified in 5.7. 


b 


wm 


NOTE — Zero-setting accuracy is specified as 0.25 mpd so 
that additional allowance of 0.25 mpd is added for variation 
of zero after the initial zero-setting. This is consistent with 
A-4.4 (mpe for a static test load) and A-7.3.2 of this Annex 
(temperature effect on no load indication) 


A -6.3 Zero-and Tare-Setting (see 5.7) 
A- 6.3.1 General 


Unless it is clear that zero and tare functions are 
performed by the same process then both functions 
shall be tested separately. 


Zero-and tare-setting may be by more than one mode, 
for example: 


a) Non-automatic or semi-automatic, 

b) Automatic at switch-on, 

c) Automatic at start of automatic operation, and 

d) Automatic as part of weighing cycle. 
It is normally only necessary to test the accuracy of 
zero and tare-setting in one mode if it is clear that the 


same process is used for each mode. If zero or tare is set 
as part of the automatic weighing cycle then this mode 


11 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


shall be tested. To test automatic zero or tare setting it 
is necessary to allow the instrument to operate through 
the appropriate part of the automatic cycle and then to 
halt the instrument before testing. 


A-6.3.2 Accuracy of Zero-Setting (see 5.7) 


A-6.3.2.1 Set the instrument to zero in a mode as 
determined by A-6.3.1. 


A-6.3.2.2 Add weights to the load receptor to determine 
the additional load at which the indication changes 
from zero to one scale interval above zero. 


A-6.3.2.3 Calculate the error at zero according to the 
description in A-4.4.2(a). 


A-6.3.3 Accuracy of Tare-Setting (see 5.7) 


Accuracy of tare shall be tested at the maximum tare as 
specified by the manufacturer. 


A-6 3.3.1 Place the tare load on the load receptor 
and allow the tare function to operate in a mode as 
determined by A-6.3.land in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions. 


A-6.3.3.2 Add weights to the load receptor to determine 
the additional load at which the indication changes 
from zero to one scale interval above zero. 


A-6.3.3.3 Calculate the error according to the 


description in A-4.4.2(a). 


A-6.3.4 Static Weighing Test Method (see 7.2.3) 


Apply test loads from zero up to and including Max, 
and similarly remove the test loads back to zero. The 
test loads selected shall include values close to Max 
and Min and other critical loads as specified in 8.2(a), 
subject to requirements of this Annex. 


Determine the error at each test load, using the 
procedure of 4.4.2 of this Annex, if necessary, to obtain 
the accuracy requirement of 4.4.1 of this Annex. 


It should be noted that when loading or unloading 
weights, the load shall be progressively increased or 
progressively decreased. 


A-6.3.5 Determination of Reference Accuracy Class 
(see 7.2.5) 


The static weighing tests during application of influence 
factors (as appropriate) shall be used at pattern approval 
stage to establish the reference value for accuracy class, 
that is, Ref(x), as follows: 


a) Perform static weighing tests for influence factors 
and loads as specified in this Annex. 


b) For each load determine the maximum permissible 


error for influence factor tests for class X(1), mpe i 


(Refer to 2.4 and to this Annex where appropriate). 


c) Calculate [Error / mpe _,,] for each load. 


(69; 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


d) Calculate [Error / mpe 
factor tests, [Error / mpe 


ad for all the influence 


al 

e) Determine Ref(x) from [Error / mpe 
Ref(x) > [Error / MPC max] and 
Ref(x) = 1 x 10*, 2x 10%, or 5x10*, 
the index k being a positive or negative whole 
number or zero. Values for significant fault shall 


then be calculated from the mpd for the reference 
class. 


mee 


A-7 INFLUENCE 
DISTURBANCE TESTS 


FACTOR AND 


A-7.1 Test Conditions 


A-7.1.1 General Requirements 


Influence factor and disturbance tests are intended to 
verify that electronic instruments can perform and 
function as intended in the environment and under 
the conditions specified. Each test indicates, where 
appropriate, the reference condition under which the 
intrinsic error is determined. 


It is generally not possible to apply the influence factors 
or disturbances to an instrument which is processing 
material automatically. The instrument shall therefore 
be subjected to the influence factors or disturbances 
under static conditions or simulated operation as 
defined herein. The permissible effects of the influence 
factors or disturbances, under these conditions, are 
specified for each case. When the effect of one influence 
factor is being evaluated, all other factors are to be held 
relatively constant, at a value close to normal. After 
each test the instrument shall be allowed to recover 
sufficiently before the following test: 


Where parts of the instrument are examined 
separately, errors shall be apportioned in accordance 
with 7.2.3(c). 


The operational status of the instrument or simulator 
shall be recorded for each test. When the instrument 
is connected in other than a normal configuration, the 
procedure shall be mutually agreed on by the approving 
authority and the applicant. 


A-7.1.2 Simulator Requirements 


A-7.1.2.1 General 


The simulator for influence factor and disturbance tests 
should include all electronic elements of the weighing 
system. 


A-7.1.2.2 Load cell 


The simulator should also include the load cell and a 
means to apply standard test loads. Where this is not 
possible, for example, for high capacity instruments, 
then a load cell simulator may be used or alternatively 
the load cell interface may be modified to incorporate a 


12 


scaling factor to give the design output for a small test 
load. Repeatability and stability of a load cell simulator 
should make it possible to determine the performance 
of the instrument with at least the same accuracy as 
when the instrument is tested with weights. 


A-7.1.2.3 Interfaces 


Susceptibility that would result from the use of 
electronic interfaces to other equipment shall be 
simulated in the tests. For this purpose it is sufficient 
to connect 3 m of interface cable terminated to simulate 
the interface impedance of the other equipment. 


A-7.1.2.4 Documentation 


Simulators shall be defined in terms of hardware and 
functionality by reference to the instrument under test, 
and by any other documentation necessary to ensure 
reproducible test conditions. This information shall be 
attached to, or be traceable from the test report. 


A-7.1.3 Test Limits for Multi-Load Instruments 


For instruments where the fill may consist of more than 
one load, the value of a significant fault and the limit 
of error for influence factor test must be determined by 
the metrological authority after considering the design 
of the instrument and the method of test, such that the 
effect on the fill is equivalent to the values specified 
in 5.2.5 specified in IS 17080 (Part 1) and 2.4 of this 
standard. 


A-7.1.3.1 Significant fault for multi-load instruments 


The following examples show how to determine the 
value of a significant fault on selective combination 
weighers and cumulative weighers when testing. 


a) Significant fault for selective combination 
weighers — A fault greater than 0.25 of the 
maximum permissible deviation of each fill (as 
specified in Table 1) for in-service verification 
divided by the square root of the average (or 
optimum) number of loads in a fill, for a fill 
equal to the minimum capacity multiplied by the 
average (or optimum) number of loads in a fill. 


Example: 


For a class X (1) instrument with Min = 200 g 
designed for an average of 8 loads per fill, fill = 
1 600 g, the maximum permissible deviation of 
each fill from the average fill (as specified in Table 
1) for in-service verification is 1.5 percent = 24 g. 
Hence the value of significant fault is: 


0.25 x (24/ V8) =2.12 g 


Significant fault for cumulative weighers — A 
fault greater than 0.25 of the maximum permissible 
deviation of each fill (as specified in Table 1) for 
in-service verification, for a fill equal to the rated 
minimum fill, divided by the square root of the 
minimum number of loads per fill. 


b 


ma 


Example: 


For a class X (1) instrument with Max = 1 200 g 
and rated minimum fill of 8 kg : 8 kg/1.2 kg = 
6.67; therefore the minimum number of loads 
per fill is 7. The maximum permissible deviation 
(as specified in Table 1) for the minimum fill of 
8 kg is 1.5 percent or 120 g. Hence the value of 
significant fault is: 


0.25 x (120 / V7) = 11.34 g 


N — This definition of significant fault for 
cumulative weighers does not include Min. A 
cumulative weigher would normally be used at or 
near to Max. 


A-7.1.3.2 Limits of error for influence factor tests 


The following examples show how to determine the 
limit of error for influence factor testing for selective 
combination weighers and cumulative weighers when 
testing. 


A-7.1.3.2.1_ For selective combination weighers 
the maximum permissible error for any static test 
load during influence factor tests shall be 0.25 of 
the maximum permissible deviation for in-service 
verification for the appropriate mass of the fill divided 
by the square root of the average (or optimum) number 
of loads per fill. 


Example: 


Class X (1) selective combination weigher, where 
the average number of loads per fill = 4. For a static 
test load = 100 g the appropriate mass of the fill will be 
400 g for which the maximum permissible deviation 
for in-service verification is 3 percent that is, 12 g. 
Hence, the maximum permissible error for influence 
factor tests is: 0.25 (12 g / V4) = 1.5 g. 


A-7.1.3.2.2 For cumulative weighers the maximum 
permissible error for any static test and during 
influence factor tests shall be 0.25 of the maximum 
permissible deviation for in-service verification for the 
rated minimum fill divided by the square root of the 
minimum number of loads per fill. 


Example: 


For a class X (1) instrument with Max = 1 200 g and 
rated minimum fill of 8 kg/1.2 kg = 6.67; therefore the 
minimum number of loads per fill = 7. The maximum 
permissible deviation (as specified in Table 1) for the 
minimum fill of 8 kg is 1.5 percent that is, 120 g. Hence 
the maximum permissible error for influence factor 
tests is: 


0.25 (120 / V7) = 11.35 g 


NOTE — For cumulative weighers the average number of 
loads per fill is not known. Therefore it is not possible to define 
the limit of error for influence factors in terms of average loads 
per fill and appropriate mass of the fill. The above definition is 
based on maximum load and rated minimum fill. 


13 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


A-7.2 Influence Factor Tests 
Summary of Tests 


Test Characteristic Conditions 

Under Test Applied 

Static temperatures Influence factor § Mpe(*) 

Temperature effect Influence factor 

on no-load indication 

Damp heat, steady Influence factor Mpe(*) 

state 

Power voltage Influence factor Mpe(*) 

variation 

Tilting Influence factor Mpe(*) 


(*) Mpe: maximum permissible error 


A-7.2.1 Static Temperature (see 3.1) 
Static temperature tests are carried out according to 
Table 3: 
Table 3 
( Clause A-7.2 ) 


Environmental Phenomena Test Specification 
Reference of 20°C 
Specified high for 2 h 
Specified low for 2 h 
5°C 

Reference of 20°C 


Temperature 


Object of the test: To verify compliance with the 
provisions in 3.1 under conditions of dry heat (non 
condensing) and cold. The test specified in A-7.2.2 of 
this Annex may be conducted during this test. 


Test procedure in brief: 


16h 


Normal power supplied and “on” 


Precondition 


condition of the 


EUT: for atime period equal to or greater 
than the warm-up time specified 
by the manufacturer. Power is to 
be “on” for the duration of the 
test. The automatic zero-setting 
should be disabled. 

Stabilization: 2 h at each temperature under 
“free air” conditions 

Temperature: As specified in 3.1 

Temperature Reference temperature of 20°C 

sequence: 


Specified high temperature 
Specified low temperature 
Temperature of 5°C 


Reference temperature of 20°C 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


Number of test At least one cycle. 
cycles: 


After stabilization at the reference 
temperature and again at each 
specified temperature conduct the 
following: 


Adjust the EUT as close to 
zero indication as practicable. 
It is important to ensure that 
the test result is unaffected 
by the automatic zero-setting 
function which should therefore 
be disabled. The EUT shall be 
tested with at least five different 
static test loads (or simulated 
loads) including maximum and 
minimum capacities. | When 
loading or unloading weights 
the load must be respectively 
increased or decreased 
monotonically. 


Weighing test: 


Record: a) date and time 

b) temperature 

c) relative humidity 

d) test load 

e) indications 

f) errors 

g) functional performance 


Maximum 
allowable 
variations: 


All functions shall operate as 
designed. All errors shall be 
within the maximum permissible 
errors specified in 2.4 


A-7.2.2 Temperature Effect on No-Load Indication 


NOTE — This test should not be performed for instruments 
that have automatic zero-setting as part of the automatic 
weighing process. 
The instrument is set to zero; the temperature is 
then changed to the prescribed highest and lowest 
temperatures as well as at 5°C are calculated for any 
two consecutive temperature of this test. 


This test may be performed during the temperature test 
(see A-7.2.1). 


Maximum permissible variations: the change in zero 
indication shall not vary by more than the maximum 
permissible error for influence factor tests for a load 
equal to the rated minimum fill, for a temperature 
difference of 5°C. 


Condition of 
EUT: 


Normal power supplied and 
“on” for a time period equal to 
or greater than the warm-up time 
specified by the manufacturer 
Power is to be “on” for the 
duration of the test. 


14 


A-7.2.3 Damp Heat, Steady State (see 6.3.2) 


Damp heat, steady state test are carried out 
according to Table 4. 


Table 4 Damp Heat Test 
( Clause A-7.2 ) 


Environmental Test Specification 
Phenomena 
Damp heat, steady state Upper limit temperature and 
relative humidity of 85 percent for 
2 days 
Supplementary information: 
Object of the To verify compliance with 
test: the provisions of 6.3.1 under 
conditions of high humidity and 
constant temperature 
Precondition: Not required. 
Test load: One static test load close to 
minimum capacity 
Condition of the Normal power supplied and 
EUT “on” for a time period equal to 


or greater than the warm-up time 
specified by the manufacturer. 
Power is to be “on” for the 
duration of the test. 


The zero-setting and zero-tracking facilities shall be 
enabled as for normal operation. Adjust the EUT as 
close to zero indication as is practicable, prior to the 
test. 


The handling of the EUT shall be such that no 
condensation of water occurs on the EUT. 


Three hours at reference 
temperature and 50 percent 
humidity. Two days at the upper 
limit temperature as specified 
in 3.1 


Reference temperature of 20°C 
and at the upper limit as specified 
in 3.1 


50 percent at reference 
temperature. 85 percent at upper 
limit temperature. 


Stabilization: 


Temperature: 


Relative 
humidity: 


Temperature /: 
Humidity 
sequence 


The reference temperature of 
20°C at 50 percent humidity. The 
upper limit temperature at 85 
percent humidity. The reference 
temperature of 20°C at 50 percent 
humidity. 

Number of test 
cycles: 


At least one cycle. 


Weighing After stabilization of the EUT 

test and test at reference temperature and 50 

sequence: percent humidity apply the test 
load. 

Record: a) date and time 


b) temperature 

c) relative humidity 
d) test load 

e) indications 

f) errors 


Increase the temperature in the chamber to the upper 
limit and increase the relative humidity to 85 percent. 
Maintain the EUT at no load for a period of 2 days. 
Following the 2 days, apply the static test load and 
record the data as indicated above. Allow full recovery 
of the EUT before any other tests are performed. All 
errors shall be within the maximum permissible errors 
specified in 2.4. 


A-7.2.4 Power Voltage Variation (see 3.2) 
Power voltage variation tests are carried out according 
to Table 5. 
Table 5 Voltage Variation Test 
( Clause A-7.2 ) 


Environmental Phenomena Test Specification 


Reference voltage 
P Reference voltage + 10 percent 
Voltage variation 
Reference voltage - 15 percent 


Reference voltage 


Supplementary information: 


Object of the test: to verify compliance with the 
provisions of 3.2 under conditions of voltage variations. 


Test procedures in brief: 


Precondition: Not required. 
Condition of the Normal supplied and “on” for a 
EUT: time period 


Equal to or greater than the 
warm-up time specified by the 
manufacturer. 


Adjust the EUT as close to zero 
indication as practicable, prior 
to the test. If it has an automatic 
zero-setting function then the 
instrument should be set to zero 
after applying each level of 
voltage. 


Number of test 
cycles: 


At least one cycle 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


The EUT shall be tested with a 
test load approximately equal 
to the minimum capacity. Zero- 
setting function shall be in 
operation. 


Weighing test: 


Test sequence: Stabilize the power supply at 


the reference voltage within the 
defined limits and apply the test 
load. 


Record the a) date and time 


following data: b) temperature 
c) power supply voltage 

d) test load 

e) indications (as applicable) 
f) errors 


g) functional performance 


Maximum All functions shall operate as 
allowable designed. All errors shall be 
variations: within the maximum permissible 


errors specified in 2.4. 


A-7.2.5 Tilting (see 3.3) 


This test is not required for mobile instruments with a 
level indicator if it can be established that the tilt can be 
adjusted to 1 percent or less. 


Test method: Static test whilst the EUT is 
tilted 
Object of the test: To verify compliance with 


the provisions in 3.3 under 
conditions of tilt. 


Test procedure in 
brief: 


The test consist of tilting 
the EUT both forwards and 
backwards, longitudinally and 
from side to side (transversely), 
while observing the weight 
indications for a static test load. 


Instruments without level 
indicators shall be tested at a 
tilt of 5 percent 


Test severities: 


Maximum All indications shall be within 
allowable maximum permissible errors 
variations: specified in 2.4 

Condition of EUT: Normal power supplied and 


“on” for a time period equal 
to or greater than the warm- 
up time specified by the 
manufacturer. Power is to be 
“on” for the duration of the test. 


Adjust the EUT in its reference 
position (not tilted) as close to 
zero indication as practicable. 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


Test sequence: 


NOTE — This test only applies to instruments that will not be 


If the instrument is provided 
with automatic zero-setting it 
shall not be in operation. 


The test shall be performed 
with a test load approximately 
equal to the maximum capacity 


Record the zero indication. 
Apply the test load and record 
the indication. Remove the test 
load. 


Tilt the EUT longitudinally to the 
appropriate extent and record the 
zero indication. Apply the test 
load and record the indication. 
Remove the test load. 


Without further adjustment to any 
control affecting metrological 
performance tilt the EUT to 
the appropriate extend in the 
opposite direction and repeat the 
static weighing tests as above. 


Tilt the EUT in the transverse 
direction to the appropriate 
extend and repeat the tests. 


Tilt the EUT in the opposite 
direction and repeat the tests. 


In order to determine the 
influence of tilting on the loaded 
instrument, the indication 
obtained at each tilt shall be 
corrected for the deviation from 
zero which the instrument had 
prior to loading. 


permanently installed. 


A-7.3 Disturbance Tests (see 6.1.3) 


A-7.3.1 Short Time Power Reduction 


Short time power reduction (voltage dips and short 
interruptions) tests are carried our according to Table 6. 


Table 6 Short Time Power Reduction 
( Clause A-7.3.1 ) 


Environmental 
Phenomena 


Voltage dips and short 
interruptions 


Test Specification 


Interruption from reference voltage to 
zero voltage for one half cycle. 


Interruption from reference voltage to 
50 percent of reference voltage for two 
half cycles. 


These mains voltage interruptions 
shall be repeated ten times with a time 
interval of at least 10 s 


16 


Supplementary information to the test procedures: 


Object of the 
test: 


To verify compliance with 
the provisions in 6.1.3 under 
conditions of short mains voltage 
interruptions and reductions while 
observing the weight indication 
for a static load approximately 
equal to the minimum capacity. 


Test procedure in brief: 


Precondition 


Condition of the 
EUT: 


Number of test 
cycles: 
Weighing 

test and test 
sequence: 


None required 


Normal power supplied and 
“on” for a time period equal to 
or greater than the warm-up time 
specified by the manufacturer. 


Adjust the EUT as close to zero 
indication as practicable, prior to 
the test. Zero-setting functions 
shall not be in operation. Not to 
be adjusted or readjusted at any 
time during the test except the 
reset if a significant fault has 
been indicated. 


At least one cycle 


The EUT shall be tested with a 
test load approximately equal to 
the minimum capacity. 


Stabilize all factors at nominal 
reference conditions. Apply the 
test load and record the following 
data: 


a) date and time 

b) temperature 

c) power supply voltage 
d) test load 

e) indications 

f) errors 

h) functional performance 


Interrupt the power supply to 
zero voltage for a period equal 
to one half cycle and conduct the 
test. During interruption observe 
the effect on the EUT and record 
as appropriate. 


Reduce the power supply to 
50 percent of nominal voltage 
for a period equal to two half 
cycles and conduct the test. 
During reductions observe the 
effect on the EUT and record, as 
appropriate. 


Maximum The difference between the 
allowable weight indication due to the 
variations: disturbance and the indication 


without the disturbance either 
shall not exceed the values given 
in 6.2.5, or the EUT shall detect 
and act upon a significant fault. 


A-7.3.2 Electrical Bursts (Fast Transient Tests) 


Electrical bursts tests (fast transient tests) are carried 
out for two minutes with a positive polarity and for 
2 min with a negative polarity according to Table 7A, 
7B and 7C. 


Table 7A Ports for Signal Lines and Control Lines 
( Clause A-7.3.2 ) 


Environmental Phenomena Test Specification 


0.5 kV (peak) 
5/50 ns T/T, 
5 kHz rep. frequency 


Fast transient common mode 


NOTE — Applicable only to ports or interfacing with 
cables whose total length may exceed 3 m according to the 
manufacturers’ functional specification. 


Table 7B Input and Output DC Power Ports 
( Clause A-7.3.2 ) 


Environmental Phenomena Test Specification 


0.5 KV (peak) 
5/50 ns T/T, 
5 kHz rep frequency 


Fast transient common mode 


NOTE — Not applicable to battery operated appliances that 
cannot be connected to the mains while in use. 
Table 7C Input and Output AC Power Ports 
( Clause A-7.3.2 ) 


Environmental Phenomena Test Specification 


0.5 kV (peak) 
5/50 ns T/T, 
5 kHz rep frequency 


Fast transient common mode 


A coupling/decoupling network shall be applied for 
testing AC power ports. 


Supplementary information to the test procedures: 


Object of the 
test: 


To verify compliance with 
the provisions in 6.3.3 under 
conditions where electrical bursts 
(fast transients) are superimposed 
on the mains voltage while 
observing the weight indication 


17 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


for a static test load approximately 
equal to the minimum capacity. 


Test procedures in brief: 


Precondition: 


Condition of the 
EUT: 


None required. 


Normal power supplied and 
“on” for a time period equal to 
or greater than the warm-up time 
specified by the manufacturer. 
Reset the EUT if a significant 
fault has been indicated. 


Before any test stabilize the EUT 
under constant environmental 
conditions. 

With the single static load in 
place record the following with 
and without the transients: 


Stabilization: 


Weighing test: 


a) date and time 

b) temperature 

c) test load 

d) indications (as applicable) 


The difference between the 
weight indication due to the 
disturbance and the indication 
without the disturbance either 
shall not exceed the value given 
in 5.2.5 of Part 1 of this standard, 
or the instrument shall detect and 
act upon a significant fault. 


Maximum 
allowable 
variations: 


A-7.3.3 Electrostatic Discharge 
Electrostatic discharge tests are carried out with test 
signals and conditions as given in Table 8. 
Table 8 Electrostatic Discharge 
( Clause A-7.3.3 ) 


Environmental Phenomena Test Specification 


Electrostatic discharge 8 kV air discharge 


6 kV contact 
discharge 


NOTE — The 6 kV contact discharge shall be applied to 
conductive accessible parts. Metallic contacts e.g. in battery 
compartments or in socket outlets are excluded from this 
requirement. Contact discharge is the preferred test method 
20 discharges (10 with positive and 10 with negative polarity) 
shall be applied on each accessible metal part of the enclosure. 
The time interval between successive discharges shall be at 
least 10 s. In the case of a non conductive enclosure, discharges 
shall be applied on the horizontal or vertical coupling planes. 
Air discharges shall be used where contact discharges cannot 
be applied. Tests with other (lower) voltages than those given 
in Table 8 are not required. 


IS 17080 (Part 2): 


2020 


Supplementary information to the test procedures: 


Object of the 
test: 


To verify compliance with 
the provisions of 6.1.3 under 
conditions where electrostatic 
discharges are applied while 
observing the weight indication 
for a static test load approximately 
equal to the minimum capacity. 


Test procedures in brief: 


Precondition: 


Condition of the 
EUT: 


Stabilization 


Weighing test: 


Maximum 
allowable 
variations: 


None required. 


Normal power supplied and ‘on’ 
for a time period equal to or 
greater than the warm-up time 
specified by the manufacturer. 
Reset the EUT if a significant 
fault has been indicated. 


Before any test stabilize the EUT 
under constant environmental 
conditions. 


With the single static load in 
place, record the following 
with and without electrostatic 
discharge: 


a) date and time 

b) temperature 

c) test load 

d) indications (as applicable) 
The difference between the 
weight indication due to the 
disturbance and the indication 
without the disturbance either 
shall not exceed the value given 
in 5.2.5 of Part 1 of this standard 


or the instrument shall detect and 
act upon a significant fault. 


A-8 SPAN STABILITY TEST (see 6.3.3) 


Test method: 


Object of the 
test: 


Reference to 
standard: 


Test procedure in 
brief: 


Span Stability 


To verify compliance with the 
provisions of 6.3.3 after the 
EUT has been subjected to the 
performance tests. 


No reference to international 
standards can be given. 


The test consists of observing 
the variations of error of the 
EUT inefficiently constant 
conditions (reasonably constant 
conditions in a normal laboratory 


18 


Test severities 


Maximum 
allowable 
variations: 


Number of 
tests (n): 


environment) at various 
intervals, before, during and after 
the EUT has been subjected to 
performance tests. 


The performance tests shall 
include the temperature test and, 
if applicable the damp heat test. 
Other performance tests listed in 
this Annex may be performed. 


The EUT shall be disconnected 
from the mains power supply, 
or battery supply where fitted, 
two times for at least eight hours 
during the period of the test. The 
number of disconnections may 
be increased if the manufacturer 
specifies so or at the discretion 
of the approval authority 
in the absence of any such 
specification. 


In the conduct of this test, the 
operating instructions for the 
instrument as supplied by the 
manufacturer shall be considered. 


The EUT shall be stabilized at 
sufficiently constant ambient 
conditions after switch-on 
for at least five hours, and at 
least sixteen hours after the 
temperature and damp heat tests 
have been performed. 


Test duration: Twenty eight days 
or over the period necessary for 
the conduct of the performance 
tests, whichever is less. Time t 
(days) between tests: 0.5 <t< 10. 


Test load: a static test load near 
maximum capacity (Max): the 
same test weights shall be used 
throughout the test. 


The variation in the indication of 
the test load shall not exceed half 
the absolute value of the mpe for 
influence factor tests in 2.4 for 
the test load applied on any of the 
(n) tests conducted. 


n > 8. If the test results indicate 
a trend more than half the 
permissible variation specified 
above, conduct additional tests 
until the trend comes to rest 
or reverses itself, or until the 
error exceeds the maximum 
permissible variation. 


Precondition: None required. 
Test equipment: Verified mass standards. 
Condition of the Adjust the EUT as close to zero 


EUT: indication as practicable before 
each test. 
Test sequence: Stabilized all factors at nominal 


reference conditions. If the 
instrument is provided with 
automatic zero-setting it shall 
not be in operation. Apply the 
test load (or stimulated load) and 
record the following data: 


a) date and time 

b) temperature 

c) barometric pressure 

d) relative humidity 

e) test load 

f) indication 

g) errors 

h) changes in test location 


Apply all necessary corrections 


resulting from variations 
of temperature, pressure, 
etc. between the various 
measurements. 


At the first measurement 
immediately repeat zeroing and 
loading four times to determine 
the average value of error. For 
the next measurements perform 
only one, unless either the result 
is outside the specified tolerance 
or the range of the five readings 
of the initial measurement was 
more than 1/10 of the maximum 
permissible variation. 


Repeat this test at periodic 
intervals during and after 
the conduct of the various 
performance tests. 


Allow full recovery of the 
EUT before any other tests are 
performed. 


A-9 PROCEDURE FOR MATERIAL TESTS 


A-9.1 Material tests at pattern evaluation (see 7.1.2(a) 
and 7.2). 


Operational tests with material shall be done on a 
complete instrument to assess compliance with the 


19 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


technical requirements of sub-paragraph (3) with 
material for the test load as specified in 7.1.2(a). 


a) Feeding device (see 5.5) 


b 


wm 


Check that the feeding device provides sufficient 
and regular flow rate. 


Check that any adjustable feed device has 
an indication of the direction of movement 
corresponding to the sense of the adjustment of 
the feed (where applicable). 


For instruments using the subtractive weighing 
principle check that residual material retained at 
the feeding device after each load is delivered, is 
negligible relative to limits of error. 


Load receptor (see 5.6) 


For instruments that weigh material in a separate 
load receptor prior to discharge to a container, 
check that the residual material retained at the 
load receptor after each discharge is negligible 
relative to limits of error. 


Check that manual discharge of the load receptor 
is not possible during automatic operation. 


A-9.2 Material Tests at Initial Verification 
(see 7.1.2(b) and 7.3) 


Metrological tests with material shall be done on a 
complete instrument, fully assembled and fixed in 
the position in which it is intended to be used and as 
specified in 7.1.3(b). 


The accuracy class for (or classes) shall be determined 
from the results. 


a) Requirements for metrological material tests. 


b 


wm 


1) Types of loads [see 7.3.1 and 8.2(a)]: The 
material used as the test load shall be as 
specified in 8.2(a). 

Mass of test loads and fills (see 8.2): The mass 
of the test loads and fills shall be as specified 
in 8.2 (a, b and c). 

3) Adjustments [see 8.2(d)]: The adjustments 

shall be set as specified in 8.2 (d). 


4) Correction devices (see 8.2.1): Any correction 
device shall be operated as specified 
in 8.2.1. 

5) Number of fills (see 8.3): The number of fills 
shall be specified in 8.3. 


Methods for metrological material tests (see 8.5) 


2 


a 


One of the following verifications methods shall 

be used: 

1) Separate verification method: the separate 
verification method is as defined in 8.5.1. 

2) Integral verification method: the integral 
verification method is as defined in 8.5.2. 


IS 17080 (Part 2) : 2020 


A-9.3 Procedure for Metrological Material Tests 
Steps 


a) Set up the instrument in accordance with 8.2(d) 


and 8.2.1. 


b) Select a preset value for the fill and set the load 


value if different from the fill, in accordance with 
8.2. Record the indicated preset value. 


c) Run the instrument to produce a number of fills as 


specified in 8.3. 


d) Weigh all the fills by one of the methods in 8.5.1 


or 8.5.2. 


e) Calculate the average value of all the fills in the 


test and the preset value error (see 2.3). 


f) Calculate the deviation of each fill from the 


average (see 2.2). 


g) Repeat stages (b) to (f) for other loads as specified 


in 7.2. 


1) Concerning 8.7: The result of weighing the 
test fill on the control instrument shall be 
considered as the conventional true value of 
the test fill. 


Concerning 8.8: The deviation for automatic 
weighing used to determine compliance of each 
fill with the maximum permissible deviation 
for automatic weighing (see 2.2) shall be 
the difference between the conventional true 
value of the mass of the test fill as defined 
in 8.7 and the average value of all the fills in 
the test. 


Concerning 8.9: The preset value error 
for automatic weighing used to determine 


2 


wm 


3 


w 


20 


compliance with 2.3 shall be the difference 
between the average value of the conventional 
true value of the mass of the test fills, 
as defined in 8.7 and the preset value for the 
fills. 


A-9.4 Determination of Accuracy Class (see 7.2.5) 


a) For each preset value of the test fill, determine the 


b 


c 


wm 


wm 


preset value error ( that is, the setting error, se) 
and the maximum permissible preset value error 
for class X(1), mpse,,,. 


Then calculate [se / mpse 
of the test fill. 


For each preset value of the test fill determine the 
maximum actual deviation from the average (md) 
k and the maximum permissible deviation from 
the average for class X(1), mpd_,, for each preset 
value of the test fill. 


From (1) determine the maximum value of [se / 
mpse „l, 


a] for each preset value 


[se / mpse ‘ashi 


iv) From (2) determine the; maximum value of md / 


mpd 


ay 


[md / mpd 


ashi 


v) Determine the accuracy class (x) such that: 


(x) > [se / mpse 
And (x) > [md / mpd (1)] Max 
And (x) = 1 x 10%, 2 X 10*, or 5 X 10, 


The index k being a positive or negative whole 
number or zero. 


lma 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PGD 26 (1114). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


