**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 15678 (2006) : Intelligent pigging of pressurized natural 
gas pipelines - Code of practice [PCD 3: Petroleum, 
Lubricants and their Related Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 15678 : 2006 

Indian Standard 

INTELLIGENT PIGGING OF 

PRESSURIZEDNATURAL GAS PIPELINES — 

CODE OF PRACTICE 



ICS 75.200 



© BIS 2006 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



June 2006 Price Group 9 



Petroleum, Lubricants and Their Related Products Sectional Committee, PCD 3 



FOREWORD 

This Code was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Petroleum, Lubricants 
and Their Related Products Sectional Committee had been approved by die Petroleum, Coal and Related Products 
Division Council. 

Underground cross country pipelines are a well-established convenient and cost effective means of transporting 
pressurized natural gas through pipelines over long distances of several hundred kilometres. It is essential to 
check, monitor and ensure the integrity of such a large magnitude of buried steel structure over the years. The 
random pipeline failures are a potential threat to the environmental pollution and safety of the public at large 
besides causing interruptions in the supply of essential conmiodities. 

The integrity of buried cross-country pipelines is likely to be adversely affected despite appropriate design standards, 
manufacturing and construction codes. The main influencing factors are changes in soil resistivity, external 
interference, periodic inadequacy of corrosion protection system, pipelme age, man-made or natural ground 
movements and third party activities over the right of way. 

For technical integrity assurance purposes the pressurized pipeline system can be treated like any other pressure 
vessel and theoretically conventional hydro test can be applied for integrity check. However, hydro test is only a 
fail/no fail test and provides no information about the existence including the density of sub-critical defects close 
to failure. Such defects may possibly be adversely influenced by the test itself Further hydro test presents serious 
logistics problems related to disposing ofTthe contaminated water, restricting public access in the testing zone 
and discontinuity in the product delivery during hydro test. Moreover, due to the inherent handicap of physical 
access to total pipeline structure, visual inspection and conventional non-destructive examination are not feasible 
like other pressure vessels. 

In recognition of the above factors, through intensive research and developments, suitable inline inspection systems 
for cross country pipelines have been developed and commercialized in the last three decades. The most commonly 
used system for inline inspection is based on magnetic flux leakage (MFL) technology and is frequently used by 
pipeline owning companies to check the health of their pipeline systems. The technology, including the hardware 
and software used for the purpose have matured over the years and reasonably reliable results and very useful 
information is obtained through commercially available inline inspection tools. The general safety concentrations 
are covered in this Code, however, hazard related to stuck up due to design and installation of pipe, valves, tee, 
etc, condensate removing from the pipeline and pipeline health are not covered. This Code provides a uniform 
authentic reference to the pipeline operators which shall help them in taking decisions about selection of appropriate 
MFL tool besides keeping them fully aware as to what best can be expected out of intelligent pigging inspection. 
A regular update of this standard incorporating the recent developments in the technology shall make the document 
live and relevant for pipeline operating companies. 

The pipeline design features and operating parameters have been suitably addressed in this Code. While selecting 
a specific intelligent pig tool for a particular pipeline segment, its suitability should be confirmed. Further, while 
evaluating the residual life of the pipeline, post-inspection, it is recommended to apply appropriate standards such 
as ASME B 31G * Manual for determining^ the remaining strength of corroded pipelines' or Fitness for Purpose 
analysis can be carried out through fractum medianics assessment techniques taking into consideration the applied 
stresses, defect size and location, and line pipe material toughness properties. 

Considerable assistances have been derived from the following standarits: 

RP0102 - 2002 Standard recommended practice inline inspectfonrof pipelines (NACE standard) 

OISD - STD 1 4 1 Design and construction requirements for cross oounti^ jjydrocarbon pip>elines 

OISD - STD 138 Inspection of cross country pipelines — Onshpre 1^ ^ "^ '^ 

ASME B 3 1 . 8 : 2003 Gas transmission and distribution piping systei^ i <^. 



(Continued on third cover) 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 OCTOBER 2006 

TO 

IS 15678 : 2006 INTELLIGENT PIGGING OF 

PRESSURIZED NATURAL GAS PIPELINES — 

CODE OF PRACTICE 



(Second cover, Foreword, para 5, line 6) — Substitute 'Considerations' 
for 'Concentrations'. 

(Third cover, Foreword, para 1) — Insert the following new paia after 
para 1: 

* 1,1 In line with the practices followed in the industr>' in this field, units are 
given in FPS system also. For conversion of FPS units to corresponding SI units, 
the following conversion factors are appUcable: 

r'[inch] = 25 mm, for nominal sizes; otherwise r'[inch] = 25.4 mm; 

Each system shall be used independently of the other, without combining values 
in any way.' 

(Page 3, clause 4, line 3) — Substitute 'an' for 'a'. 

(Page 9, clause 7.2.1.1, line 1 and wherever it appears) — Substitute 
'shair/or 'must'. 

(Page U, Table \, Note A)— Substitute *!"- 25.4 mm' /or *r- 0254 mm'. 



( PCD 3 ) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, IndU 



IS 15678 : 2006 



Indian Standard 

INTELLIGENT PIGGING OF 
PRESSURIZED NATURAL GAS PIPELINES 
CODE OF PRACTICE 



1 SCOPE 

The objective of inline inspection is to assess the health 
of the pipeline segment in quantifiable terms. The 
relevant data on pipeline condition can be generated 
by the application of appropriate tools and technology 
and the same is analyzed through industry accepted 
standards to arrive at the desired results. 

2 APPLICABILITY 

2.1 This Code has been specifically prepared for the 
inspection of underground carbon steel pipeline systems 
used for transportation of onshore pressurized natural 
gas by Intelligent Pigging. The standard provides 
recommendations to the pipeline operators. 

2.2 This Code elaborates different techniques of 
intelligent pigging for onshore natural gas pipelines and 
its application. Though various techniques of intelligent 
pigging are available, this Code elaborates the MFL 
technique of pigging. 

3 DEFINITIONS 

The following terminologies are commonly used in 
inline inspection related activities. 

3.1 Anomaly — Any kind of imperfection, defect, or 
critical defect that may be present in the wall of the 
pipe. 

3.2 Characterize — To quantify the type, size, shape, 
orientation, and location of an anomaly, defect, or 
critical defect. 

3.3 Cleaning Pig — A utility pig that uses cups, 
scrapers, or brushes to remove dirt, rust, mill scale, or 
other foreign matter from the pipeline. Cleaning pigs 
are run to increase the operating efficiency of a pipeline 
or to facilitate inspection of the pipeline. 

3.4 Critical Defect — As used in this text, a subset of 
defect, for which an analysis, such as ASME B 31G, 
would indicate that the pipe is approaching failure at 
pressures equal to maximum operating pressure or the 
maximum allowable operating pressure for the pipe. 

3.5 Corrosion 

3.5.1 General External — Metal loss due to 
electrochemical, galvanic, microbiological, or other 



attack of the pipe due to environmental conditions 
surrounding the pipe. 

3.5.2 General Internal — Metal loss due to chemical 
or other attack of the steel from gases inside of the 
pipe. Electrochemical attack can also occur in local 
cells, but this condition is less frequent. 

3.6 Pit — Local concentrated-cell corrosion on the 
external or internal surfaces that results from the 
generation of a potential (voltage) difference set up by 
variations in oxygen concentrations within and outside 
the pit. The oxygen-starved pit acts as the anode and 
the pipe surface acts as the cathode. 

3.7 Stress Corrosion Cracking — A progressive inter- 
granular and/or trans-granular cracking that results from 
a combination of applied tensile stress, cathodic 
protection currents, and a suitable corrosive 
environment. 

3.8 Cracks 

3.8.1 Fatigue — Progressive cracking in the base 
material, weld or weld zone that is caused by pressure 
cycling or oscillatory stresses associated with the 
operation of the system. 

3.8.2 Girth Weld — Cracks in the weld or weld zone 
of the butt welds that connect sections of pipe. 

3.8.3 Seam Weld — Cracks in the weld or weld zone 
of the longitudinal seam weld of the pipe. 

3.9 Data Analysis — The process through which 
indications are evaluated to classify and characterize 
them as non-relevant conditions, pipeline components, 
anomalies, imperfections, defects, or critical defects. 

3.9.1 Defect — As used in the text, an anomaly for 
which an analysis, such as ASME B3 IG, would indicate 
that the pipe is approaching failure as the nominal hoop 
stress approaches the specified minimum yield stress 
of the pipe material. 

3.9.2 Detect — To sense or obtain a measurable 
indication from an anomaly in a pipeline. 

3.9.3 Dent — A local depression in the pipe surface 
caused by mechanical damage that produces a gross 
disturbance in the curvature of the pipe without 
reducing the pipe wall thickness. The depth of a dent is 



IS 15678:2006 



measured as a gap between the lowest point of the dent 
and a prolongation of the original contour of the pipe. 

3. 1 Flux — The (scalar) number of flux lines crossing 
a unit area at right angles to the unit area. 

3.11 Flux Leakage — The flow of flux out of a 
magnetic material, such as the wall of a pipe, into a 
medium with lower permeability, such as gas or air. 

3.12 Flux Lines — A representation of the strength 
and direction of a magnetic field. Flux lines are drawn 
parallel to the direction of magnetic force. The spacing 
of these lines represents the magnetic field strength. 
Flux lines always form non-intersecting closed loops 
starting at the North Pole and ending at the South Pole 
of a magnet. 

3.13 Gauging Pig — A utility pig that is permanently 
deformable by obstructions in the pipeline and thus, 
upon retrieval from the line, provides evidence of the 
worst-case obstruction in a given pipeline segment. 

3.14 Geometry Pig — A configuration pig designed 
to record conditions, such as dents, wrinkles, ovality, 
bend radius and angle, and occasionally indications of 
significant internal corrosion, by making measurements 
of the inside surface of the pipe. 

3.15 Gouges — Mechanical or forceftil removal of 
metal from a local area on the surface of the pipe that 
may work harden the pipe and make it more susceptible 
to cracking. 

3.16 Hall-Effect Sensor (Hall Elements) — A type 
of sensor that directly measures magnetic field. Hall- 
effect sensors require power to operate. 

3.17 Hard Spots — Localized changes in hardness 
of the steel in the pipe resulting from non-uniform 
quenching procedures during the manufacture or 
changes in chemistry of the steel. Hard spots, when 
stressed, are subject to failure from mechanisms, such 
as hydrogen-stress cracking. 

3. 1 8 Induction Coil Sensor — A type of sensor that 
measures the time rate of change in flux density. 
Induction coil sensors do not require power to operate. 

3.19 Inspection — (1) The process of examining a 
pipe using a non-destructive testing technique to look 
for anomalies or to evaluate the nature or severity of 
an indication. (2) The process of running a 
configuration tool or an inline inspection tool through 
a pipe to detect anomalies. 

3.19.1 Inline Inspection (I LI) — The inspection of a 
pipeline from the interior of the pipe using an inline 
inspection tool. 

3. 1 9.2 Inline Inspection Tool — The device or vehicle, 
also known as an intelligent or smart pig, that uses a 



non-destructive testing technique to inspect the wall of 
a pipe. An inline inspection tool is one type of 
instrumented tool. 

3.20 Launcher — A pipeline facility used for inserting 
a pig into a pressurized pipeline. 

3.21 Lamination — A type of imperfection or 
discontinuity in the pipe wall with a layered separation 
usually aligned parallel to the working direction of the 
metal. 

3.22 Magnetic Field — A vector quantity representing 
the force of attraction that a magnet exerts on steel 
pieces and on other magnet poles. 

3.23 Magnetic Field Strength — The magnitude of 
the magnetic field produced by a magnet. 

3.24 Metal Loss — Several types of anomalies in pipe 
in which metal has been removed from the pipe surface, 
usually due to corrosion or gouging. 

3.25 Permanent Magnet — A type of magnet that 
requires no electrical current to generate a magnetic 
field. 

3.26 Permeability — ( 1 ) The ability of magnetic flux 
to difiijse through (or permeate) a magnetic material. 
(2) The ratio of magnetic flux density to magnetic field 
strength. 

3.27 Pig — A generic term signifying any independent, 
self-contained device, tool or vehicle that moves 
through the interior of the pipeline for purposes of 
inspecting, dimensioning, or cleaning. All pigs in this 
report are either utility pigs or instrumented tools. 

3.28 Pipe — As used in the text, the steel pipe 
exclusive of protective coatings or attachments that is 
used to transport natural gas. 

3.29 Pipeline — That portion of the pipeline system 
between the compressor stations including the pipe, 
protective coatings, cathodic protection system, field 
connection, valves and other appurtenances attached 
or connected to the pipe. 

3.30 Saturation — The degree of magnetization where 
a further increase in magnetic field strength produces 
a decrease in permeability of a material. 

4 PRINCIPLE OF MAGNETIC FLUX LEAKAGE 

When a magnet is placed next to a pipe wall, most of 
the magnetic flux lines pass through the pipe wall. That 
is pipe wall is a preferred path for the flux. Flux leakage 
at a metal loss region is caused by a local decrease in 
the thickness of the pipe wall. At a metal loss region, a 
flux carried by the thin section is less than that carried 
in the full cross section of the pipe wall. Flux leaks 
from both the surfaces of the pipe wall. A sensor 



IS 15678:2006 



positioned on the inside of the pipeline is typically used 
to record this leakage flux. In this manner a MFL tool 
detects a anomaly that causes flux to leak. The measured 
leakage field depends upon the radial depth, axial 
length, circumferential width and shape of the anomaly 
as well as magnetic properties of the material. The 
typical phenomena of magnetic flux leakage have been 
schematically shown in Fig. 1. 

5 COMMERCIALLY AVAILABLE PIPELINE 
INSPECTION TOOLS ON MFL PRINCIPLE 

The pipeline inspection tools based upon their 
capabilities, which work on the principle of magnetic 
flux leakage principle, can be categorized as under. 

5.1 Standard/Conventional MFL Tool 

These are first generation inspection tools, which were 
developed and initially used during early stages of 



commercialization of MFL technology for pipeline 
inspection. However, they have a limited utility even 
today for cases where the pipeline operator does not 
require a detailed analysis and characterization/sizing 
of the defects. These tools have much less numbers of 
sensors and can reliably detect the defect but not size 
them for the purposes of defect analysis. 

5.2 High Resolution MFL Tool 

A high resolution MFL tool comprises of a large number 
of sensors and employs digital recording. The sensor 
sizing and the axial sampling interval determine the tool 
resolution and the ability to accurately characterize the 
defect. A typical high resolution tool has an axial 
sampling rate (Data recording of signals from individual 
sensors) of 3 mm and a sensor size is so designed that 
the smallest defect is not missed during data collection. 
A typical high resolution MFL tool is shown in Fig. 2. 



priniMys0nor«rny seamdifyMraoramy 

{4ptD>JL600dummli) 







Fig. 1 Basic Principle of Magnetic Flux Leakage 

3 



IS 15678 : 2006 



Battery 
Unit 



Computer 
Unit 



Odo 

meter 

Unit 




VtKKB «-••<» lit 



I* 



1^ ■ fc.fiii ,•2: ««■■ 'I'^TSf S3* 

li'^Mni ii"^i** tiMHi "^ -"l^V' ^^2 






i>i 



•;o"^' ::-''''*.'~'i!!0'' vHv'i 




Primary 


• ■ - Secondary 


Sensor 


Sensor 


Unit 


Unit 



Fig. 2 Typical High Resolution MFL Tool 



5.3 Transverse Field Inspection (TFI) 

In case of a standard and high resolution MFL tool, the 
magnets are placed on the tool body in such a manner 
that magnetic field is introduced into the pipe wall in 
the longitudinal direction while in case of a TFI tool 
the magnets are so arranged that the magnetic field is 
introduced into the pipe wall in a transverse direction, 
thus enhancing the capability of MFL tool to detect 
longitudinal crack like defects. A typical TFI tool is 
shown in Fig. 3. 

6 COMPONENTS OF A TYPICAL MFL BASED 
TOOL 

6.1 MFL tools deployed for pipeline inspections are 
self-contained modular units comprising of modules 
having magnets, sensors, data conditioning and 
recording systems, and power systems. These modules 
are connected with each other by flexible universal 
joints. The systems used in most MFL tools include 
the following. 

6. LI Drive system, which is used to propel the tool 
through the pipeline. Differential pressure acting on 
the drive system pulls the tool through the pipeline. 



6. 1 .2 Power system, which provides battery power for 
the sensor system, data conditioning system, and 
recording system. 

6. 1 .3 Magnetization system for magnetizing the pipe wall. 

6. 1 .4 Sensor system, used to measure the flux-leakage 
signal. 

6.L5 Data conditioning and recording system, which 
amplifies, filters, and stores the measured signals. 

6.2 Drive System 

The force exerted by gas medium pushing on a cup or 
set of cups at the front of the tool pulls the tool through 
the line. DiflFerential pressure acting between the front 
and back of the drive cups provides a force along the 
pipe axis. This force propels the drive cups, which in 
turn pull the rest of the tool. 

The driving force on a tool must overcome the friction 
between the tool and the pipe and the magnetic drag 
that the tool exerts. The pressure differential required 
to move most tools is small. 

The drive cups are typically at the front of the tool. 
Additional cups can be used to center each tool segment 



IS 15678 : 2006 





^^iT^^^^/. '^ 




^^:J.^.;?." 



Fig. 3 Typical Transverse Field Inspection Tool 



in the pipeline. To prevent gas pressure from pushing second set of drive cups helps overcome this problem if 
a trailing segment of the tool into the leading segments, the cups are spaced far enough apart so that one cup is 
the gas is vented through holes in trailing cups. always away from the connection or valve. 



MFL tools often have two or more drive cups. Multiple 
drive cups help the tool traverse pipeline connections. 
At the connections and at valves, the differential pressure 
across a cup can drop if gas bypasses around the cup. A 



6.3 Magnetization Systems 

An MFL tool contains a system that magnetizes a length 
of the pipe wall. Typically, sets of magnets are used to 



IS 15678:2006 



provide coverage around the circumference of a pipe. 
Generally permanent magnets are used. Permanent 
magnets have a constant magnetic strength and they 
require no power to operate. 

The body of an MFL tool contains the permanent 
magnets. A brief description of other components of 
magnet system and their functioning is as under. 

6.3»1 Magnet Strength 

The data recording capabilities of an MFL tool strongly 
depend on the applied magnetic field strength. In 
general, the required uesign strength of a magnet system 
depends on the wall thickness and properties of the 
material of construction of the pipe to be inspected. 

6.3.2 Magnet Orientation 

The magnetizing assemblies in all currently available 
tools are oriented with their backing bars along the pipe 
axis. So, the flux lines that are produced are parallel to 
the axis of the pipe. The open area between the poles is 
a logical space to place sensors to measure the flux 
leakage from metal-loss regions. By using magnet and 
sensor assemblies around the pipe circumference, 
enables the full (100 percent) monitoring of the flux 
leakage at the inside pipe surface. 

6.3.3 Magnet Mounting Systems 

The tools are provided with brushes for coupling of 
the magnetic field into the pipe. Brushes help absorb 
the shock that can result at internal' penetrations such 
as weld roots, restrictions, and dents in the pipeline. 
For tools with solid magnetic shoes, the dynamic 
performance is not as smooth, but the magnetic coupling 
is better. Spring mounting systems are used to attach 
the magnets to the body of the tool. These systems help 
center the tool in the pipe, and they absorb and damp 
the vibrations. 

6.3.4 Brushes, Backing Bars and Other Magnet 
Components 

The fiux leakage field is a function of the strength and 
uniformity of the flux density in the pipe and in the 
surrounding gas. The fiux density depends on the 
strength and orientation of the magnets and on the entire 
system used to channel the magnetic flux into the pipe. 
So, the selection of the other magnetizing assembly 
materials is important. 

To reduce the likelihood of flux leakage around the 
backing bar, materials with high magnetic permeability, 
such as pure iron and silicon-based transformer steels, 
are typically used. To further reduce stray flux leakage, 
the backing bars thickness usually exceed the maximum 
wall thickness of pipe. In this way, the magnetic field 
in the pipe is not limited by the field that can be carried 
by the backing bars. 



6.3.5 Sensor Systems 

Sensors are the heart of any MFL inspection tool and 
are located between the magnet pole pieces to measure 
the flux leakage field. The purpose of sensor systems 
is to convert the flux leakage field into a signal that 
can be stored and analyzed. The sensor system consists 
of the sensors themselves, the mounting system used 
to support the sensors, wear plates between the sensors 
and the pipe, and cabling between the sensors and other 
electronic components. 

6.3.6 Sensor Types 

Two types of sensors commonly used in MFL tools 
are 'induction coils' and 'Hall elements' (field 
sensor). Coils measure the rate of change of a 
magnetic field, which in this case is the leakage flux 
while Hall elements measure the actual magnetic 
field strength. Induction coils are the most commonly 
used type of sensor on MFL inspection tools because 
they do not require a power source. Instead, a voltage 
is generated in a passive coil of wire or printed circuit 
as it passes through a changing magnetic field. A 
recording device measures this voltage, which is 
proportional to the change in flux density. Since a 
coil responds to rate of change in flux density, the 
output of a coil is a function of the speed at which it 
is moving. 

Hall elements are not as commonly used on MFL tools 
as induction coils because they require power to 
operate. Since the battery power is limited and 
inspections are many hours long, sensors that require 
power to operate must output unique information to 
justify their use. In a Hall element, an electrical current 
is distorted by the presence of a magnetic field. A 
recording device measures the change, which is 
proportional to the strength of the magnetic field and 
the amount of current. Although electrical power is 
required to generate the current, Hall elements are not 
sensitive to speed, which makes them attractive for 
some applications. Several recently introduced MFL 
tools use Hall elements alone or in combination with 
coils. 

6.3.7 Sensor Size 

An important sensor parameter is its size. Sensor size 
and therefore number of sensors in a tool directly 
impacts the resolution of the measurement system. The 
axial length of a sensor and the sampling or data 
acquisition rate define the axial resolution of the 
measurement system. Sensors are usually less than one 
inch long. The circumferential width of a sensor defines 
the resolution around the pipe circumference. The width 
of the sensors in typical systems is generally less than 
half inch. The radial height of a sensor is usually less 
than one inch. 



IS 15678: 2006 



6.3.8 Sensor Orientation 

A single sensor measures in only one direction, and so, 
it measures only one component of the flux leakage field. 
Most commercial MFL inspection systems measure the 
radial or axial component of the flux leakage field. The 
third component in the circumferential direction is 
usually ignored due to its low amplitude. 

6.3.9 Other Sensor Consideration 

Most MFL tools attempt to determine whether a metal 
loss region is on the inside or the outside surface of the 
pipe. 

Additional sensors are required for this purpose. These 
are often referred to as inside diameter/outside diameter 
sensors. These are suitably mounted on the tool assembly. 

6.4 Data Conditioning and Recording Systems 

The amount of data generated during an inspection 
is large. As a result of high volume of data, many 
tool designers use data conditioning systems to 
compress the data and reduce storage requirements. 
For example, the amount of data stored can be 
reduced by recording only channels with changing 
signals. This type of data compression technique 
requires a threshold to be defined prior to the 
inspection. 

Data are stored in an analog or digital fashion on either 
tape or solid-state memory boards. 

Most of the recently developed high-resolution MFL 
tools use digital recording systems. Digital systems 
require on-board analog-to-digital converters, which 
add power, size, and complexity to the tool. Digital 
systems provide more safeguards on data integrity 
(error checking) and allow easier data compression. 
Digital systems also provide data in a format suitable 
for use in computerized analysis systems. 

6.5 Power Systems 

The data conditioning and data storage devices that 
are used in an MFL tool require a significant amount 
of power to operate. So, the battery power that is 
available limits the mileage that can be inspected at 
any time. Most tools use rechargeable battery systems; 
the capacity of these systems and the energy 
requirements for the operating systems define the 
maximum inspection length. 

Several types of standard battery packs are available. 
Proprietary designs may use nickel cadmium cells and 
lead acid cells. These cells are usually connected in 
series to produce the desired voltage. Encapsulation of 
the battery units reduces shock and vibration effects. 
These types of battery packs have been used 



successfully for years and are considered extremely 
rugged and reliable. 

6.6 Other Components and Systems 

6.6.1 Odometer Systems 

All the MFL tools have odometer systems. Signals from 
odometer wheels are used to estimate the location of 
indications from the start of the inspection or from 
recognizable features along the pipeline route. 
Recognizable features include pipeline connections, 
valves, wall thickness changes at road crossings, and 
girth welds. 

The accuracy of the odometer system depends on the 
size of the odometer wheels. Slippage of the odometer 
wheels on the inside of the pipe also affects the 
accuracy. For this reason, markers (magnetic markers 
or locator coils) that produce and record signals that 
can be detected by the inline inspection tool are often 
placed at known places along the pipeline 'right of way 
(ROW)' to create reference points for later 'defect 
verification' purposes. 

6.6.2 Orientation Measuring Systems 

Most MFL tools contain pendulum-type orientation- 
measuring systems. These systems are used to 
determine the circumferential location of an indication. 

6.6.3 Pressure Containment Systems 

All MFL tools are provided with small pressure vessels 
in which electronic and battery components are 
mounted. These pressure vessels prevent damage to tool 
components from the line pressure, harmful gas 
components, and moisture. 

7 FACTORS INFLUENCING THE TOOL 
PERFORMANCE 

There are a number of factors that affect the anomaly 
detection and characterization capabilities and accuracy 
by MFL tools. These can be grouped into two main 
areas: Tool Design Parameters and Pipeline Design 
Features and Operating Parameters. 

7.1 Tool Design Parameters 

The following factors related to tool design are 
important for detection and characterization of 
anomalies in the pipe wall. 

7.1.1 Magnetization Level 

The detection is most strongly affected by the 
magnetic field strength while good characterization 
requires a magnetic field that is strong, uniform and 
consistent. The magnetic strength has the strongest 
impact on the applied magnetic field. The 
magnetization systems in MFL tool are usually 



IS 15678 : 2006 

designed to produce near magnetic saturation in the 
pipe wall so that a reduction in the pipe wall material 
will cause flux to leak. The strength of the magnetization 
system must be tailored to the wall thickness of the 



20 



pipe proposed to be inspected. The typical 
magnetization curve for low, medium and high 
magnetization levels and corresponding flux leaks are 
shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5. 



18- 
16- 

|lO- 
§ 8- 

^ 6- 
4 - 
2 - 











High Magnetization 



Medium Magnetization 



Low Magnetization 



20 40 60 

Magnetic Field 

Fig. 4 Typical Magnetization Curve 



I 

80 



100 



Low Magnetization 




Medium Magnetization 




Higli Magnetization 




Fig. 5 Flux Leakage at Three Magnetization Levels 



IS 15678:2006 



7.1.2 Sensor System 

Sensor size directly impacts the resolution of the 
measurement system. AH sensors have an axial length, 
circumferential width, and radial height, and they 
provide an average measurement of the flux passing 
through the volume of the sensor. The resolution of a 
system is defined by the circumferential width of the 
sensor. The use of narrow sensors improves system 
resolution by providing more signals for analysis from 
a given metal loss region. 

When the sensor width is of the order of or greater 
than the Width of a defect, flux leakage levels may not 
be properly measured. Damage processes that leave 
short defects, narrow pits or pinhole defects, require 
small sensors for accurate defect detection and sizing. 

MFL pigs record flux leakage at specified intervals in 
both the axial and circumferential directions in the pipe. 
The data-recording interval in the circumferential 
direction is defined by the number of sensors and in 
the axial direction is defined by the sampling rate. The 
latest generation inspection pigs have an order of 
magnitude more sensors. A high-resolution MFL tool 
suitable for 24" diameter pipeline will typically have 
between 1 50 and 300 sensors, thus the circumferential 
data interval be between 0.25 and 0.5 inches (6.4 and 
1 2.8 mm). The axial data recording intervals (sampling 
rate) is dictated by the data recording system, and is 
usually between 0.1 and 0.2 inches (2.5-5.0 mm). 

7.2 Pipeline Design Features and Operating 
Parameters 

The following features related to pipeline design and 
operating parameters have significant bearing on the 
successful performance of the MFL tool. 

7.2.1 Pipeline Design Features 

7.2.1.1 Launching and receiving facilities must be 
adequate for the type of tool. Launchers and receivers 
may be installed with new construction or during 
modification of existing facilities and may be permanent 
or temporary installations. Consideration should be 
given to the following: 

a) Workspace availability — The work area 
should be reviewed to ensure sufficient space 
for manoeuvring tools and associated 
equipment (for example, cranes and lifting 
equipment) during loading and unloading of 
live inspection tool. 

b) Adequate barrel length — Sufficient room 
must be maintained between the door and the 
isolation valve such that the proposed 
inspection tool can be accommodated in that 
length. For launchers, the oversize section 
length should be greater than or equal to the 



tool length; nominal pipe length can be kept 
to a minimum. In cases in which the oversize 
section is shorter than the tool length, 
significant consideration must be given to 
alternative loading methods such as pulling a 
tool in. For receivers, the nominal pipe section 
length must be greater than or equal to the 
tool length to ensure the entire tool will clear 
the isolation valve. The length of the oversize 
section must be sufficient to accommodate 
the tool stopping distance upon receipt. Actual 
length requirements may vary depending on 
the tool used. 

7.2.1.2 Internal diameter changes (for example 
buckles, dents, bore restrictions, reduced port valves, 
and checks valves) can be present in the line for many 
different reasons and should be addressed before the 
internal inspection. Sometimes the tool is able to 
negotiate these types of restrictions, but each situation 
should be assessed on a case-by-case basis. 

7.2.1.3 Probes intruding into the pipeline can restrict 
inspection tools. Neglecting to remove them can 
damage the facilities and the tools. 

7.2.1.4 Wall thickness is an important parameter for 
which some tools need to be calibrated and thus should 
be considered by the vendor. ILl vendors should be 
alerted if line wall thickness is less than 6.4 mm 
(0.25 inch) or greater than 13 mm (0.50 inch). Smaller 
diameter lines with heavy wall pipe may severely limit the 
number and types of tools that can be successfully used. 

7.2.1.5 Short radius bends 

The majority of inspection tools are capable of 
negotiating a ?>D bend radius or greater. Any bends that 
are tighter shall be addressed on a case-by-case basis 
depending on the tool to be used and the wall thickness 
of the bend. An increasing number of tools are capable 
of passing a 1 .5 D bend radius. 

7.2.1.6 Back-to-back bends 

Bends installed in a back-to-back configuration, that 
is, without an intervening section of straight pipe 
between the bends, can present an impediment or 
sticking hazard for ILI tools. 

7.2.1.7 Valves 

Reduced port valves can result in tool damage and in 
extreme cases can result in the tools becoming lodged 
in the line. Close attention shall be given to the ability 
of the tools to negotiate through check valves. Check 
valves flappers shall be locked in the open position 
during pigging operations. 

7.2.1.8 Field bends and river crossings shall be 
reviewed thoroughly, because older construction lines 



IS 15678 : 2006 



may contain tight radius bends, miters and step 
transitions. These locations are potentially more 
susceptible to geo-technical movement and may have 
pipeline deformations that need to be detected before 
inline inspection is attempted. 

7.2.1.9 Internal coating can interfere with inspection. 
Conversely, certain tools can damage internal coatings. 
Thus, this factor shall be considered prior to inline 
inspection commencement of pigging operations. 

7.2.1.10 Sales taps/feeds shall be reviewed. In most 
cases, the sales taps and feeds shall be isolated as the 
ILI tool passes. Factors affecting this decision include 
size and orientation of tap, amount of flow, amount of 
line debris, and type of tool. 

7.2.1.11 Unbarred and back-to-back tees 

Branch connections (30 percent of the pipe diameter or 
greater) should have scraper bars; however, larger 
unbarred branch connections may be tolerable depending 
on tool geometry and orientation. Hot taps, also identified 
as sharp edges can present a hazard to the tools. The 
dimensions between tees shall be reviewed keeping the 
specific ILI tool in mind, because back-to-back tees can 
create a situation in which the ILI tool gets lodged. This 
results when the geometry of the tees, combined with 
the cup spacing of the tool is such tliat the propelling 
product can follow a path around the tool without 
providing any driving force to the tool. 

7.2.2 Pipeline Operating Parameters 

7.2,2A Temperature and pressure 

Most tools have specific temperature and pressure 
ranges for operation that shall be addressed in advance. 

7.2.2.2 Gas composition considerations 

The product if contains chemicals such as H2S, 
modification to the standard tool design shall be 
considered to deal with the corrosive properties. 

7.2.2.3 Insufficient product flow 

When low flow gas lines are inspected using an MFL tool 
equipped with induction coils, the normal pipeline flow 
may need to be supplemented with additional product to 
achieve the minimum required inspection velocity. 

7.2.2.4 Tool velocity 

The tool velocity, which is practically the same as the 
gas velocity in the pipeline has significant effect on the 
magnetic flux leakage field. In general, leakage fields 
signals from shallow regions of defect are more aflfected 
than those from deep regions. 

7.2.2.5 Effect of stress 

The magnetic properties of a material change with the 
application of stress. The change in magnetic properties 



affects both the applied field strength and the 
uniformity of the flux density around a defect. Stress 
in a pipeline arises due to gas pressure and residual 
stresses from the fabrication process including bending/ 
welding. In addition, metal loss regions, dents, and 
attachments act as stress risers that increase locally the 
effects of stress even further. Stress changes the overall 
(bulk) permeability of steel and it changes the local 
permeability around the defect. The effects of stress 
are greatest at low magnetization levels. At high levels, 
the inspection signals are nearly independent of stress. 
To reduce the effect of stress, the latest generation of 
MFL inspection tools uses extremely high magnetic 
intensities to detect and size metal loss defects. 

7.2.2.6 Effect of remnant magnetization 

The remnant magnetization changes the applied flux 
levels, it also affects the flux leakage field and the ability 
to detect and characterize metal loss. The results 
indicate that the flux leakage fields drop after each 
magnetization. These effects diminish with repeated 
magnetizations. For defects that are circumferentially 
wide and deep, there is a large initial drop in flux 
leakage. The axial length of the defect does not seem 
to have a significant effect on signal shape and size. 

Hard spots in a pipe have a higher remnant magnetization 
than the surrounding pipe material. Therefore, hard 
spots can be located by measuring the remnant 
magnetization level using a sensor that trails behind 
the magnetizing assembly. 

7.2.2.7 Effect of noise and background signals 

An MFL inspection pig passing though a pipeline 
detects small changes in flux leakage in tiie absence of 
defects. These signals, referred to as noise, are a result 
of variations in magnetic properties and wall thickness 
in a pipe. So, they are repetitive from run to run. Noise 
signals are due to natural variation of magnetic 
properties, wall thickness changes, sensor liftoff 
variation, random noise. Seamless pipe produces noise 
levels that are especially severe. 

8 DEFECT CHARACTERIZATION 

Detection, Identification and sizing of the metal loss 
features with a confidence level and probability of 
detection are called Defect characterization. All the 
metal loss features need to be characterized with at least 
80 percent confidence level and 90 percent probability 
of detection. 

8.1 Detection 

All metal loss features are required to be detected with 
kilometer chainage and circumferential orientation by 
the proposed MFL tools witfiin the acceptable tolerance 
for defect location (see 9). 



10 



18 15678:2006 



8.2 Identification 

All metal loss features should be categorized according 
to their shape and size as under. 

The geometrical representation of these metal loss 
features with respect to their width and length have been 
shown in Fig. 6. 

8.3 Pinhole 

If the length (L) and width (IV) of the flaw is equal 
to or less than A >^ A, it is categorized as Pinhole 
where /< = 10 mm, if nominal pipe wall thickness is 
less than 10 mm and A == t, if pipe wall thickness (/) 
is ^ 10 mm. 

that is 0<W<\A and 0<L<\A 

8.4 Pitting 

The metal loss flaw is defined as pitting, if its length 
(I) and width {JV) conform to the following sizing: 



A<.W<.6A 
W^1>A 



and 
and 



A<L<.6A 
L>3A 



and not 

8.5 General Corrosion 

The metal loss corrosion is identified as general 



corrosion, if its length (L) and width (IV) conform to 
the following sizing: 

W^3A\ and L>3A 

8.6 Axial Grooving 

The metal loss is identified as axial grooving, if its length 
(L) and width (HO conform to the following sizing: 

\A<IV<3A and UIV^IA 

8.7 Circumferential Grooving 

The metal loss is identified as circumferential grooving, 
if its length (L) and width (WO conform to the following 
sizing: 

L/W=0.5 and \A<L<3A 

8.8 Slotting 

The metal loss is identified as axial/circumferential 
slotting, if its length (L) and width (ff) conform to the 
following sizing: 

a) Axial slotting: 

0<W< U; and L= \A 

b) Circumferential slotting: 

ff = \A\ and 0<L<\A 



8 
7 

6 - 

5 - 

4 - 

3 - 

2 - 

1 - 



E 
3 



7 



Pitting 



2 



General 



Axial Grooving 



Axial Slotting 



-J" 
6 



T 
7 



"T" 
8 



1 



1^ 
4 



Pinhole 



Defect Length(A) 
Fig. 6 Geometrical Representation of Metal Loss Feature Definitions 



11 



18 15678:2006 



8.9 Crack Type Features 

In some cases the scope of work for the inspection 
will include the detection of cracking in addition to 
the detection of metal loss. Where this is the case the 
cracking may be classified into: 

a) Girth weld cracking, 

b) Longitudinal seam weld cracking, 

c) Stress corrosion cracking, and 

d) Hydrogen induced cracking (HIC). 

9 METHODOLOGYOFMETALIjOSSFEATURES 
SIZING FOR LENGTH (L), WIDTH (W), 
DEPTH (D) AND ORIENTATION 

9. 1 The start and endpoint of a metal loss feature is 
determined by the measurement threshold as indicated 
in Fig. 7. The length, 'L\ of an individual metal loss 
feature is given by the projected length on the 
longitudinal axis of the pipe. The width, 'W\ of an 
individual metal loss feature is given by its projected 
length on the circumference of the pipe. 

9.2 The depth of the metal loss 'd' is determined by 
the maximum wall loss in a metal loss feature and can 
be given as a depth from or percentage of the reference 
wall thickness. 



9.3 Where no metal loss feature interaction rules are 
specified, two individual metal loss features interact 
and shall be clustered when the axial spacing between 
the metal loss feature edges is less than the smallest 
metal loss feature length and the circumferential spacing 
is less than the smallest metal loss feature width. 

10 METAL LOSS DETECTION AND SIZING 
ACCURACY LEVELS 

The magnetic flux leakage (MFL) technique is an indirect 
method of detecting and characterizing the pipeline 
anomalies. This depends on a number of tool design and 
pipeline operating/constructional features, which have 
been detailed out at 7. Like any other measurement, there 
will tfierefore be some tolerances in the anomaly sizing. 

The characterization accuracy levels for various types 
of metal loss features for ERW pipes, seamless pipes 
and for the flaws located in the heat affected zone shall 
be different and the accepted accuracy levels at 90 
percent Probability of Detection (POD) with 80 percent 
confidence level are given in Table 1 . 

11 DEFECT VERIFICATION 

To verify the tool performance within the specified 
tolerance of the recorded/reported data as per 10, it is 



m^talloMarsa 




Hs*stMl point 
E"«nd point 



detection 
thrttthokJ 



< 



start point(s) 



(•ngth of mtUI l0M(L) 



\ l- H z 

■■■""■■TT* ' ^^^ iJr 14 ^ i^-^ I I I . I 1 I J 1 I I \ M^^ 



•ndpoint(E) 




Fig. 7 Location and Dimension of Metal Loss Features 

12 



IS 15678 : 2006 



Tible 1 Characterization Accuracy Levels for Various Types of Metal Loss Features 

(Clause 10) . 





SI 
No. 

(1) 




Pinhole 

(2) 


Axial 
Slotting 

(3) 


Circular 
Slotting 

(4) 


Pitting 

(5) 


Axial 
Grooving 

(6) 


Circular 
Grooving 

(7) 


General 

(8) 


A) 


LONCrrUDINALLY WELDED PIPE (ERW): Full detection and sizing accuracy for meUI loss features in pipe body 


i) 


Depth at POD 
90 percent 


Detectable 


Detectable 


1 percent 
w.t. 


10 percent 
w.t. 


±10 percent 
w.t. 


10 percent 
w.t. 


±10 percent 
w.t. 


H) 


Depth sizing accurac)' at 
80 percent confidence 


N/A 


N/A 


10 percent 
w.t. 


10 percent 
w.t. 


±10 percent 
w.t. 


10 percent 
w.t. 


±10 percent 
w.t. 


m 


Width sizing accuracy 
at 80 percent 
confidence 


0.40" 


0.40" 


0.40" 


0.40" 


±0.40" 


0.40" 


±0.40" 


iv) 


Length sizing accuracy 
at 80 percent 
confidence 


0.40" 


0.40" 


0.40" 


0.40" 


±0.40" 


0.80" 


±0.80" 


B) 


SEAMLESS PIPE: Full detection and sizing accuracy for metal loss features in pipe body 





Depth at POD 
90 percent 


Detectable 


Detectable 


10 percent 
w.t. 


1 percent 
w.t. 


10 percent 
w.t. 


1 percent 
w.t. 


10 percent 
w.t. 


ii) 


Depth sizing accuracy at 
80 percent confidence 


N/A 


N/A 


1 5 percent 
w.t. 


1 5 percent 
w.t. 


±15 percent 
w.t. 


1 5 percent 
w.t. 


±15 percent 
w.t. 


iii) 


Width sizing accuracy 
at 80 percent 
confidence 


0.40" 


0.40" 


0.40" 


0.40" 


±0.40" 


0.40" 


±0.40" 


iv) 


Length sizing accuracy 
at 80 percent 
confidence 


0.40" 


0.40" 


0.40" 


0.40" 


±0.40" 


0.80" 


±0.80" 


C) 


GIRTH WELD OR HEAT AFFECTED ZONE (HAZ): Full detection and sizing accuracy for metal loss features 


i) 


Depth at POD 
90 percent 


Detectable 


Detectable 


10 percent 
w.t. 


1 percent 
w.t. 


10 percent 
w.t. 


10 percent 
w.t. 


1 percent 
w.t. 


ii) 


Depth sizing accuracy at 
80 percent confidence 


N/A 


N/A 


20 percent 
w.t. 


20 percent 
w.t. 


±20 percent 
w.t. 


20 percent 
w.t. 


±20 percent 
w.t. 


iii) 


Width sizing accuracy 
at 80 percent 
confidence 


0.40" 


0.40" 


0.40" 


0.40" 


±0.40'» 


0.40" 


±0.40" 


iv) 


Length sizing accuracy 
at 80 percent 
confidence 


0.40" 


0.40" 


0.40" 


0.40" 


±0.40" 


0.80" 


±0.80" 



NOTES 

1 The use of the term 'GcneraP in this context does not correspond to the use of the term ^General corrosion' related to any governmental 
regulations or industry recommended practices. 

2 Longitudinal location accuracy is ±4.0" from the nearest girth weld. Circumferential location accuracy is ± 15 degrees or half an 
hour (clock orientations). 

3 \fw.t. < 10 mm, theny4 « 10 mm. Otherwise, A = w.t. (wall thickness). 

4 r- 0254 mm. 



recommended to carry out defect verification checks 
in the field by actual excavation at 2/3 flaw locations 
in the field. 

11.1 Flaw Selection 

While selecting the flaws for verification the following 
guidelines may be followed. 

11.1.1 The larger anomalies with more than 20 percent 
wall thickness metal loss, which are likely to have greater 
impact on the pipeline integrity, may be preferred. 

1 1.1.2 In case where defect verification activity is not 
possible (oflFshore pipeline, the defect lying under river/ 
canal/water body crossing or the line segment does not 



have verifiable defects) the identification and 
characterization of pipeline permanent features such 
as valves, bands, tees etc. as reported by the inspection 
tool shall be considered for verification by comparing 
them with the pipe book. 

NOTE -^ Pipe book is a comprehensive document maintained 
by the organization engaged in this activity. It gives the details 
of each pipe length, bend, offtake tees, and other attachments 
including mainline valve, non-return valve to the main pipe line. 

11.1.3 Flaw Verification Procedure 

1 1 . 1 .3. 1 Select the flaws to be verified as per 1 1 . 1 from 
the report of the inspection agency. 

11.1.3.2 A feature location sheet as per enclosed 
sample at Fig. 8 should be provided by the inspection 



13 



IS 15678 : 2006 



^ 


E 


< 


s 


a: 


o> 


g 


5 


S5 


CO 


LL 





X 



S B 



o 

CO 
CO 

♦^ 

I 

05 



O 



OJ 

E 

OJ 
0) 

c 

§ 



E 

8 



CO 
oo 



E 



CM 



O 
CO 

lO 

oi 

CO 

I 

OJ 

o 

c 
o> 

CD 

E 



1 




CO 



CO 



CN4 



I 

LL 



O 
Csi 



CO 
0> 



E 



E 



c 
o 

(0 



2L 

O 
CM 

(0 
0) 



I 



o 

4> 

^32 



0) ^ 



E 
E 

8 



CO c c 
Q < -D 



E 
E 

CO 

03 

E 



o 
< 

£ 

> 

< 

3 



O) 



o 



12 ID 

o o 
18 



S 



(Q 



E 
E 

CM ® 




14 



IS 15678 : 2006 



agency for each of the defects proposed to be 
verified. 

11.1.3.3 Find the distance of the nearest above ground 
marker in the upstream and downstream directions 

11.1.3.4 Both upstream and downstream closest 
references have to be used for taking over ground 
measurements to mark the location of the targeted flaw. 

11.1 .3.5 The two locations shall generally not match due 
to the fact that: (1) The above ground measurements 
consider the topography and does not necessarily include 
pipeline bend geometry or similar; and (2) Dirt or slippage 
could affect the wheel count based measurements. 

11.1.3.6 Therefore, to minimize the discrepancies in 
the field, at least three pipe lengths on either side of 
the flaw should be excavated and girth weld to girth 
weld lengths as obtained in the field and those reported 
should match to confirm the exact spot. 

11.1.3.7 Having obtained the flaw in the field, the 
measurements are taken as under: 

a) Clean locally the pipe thoroughly, preferably 
by sand blasting; 

b) Measure depth of anomaly at various locations 
and arrive at the deepest spot; 

c) Measure length (longitudinally axis) and width 
(circumferential direction) of anomaly; 

d) Sketch defect geometry including surrounding 
or take photo if possible; 

e) Measure the average wall thickness in sound 
area close to the defect; 

f) Mark on sketch/photo feature type (also 
anomalies like dents, gouges, mill defects etc. 
have to be described), log distance, 
orientation; and 

g) Mark on Feature Location Sheet actual 
measured distance to girth weld, orientation, 
feature type, feature dimensions, actual wall 
thickness, etc. 

11.1.3.8 Compare the data on flaw size, orientation 
and location with respect to the reported dimensions 
by applying suitable tolerances as per 10 to confirm 
the results. 

12 TOOL SELECTION 

In order to meet the objective as stated at 2, it is essential 
to ensure the appropriateness of the tool selected for the 
inline inspection. The pipeline owner should match the 
relevant facts known about the pipeline and expected 
anomalies with the capability and performance of an 
inspection tool. 

12.1 The following broad guidelines may be considered 
for tool selection: 



a) Standard/Conventional MFL Tools — These 
tools can detect metal loss due to corrosion in 
a limited manner but cannot do defect sizing 
and internal/external wall discrimination. 
Further, these tools cannot detect any type of 
cracks and mid wall defects. 

b) High Resolution MFL Tools — These tools can 
detect, identify and characterize metal loss due 
to corrosion or due to other reasons. These tools 
can discriminate between internal/external wall 
metal loss. These tools have higher accuracy 
levels and more reliable in data generation and 
can identify circumferential cracks. 

c) Transverse Field Inspection (TFl) Tools — 
These tools can fulfil all the functions like a 
high-resolution tool and in addition can 
identify all types of longitudinal cracks but 
cannot identify circumferential cracks. 

12.2 Tool Specifications 

For the purposes of right tool selection for a specific 
pipeline, as a minimum the following data should be 
furnished by the tool owning agency to the pipeline owner. 

12.2.1 Tool specification shall include: 

a) Wall thickness range; 

b) The magnetic field strength H in Am' as 
function of wall thickness (only for MFL pigs); 

c) Speed range of the tool for valid data 
generation; 

d) Temperature range; 

e) Maximum pressure; 

f) Minimum pressure for gas pipelines; 

g) Minimum bend radius; 

h) Minimum internal diameter; 

j) Tool length, weight and number of segments; 

k) Minimum length of pipeline that can be 

inspected in one run (may be coupled to run 

times and state of the pipeline); 
m) Axial sampling frequency or distance; 
n) Nominal circumferential sensor spacing/No. 

of sensors; and 
p) Sizing and location accuracy of the features 

and flaws with respect io the upstream girth 

weld, the upstream marker and the orientation 

in the pipe. 

12.2.2 If crack detection is possible and is included in 
the inspection scope of work, the contractor shall 
provide the following parameters: 

a) Minimum depth and length for the detection 
of a crack, 

b) The confidence level for the detection of this 
minimum crack, 



15 



IS 15678 : 2006 

c) The accuracy of sizing of crack length and 
depth, 

d) The confidence level for the sizing 
performance, 

e) The measurement of various pipeline features 
with applicable probability of identification, 
(POI) as per Table 2 shall be mentioned by 
tool owning agency as a part of tool 
specification/information, and 

f) The sizing accuracy of various categories of 
defects shall be mentioned in Table 3 by tool 
owning agencv. 

13 TYPICAL INTELLIGENT PIGGING 
OPERATION 

A typical intelligent pigging operation shall involve the 
activities such as pre-inspection activities, Field 
activities during intelligent pig run, post intelligent pig 
run activities including data analysis and reporting. 

Typical pipeline preparation/inspection program have 
been presented in a tabular form as given at Annex A. 

13.1 Pre-inspection Activities 

The following preparatory activities need to be 
undertaken in the field for performing a successful 
intelligent pig run. 

13.1.1 Pull Through Test 

The proposed intelligent pigging tool shall be calibrated 
through a pull through test at tool owning agency's 
works before dispatch to site. The pull through test shall 
be performed on a set of test pipe pieces having a series 
of artificial defects. This test shall be performed 
preferably on such test pipes which have comparable 



wall thickness as the actual pipeline to be inspected 
and the tool velocity maintained during pull through 
test shall be nearly the same as expected during the 
actual run of the live tool in the field. Subsequent to 
the tool run in the test loop, the length, width and depth 
accuracy of known defects in the test loop shall be 
compared with the recorded data obtained out of the 
test run. Besides, the accuracy, relative weld distances, 
joint lengths and circumferential position of the defects 
shall also be checked with applicable tolerances. In case 
there is a mismatch the tool shall be recalibrated and 
tested again until this conformity is obtained. The 
magnetic field strength of the tool shall be measured 
and recorded during the test run. 

13.1.2 Information Review 

It is essential to make sure that known pipeline features 
such as valves will allow unhindered passage of the 
inspection tool. This calls for a thorough review of all 
available pipeline drawings and information. Further, 
the pipeline bends, elevations shall be known and it 
shall be established in advance that the inspection 
vehicle shall negotiate all the bends, curvatures and 
elevations of the pipeline. The presence of non-return/ 
check valves in the pipeline shall be particularly 
checked and must be ensured that they are kept in lock 
open condition during the pig runs. 

13.1 .3 Pipeline Cleaning and Geometry Assessment 

The quality of inspection data besides magnetization 
level and tool velocity largely depends on the contact 
between magnetic sensors and pipe wall. It is, therefore, 
essential that pipeline is reasonably cleaned by passing 
several cleaning pigs just before the instrumented pig 
survey is taken up. It is often advisable to make a few 
cleaning pig runs using special cleaning pigs such as 



Table 2 Identification of Features 

[Clause 12.2.2(e)] 



SI No. 


Feature 


Yes 


No 


May be 






POI > 90 


POI < 50 


50 ^ POI ^ 90 






Percent 


Percent 


Percent 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(3) 



i) 


Internal/external discrimination 


•i) 


Metal loss feature 


iii) 


Metal loss pipe mill feature 


iv) 


Mid-wall feature 


V) 


Grinding 


vi) 


Gouge 


vii) 


Dent 


viii) 


Dent with metal loss 


ix) 


Spalling 


X) 


Axial crack 


xi) 


Circumferential crack 


xii) 


Eccentric pipeline casing 


xiii) 


Sleeve repair 


xiv) 


Fitting 


xv) 


Valve 


xvi) 


Tee 


xvii) 


Bends (5 D or less) 



16 



IS 15678 : 2006 



SI 
No. 

(1) 



Table 3 Full Identification and Sizing Accuracy for Metal Loss Features 

[Clause 12.2.2(0] 



Pinhole 



(2) 



Axial 


Circular 


Pitting 


Axial 


Circular 


General 


Slotting 


Slotting 




Grooving 


Grooving 




(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


(8) 



A) In Body of Pipe 

i) Depth at POD 

90 percent 
i i) Depth sizing accuracy at 

80 percent confidence 
iii) Width sizing accuracy 

at 80 percent 

confidence 
iv) Length sizing accuracy 

at 80 percent 

confidence 

B) In Girth Weld or Heat Affected Zone 

i) Depth at POD 

90 percent 
ii) Depth sizing accuracy at 

80 percent confidence 
iii) Width sizing accuracy 

at 80 percent 

confidence 
iv) Length sizing accuracy 

at 80 percent 

confidence 



magnetic cleaning pigs besides brush cleaning to pick 
up metallic debris such as loose scale, leftover welding 
rods etc. to avoid possible damage of the live tool. 

It is most advisable to run an electronic geometry pig 
(EGP) in the pipeline prior to live intelligent Pig run. 
This provides the information about the dents or any 
other possible pig movement/passage restrictions in the 
pipeline. 

13.1.4 Placement of Above Ground Markers 

Marking systems provide the reference locations, 
which establish a relationship between the locations 
of significant defects on the pipeline and those on the 
survey charts/logs. Reference sites shall be established 
prior to performing an inspection. The pipelines for 
which GPS (Geographical Positioning System) data 
(X, Y and Z co-ordinates with respect to a known 
reference) is available, need not be installed with any 
additional marker system during intelligent pigging. 
However, if GPS co-ordinates are to be utilized for 
defect location purposes, the live tool shall have an 
additional GPS pathfinder attachment. A pipeline 
marker will be placed at each location before the survey 
tool passes. The markers shall be placed maximum at 
an interval of 1-1.5 km. The following are two types 
of markers in vogue currently. 

1 3. 1 .4. 1 Magnet marker system 

The system consists of a permanent magnet placed 
singly or in pairs over the pipeline and in its contact 
preferably at 12 O'clock position and detected by the 



MFL tool as it passes each of these locations. The 
signals caused by these permanent magnets are easily 
identified on the survey charts. The magnets shall be 
in contact with the pipe wall and pipe coating needs to 
be removed at magnet locations if coating thickness is 
more than 1.5 mm. However, in this regard the 
instructions must be obtained from the intelligent pig 
tool manufacturer. The use of permanent magnets is 
most efficient in areas where pipeline can be easily 
excavated and backfilled. 

13.1.4.2 Above ground marker coils 

Some of the intelligent pig tool manufacturers offer 
electro magnetic coils, which can be placed directly 
above the pipeline over ground. These coils transmit 
signals, which are picked up by the passing tool inside 
the pipeline. The location of these coils is marked 
permanently over ground so that the same can be 
tracked back at the time of defect verification. These 
coils have to be leap fogged during the live tool run. 

13.2 Field Activities During Intelligent Pig Run 

13.2.1 Having successfully completed the pipeline 
cleaning and Electronic geometry pigging the pre- 
calibrated live tool shall be launched into the pipeline. 
The generic launching procedure for a live tool is 
similar to launching a normal pipeline pig (see Fig. 9) 
and is briefly described as under. 

13.2.2 During insertion, valves A and C will be closed 
while valves B and D will be open. When the launch 
closure is sealed, pressure up the barrel slowly by 



17 



IS 15678 : 2006 



VENTS AND DRAINS 
TO SUIT 

OVERSIZE PIPE 

(NOMINAL DIAMETER 

^2") 



CLOSE TO 

CLOSURE AS 

POSSIBLE 



TOOL LENGTH ♦ 1 FT 




FLO>N- 



FULL OPENING THRU 
CONDUIT VALVE 



OVERSIZE PIPE 
(NOMINAL DIAMETER * 2") 

GAS LINE - TOOL LENGTH 

LIQUID LINE . TOOL LENGTH 

OR 3 FT. MINIMUM 



VENTS 

AND 
DRAINS 
TO SUIT 




CLOSE TO CLOSURE 
AS POSSIBLE 



NOTE — An unobstructed working area equal to the survey tool 
length is required in front of all launch and trap doors. 



Fig. 9 Typical Launcher/Receiver Arrangement 



''cracking'' valve A. Bringing up the pressure slowly 
prevents damage to the tool and lessens the chance of 
running the tool into the launcher valve C. With the 
barrel equalized to line pressure, open valve C making 
certain it is fully open. Next, open valve A fully and 
close valve B. Slowly and steadily start closing valve D. 
These will divert the flow through valve A into the barrel 
behind the tool. When the tool launches and is past the 
'tee', open valve D ftilly. Restore the launch trap to its 
normal condition. 

13.2.3 Natural gas is a compressible medium. This 
makes tool behavior very unpredictable when 
receiving. Generic guidelines are not possible since 
exact trap configuration, line pressure, and 
throughput vary greatly from one pipeline to another. 
Procedures must be based on the pipeline operator's 
experience with a particular receiver trap. Due 
consideration must be given to the extra length and 
weight of a live tool and existing procedures must 
be modified accordingly. 



13.2.4 Removing the Tool 

Blow down the barrel slowly. If possible, verify that 
the pressure has been relieved on both sides of the tool. 
Open the end closure and block up the handling tray so 
that it is even and level with the barrel. Secure the tray 
to the barrel so that it cannot move out of position when 
the tool is pulled out. Using the tool's nosepiece as a 
pull cable attachment point, gently ease the tool out of 
the barrel and onto the handling tray. Inspect the tool 
closely for line induced damage and excess debris. 

The tool shall be tracked at every 5-10 km interval to 
ensure its smooth movement into the pipeline until it is 
received in the receiving trap. 

13.3 Post Intelligent Pig Run Activities Including 
Data Assessment 

During the intelligent pig tool run the data is 
recorded in the solid-state memory of the computer 
and can be viewed in a digitized format on a 
computer. Each signal channel displays indications 



18 



IS 15678:2006 



recorded by an individual sensor on the survey tool. 
Channel traces remain relatively flat until a 
recorded deviation in pipe wall or other event 
causes a flux leakage signal proportional to the 
magnitude of the event. These events appear on the 
log as sine waves of varying amplitudes and 
frequencies. Depending on their geometry, polarity, 
grouping, orientation, and other characteristics, 
signals are recognizable as either loss of pipe wall 
or as valves, tees, taps, casings, sleeves, and other 
pipeline features. Additional data channels provide 
other important survey information. The magnet 
marker channels display magnet positions and aid 
in identifying welds, casings, dents, and bends. 
A time channel indicates the positions of Linacron 
above ground reference markers placed during the 
run. A binary code channel displays distance, 
orientation, and tool speed data. Following the 
recording of data, tool performance within the 
specified tolerance shall be verified. This has to be 
done in conformity with the details given at 10. 

13.4 Reporting 

The typical final inspection report shall contain the 
following information: 

a) Tool operational data, 

b) Pipe tally, 

c) List of features, 

d) Summary and statistical data, 

e) Fully assessed feature sheets, and 

f) Defect assessment method. 

1 3.4. 1 Tool Operational Data 

The tool specifications shall be given. In addition the 
following operational data shall be provided: 

a) Data-sampling frequency or distance; 

b) Detection threshold; 

c) Reporting threshold, normally taken at 90 
percent POD, if not specified otherwise; 

d) A tool velocity plot over the length of the 
pipeline {see Fig. 10); 

e) Optionally, a pressure and/or temperature plot 
over the length of the pipeline; and 

f) In case of MFL pigs, the magnetic field 
strength H in Am '. 

The tool operational data shall indicate whether the tool 
has functioned according to specification, it shall detail 
all locations where the measurement specifications are 
not met. 

13.4.2 Pipe Tally 

The pipe tally shall contain numbering of all pipe 
joints and listing of all girth welds by log distance, 



listing of each joint length and listing of all pipeline 
installations including fittings, valves, tees, markers, 
CP points, etc. 

13.4.2.1 The joint numbering shall start at the first 
joint after the first line valve. The zero position of the 
^^^og distance shall be the center-point of the first line 
valve. 

Mam line valve and associated 
pup joints flanges and taps 



H- 



Vf- 



i> 



iH4^ 



Clustered corrosion 



indications at 6 o clock 



The survey log" displays 



one signal channel for each 



corrosion sensor on the tool 



Attachment to pipe 




Clustered corrosion 



indications at 12 o clock 




-^<t-*JW-»*<(#-Y — 



Magnet marker channels 

The Linacron marker channel displays the passage of time in binary code 



pT p"" i n '" L" ''' " !^"r^ 



.^\ 



iiT""T:r" ri| IT' ip 
The code channel indicates distance travelled onentation and speed of the survey tool 

Printed survey reeords are a standard format for analog 
conventional resolution survevs. Linaloii, Plus surveys may 
he presented in printed or digitized formats. 



H View«f Windows Application H I R F7 PRJ 



("HEX TMotwlock RMiOal* S M D«fti46 Hi M 

(f 0«c OM Iq Hmkm <r 3 9" WNm4 C»unl ^^^ J J* 



«H>((in| V *r 



(6) 



'iKifirpiMSvr 



Digitized data presented via a computer monitor is the 
standard format for high resolution TruRes surveys. 

Fig. 10 Typical Data Charts 



19 



IS 15678 : 2006 



13.4.2.2 The pipe tally list shall contain the parameters: 

a) Log distance, in m; 

b) Joint number giving log distance at upstream 
girth weld; 

c) Joint length, in m; and 

d) Description of installation. 

13.4.3 List of Features 

All features with dimensions above the reporting 
threshold at 90 percent POD or above a reporting 
threshold as subscribed in the technical scope of work 
of the contract shall be reported in the list of features. 

The list of features shall contain the following 
parameters: 

a) Log distance; 

b) Joint number; 

c) Nominal pipe wall thickness or reference wall 
thickness as measured by the tool; 

d) Feature description adjacent to girth weld; 

e) Distance to upstream girth weld; 
Orientation; 

g) Feature length, width and depth; 
h) ERF (Estimated Repair Factor); and 
j) Intemal/extemal/mid-wall indication. 

The accuracy levels of measurement in the above fields 
shall be in conformity with 9. 

13.4.4 Summary and Statistical Data 

The summary data shall contain the following 
information: 

a) Total number of metal loss features, 

b) Number of internal metal loss features, 

c) Number of external metal loss features, 

d) Number of genera! metal loss features, 

e) Number of pits, 

Number of axial and circumferential grooves, 
g) Number of metal loss features with depth 

0-9 percent, 
h) Number of metal loss features with depth 

10-19 percent, 
j) Number of metal loss features with depth 

20-29 percent, 
k) Number of metal loss features with depth 

30-39 percent, 

m) Number of metal loss features with depth 

40-49 percent, 
n) Number of metal loss features with depth 

50-59 percent, 
p) Number of metal loss features with depth 

60-69 percent. 



q) Number of metal loss features with depth 
70-79 percent, 

r) Number of metal loss features with depth 
80-89 percent, 

s) Number of metal loss features with depth 
90-100 percent, 

t) Number of metal loss features with 0.6 ^ 
ERF ^0.8, 

u) Number of metal loss features with 0.8 ^ 
ERF <. 0.9, 

v) Number of metal loss features with 0.9 ^ 

ERF :^ 1.0, and 
w) Number of metal-loss features with ERF ^ 1 .0. 

13.4.5 The following histograms shall be provided 
over the entire pipeline length: 

a) Number of metal loss features in 500 m 
sections, 

b) Number of metal loss features in 500 m 
sections with depth ^ 0.4 /, 

c) Number of metal loss features in 500 m 
sections with depth ^ 0.6 /, 

d) Number of metal loss features in 500 m 
sections with ERF ^ 0.8, and 

e) Number of metal loss features in 500 m 
sections with ERF ^ 1.0. 

NOTE — ERF is Estimated Repair Factor. 

13.4.6 The following plots (graphical presentations) 
shall be provided: 

a) Sentenced plot including ERF = 1 curve of 
metal loss feature length against metal loss 
feature depth showing all metal loss features 
for the predominant wall thickness, 

b) Orientation plot of all metal loss features over 
the full pipeline length, 

c) Orientation plot of all internal metal loss 
features over the full pipeline length, 

d) Orientation plot of all external metal loss 
features over the full pipeline length, and 

e) Orientation plot of all metal loss features as 
function of relative distance to the closest girth 
weld. 

13.4.7 Fully Assessed Feature Sheets (Dig Up Sheets) 

Fully assessed feature sheets shall be provided as a 
minimum for the 10 most serious metal loss indications. 
Selection of the most serious metal loss indications can 
be based on depth or as defmed in technical scope of 
work in the contract. 

Fully assessed feature sheets shall contain the following 
information to the full sizing specification: 



20 



IS 15678 : 2006 



a) Length of pipe joint and orientation of 
longitudinal seam (when present), 

b) Length and longitudinal seam orientation of 
the 3 upstream and 3 downstream 
neighbouring pipe joints, 

c) Distance of upstream girth weld to nearest 
upstream marker, 

d) Distance of upstream girth weld to nearest 
downstream marker, 

e) Distance of metal loss feature to upstream 
girth weld, 

f) Distance of metal loss feature to downstream 
girth weld, 

g) Orientation of metal loss feature, 

h) Feature description and dimensions, and 
j) Intemal/extemal/mid-wall indication. 

14 SAFETY PRECAUTION DURING PIGGING 
OPERATION 

Safety is of paramount importance during pigging, as 
pigs are used in pipelines carrying hazardous gases, 
pyrophoric gases, and asphyxiants and operating under 
high pressure. 

Safety in pigging operations is concerned with several 
areas, including access to pressure vessels, exposure 
to hazardous gases, and the mechanical aspects of 
launching and receiving pigs. 

Safe operation is achieved by a combination of good 
management systems, proper equipment maintenance 
and mechanical handling of pigs by experienced work 
crews, and basic safety procedures. 

Accidents appear to fall into three main areas of 
handling pressurized equipment, loading and unloading 
of pigs and defective equipment such as pressure 
gauges. 

Besides, common safety precautions the following 
specific safety measures need to be taken during 
pigging operations. 

14.1 Pyrophoric Materials 

Pyrophorii: materials particularly iron sulphide can be 
produced from a pipeline by efficient cleaning action 
of either cleaning tools or live inspection tools. 
Additional vigilance is required to ensure that fires are 
not initiated. For this purpose a fire tender should be 
kept ready at the receiver terminal and immediately 
after opening the receiver barrel gate, the material that 
comes out of the barrel should be drenched with water. 
Besides, thorough wetting, provisions should be made 
for the collection, removal and safe disposal of 
suspected pyrophoric and other materials coming out 
of the pipeline receiver barrel. 



14.2 Hydrate Precautions 

When a line has the potential to form hydrates, 
provisions should be made for their collection, removal 
and safe disposal. 

14.3 Slug Collection 

In case of two-phase flow gas lines intelligent pig tools 
and other cleaning/geometry pigs shall produce 
abnormal amount of slug/process fluids. The quantity 
of process slug shall be assessed in advance and 
provisions must be made for collection of this additional 
slug volume. Temporary tankage/piping connection 
may be required to divert and collection of this 
additional slug volume. 

14.4 It is recommended that written safety procedures 
shall be established before the commencement of a 
pigging programme. Pre-job safety meetings are 
recommended with all concerned personnel including 
the operators, contractors and supervisory personnel. 
A typical written procedure is given as Annex B. 

14.5 Environmental Protection 

14.5.1 Minimization of gas venting by appropriate 
planning. 

14.5.2 Minimization of spillage/land contamination by 
provision of appropriate collection facility. 

14.5.3 Appropriate disposal of solid and liquid waste 
to authorized land filled site. 

15 BASE LINE SURVEY 

15.1 Base line surveys are conducted prior to or very 
shortly after the start of normal service of the pipeline. 
It is recommended that immediately after completion 
of construction activities at site an electronic geometry 
pigging survey should be conducted as a part of pre- 
service works. This can be done by propelling the 
required pigs by the usage of compressed air. A pre- 
service electronic geometry pigging survey offers the 
benefit of confirmation that the contractors during 
construction have delivered all the system as required 
by the contract. Moreover, any abnormal geometrical 
deformity observed, which might have resulted due to 
inadvertant backfilling or otiier construction activities 
shall be known before the pipeline is put into service. 
These pipe lengths can be cut and removed while the 
pipe-laying contractor is still at site. If repau^ are made 
to a pipeline during construction following the base 
line surveys, the locations of these repairs should be 
recorded and incorporated into the permanent pipeline 
records. 

15.2 The advantage of performing a base line survey 
is to provide a figure print of the pipe steel in its 'as 



21 



IS 15678 : 2006 



laid' condition. Subsequent inspections can then 
identify and evaluate the real problems in the form of 
corrosion, from spurious indications (mill induced or 
constructional faults). Once this is achieved, the 
frequency of further inspection and a policy for 
corrosion monitoring can then be established. To enable 
this philosophy to work, a level of confidence in the 
inspection system employed must be obtained by the 
operator of the pipeline. Once this level of confidence 
has been achieved, considerable cost savings can be 
made by eliminating the amount of excavations. 
Following a base line survey and a further inspection 
within 3 to 5 years, the deterioration (if any) of the 
pipeline condition can be assessed and provide a basis 
for any remedial action on the pipeline protection 
system (s). The success of which can be monitored by 
future inspection runs, using the same equipment. 

15.3 It is useful to conduct an inline inspection survey 
of the pipeline very shortly (preferably within one year) 
after the start of service. This will provide the base 
line data for future inline inspection surveys. The data 
obtained during base line shall be very useful while 
evaluating the data obtained during future surveys. The 
comparison shall help in taking optimum decisions 
about the repairs/replacements and making a Residual 
Life Assessment of the pipeline. 

16 CONTINGENCY PLAN 

16.1 Notwithstanding, the best of preparation and 
planning, the occurrence of contingency situations 
cannot be completely ruled out. Therefore it is 
recommended that provision shall be made for at least 
the following type of contingencies while a pii)eline 
pigging programme is undertaken. 

16.2 Contingency Arising Out of Stuck Pig 

16.2.1 Any pig (except the foam pig which are highly 
flexible and generally get shredded, if stuck and 
therefore can come out into pieces) has a potential to 
get lodged into the pipeline due to various reasons. This 
includes hindrances caused by mainline valves, 
non-return (check) valves, pipeline deformity, 
mechanical breakdown of the pig, sudden stoppage of 
pipeline flow, abnormal tee or spur connection, etc. 

16.2.2 Each pig stuck scenario is unique and a careful 
analysis should be done before taking any steps to 
dislodge the stuck pig. It is therefore not possible to 
formulate any general procedure for releasing the stuck 
pig. However, certain generic guidelines are as under. 

1 6.2.2. 1 As soon as it is confirmed that die pig has got 



stuck, immediate steps should be taken to fmd the exact 
location of the stuck pig in the pipeline. It is therefore 
essential to ensure that each pig (except the foam) that 
is introduced into the pipeline is equipped with a pig- 
locating device having sufficient battery life (at least 
72 h) to provide adequate time for pig location in the 
field. 

1 6.2.2.2 In case these efforts fail, and if circumstantially 
it is confirmed that the pig has mechanically broken 
down (in such cases full pipeline flow shall continue 
despite non-movement of pig) it is preferable to launch 
another soft pig [foam or 'bi-directional (Bi-Di)]' to 
push out the broken components of the lodged pig. 
However, if all the above efforts fail to remove the 
lodged pig, cutting the pipeline through hot tapping 
remains the only option to restore the normalcy. An 
investigative analysis immediately after the pig 
recovery should be done by experts and reasons should 
be recorded to avoid such situations in future. 

16.3 Contingency Due to Sudden Stoppage of Flow 

This can happen due to total power failure or any major 
mechanical or electrical breakdown in the compressor/ 
pumping system and can lead to stoppage of the pig. 
Generally the pig movement shall restart unless the pig 
get stuck at some abnormal location during flow 
stoppage. 

16.4 Sudden Failure of Pipeline 

In case sudden burst/major leak/third party activity 
damage occurs when the pig is inside the pipeline, a 
situation similar to 16.2 shall occur. 

16.5 Contingency arising due to excess amount of 
condensateAvater mixtures and/or black dust/iron oxide 
coming out along with cleaning pig or Intelligent tool 
shall be taken care. The following shall be considered 
for contingency: 

a) Adequate amount of condensate/dust collection 
facility, 

b) Appropriate design and installation of 
collection facility, 

c) Operation procedure for collection of 
condensate/dust, 

d) Control/reduction of speed for last few 
kilometers of travel, 

e) Readiness of fu^ fighting, and 

f) Communication and readiness for curtaihnent/ 
stoppage of gas supply to downstream 
customers. 



22 



IS 15678 : 2006 



ANNEX A 

(Clause 13) 

TYPICAL LINE PREPARATION/INSPECTION PROGRAMME 



REVIEW OF 

LAUNCHER/RECEIVER AND 

PIPELINE DETAILS 



I 



NOT 
O.K. 



BEGIN PIOGINO PROGRAM 



J. 



CLEANING/SCRAPPER TOOL 
RUNS INCLUDING 
MAGNETIC CLEANING 




MECHANICAL GAUGE TOOL 
RUN 



O.K. 



1 



ELECTRONIC 

GEOMETRY/CALIPER TOOL 

RUN 




E 



EVALUATE CALIPER 
TOOL DATA 




O.K. 



REPAIR PROBLEMS AND 
RE-RUN 



SURVEY PROGRAM 
COMPLETE 



I 



MODIFY FACILITIES AS 
REQUIRED 



NOT 






EXCESS DEBRIS OR STUCK 
TOOL 


^ 


O.K. 





r 



LOCATE TOOL 
WITH LOCATING DEVICE, 



MAGNET MARKERS 

INSTALLED AND/OR ABOVE 

GROUND MARKER SITES 

SELECTED 



O.K. 




23 



IS H678 : 2006 



ANNEXE 

(Clause 14.4) 

SAMPLE WRITTEN PROCEDURE: SAFETY IN PIPELINE PIGGING 



B-1 If not directly involved with the operation of the 
pig traps, stay away from the area. 

B-2 Generally a two man teams should perform most 
of the jobs. 

B-3 Pressure test main line ball valves on pipelines 
that are not frequently pigged. 

B-4 Hold pressure build-up rate to a minimum during 
launching procedures. Do not exceed the MAO? 
(Maximum Allowable Operating Pressure) of the 
facilities. 

B-5 Eliminate sources of ignition, particularly in the 
launcher and receiver areas. 

B-6 Keep fire extinguishers/fire tender readily 
available on site of receiver/launcher. 

B-7 If there is a history of iron sulphide being present, 
have a supply of water or other fire or heat suppressing 
materials available when opening the barrel. 

B-8 Ensure ball valves, used as launcher or receiver 
valves, have body bleeds blown down before barrel 
door is open. 



B-9 Do not open the closure until the trap has been 
blown down. 

B-10 Do not blow back lodged pigs (spheres, 
squeegees]^ through an open launcher or blow forward 
through an open receiver at frill line pressure. Treat a 
lodged pig similar to a solid line freeze and clear 
accordingly. 

B-11 Do not stand in the projected path of the end 
closure while opening. 

B-1 2 Wear protective clothing and equipment when 
removing a pig from the trap. 

This includes frill breathing apparatus when hydrogen 
sulphide or nitrogen is in use. 

B-13 Ensure the provision and use of dust mask while 
opening of receiver and removal of pig and dust from 
barrel. 

B-14 Ensure the provision of hydrocarbon detector at 
pig receipt site and monitoring of hydrocarbon 
(methane) in downstream wind direction in case of gas 
venting. 



24 



(Continued from second cover) 

ASME B 3 1 G : 1 99 1 Manual for determining the remaining strength of corroded pipelines (Supplement to B3 1 
Code - Pressure piping) Specification and requirement for intelligent pig inspection of 
pipelines, version 2.1, 9 November 98 - Pipeline Operator's Forum (POP) Document 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
witii IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding ofT numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing 
the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issjed to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. PCD 3 (2349). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 website : www.bis.org.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg r2323 7617 

NEW DELHI 1 10002 12323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi r2337 8499, 2337 8561 

KOLKATA 700054 12337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34.A, CHANDIGARH 160022 r 260 3843 

1260 9285 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 r2254 1216, 2254 1442 

12254 2519,2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) r2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 12832 7891, 2832 7892 

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi 



