Indian Standard

IS : 8062 ( Part III ) - 1977 (Reaffirmed 2002)

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CATHODIC PROTECTION OF STEEL STRUCTURES
PART III SHIP'S HULLS

( First Rcpri 111 .I UNE 1906 )

UDC620.197.5 :629.12.011

0

Copriglrt

1978

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
SHAHZAFARMARG 110002

MANAKBHAVAN,

9 BAH`ADUR
NEW DELHI

February

1978

IS : 8062 ( Part III ) - 1977

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CATHODIC PROTECTION OF STEEL STRUCTURES
PART III Corrosion Protection
Chairman
SRRI C. P. DE

SHIP'S

HULLS SMDC 29
Laboratory,

Sectional Committee,
Representing
Naval Chemical Bombay &

Metallurgical

Mcmbsrs
Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI H. R. BAPU SEETHARAY SHRI P. S. K. PRASAD ( Alfwnate ) National Test House, Calcutta DR A. S. BRADURI SHRI B. C. BISWAS ( Alternate) The Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India &RI S. BHATTACHARYYA Limited, Calcutta SHRI V. R. KRISHNAN ( Altwzate ) Indian Tube Co Limited, Jamshedpur SHRI D. D. BHUPTANI Tube Products of India, Avadi, Madras SARI B. N. DAS SHRI H. R. THILKAN ( Alternate ) Indian Paint Association, Calcutta !&RI M. M. GHosH The Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, Sindri SHRI A. D. GUPTA SHBI A. N. SINDHI ( Alternate ) Ministry of Railways STAN;~~~ DIRECTOR JOINT izc;;oy
CHEMIST

A o E )a

,

& METALLURQIST-I LUCKNOW RDSO, ( AILcrnatc) JOINT DIRECTOR ( CHEMICALS ), Ministry of Railways RDSO, LUCKNOW c~;igs; & METALLURQIST-II, LUCKNOW ( Altcmiata ) Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi DE A. K. LAHIRI National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI G. C. MATHUR SHBI S. H. BALOHANDANI( Alk-rnatc ) Heavy Electricals ( India ) Ltd, Bhopal SHRI R. C. MISHRA &RI A. K. BASU ( Alterde )

( Continued on page 2 )
@ Copyright 1978
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is profected under the h&n Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or m part by any Feans except with written permission of th publisher shall be deemed to be an mfrmgement of copyright under the said Act+

IS : 8062 (Part III) - 1977 ( Continued from pa.+-1 )
Members Representing Metallurgical National Jamshedpur DR ~DEJ~ s1NC1l ( Likemate SHRI R. N. MUKHF:RJEX SHRI K. ANN~UH ( Alternate
SHEI SHRI DIL K. DR SIIRI R. L. DR P. N/CAR PlX.\7HI~:NTHY 1 M. N. PAI<THASARATIII S. RAJAIXWAI,.~N ( ) )

Laboratory

( CSIR

),

Bokaro Steel Ltd, Bokaro Steel City Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay Indian Lead/Zinc Information Centre, ,._ .\
Central

New Delhi Institute

( .`I~EPwcJLc)

( CSrR
Alternate

Electra-chemical ), Karaikudi

Research

N. SIJRRAXANYAN S. RAMAJ.\YA~T SHRI M. S. NANJCNDA
X.

6. Rnn SHRI .J. BANXRJEE ( Alternate) Oil & Natural Gas Commission, Dehra Dun REPRESE~ATIW Ashok Chemicals, Bomhay REPRESENTATIVI< Addisons Paints & Chemicals Ltd, Madras SXRI M. B. SITYANARAYANA Pyrene - Rai Metal Treatments Ltd, Bombay Da R. SIVA Kunmn \ SARI M. B.%L~~IZ~SHNAN ( &tern& ) Directorate General of Ordnance Factories ( Ministry SJ~W Y. C. SGBRAMANYA of Defence ), Calcutta Hindustan Steel Limited, Ranchi SHRI S. N. WAZIR SXRI B. N. SEN ( Alternate ) Director Gerieral, I'S1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SHRI C. R. RAMA RAo, Director ( Strut & Met ) DR

Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore RAO ( Nlernctr ) Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur Ministry of Dcfencc ( R & D )

Indian

)

SHRI B. MUIXERX Deputy Director ( Metals

), IS1

2

IS : 8062 ( Part III ) - 1977

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CATHODIC PROTECTION OF STEEL STRUCTURES
PAR? III SHIP'S HULLS

0. 0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard ( Part III ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 27 October 1977, after the draft finalized by the Corrosion Protection Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 Anti-corrosive paints applied to ship's hull fail to provide complete protection to the hull from the corrosive attack of seawater. During painting, holidays are left on the portions resting on the keel blocks. Paint coatings, normally applied under conditions existing in the dry dock, contain pores and are susceptible to various degrees of water permeation, and are more prone to detachment due to turbulence in the stern area. The coating may loosen, blister or undergo physical damage during active service thus exposing areas which become more vulnerable to corrosion. when applied in conjunction 0.3 Cathodic protection, coating, ensures fi-eedom from corrosion and, therefore, life of the hull. with -protective provides longer

0.4 This code of practice is being issued in parts. This part covers the The other parts are as follows: cathodic protection of ship's hulls. General principles Part I Underground pipelines Part II Part IV Galvanic protection of dock gates, caissons, piers and jetties 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part III) deals with the cathodic protection of underwater hulls of active ships including its application during fitting-out period or when laid up. It should be read in conjunction with IS : 8062 ( Part I ) - 1976*. *Code of practice for cathodic protection of steel structures: Part 1 General principles. 3

IS : 8062 ( Part 2. GENERAL

III ) - 1977

2.1 Cathodic protection of ship's 1~~11~ should preferably be considered ah the design stage. With the exception of fresh water fitting-out dock, the conditions as obtained in other docks are highly corrosive. Ships, therefore, should be provided with cathodic protection at such sites during the fitticg-out period till the first docking. 3. METHODS OF CATHODIC PROTECTION

3.1 There are two methods of cathodic protection for ships or other marine structures in immersed condition, namely: (a) cathodic protection by galvanic anodes, and (b) cathodic protection by impressed current system. Both the systems are applied to ships or marine structures which have been provided with a suitable protective coating, such as paint. 4. CHOICE OF CATHODIC PROTECTION METHOD of cathcbe based

4.1 There is no general rule for selecting's particular method die protection. The choice between the two methods should upon the prevailing circumstances and overall economy.

4.2 Ships of small size or low speed may preferably be fitted, with galvanic anodes, while ships of larger size and greater speed may be fitted with impressed current system. In larger ships, technical staff are normally available who may supervise the operation of the impressed current system. 4.3 The relative advantages and

given in Appendix A, should be taken the protection system.
5. FACTORS AFFECTING

disadvantages of the two methods as into consideration while selecting

DESIGN into consideration while

5.0 The following aspects should be taken designing the cathodic protection system.

and/or maintenance of galvanic anodes 5.1 Installation - Install,ation and other work may only be carried out when the ship is in dry dock. Galvanic anodes should, therefore, be designed for a life which is a multiple of the interval between successive dockings of the ship. due to 5.2 Effect of Drag - The possible increase in hull resistance fitting of anodes should be considered at the design stage. The anodes should be so shaped and positioned as to reduce turbulence in the streamlines around the hull. Anodes may also be grouped and fitted by streamlining so as to reduce drag. Close spacing, however, reduces current output compared to widely spaced anodes. 4

IS : 8062 ( Part III ) - 1977 5.2.1 Drag increases with speed and hence the ship requires increased shaft horsepower to maintain the enhanced speed. Drag effect is relatively more pronounced with the galvanic anode system and it is almost negligible with the impressed current system. 5.3 Corrosion Rates at the Stern - Corrosion rates are normally higher at the stern area due to increased turbulence near the propellers and formation of galvanic cell between the bronze propellers and Careful consideration should, therefore, be given to the the steel hull. design of the cathodic protection system for the stern area. 5.4 Hull Potential - If the hull potential is made considerably more negative than the protective potential, the paint applied on the hull may be damaged, The application of cathodic protection should be considered along with the quality of paint which should be compatible with the protective potential range. 5.5 Current Requirements - Current density required by a ship for cathodic protection, is generally variable and depends on (a) speed, (b) immersed area, (c) quality and condition of paint, (d) bare areas, These factors should be taken into (e) salinity, and (f) temperature. account in the design of control equipment for the impressed current system. 6. PAINTING OF SHIP'S HULL

6.1 The underwater hull of a ship should be painted with the approved anti-corrosive paints, following the recommended practice for painting ship's bottom. 6.1.1 Generally oil-based and oleoresinous paints are not compatible with cathodic protection, for such paints are susceptible to softening and blistering by the alkali generated at the hull ( cathode) due to electroHeavy duty coatings are desirable and should always be lytic action. used where the hull potential may become more negative than -900 mV, with reference to silver/silver chloride or saturated calomel electrode. The heavy duty coatings are based upon epoxy resin, chlorinated rubber, vinyl or other alkali resistant material. 6.1.2 According to the availability of materials, cost and other factors, the entire hull or the areas around the anodes may be protected with the The hull surface should be adequately prepared heavy duty coatings. and coating thickness should conform to the specified limit. 6.2 Current Density for Protection - The current density required to protect the wetted area of the painted hull of a ship may vary from 10 to 50 mA/m2. For cargo ships, the wetted area should be calculated on the maximum draught. 5

IS :8062(Part III ) - 1977
7. APPLICATION 7.1 Anrode Material OF GALVANIC The galvanic ANODE SYSTEM anode material may be made of

alloys based on magnesium, zinc or aluminium. The application of aluminium anodes is preferable to other types of anodes for cathodic protection from the point of view of availability. 7.2 Design and Installation of Anodes - Galvanic anodes should be provided with steel inserts suitable for welding or fitting by means of Where welding studs. Anodes are normally welded directly on the hull.

and rewelding may affect the hull plate, a small doubler plate may be welded on the hull. The anode may be conveniently welded to the doubler plate or fitted with stud-on type anodes. Studs should be securely Tack welding of welded to the hull. Nuts are used to lock the anode. the nut to the insert is desirable. The cavity around the stud and nut should be filled up with a putty. Anodes which are to be fitted in midsllip section should preferably be fitted on both sides of the bilge keel. 7.2.1 Safety precautions should be taken prior to welding anode inserts or studs on the hulls of ships whose tanks or adjacent tanks n*ay contain or had contained oil and fuel. 7.3 Mass of Anode Material - The mass of the anode material required to cathodically protect a ship from marine corrosion depends upon: (a) current density required per unit area of wetted surface of the ship, (b) current capacity of the anode, and (c) the period for which cathodic protection is required. 7.3.1 Knowing the current capacity of the anode in terms of ampere year per unit mass (kg) the total mass of anode required may be calculated for the entire wetted area for one year or a multiple of the period between dry dockings. The additional current required for the Normally one bronze propellers should also be taken into consideration. As the to three years of cathodic protection of the hull is envisaged. anodes are consumable-their replacement during dry docking would be It may not be necessary to replace all anodes during the necessary. same docking. 7.4 Number and Distribution of Anodes - The number of anodes shall depend upon mass and drmenslon of individual anodes and ease of handling. The aspects of drag and satisfactory distribution of the anodes shall also influence the number. Adjustment in the number of Distance between individual anodes should anodes may be necessary. be usually 6 to 7 m. Anodes may be fitted in line. be necessary at the stern or when the anodes are groupe the midship area it is not advisable to carry out welding the hull plating. The normal practrce 1s to fix the Normally 15 to 20 percent of keel or to weld them on doubler plates. The the total quantity of anode material is installed at the stern area. remaining anodes are distributed along the side of the hull including the bilge keel. 6

IS : 8062 ( Part III ) - 1977 7.5 Protection of Anodes During Painting - The anode surface should not be painted on any occasion. During hull painting, anodes should be suitably marked. If any paint or other coating material falls or is found to adhere to the anode surface, it should be cleaned by means of a suitable solvent or scraped off.
7.6 Evaluation of Hull Potential - The hull potential of an active ship or a ship during fitting out or when laid up may be obtained both befijre or during cathodic protection by means of an external rcft,rencc electrode. The protective hull potential should be between - 750 mV to -850 mV with refrence to silver/silver chloride electrode, or -800 mV to -900 mV with reference to saturated calomel electrode, or +250 mV to + 150 mV with reference to zinc electrode. 8. IMPRESSED

AND

CURRENT CATHODIC PROTECTION ITS, INSTALLATION FOR SHIP'S HULL

SYSTEM

In the impressed current cathodic protection ( ICCP ) system, direct current is supplied to respective insoluble ancdes fitted on Hull potential is measured with respect the underwater hull of the ship. to reference electrodes which is permanently fitted on the hull. Protective hull potential is closely maintaned to a preset reference potential in the electrical control equipment which should be so constructed that a dc output is automatically adjusted to the value required to maintain the required protective potential of the hull. on the ship, a 8.2 Control Equipment - When ac supply is available transformer-rectifier unit is used to obtain dc. The equipment is designed to provide adjustable low-voltage dc output. Protective current isnormally required to be adjusted so that the .protective hull potential is attained and maintained. Automatic control system is preferable to manual control though the latter system is also often included in the automatic equipment. As the impressed current system has to operate continuously throughout the active period of the ship, the equipment should be of Power supply may also be robust construction and efficient in design. obtained from other sources, such as dc supply. All electrical plants, cables, switchgears, etc, should conform to normal safety requirements. types of automatic potentio8.2.1 Automatic Control System - Various stats, transformer-rectifier equipment are available based on saturable They control the current output so reactors, thyristors or transistors. that the potential of the hull of the ship is maintained close to the preset value designed on the basis of the optimum protective potential and A number of anodes may be connected siting of the reference electrodes. to a single control unit. Details about the control unit and their number, the number and type of anodes, and the reference electrodes may be worked out by the designer in consultation with the user taking into account the class of the ship and the paint system used. 7

8.1 General -

IS :8062 `8.3 Hull

( Part

HI ) -1977

arc required to be perforated at all Perforation -- Hulls points where al~oclm and reference electrodes are to be installed. The positions of perforations should be decided upon by the designer of the cathodic protection system and the shipbuilderjuser in such a way that The holes should be oil, fuel and even water ballast tanks are avoided.

shielded f~(jn~ inside with gad~rts having appropriate cable entry system, by means of appropriate glands, should al$o be and watcrtiglltness, ensure(l.
used anode for use with impressed current 8.4 A.tsode -- The commonly systcm, consists of Icacl alloy Or platinized-titani urn. Both the anodes may bc usecl at high current density. 8.4.1 The ax.ode material should be mounted on backing insulating shield for hull mounting and should be provided with power cables. The anodes may consist of lon,g strips , ciiscs or may be of oval dexign, and Necessary should lx so sh:lpcd that it Off<>iSleast resistance to water-flow.

attention anode.

shoLdd be paid

to building-up

of insulating

shield

around

the

8.5 Reference

-- `The reference electrode may be of high Electrodes It should be secured to, but purity zinc or silver/silver chloride type. insulated from, the hull, and should be provided with suitable cables.

8.6 Number of Anodes -- The anodes required for impressed current Usually system are small in number compared to the galvanic system. 2 to 5 anodes are adequate for a small to large ship. For example, four anodes are required for a ship of 13000 DWT. -- The number of reference 8.7 Number of Reference Electrodes electrodes usually varies from 2 to 5 -depending upon the size of the ship, and should be worked out by the designer on the basis of past experience.

d

8.8 Location of Anodes and Reference Electrodes -- On small ships, anodes may be installed a little forward of the midship and near the stern. On larger ships appropriate distribution may be made around in view the requirement of high current the wetted hull area, keeping density at the stern.

[

8.8.1 For cargo tanks, anodes should be installed forward and aft of the cargo tank space. Sometimes, anodes may be fitted only at the aft of the cargo tank. 8,8.2 The reference electrodes should be installed a few metres away from the anodes. It is necessary to mount the reference electrodes on the ships hull at suitable predetermined positions. 8.9Insulating Shield -- In the impressed current system the anodes receive high current density which may damage the paint in the vicinity of the anodes as it produces high negative potential. The area aro-und the anode should, therefore, be protected by means of a specially prepared insulating layer. 8

IS : 8062 ( Part III ) - 1977 8.9.1 The anode shield may follow the shape and size of anode. Usually a circular shield is chosen for oval or disc-shaped anode, while rectangular types of anodes may have rectangular shield. 8.9.2 The size of the insulating shield should be such that the potential at any point adjacent to its outer edges is unlikely to break down the adjacent paint. The insulating shield may be built of high-duty coating about 1 mm thickness consisting of glass-reinforced epoxy or polyester resin. 8.9.3 It is essential to apply anti-fouling paint to the anode shield but it is imperative that no paint is applied to the working surface of the anode. 8.10 Impressed Current Circuit - The positive terminals of dc output in the transformer-rectifier unit are connected to the respective anodes fitted on thz underwater hull. Cables are taken through a junction box suitably positioned. Cables should be of approved quality, and should not run through oil, fuel or water ballast tanks. The negative terminal of the dc output should be connected to the hull of the ship by means of an appropriate power cable. The reference electrodes should be connected to the control unit according to the manufacturer's instructions. 9. BONDING 9.1 As the propellers are made of nobler metals than the hull of the ship, propeller shaft should be bonded to the hull structure, by means of appropriate slip ping and brush arrangement. The resistance of this bond in service should be less than 0'01 ohm. Whenever the propeller shaft is in bonded condition, cathodic protection system should be in operation. Otherwise a galvanic cell is set up which may cause corrosion of the hull. The propeller themselves receive cathodic protection due to bonding which reduces its general corrosion as well as impingement attack. 10. CATHODIC PROTECTION OUT OR WHEN LAID UP OF SHIPS DURING FITTING-

of galvanic cathodic 10.1 During Fitting-Out - The application protection system during the fitting-out period by suspending sacrificial anodes in the seawater on either side of the ship is considered convenient and practical as these anodes may be hauled on board as and when required or lowered back by altering theu- number and position, when the ship is moved to other sites. The anodes should be hung at a distance of about 3 m from the ship's sides. 9

IS x8962 ( Part III ) - 1977 10.1.1 It is not desirable to employ impressed current cathodic protection system during fitting-out period even though the ship might have been provided with the complete installation system at the construction stage. Leakage of current often occurs during welding operation on board ships, and interferes with the operation of the impressed current system. 10.2 When Ship is Laid Up - Choice has to be made if the hull is to be protected by suspended galvanic anode, hull mounted anode or impressed current system. The hull mounted anodes may have to be replaced in dry docks, while suspended anodes may be removed at sites. At permanent moorings, galvanic or impressed current anodes may be laid on sea bed provided clearance between the galvanic or anodes and the keel at low water is sufficient to prevent damage of the painting on the hull. 10.3 Interaction with Unprotected Ships - Corrosion interaction may arise due to cathodic protection of a ship, if it is moored alongside an unprotected vessel or jetty, or due to cathodic protection on jetties which may cause interaction while unprotected ships are alongside. In either case, the interaction may be reduced by bonding the unprotected ship to the protected ship or jetty by means of steel mooring ropes.

10

IS : 8062 ( Part

III ) - 1977

APPENDIX ( Clause 4.3 )
COMPARISON OF GALVANIC CURRENT ANODES SYSTEM

A
AND IMPRESSED

Galvanic Anode System 1. Relatively
2. Require simple usually to install. many anodes.

Impressed Current System
1. Needs careful insta!lation. 2. Requires anodes. a smaller design number for of

3. Anodes are in electrical contact with structure through welded inserts or bolts. Does not require anode shield. 4. No perforation on the hull or structure is necessary. Anode may be welded or bolted to the structure. 5. Anode forms galvanic cell with the hull/structure. No other source of electric supply is necessary.

3. Anodes are effectively from the structure. anode shield. 4. Hull/structure necessary.

insulated Requires

perforations

5. Direct current is required to be delivered to the anode in controlled manner from a transformer-rectifier or dc SUPPlY * 6. Drag is negligible.

6. Introduces

drag on ship's hulls.

7. Use is generally restricted to well-coated structures, because of limited available current. 8. Anodes Requires ment. consumable. are periodical replace-

7. May be applied to a wide range of structures, including, if necessary, uncoated structures. 8. Anode is durable Does not require and insoluble. replacement.

9. Hull/structure potentials require to be measured with the aid of external reference electrode.

9. Hull potential is measured and controlled with the fixed reference electrode on the hull/ ,structure, which is an integral part in the control system. 10. Cost of sophisticated impressed current system is high.

10. Initial

cost is low.

11

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Heedquarters: Manak Bhavan. 8 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 8375,323 9402 Fax : 91 113234062,Ql 113239399 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Office&) Telephone 0-77 00 32

Central Laboratory : Plot No. 20/Q, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010 Regional Ofices:

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 pastern

32376 17 337 86 62 603043 235 23 15 832 92 95

: l/14 CiT Scheme VII ht. V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054

Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C.I .T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 tWestem : Manakalaya, EQ. Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East), MUMBAI 400093 Branch Offices:: `Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 SPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar. BHCPAL 462003 Plot No. 6263, Unit VT. Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751001 Kafaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATCRE 641037 Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 Savftri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 53/5 Ward No.29. R.G. Barua Road, 5th By&e, GUWAHATI 781003

5501348 839 49 55 554021 403627 21 01 41 8-28 88 01 8-71 1eQ6 541137 20 10 83 372925 21 6876

'

S-8-56C, L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampafly Station Road, HYDERABAD 500061 E-52, Chiiaranjan Marg, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 117/418 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Seth Bhawan. 2nd Floor, LUCKNOW 226001 Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road,

2388 23 26 23 05

Patfiputra lndustriaf Estate, PATNA 800013 T.C. No. 14/l 421, University P. 0. Palayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM inspection Offices (With Safe Point) 695034

621 17

:
52 51 71 32 36 35

Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A, West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 InsQtution of Engineers (India) Building 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005

Sales Cffice is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street CALClJl-TA 700072 tSales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAl400007 *Sates Dffice is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashiiraja BANGALORE 560002 Square,

27 10 85 3086528 222 39 71

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

