( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 8912- 1978

, Indian ,Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT SUPPRESSION CHARACTERISTICS ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE
Composition
Chairman SHRI T. V. SRIRANGAN Members DR M. K. RAO (Al&n& to Shri T. V. Srirangan) SHRI N. BALASUNDARAM SHRI B. C. MATHUR (Alternate) LT GEN R. N. BATRA

OF OF FILTERS

of Electromagnetic Interference Sectional Committee, LTDC 22

Suppression

Representing Wireless Planning and Co-ordination wing (Ministry of Communications), New Delhi

Eastern Electronics Limited, Faridabad Institute of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineer (IETE), New Delhi

SHRI R. S. KALE (Alternate) Ministry of Defence COL T. R. BHALOTRA MAJ A. K. AGARWAL (Alternate) Department of Electronics, New Delhi DR A. K. CHAKKAVART~ DR R. DJZVANATHAN (Alternate) National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), New Delhi DR A. F. CHHAP~AR SHRI SURESH CHANDRA (Alternate) Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, SHRI K. L. GARG New Delhi SARI R. V. NARAYANAN (Alternate) Indian Telephone Industries Limited, Bangalore SHRI A. K. GHOSE SHRI N. KRISHNA KUTTY (Alternnte) Philips India Limited, Bombay; and Radio ElectroSHRI J. GUPTA nic and Television Manufacturers Association (RETMA), Bombay SHRI S. P. AHLUWALIA(Alternate) Directorate of Co-ordination (Police Wireless), SHRI R. S. KALE Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi SHRI S. JANAKIRAMAN (Alternate) Overseas Communication Service, Ministry of SHRI A. S. KHADILKAR Communications, Bombay Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi SHRI N. V. KRISHNASWAMI SHRI S. L. ,JAIN (Alternate) Indian Radiological Association, Bombay DR V. P. LAKHANPAL

(Continued on page 2) 0 Copyright STANDARDS 1980 INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication

is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS ~: 8912 - 1978
(Continuedfrom page 1) Representing Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi

Members

SHRI B. S. V. RAO Automobile Research Association of India, Pune SHRI 2. A. MUJAWAR (Alternate) SHRI A. S. RAMA RAO Railway Board, Ministry of Railways SHRI N. A. P. S. RAO (Alternate I) SHRI S. A. A. ZAIDI (Alternate II) REPRESENTATWE Posts and Telegraphs Department, New Delhi RESEARCHENGINEER Directorate General of All India Radio. New Delhi Electrical Appliances Manufacturers `Association, SHRI K. P. SETHI Delhi SHRI S. K. ANEJA (Alternate) Director General, ISI (Ex-O&O Member) SHRI N. SRINIVASAN,. Director (Electromcs) Secretary SHRI B. K. SHARMA Assistant Director (Electronics), IS1

DR S. @. MAJUMDAR SHRI Y. P. BATRA (Alternate)

2

IS : 8912 - 1978

METHODS OF MEASUREMENT SUPPRESSION CHARACTERISTICS ELECTROMAG~NETIC INTERFERENCE
0. FOREWORD

OF OF FILTERS

0.1This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 28 August 1978, after the draft finalized by the Electromagnetic Interference Suppression Sectional Committee had been approved by Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council.
0.2 The object of this standard is to establish standard laboratory method of measurement of insertion loss of passive electromagnetic interference filters which may consist of single elements such as capacitors, inductors or resistors, or combination of inductors, capacitors and resistors of either the bumped or distributed types. 0.3 As a general rule, suppression characteristics of electromagnetic interference filter depend on impedances between which the filters work (because they are of decisive importance for energy reflection on the input of the filter), on operating current and voltage levels and also on other factors such as ambient temperature. 0.4 In order to make it possible to compare the results of measurements of suppression characteristics performed in various laboratories, or reported by various manufacturers, standard test methods shall be used. assistance has been derived from 0.5 While preparing the standard, CISPR/A (Secretariat) 13 Second draft of report - Methods of measurement of the suppression characteristics of passive radio interference suppression issued by International Special devices and radio interference filters, Committee on Radio Interference (CISPR). 0.6 IS: The limits 6842-1977". for electromagnetic interference are covered by

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-196Ot. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.
*Specification for limits for electromagnetic interference tRules for rounding off numerical values (revised). (Jirst reuirion).

3

1s : 8912 - 1978
1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes methods of measurement of insertion loss of passive electromagnetic interference suppression filters which may consist of single elements, such as capacitors, inductors or resistors, or combination of inductors, capacitors and resistors of either the bumped or distributed types.

2. TERMINOLOGY
2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions in addition to those given in IS: 1885 (Part XXXVI)-1972*, shall apply. 2.1 Insertion Loss - At a given frequency, the insertion loss of a filter connected into a given transmission system-is defined as the ratio of voltage appearing across the line immediately beyond the point of insertion, before As specified herein, the inserand after insertion of the filter under test. tion loss is measured in the specified system with fixed, real and equal impedances of the equivalent generator and receiver. 2.2 Load Current - DC or ac mains frequency the current conductor(s) of the filter under test. 2.3 Load Voltage - DC or ac mains specified parts of the filter under test. frequency current voltage flowing applied through between

2.4 Impedance of the Test Circuit - Impedance of the test circuit without the filter connected. 2.5 Asymmetrical Test Circtiit - A test circuit under test is connected with coaxial cable of which constitutes a return path for high frequency current.

across

the terminals

in which the filter the outer conductor

2.6 Symmetrical Test Circuit - A test circuit in which the filter under test is connected with screened conductor pairs and in which asymmetric voltage is small enough to be neglected. 2.7 Symmetry Coefficient of Symmetrical Test Circuit - The ratio of symmetrical and asymmetrical voltages which appear at the point of connecting the filter under test (expressed in dB). 3. STANDARD LABORATORY METHODS (see Appendix A)

3.1 The measurement of suppression characteristics of the filter is made with it terminated in fixed resistance normally 50 to 75 ohms (insertion loss Two variants are in use, namely: measurement). a) b) filter without load, and filter under full dc or ac load (current and/or voltage).

characteristics obtained may differ from that one observed in practice bccausc the terminating impedances during the measurement differ from those existing during its use in an actual device.
NOTE-The

*Electrotechnical

vocabulary:

Part XXXVI

Radio interference.

4

IS : 8912 - 1978 4. FILTER MOUNTING ARRANGEMENTS

4.0 The filter under test shall be mounted in an appropriate test container. Unless the specific test arrangement is otherwise specified by the manufacturer, the test container shall be as described in 4.1.
4.1 Construction of the Container - The interference suppression elements and filters which have no screens and coaxial plugs of their own at the input and output are placed for measurements into a test container whose dimensions depend on those of the articlc under test, for example on its length I, height h and width u. A container is a box which is supplied A container which is inwith a lid and is made of non-magnetic metal. tended for measurement of feed through capacitors and filters with flange mounting should have an internal partition with a hole for mounting of capacitors and filters. Reliable electrical contact should exist between separate parts of the container. Separate parts of the housing are joined by soldering or continuous seam welding; the lid and the housing are joined together by a spring contact device or by a screw joint. 4.1.1 Coaxial jacks of should the bc mounted on two walls of the container. Suppression Filters in the

4.2 Mounting Containers 4.2.1 Capacitors

Interference

and Filters

4.2.1.1 Nofz-feedthrough &bes - Capacitors with two Aexiblc leads are mounted according to Fig. lA, capacitors with two insulated rigid leads according to Fig. lB, capacitors with one insulated rigid lead, according to Fig. 1 C, and capacitors and four-terminal non-coaxial filters according to Fig. 1D. 4.2.1.2 Feedthrough g)pes ~- The mounting and connecting of capacitors of feedthrough type and of filters with flange mounting should be as shown in Fig. 2A. The mounting and connecting of filters and feedthrough The mounting capacitor fixed by clamps should be as shown in Fig. 2B. and connecting of filters with screened leads should be as shown in Fig. 2C. Where filters are designed to be part of an integral coaxial structure, the mounting shall be as shown in Fig. 2D. 4.2.2 Chokes - The mounting ancl connecting of large-sized chokes should be shown in Fig. 3A and of small-sized chokes (with a diameter up to 10 mm) as shown in Fig. 3B. 4.2.3 Interference Suppression liesistors, Cables and Other Filters Suppession of Interference from [pition Systems of Vehicles Used for

4.2.3.1 The mounting for connecting and making of measurements should comply with the requirements of 5.1 of IS: 6873 (Part I)-1977".
*Methods of measurement o imotor vehicles and other of electromagnetic interfcrcncc: similiar devices (jrsl revision). Part I From ignition systems

5

8912 - 19'78

2. Coaxial plug 1. Container 4. Object under test 3. Element of the mounting I, should be not greater than 1+20 mm, 1, not greater than 20 mm, hl and w1 not greater than 80 mm.

FIG. 1 MOUNTING OF NON-FEEDTHROUGH TYPE CAPACITORS 6

IS : 8912- 1978

2A

ENTRAL CONOUCTOR UPPLY CURRENT

CARRYING

CIRCULAR MOUNTING FLANQE,EARTHED

::

Container Object under
hl and

test

2D 2. Coaxial plug 5. Screened lead

3. Elemmt 6. Screened than

of the mounting plug 20 mm,

I, should be not greater than 10 mm: 1, not greater q not greater than 40 mm.

FIG. 2 MOUNTING OF FEEDTHROUGH TYPE CAPACITORS 7

IS : 8912 - 1978

3A

3B 1. Container 2. Coaxial 3. Element 4. Object plug of' the mounting under test

LI should be not greater than 10 mm, 1, not greater than 20 mm. FIG.

3 MOUNTING

OF CHOKES

8

IS : 8912 - 1978

APPENDIX (CZau.~e 3)

A

STANDARD LABORATORY METHODS OF INSERT4ON LOSS MEASUREMENT OF SUPPRESSION FILTERS A-l. A-l.1 REQUIREMENTS

Basic Test Circuit - The basic test circuit shall be arranged as shown in Fig. 4 and 5. All elements of the circuit shall be screened. An asymmetrical (coaxial) test circuit shall be used for measurement of filters intended for asymmetrical interference voltage suppression and a symmetrical test circuit shall be used for measurement of filters intended for a symmetrical interference voltage suppression.
NOTE Practical modifications of test circuits shown in Fig. 4 and 5 are given in A-3.

3 K _;
BO=

4A

Reference

Circuit

4B Measurement

Circuit

Filter under test G= Generator

7 Isolation attenuator 10 dB 0 = Receiver

FIG. 4 BASIC TEST CIRCIJIT FOR MEASUREMENTWITHOUT LOAD

9

8912 - 1978

5A Reference

Circuit

58 Measurement BO = Filter

Circuit

under test rr'= Isolation attenuator 10 dB UO- Buffer-network

0 = Receiver 5= Current or voltage source, terminals E and Fare not connected to ground G= Generator

FIG. 5 BASIC TEST CIRCUIT FOR MEASURE~~ENT WITH LEAD APPLIED A-l.2 Rincipal Characteriseics of the Test Circuit - The principal characteristics of the test circuit shall be within the limits given below: Characteristics Impedance VSWR Symmetry metrical of the Test Circuit Value 50 or 75 ohms 1.2, Max 26 dB, Min

coefficient (only for symtest circuits) insertion loss

Accuracy: Max measurable a) b) c)
NOTE -

10 dR better than required [see A-1.7(d) ] f3 dB &S dB f2.0 percent
on each measuring frequency

level

Insertion loss For levels over 80 dB Frequency
Characteristics shall be maintained

each value of load current and voltage.

and for

10

IS : 8912 - 1978 A-l.3 Test Equipment

A-1.3.1 Signal Generator - Asinusoidal-signal generator is recommended. Generators of other signals (for example noise or impulse), which have a uniform output spectrum in the frequency range of interest, may be used but in such cases the receiver shall have good selectivity and spurious rejection. A-1.3.2 Receiver-A selective receiver (having at least one resonant circuit before the first amplifying stage) is recommended. The use of a nonselective receiver is acceptable if harmonic and other undesirable frequencies in the output of the generator are small enough so as not to affect the results of measurement. A-1.3.3 Load Current or Voltage Source - The source providing loading current or volta,ge shall be floating and have both terminals (E and F in Fig. 5) isolated from ground with the possibility of grounding any of them when it is appropriate.
NOTE 1 - Substantial simplification of the measurement procedure can be achieved when using a suitable sweep generator and panoramic receiver tuned synchronously. The suppression characteristic may then be observed on an oscilloscope screen or automatically recorded. NOTE 2 - Examples of buffer-networks are given in Appendix B.

A-l.4 Method of Test - Measurements shall be performed in two steps. In the first step the test circuit shall be arranged without the filter under test and the generator and the receiver shall be directly connected via The generator shall be adjusted to the desired frequency suitable cable. and the receiver tuned to resonance at the frequency of the generator. The output voltage of the generator and input voltage of the receiver shall be recorded. In the second step the test circuit shall be arranged and voltages once more shall be recorded. The insertion F $2 in filter-in condition

loss of the filter under test can be found from the formula

:

A = 20 log,, r where 41 =
input

&I
"02

+ 20 log,,

UYl

+ At, in filter-out in filter-in condition, condition, condition, condition,

voltage voltage

of the receiver of the receiver

UO, = Eg, = Eg,
Atr

input emfof

the generator

in filter-out in filter-in

=
=

emf of the generator

value of attenuation (in dB) for a ~calibrated attenuator which replaces the filter under test in an approximate circuit (see A-3).

NOTE In practice it is convenient to deal with readings from the generator (or receiver) only and for this purpose the second voltage is maintained at the constant level U,,=U,s (or Egl=EgZ );for more details, see A-3.

11

IS : 8912 - 1978 A-1.5 Connection of the Filter Under Test

A-1.5.1 The connection of the filter under test and especially the length and positioning of its connecting leads shall correspond to manufacturer's instructions for use, if any. A-1.5.2 Filters for suppression of symmetrical and asymmetrical voltage shall be tested respectively in symmetrical and asymmetrical test circuits.
in conjunction
NOTE -

In the symmetrical

test circuits, the symmetrical generators and receivers used with proper unbalance to balance transformers.

A-1.5.3 Multiple independent circuit filters shall be tested for each lead separately & shall be placed on all unused terminations and shall be Additionally, consistent with the x0 of the line, generator and receiver. coupling between individual leads shall be tested with the leads loaded with <s as shown in the Fig. 6.

..

FIG. 6 ARRANGEMENT

TO TEST FILTER

A-1.6 Mountin of the Filter in the Test Circuit -- Mounting of t]lc filter in the test cucuit shall correspond to that in normal use and as specified by the manufacturer. The arrangement shall not disturb continuity and effectiveness of test-circuit screening. Unless specified otherwise, the filter under test shall be played in a test-box as specified in 4. A-l.7 Presentation of shall contain the following the Resultsspecific data: The report of measurements

a) Test circuit impedance; `1) Kesults of measurements cl d)

for example in the form of a table or diagram drawing the insertion loss in dB as a function of frequency in orthogonal semi-logarithmic coordinates; Description (sketch) of connectors test circuit containing the shape and connecting leads (ifneeded); and mounting of the filter in the and dimensions of the test-box

Maximum measurable insertion loss of test circuit (only if it is less than 10 dB greater than actually measured values for filter under test).

12

I

IS : 8912 - 1978 A-2. METHODS OF PARAMETERS VSWR Checking VERIFICATION OF TEST CIRCUIT MAIN

A-2.1

A-2.1.1 Method IThe test circuit shall be divided at the points of connection of the filter under test into two parts, one of which contain the generator and the other receiver. Then the impedance of each of these parts shall be measured separately at the points of connection of the filter. VSWR shall be calculated (for each part separately) according to the following formula :
V$WR =:

1

-c I rl
Irl

lwhere

and 5 = complex value of measured impedance, K = rated resistance of the test circuit. and

A-2.1.2 Method IIThe test circuit shall be divided into two parts as in Method I. Then the VSWR shall be measured directly (for example with the help of the slotted line) for each part separately. The maximum error of the VSWR measurement shall be & 10 percent. NOTE - When checking the VSWR in the test circuit in which isolation attenuators are used it is allowed to change the generator and receiver for resistors of values equal to their rated resistances. A-2.2 Attenuation Accuracy Checking - Accuracy checking shall be made with the help of a standard attenuator with the following characteristics : a) Attenuation of 50+0*5 dB over the frequency range of interest, b) c) Maximum Input VSWR of 1.2 over the frequency impedances minimum matched range of interest, and test circuits in place and output to test circuit,

d) Symmetry only).

coefficient

26 dB (for symmetric

The standard attenuator shall be inserted into the test circuit of the filter under test and its insertion loss shall be measured.

Test circuits containing buffer-networks and other arrangements for connecting a current or voltage source shall be checked with these included. The source itself shall be disconnected and terminals for its connection shall be short-circuited. A-2.3 Frequency having accuracies Accuracy - Checking better than 2 percent. 13 shall be made with equipment

IS : 8912 - 1978 A-2.4 Maximum Measurable Insertion Loss Checking

A-2.4.1 Maximum measurable insertion loss is limited by generator power, receiver sensitivity, leakage of signal from generator to receiver around the filter under test, and by penetration of undesirable external signals. A-2.4.2 The test circuit shall be set up as shown in Fig. 4B or 5B except the filter under test shall be replaced by a short-circuit the insertion loss of which shall be measured (an example of this short-circuit is shown in Fig. 7). A-2.4.3 If receiver voltage is a minimum of 1 dB above the circuit noise level then the maximum measurable insertion loss is limited by leakage of the test signal from the generator to the receiver or by undesirable external signals. Otherwise it is limited by the generator power or receiver sensitivity. A-2.5 Symmetry divided at the point which contains the auxiliary generator measured as shown The symmetry Checking - The test circuit shall be of the tested filter into two parts one of Then using the generator and the other the receiver. and auxiliary receiver the voltage V, and Us shall be in Fig. 8. Coefficient

of connection

coefficient k z

shall be calculated

from the formula:

20 log $. OF

2 BASIC TEST CIRCUIT

A-3.

MODIFICATIONS

THE

A-3.0 Measurements performed in the basic test circuit (Fig. 4B and 5B) need a previously determined reference level (0 dB) in the circuits shown in Fig. 4B and 5B. If the stability of parameters of equipment used is sufflcient for maintaining the needed measurement accuracy then the test circuit may be calibrated once in the whole frequency range before the measurements. If stability is insufficient then the test circuit must be calibrated before each measurement separately. A-3.0.1 Examples of test circuits facilitating such measurements, are equivalent to basic test circuits are shown m Fig. 9, 10 and Il.
NOTE 1 - These tests are performed components connected to the plate. on a conducting metallic plate,

which
with all

NOTE 2 - The total length of each cable X and Y on Fig. 9 and 10 between the filter under test, or the calibrated attenuators and the isolation attenuators, shall not be more than 0.05 wavelength at any test frequency. Where difficulties in satisfying this condition arise, for example at frequencies above 50 MHz, the test circuit shown in Fig. 11 may be used in place of that shown in Fig. 9. The two isolating attenuators in the branch containing the calibrated attenuator may be omitted if tests show that, with ,me coaxial switches m position 1, the VSWR requirement of A-Z.2 is maintained in the lines between generator and receiver. A corresponding circuit may be used in place of Fig. 10.

14

7A Schematic

Diagram

SOLDERED

CONNECTION

7B The

Way
SP=

of Realization Short-circuiting
OF

with a Cylindrical silvered plate

BOX

FIG. 7

EXAMPLE

SHORT-CIRCUIT IN TEST CIRCUIT

IS : 8912 - 1948

PO

t
Ll
8A Checking of Generator

-

86

Checking

of Receiver

G

= Generator
Auxiliary

under

test with with

asymmetric tor or rcceivcr 0 = Receiver

output to gcneraunder test test

PO =

asymmetric

rccciver input gcncrator

R = Resistor matched
under

PC = Auxiliary

FIG. 8 CHECKING 01' SYMMETRY COEFFICIENT OF TEST CIRCIJIT

A-3.0.2 Measurements of loaded filters also shall be performed according to Fig. 9 and 10 but the filter under test shall be replaced by the set of elements shown in Fig. 12 (SECAppendix B) . A-3.1 General Fig. 9) a) Method of Test with Two Coaxial Switches (see

Method IThe calibrated attenuator is set equal to zero. The input voltage of the receiver shall be maintained for filter-in and filter-out positions of the switches at a constant level (UOl -UO2). Insertion loss shall be calculated from the formula given in A-1.4, in which the first and last components arc zero.

IS : 8912 - 1978

b)

Method IIThe calibrated attenuator is set equal to zero. The output voltage of the generator shall be maintained, for both positions of the switches, at a constant level (Egl=Eg2). Insertion loss shall be calculated from the formula in A-l.4 in which the second and last terms are zero. Method IIIBoth generator output level and receiver input level are maintained constant with the filter in and with it replaced by a calibrated attenuator having 1 dB steps. The attenuation is then obtained from the formula in A-l.4 in which both the first and second terms are zero.

cl

A-3.2 Method of Test with Two Coaxial -Switches and Calibrated Attenuator in Series with the Filter Under Test (see Fig. 10) - The output voltage of the generator and the input voltage of the receiver shall be maintained at a constant level for both positions of the switches. The insertion loss of the filter under test shall be calculated using the formula:

where AT~ = insertion position loss of the calibrated 1, and attenuator attenuator for switches for switches in in

AT2 =

insertion loss of the calibrated position 2.

X
JR

Y
P IL t

. G L T -

Q2 I u
BO `r
0

29
I

-

J

-

0

G = Generator

v

= Isolation altcuuator
= Rcceivcr Pairs of identical

10 dB

P = Coaxial switch T R = Calibrated attenuator (adjustable)

X, Y =

cables

FIG. 9 TEST CIRCUIT WITH Two COAXIAL SWITCHES AND CALIBRATED ATTENUATOR PARALLEL TO THE FILTER UNDER TEST
17

I$ : 8912 - 1978

G

P
0

x,
FIG.

Y =

Generator Coaxial switch Receiver Pairs of identical cables

1

=

Isolation

attenuator

10 dB

BO
lx

= Filter under test = Calibrated attenuator

10 TEST CIRCUIT WITH Two COAXIAL SWITCHES AND CALIBRATED ATTENUATOR IN SERIES WITH THE FILTER UNDER TEST

G P 0 X,

= = = Y =

Generator Coaxial switch Receiver Pairs of identical FIG. 11 TEST

7II0 cables CIRCUIT WITH 18 Tll Two

= = =

Isolation

attenuator

10 dB

Filter under test Calibrated attenuator SWITCHES

COAXIAL

IS : 8912 - 1978

A9

I

QB

I

uo

BO

uo

.
Et) OF Z
J

BO = g =

Filter under test Current or voltage source

UO =

Buffer-network

FIG. 12 SET OF ELEMENTS REPLACINGFILTER UNDER TEST IN FIG. 9, 10 AND 11 WHEN CONDUCTINGMEASUREMENTS WITH CURRENT OR VOLTAGE LOAD

APPENDIX

B

(Clauses A-1.3.3 and A-3.0.2)
EXAMPLES
B-1.

OF THE

BUFFER-NETWORK

Circuit diagrams of current source buffer-networks for the frequency range of 0.1 to 30 MHz and 30 to 300 MHz are shown in Fig. 13. Specification of elements of those buffer-networks is given in Table 1.

B-2. The ways of connecting in Fig. 14 to 17.

buffer-networks

in test circuits

are shown

B-3. Before testing the attenuation of the loaded filter, it must be ascertained by a preliminary test made without current or voltage (unloaded filter) that the tests in the frequency range considered are not influenced by the presence of the buffer-network UO and of the source 5. 19

IS : 8912 - 1978
TABLE

1 SPECIFICATION

OF ELEMENTS (Clause B-l)

OF BUFFER-NETWORKS

ELEMENT

c1 G L

FREQUENCY RANGE _------_-------\ `0.1-30 MHz 30-300 MHz' Non-inductive capacitor 0.1 PF Non-inductive capacitor 2 PF Feedthrough capacitor 1 pF/ 100 A Two feedthrough capacitors 1 rF/lOO A Split winding choke Each choke: 7 X 20 turns in five layers One layer winding 20 turns Cotton-covered 5 mm wire Cotton-covered 4 nun wire Open ferrite core: Open ferrite core: Seven 8x 220 mm rods of Ni-Zn 8 x 42 mm rod of Ni-Zn ferrite with ferrite with pi =200 p,=zoo Choke length 176 mm Choke length 45 mm Choke diameter 75 mm Choke diameter 15 mm L, kHz=l.2 mH L, kHz=2 FH NOTE - Buffer-networks for which parameters are given in this table are designed for 60 A continuous load and 100 A short-time load.

L__C1___________J `q-2

I

I L__ 4

c2

I __J

3
Range 0-I to 30 MHz 136 For the Frequency Range 30 to 300 MHz

13A For the Frequency

1= To generator or receiver Z=To the filter under test 3 = To load current source FIG. 13 EXAMPLE OF CURRENT SOURCE BUFFER-NETWORKS

20

IS : 8912 - 1978

Z
BO = Filter under test 0 = Receiver UO =Buffer-network G = Generator I =Isolation attenuator < =I,oad current source 10 dB

FIG. 14 EXAMPLE OF CONNECTING BUFFER-NETWORKS FOR LOAD CURRENT SOURCE IN ASYMMETRIC TFST CIRCUIT

BO =Filter under 0 =Receiver UO=Buffer-network G = Generator

test

= Isolation attenuator IOdB < -= Load current Source (See Note under Fig. 17)

r,/T2

FIG. 15 EXAMPLE OF CONNECTING BUFFER-NETWORKS FOR LOAD CURRENT SOURCE IN SYMMETRICAL TEW CIRCUIT 21

IS : 8912 - 1978

BO =Filter under test 0 = Receiver UO ==Buffer-network

G = Generator 7 =Isolation attenuator 10 dB < =Load voltage source

FIG. 16 EXAMPLE OF CONNECTING BUFFER-NETWORKS FOR LOAD VOLTAGE SOURCE IN ASYMMETRIC TEST CIRCUIT

G

BO = Filter under test 0 = Receiver UO=Buffer-network

G = Generator 7 -Isolation attenuator 10 dB k =Load voltage source

NOTE - In the symmetrical test circuits shown in Fig. 15 and 17, the symmetrical generators and receivers may be replaced with asymmetrical generators and receivers used in conjunction with proper unbalance to balance transformers.

FIG. 17 EXAMPLE OF CONNECTING BUFFER-NETWORKS FOR LOAD VOLTAGE SOURCE IN SYMMETRICAL TEST CIRCUIT 22

