NAT Alan IS 8451 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


Haa İT re Ter aT 
anafàm teor va utao — 
MuRaT 


( dtaa FATT ) 


Periodic Inspection and Testing of 
Seamless Steel Gas Cylinders — 
Code of Practice 


( Third Revision ) 


ICS 23.020.30 


© BIS 2018 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay fereft— 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2018 Price Group 9 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 
This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


This standard was first published in 1977 and subsequently revised in 1984 and 2009. In this revision following 
clauses have been added/modified: 


a) Scope is modified by increasing the water capacity 3 000 litres in place of 150 litres; 
b) Internal and external cleaning clause added; 

c) Check of internal Condition clause modified; 

d) Proof Pressure clause test removed; and 

e) Painting and Coating clause modified. 


This standard is, of necessity, general in nature although some specific limits are recommended. It should be 
distinctly understood that it will not cover all circumstances for each individual cylinder type. Each cylinder 
user is expected to modify them to suit his own cylinder design or the conditions of use that may exist in his 
own service. Rejection, or acceptance for continued use in accordance with these limits, does not imply that 
these cylinders are, or are not, dangerous, or subject to impending failure, but represents practice which has been 
satisfactory to a cross section of the industry. 


Experience in the inspection of cylinders is an important factor in determining the acceptability of a given 
cylinder for continued service. Users lacking this experience and having doubtful cylinders should return them to 
a manufacturer for re-inspection. 


In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from ISO 6406 : 2005 ‘Periodic 
inspection and testing of seamless steel gas cylinder’. 


Periodic inspection and testing for seamless aluminum cylinders are covered in IS 16017 : 2013 ‘Transportable 
gas cylinders — Periodic inspection and testing of seamless aluminium alloy gas cylinders’. 


The Gas Cylinders Rules, 2004 and the Indian Standard specifications relating to compressed gas cylinder 


require that a cylinder be condemned when it leaks, or when internal or external corrosion, denting, bulging, or 
evidence of rough usage exists to the extent that the cylinder is likely to be weakened appreciably. 
List of corrosive gases to the cylinder material is given in Annex A. 
While implementing this standard, the manufacturer and the inspection agency shall ensure compliance with 
statutory regulations. It is the responsibility of the owners and the users to ensure that the cylinders are periodically 
tested as per norms laid down in Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004 as amended from time to time and as enforced by 
statutory authorities under the rules. 
The relevant SI units and corresponding conversion factors are given below for guidance: 

Pressure 1Pa (Pascal) = 1 N/m? 

1 kgf/mm? = 9.80665 MPa 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex G. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 


IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 8451 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


PERIODIC INSPECTION AND TESTING OF 
SEAMLESS STEEL GAS CYLINDERS — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 


( Third Revision ) 
1 SCOPE TS No. Title 
This standard deals with seamless steel gas cylinder IS 4379:1981 Identification of contents of 
(single or those from bundles) intended for storage of industrial gas cylinders (first 
compressed and liquefiable gases under pressure, of revision) 


water capacity from 0.5 | up to and including 3 000 |. 
It also applies, as far as practicable, to cylinders of less 
than 0.5 | water capacity. 


This standard specifies the requirement for periodic 
inspection and testing to verify the integrity of such 
gas cylinders to be reintroduced into service for a 
further period of time. This standard does not apply for 
periodic inspection and testing of acetylene cylinders 
and composite cylinders. 


NOTES 


1 Composite cylinders are excluded because of totally different 
nature of construction which calls for different techniques 
during period testing. 

2 Ifrequired a separate standard may be prepared for composite 
cylinders periodic inspection and testing. The panel for this 
work may include the organizations who already have set up 


such facility. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. 
183224 : 2002 


Title 


Valve fittings for compressed 
gas cylinders excluding liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG) cylinders — 
Specification (third revision) 


IS 3745 :2006 Yoke type valve connections for 
small medical gas cylinders — 


Specification (second revision) 


IS 3933: 1966 Colour identification of gas 
cylinders and related equipment 


intended for medical use 


IS 5844: 2014 | Recommendations for hydrostatic 


stretch testing of compressed gas 
cylinders (first revision) 


IS 7285 (Part 1) Refillable seamless steel gas 


: 2018 cylinders — Specification: Part 1 
Normalized steel cylinders (fourth 
revision) 

IS 7285 (Part 2) Refillable seamless steel gas 


: 2017 cylinders — Specification: Part 2 
Quenched and tempered steel 
cylinders with tensile strength less 
than 1 100 MPa (112 kgf/mm2) 


(fourth revision)) 


IS 8198 : 2004 Steel cylinders for compressed 
gas (atmospheric gases, hydrogen, 
high pressure liquefiable gases 
and dissolved acetylene gases) — 


Code of practice 


IS 9122: 2008 Inspection gauges for checking 
type 2 taper threads of gas 
cylinder valves, taper 3 in 25 — 
Specification (first revision) 


IS 15490: 2017 Seamless steel cylinders for on- 
board storage of compressed 
natural gas as a fuel for automotive 
vehicles — Specification (first 


revision) 


IS 15975:2013 Gas cylinders — Conditions for 


filling gas cylinders 


3 INTERVALS BETWEEN 
INSPECTION AND TEST 


PERIODIC 


A cylinder shall be due for a periodic inspection and 
test on its first receipt by a filler after the expiry of the 
interval in accordance with the requirements given in 
IS 15975, or as approved by the statutory authority. 


Provided the cylinder has been subjected to normal 
conditions of use and has not been subjected to abusive 
and abnormal conditions rendering the cylinder unsafe, 


IS 8451 : 2018 


there is no general requirement for the user to return a 
gas cylinder before the contents have been used even 
though the test interval may have lapsed. 
NOTE — In the case of cylinders used for emergency purposes 
(for example fire extinguishers, breathing apparatus, etc) 
it is the responsibility of the owner or user to submit it for 
a periodic inspection and tests within the interval specified 
by national authorities or as specified in the relevant cylinder 


design standard, if this interval is shorter. 


4 LIST OF PROCEDURES FOR PERIODIC 
INSPECTION AND TEST 


Each cylinder shall be submitted to periodic 
inspections and tests. The following procedures form 
the requirements for such inspection and test and are 
explained in detail in the following clauses: 


a) Identification of cylinder and preparation for 
inspection and test (see 5); 


b) Depressurization and de-valving (see 6); 
c) Internal and External cleaning (see 7) 

d) External visual inspection (see 8); 

e) Check of internal condition (see 9); 

f) Supplementary tests (see 10); 

g) Inspection of cylinder neck (see 11); 


h) Hydrostatic stretch test or ultrasonic examination 
(see 12); 


j) Inspection of valve and other accessories (see 13); 
k) Replacement of cylinder parts (see 14); 
m) Final operations (see 15); and 


n) Rejection and rendering cylinder unserviceable 
(see 16). 


It is recommended that the above listed procedures be 
performed in the suggested sequence. In particular, 
the check of internal condition (see 8) should be 
carried out after internal and external cleaning before 
the hydrostatic stretch test or ultrasonic examination 
(see 12). 


Cylinders that fail in inspections or tests shall be rejected 
(see 16). Where a cylinder passes the previously listed 
procedure, but the condition of the cylinder remains in 
doubt, additional tests shall be performed to confirm its 
suitability for continued service (see 10) or the cylinder 
shall be rendered unserviceable. 


The inspections and tests shall be carried out only 
by persons authorized under the relevant regulations. 
Mechanical properties of steel cylinders may be affected 
by heat exposure. Therefore, the maximum temperature 
for any operation shall be limited to 300°C. 


5 IDENTIFICATION OF CYLINDER AND 
PREPARATION FOR INSPECTIONS AND 
TESTS 


Before any work is carried out, the relevant cylinder 
data and its contents and ownership shall be identified. 


Traceability shall be established with respect to the 
manufacturing test certificate of the cylinder. 


6 DEPRESSURIZATION AND DEVALVING 
PROCEDURES 


All cylinders other than cylinders at manufacturer’s 
works shall be presumed to contain gas under pressure 
and the following precautions shall accordingly be 
observed (see Annex C). 


6.1 The cylinder contents shall be released in a safe 
manner keeping in mind dangers associated with the 
nature of the gas in the cylinder. Cylinders, which 
contain or may have been contaminated by poisonous 
or obnoxious substances, shall be emptied only by test 
stations properly equipped and experienced to handle 
the particular gas/substance. Such cylinders shall be 
clearly labelled that they have been contaminated. For 
flammable gases test stations which are authorized 
shall only handle such cylinders. 


6.2 The valve shall be opened and if no gas escapes 
and the port is not visibly blocked, a charge of low 
pressure nitrogen or other inert gas shall be blown into 
the valve outlet. Discharge of gas after removal of the 
nitrogen supply indicates that the cylinder is empty. 
When no gas discharges the valve shall be treated as 
obstructed. Where a cylinder has contained poisonous 
or obnoxious substances, and the valve is suspected of 
being obstructed, the gas shall be released within an 
approved appliance and the valves shall be removed in 
such a manner that the gas escapes without danger to 
the operator. 


6.3 Should the valve be obstructed the contents of the 
cylinder shall be released in safe manner as given in 
6.1. Work on cylinders containing combustible gases 
shall be carried out in the open air. 


7 INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL CLEANING 


All cylinders shall be cleaned from inside as well as 
outside. Any cylinder showing presence of foreign 
matter or signs of more than light surface corrosion 
shall be cleaned internally under closely controlled 
conditions by shot blasting, water jet abrasive cleaning, 
flailing, steam jet, hot water jet, rumbling, chemical 
cleaning or other suitable method. 


The method used to clean the cylinder shall be 
validated, controlled process. Care shall be taken all 
times to avoid damaging the cylinder or removing 
excess amounts of cylinder wall (see Annex B). 


8 EXTERNAL VISUAL INSPECTION 


8.1 Preparation for External Visual Inspection 


When necessary, the cylinder shall be cleaned and 
have all loose coatings, corrosion products, tar, oil or 
other foreign matter removed from its external surface 


by a suitable method, for example, by brushing, shot 
blasting (under closely controlled condition), water 
jet abrasive cleaning, chemical cleaning or other 
suitable methods. The method used to clean the 
cylinder shall be validated, controlled process. Care 
shall be taken at all times to avoid damaging the 
cylinder or removing excess amounts of cylinder wall 
(see Annex B). 


If fused nylon, polyethylene or a similar coating has 
been applied and the same is seen to be damaged or 
prevents a proper inspection, then the coating shall 
be stripped. If the coating has been removed by the 
application of heat, in no case shall the temperature of 
the cylinder have exceeded 300°C. 


8.2 Inspection Procedure 


The external surface of each cylinder shall be inspected 
for: 


a) Dents, cuts, gouges, bulges, cracks, laminations, 
or excessive base wear; 


b) Heat or fire damage, plug or neck inserts or electric 
arc, suspicious marks, etc (see Table 3); 


c) Corrosion (see Table 3) — Special attention shall 
be given to areas where water may be trapped. 
These include the entire base area, the junction 
between the body and the foot ring and the 
junction between the body and shroud; 


d) Other defects such as illegible or incorrect, 
unauthorized stamp marking, or unauthorized 
additions or modifications; 


e) Integrity of all permanent attachments (see B-2); 
and 


f) Vertical stability, if relevant (see B-2). 


For rejection criteria, see Annex B. Cylinders no 
longer suitable for future service shall be rendered 
unserviceable (see 16). 


9 CHECK OF INTERNAL CONDITION 


Cylinders shall be inspected internally to complete 
periodic testing requirements. 


Each cylinder shall be inspected internally using 
adequate illumination to identify any defects similar to 
those listed in 8.2 (a) and 8.2 (c). It may be checked 
with the help of instrument such as Boroscope with 
high pixel camera. Precaution shall be taken to ensure 
that the method of illumination presents no risks to the 
tester while performing the operation. Any internal liner 
or coating that may obstruct optimum visual inspection 
shall be removed. 


For the cylinder of non-corrosive gases and less than 
0.5 | water capacity with an internal neck diameter less 
than 9 mm, alternative method may be substituted for 
the internal visual inspection. 


IS 8451 : 2018 


10 SUPPLEMENTARY TEST 


Where there is doubt concerning the type and/or severity 
of a defect found on visual inspection, additional tests 
or methods of examination like ultrasonic techniques, 
weighing, or other non-destructing tests may be 
applied. Only when all doubts are eliminated; may the 
cylinder be further processed (see Annex B). 


11 INSPECTION OF CYLINDER NECK 


11.1 Cylinder to Valve Threads 


When the valve is removed, the cylinder to valve 
threads shall be examined to identify the type of thread 
and to ensure that they are: 


a) Clean and of full form, 

b) Free of damages, 

c) Free of burrs, 

d) Free of cracks, and 

e) Free of other imperfections. 


Cracks manifest themselves as lines that run vertically 
down the thread and across the thread faces. They should 
not be confused with tap marks (thread machining stop 
marks). Special attention should be paid to the bottom 
of the threads. In addition threads shall be checked 
according to relevant gauging standards. 


11.2 Other Neck Surfaces 


Other surfaces of the neck shall also be examined to 
ensure they are free of cracks or other defects (see 
Annex C). 


11.3 Damaged Internal Neck Thread 


Where necessary and where the manufacturer or the 
competent design authority confirms that the design 
of the neck permits, threads may be re-tapped to 
provide the appropriate number of effective threads. 
After re-tapping, the threads shall be checked with the 
appropriate thread gauge (see IS 9122). 


11.4 Neck Ring and Collar Attachment 


When a neck ring/collar is attached, an examination 
shall be carried out to ensure that it is secure to inspect 
for thread damage. A neck ring shall only be changed 
using an appropriate procedure. If it is found that any 
significant damage to cylinder material has occurred 
by replacement of the neck ring/collar, or the cylinder 
material is heavily corroded during use, the cylinder 
shall be rendered unserviceable (see 16). 


12 HYDROSTATIC STRETCH TEST AND/OR 
ULTRASONIC EXAMINATION 


12.1 General 


Each cylinder shall be subjected to hydrostatic stretch 
test and/or ultrasonic examination test or as specified 
by the statutory authority. 


IS 8451 : 2018 


WARNING — Take appropriate measures to ensure 
safe operation and to contain any energy that may 
be released during the hydrostatic stretch test. It 
should be noted that pneumatic pressure test requires 
more precautions than hydraulic pressure tests since, 
regardless of the size of the container; any error in 
carrying out this test is highly likely to lead to a rupture 
under gas pressure. Therefore these tests should only 
be carried out after ensuring that the safety measures 
satisfy the safety requirements. 


Each cylinder subjected to a hydrostatic stretch test 
shall use a suitable fluid, normally water, as the test 
medium. The test pressure shall be in accordance with 
the stamp markings on the cylinder. 


12.2 Hydraulic Volumetric Expansion Test 


Annex E prescribes a typical method for carrying out 
the test and gives details for determining the volumetric 
expansion of seamless steel gas cylinder by the 
preferred water jacket method or the non water jacket 
method as per IS 5844. 


The permanent volumetric expansion of the cylinder 
expressed as a percentage of the total expansion at test 
pressure shall not exceed the percentage given in the 
design specification or 10 percent whichever is lower 
after the cylinder has been held at test pressure for a 
minimum period of 30 s. The cylinder shall be rendered 
unserviceable if permanent expansion exceeds the 
minimum requirement. 


12.3 Ultrasonic Examination 


12.3.1 Scope 


This is based on techniques used by cylinder 
manufacturers. Other techniques of ultrasonic 
inspection may be used, provided these have been 
demonstrated to be suitable for the manufacturing 
method. 


12.3.2 General Requirements 


The ultrasonic testing equipment shall be capable of at 
least detecting the reference standard as described in 
12.3.3.2. It shall be serviced regularly in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s operating instructions to 
ensure that its accuracy is maintained. Inspection 
records and approval certificates for the equipment 
shall be maintained. 


The operation of the test equipment shall be by trained 
personnel and supervised by qualified and experienced 
certified personnel. 


The inner and outer surface of any cylinder which is to 
be tested ultrasonically shall be in a condition suitable 
for an accurate and reproducible test. 


For flaw detection the pulse echo system shall be used. 
For thickness measurement either the resonance method 
or the pulse echo system shall be used. Either contact or 
immersion techniques of testing shall be used. 


Acoupling method which ensures adequate transmission 
of ultrasonic energy between the testing probe and the 
cylinder shall be used. 


12.3.3 Flaw Detection of the Cylindrical Parts 


12.3.3.1 Procedure 


The cylinder to be inspected and the search unit shall 
have a rotating motion and translation relative to one 
another such that a helical scan of the cylinder will be 
described. The velocity of rotation and translation shall 
be constant within range of +10 percent. The pitch of 
the helix shall be less than the width covered by the 
probe (at least 10 percent overlap shall be guaranteed) 
and be related to the effective beam width such as to 
ensure 100 percent coverage at the velocity of rotational 
movement and a translation used during the calibration 
procedure. 


An alternative scanning method may be used for 
transverse defect detection in which the scanning or 
relative movement of the probes and the work piece 
is longitudinal, the sweeping motion being such as 
to ensure 100 percent surface coverage with about 
10 percent overlap of the sweeps. 


The cylinder wall shall be tested for longitudinal 
defects with the ultrasonic energy transmitted in both 
circumferential directions and for transverse defects in 
both longitudinal directions. 


For concave base cylinders where hydrogen 
embrittlement or stress corrosion may occur, the 
transition region between the cylindrical part and 
the cylinder base shall also be tested for transverse 
defects in the directions of the base. For the area to be 
considered (see Fig. 1). The ultrasonic sensitivity shall 
be set at + 6 dB in order to improve the detection of 
defects equivalent to 5 percent of the cylindrical wall 
thickness in this thickened portion. 


In this case or when optional testing if carried out on 
the transition area between the wall and neck and/or 
wall and base, this may be conducted manually, if not 
carried out automatically. 


The effectiveness of the equipment shall be periodically 
checked by passing a reference standard through the 
test procedure. This check shall be carried out at least at 
the beginning and end of each shift. If during this check 
the presence of the appropriate reference notch is not 
detected then all cylinders tested subsequent to the test 
acceptable check shall be retested after the equipment 
has been reset. 


12.3.3.2 Reference standard 


A reference standard of convenient length shall be 
prepared from a cylinder of similar diameter and 
wall thickness range and from material with the same 
acoustic characteristics (subjected to the same heat 
treatment) and surface finish as the cylinder to be 
inspected. The reference standard shall be free from 


IS 8451 : 2018 


KEY 

1 External Reference Notch 

2 Internal Reference Notch 

NOTE 

T<(5+0.75) % S but < 1 mm and > 0.2 mm 
W <2 T but if not possible then W< 1 mm 

E < 50 mm 


Fic. 2 SCHEMATIC REFERENCE NOTCHES FOR LONGITUDINAL DEFECTS 


discontinuities which may interfere with the detection Dimensions and shape of notches are of crucial 
of the reference notches. importance for the adjustment of the equipment (see 
Reference notches, both longitudinal and transverse, Fig. 2 and Fig. 3). 

shall be machined on the outer and inner surface of the The length of the notches (£) shall not be greater than 
standard. The notches shall be separated such thateach 50 mm. 

notch can be clearly identified. 


IS 8451 : 2018 


NOTE 

T<(5+0.75) % S but 0.2 mm < T< 1 mm 
W<2T, but if not possible then W< 1 mm 
E < 50 mm 


Fic. 3 SCHEMATIC REFERENCE NOTCHES FOR CIRCUMFERENTIAL DEFECTS 


The width (W) shall be not greater than twice the nominal 
depth (T). However, where this condition cannot be met 
a maximum width of 1.0 mm is acceptable. 


The depth ofthe notches (T) shall be < (5 + 0.75) percent 
of the nominal wall thickness (S) with a minimum of 
0.2 mm and a maximum of 1.0 mm, over the full length 
of the notch. Run-out at each end is permissible. 


The notch shall be sharp edged at its intersection with 
the surface of the cylinder wall. The cross-section of the 
notch shall be rectangular except where spark erosion 
machining methods are used; then it is acknowledged 
that the bottom of the notch shall be rounded. 


12.3.3.3 Calibration of equipment 


Using the reference standard described in 12.3.3.2, 
the equipment shall be adjusted to produce clearly 
identifiable indications from inner and outer surface 
notches. The amplitude of the indications shall be as 
near equal as possible. The indication of the smallest 
amplitude shall be used as the rejection level and for 
setting visual, audible, recording or sorting devices. 
The equipment shall be calibrated with the reference 
standard or probe, or both, moving in the same manner, 
in the same direction and at the same speed as will be 
used during the inspection of the cylinder. All visual, 
audible, recording or sorting devices shall operate 
satisfactorily at the test speed. 


12.3.4 Wall Thickness Measurement 


If the measurement of the wall thickness is not carried 
out in another stage of production, the cylindrical 
part shall be 100 percent examined to ensure that the 
thickness is not less than the guaranteed minimum 
value. 


12.3.5 Interpretation of Results 


Cylinders with indications which are equal to or 
greater than the lowest of the indications from the 
reference notches shall be withdrawn. Surface defects 


may be removed; after removal the cylinders shall be 
subjected to ultrasonic flow detection and thickness 
measurement. Any cylinder which is shown to be 
below the guaranteed minimum wall thickness shall be 
rejected. 


12.3.6 Certification 


The ultrasonic testing shall be certified by the retester. 
Every cylinder, which has passed ultrasonic testing 
in accordance with this specification shall be stamp 
marked with the symbol ‘UT’. 


13 INSPECTION OF VALVES AND OTHER 
ACCESSORIES 


If valve or any other accessory is to be reintroduced 
into service, it shall be inspected and maintained to 
ensure that it will perform satisfactorily in service and 
meet the requirements of gas tightness from the valve 
manufacturing standard, that is, IS 3224. 


An example of suitable method is given in Annex F. 


14 REPLACEMENT OF CYLINDER PARTS 


Replacement of foot-rings and neck rings or the 
grinding of cuts and other imperfection can be carried 
out. If any rework is to be done it should be done before 
the final testing is carried out. All corrosion products 
shall be removed prior to repair. 


15 FINAL OPERATION 


15.1 Drying, Cleaning and Painting 


15.1.1 Drying and Cleaning 


The interior of each cylinder shall be thoroughly dried 
by a suitable method at a temperature not exceeding 
300°C immediately after hydraulic pressure testing, 
so there is no trace of free water. The interior of the 
cylinder shall be inspected to ensure that it is dry and 
free from other contaminants. 


15.1.2 Painting and Coating 


The cylinder shall be painted externally in accordance 
with the colour scheme specified in IS 4379, and 
painting scheme given below or as approved by 
statutory authority. 


The external surface of cylinder shall be painted with 
following paint system and total dry film thickness of 
minimum 70 microns shall be maintained: 


a) Epoxy primer (two component system) 1 coat — 
Zinc phosphate/zinc chromate/zinc rich; and 


b) Epoxy/polyurethane (two component system) 
1 coat. 


Cylinders are sometimes repainted using paints that 
require stoving. Plastic coating may also be reapplied. 
Paint or coating shall be applied so that all markings 
stamped on the cylinder remain legible. 


In no case shall the temperature of the cylinder exceed 
300°C since overheating could change the mechanical 
properties of the cylinder. 


15.2 Re-valving of the Cylinder 


Before re-valving the cylinder, the thread type shall 
be identified. The appropriate valve shall be fitted 
in accordance with IS 3224/IS 3745 or to any other 
specification approved by the statutory authority. Valve 
fitting shall be done by a torque wrench at a torque 
prescribed by valve manufacturer. 


15.3 Check on Cylinder Tare Weight 


The tare weight of the cylinders shall be obtained by 
weighing on a scale calibrated with traceability to 
national or international standards. The weigh scale 
shall be checked for accuracy on a daily basis. The 
capacity of weighing scale shall be suitable for the 
tare weight of the appropriate cylinders. It shall be 
+ | percent. 


For liquefiable gas cylinder the tare shall include 
the mass of the cylinder, valve(s) and all permanent 
fittings as it is presented for retesting. For permanent 
gas cylinder the tare shall be the mass of the cylinder 
without valve and guard but including the neck ring. If 
tare weight of the cylinder differs from the stamped tare 
weight by more than the value shown in Table 1 and 


IS 8451 : 2018 


is not due to reasons of damage, the new correct tare 
weight shall be marked along with retesting date in a 
durable and legible fashion. 


15.4 Retest Marking 
15.4.1 General 


After satisfactory completion of the periodic inspection 
and tests, each cylinder shall be permanently marked 
with present test date, followed by: 


‘The symbol of the inspection body or test station.’ 
Test station shall be qualified to test the cylinder of that 
particular standard. 


15.4.2 Retest Date and Re-tester Symbol 


The retest date is the date of the present test, which 
shall be indicated by the year and month. The re-tester 
symbol is the symbol of the inspection body or test 
station. 


15.4.3 Stamping 


These marks shall be in accordance with the relevant 
standard or regulation, for example, IS 7285 (Part | 
and 2), IS 15490. 


15.5 Reference to Next Test Date 


In accordance with the relevant regulations of an 
authorized body and when regulations require, the next 
test date may be shown by an appropriate method such 
as by a disc fitted between the valve and the cylinder 
indicating the date (year and month) of the next periodic 
inspection and/or tests. Annex F provides one example 
of an existing system for indicating retest dates. Other 
systems are in use. 


15.6 Identification of Contents 


Before the cylinder is reintroduced into service, the 
intended contents shall be identified. This need not 
be part of the periodic inspection and test procedure. 
As an example, use IS 3933 or IS 4379 for colour 
coding. If painting is required, care shall be exercised 
in accordance with 15.1.2. If a change of gas service is 
involved, care shall be taken to follow the requirement 
of relevant Indian Standard and as per Gas Cylinder 
Rules, 2004. 


Table 1 Permissible Deviation in Tare Weight 
( Clause 15.3 ) 


Sl Cylinder Water Maximum Permissible 
No. Capacity (V), in | Deviation in Tare Weight, g 
(1) (2) (3) 

i) 0.5<v<5.0 +50 

ii) 5.0<v< 20 + 200 

iii) v>20 + 400 


IS 8451 : 2018 


15.7 Records 


Full record of cylinder examined and tested at any 
testing station shall be maintained giving the following 
particulars, namely: 


a) Name of the manufacturer and the owner of the 
cylinder; 


b) Serial number; 
c) The specifications to which the cylinder conforms; 


d) Date of original hydrostatic/hydrostatic stretch 
test; 


e) Test reports and certificates furnished by the 
manufacturer, if available; 


f) Test pressure; 

g) Maximum working pressure; 
h) Water capacity; 

j) Tare weight; 


k) Variation, if any, in the tare weight marked on the 
cylinder and actual tare weight; 


m) Condition of the cylinder shell; 
n) Name of gas; 
p) Type of valve fitted; 
q) Retesting date; and 
r) Remarks, if any. 


16 REJECTION AND 
CYLINDER UNSERVICEABLE 


RENDERING 


Any cylinder which fails to pass periodic examination 
or test or which loses in its tare weight by over 5 percent 
or which for any other defect is found to be unsafe for 
use or after expiry of the service life of the cylinder, 
shall not be filled with any compressed gas and shall be 
destroyed by flattening it as a whole after being cut into 
pieces in such a manner that the pieces cannot again 
be joined together by welding or otherwise to form a 
cylinder, under intimation to the owner of the cylinder, 
as specified in IS 8198. 


Gas Name 
Boron trichloride 
Boron trifluoride 
Chlorine 
Dichlorosilane 
Fluorine 
Hydrogen bromide 
Hydrogen chloride 
Hydrogen cyanide 
Hydrogen fluoride 
Hydrogen iodide 
Methyl bromide 
Nitric oxide 
Nitrogen dioxide 
Phosgene 
Silicon tetrachloride 
Silicon tetrafiuoride 
Sulphur tetrafluoride 
Trichlorosilane 
Tungsten hexafluoride 
Vinyl bromide 
Vinyl chloride 
Vinyl fluoride 


NOTES 


1 These gases in a pure form are recognized to be potentially corrosive to low alloy steels, see IS/ISO 11114-1 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
Table 2 List of Gases Corrosive to Cylinder Material 


Chemical Formula 


BCI, 


CH,Br (R40B1) 


NO 
N,O, 
cocı, 


SiHCI, 
WE 


6 


CH, : CHBr (R1140B1) 
CH, : CHCI (R1140) 
C,H,F (R1141) 


2 Mixtures containing these gases may not be corrosive. 


UN Class or Division 


2.3 
2.3 
23 
2.3 
2.3 
2.3 
2.3 
6.1 
8 
2.3 
2.3 


IS 8451 : 2018 


Subsidiary Risk 


IS 8451 : 2018 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 7, 8.1, 8.2, 9 and 10 ) 


DESCRIPTION, EVALUATION OF DEFECTS AND CONDITIONS FOR REJECTION OF SEAMLESS 
STEEL GAS CYLINDER AT TIME OF VISUAL INSPECTION 


B-1 GENERAL 


Gas cylinder defects may be physical, material or due 
to corrosion as a result of environmental or service 
conditions to which the cylinders have been subjected 
during its life. 


The objective of this annexure is to give general 
guidelines to gas cylinder users as to the application of 
rejection criteria. 


This annexure applies to all cylinders, but those that 
have contained gases having special characteristics 
may require modified controls. 


Any defects in the form of a sharp notch may be 
removed by grinding, machining or other approved 
methods. After such a repair, the wall thickness shall be 
checked, for example, ultrasonically. 


B-2 PHYSICAL OR MATERIAL DEFECTS 


Evaluation of physical or material defects shall be in 
accordance with Table 3. Permanent attachments (for 
example foot rings or shrouds) shall be inspected and 
shall be suitable for these intended purposes. 


Table 3 Rejection Limits Relating to Physical and Material Defects in the Cylinder Shell 
( Clauses 8.2 (c) and B-2 ) 


SI No. Type of Defects Definition Rejection Limit in Accordance with clause 81) 
a) © © 4) 
i) Bulge Visible swelling of the cylinder All cylinders with such a defect 
ii) Dent A depression in the cylinder that has neither When the depth of the dent exceeds 3 percent of the 
penetrated nor removed metal and is greater external diameter of the cylinder 
in depth than 1 percent of the outside external or 
diameter . F f P 
when the diameter of the dent is less than 15 times its 
depth 
iii) Cut or gouge A sharp impression where metal has been When the depth of the cut or gouge exceed 10 percent 
removed or redistributed and whose depth ofthe wall thickness 
exceeds 5 percent or of the cylinder wall 4, 
thickn Fig. 4 
m e 4) When the length exceeds 25 percent of the outside 
diameter of the cylinder 
or 
When the wall thickness is less than the minimum 
design thickness 
iv) Crack Split or a rift in the metal (see Fig. 5) All cylinders with such defects 
v) Damage Excessive general or localized heating of a All cylinders in categories (a) and (b) to be rejected 
cylinder usually indicated by: All cylinders in categories (c) and (d) may be 
a) partial melting of the cylinder acceptable only after inspection and hardness testing 
b) distortion of the cylinder at multiple points including heat affected area, if the 
iri . fpai hardness is within limits of relevant drawing/certificate 
c) charring or burning of paint and it passes hydrostatic stretch test. 
d) fire damage to valve, melting of plastic guard 
or data ring or fusible plug, if fitted 
vi) Plug or neck Additional inserts fitted in the cylinder neck, All cylinders unless it can be clearly established that 
base or wall inserts addition is a part of approved design 
vii) Stamping Marking by means of a metal punch All cylinders with illegible, modified or incorrect 
markings 
viii) Arc or torch burns Partial melting of the cylinder, the addition of All cylinders with such defects 
weld metal or the removal of metal by scarfing 
or cratering 
ix) Suspicious marks Marks introduced other than by the cylinder All cylinders with such defects 
manufacturing process and approved 
x) Vertical stability Deviation from verticality which may present a risk 


during service (especially if fitted with foot ring) 


) When applying the rejection criteria given in this table, the conditions of use of the cylinders, the severity of the defects and safety factors in the design 


shall be taken into consideration. 


10 


B-3 CORROSION 


B-3.1 General 


The cylinder may be subjected to the environmental 
conditions that could cause external corrosion of 
the metal. 


Internal corrosion of the metal may also occur owing to 
service conditions. 


There is difficulty in presenting definite rejection limits in 
tabular form for all sizes and types of cylinders and their 
service conditions. The limits of rejection are usually 
established following considerable field experience. 


IS 8451 : 2018 


Extensive experience and judgement are required 
in evaluating whether cylinders that have corroded 
internally are safe and suitable for return to service. 
It is important that the surface of the metal is clean 
of corrosion products prior to the inspection of the 
cylinder. 


B-3.2 Types of Corrosion 


The types of corrosion generally may be classified as 
in Table 4. 


Table 4 Rejection Criteria for Corrosion of the Cylinder Wall 
( Clauses 7.2(c) and B-3.2 ) 


SI No. Type of Corrosion 


() (2) 


Definition 


(3) 


Rejection Limit in Accordance 
with Clause 71) 


(4) 


i) General corrosion 


ii) Local corrosion 


iii) Chain pitting or Corrosion 


iv) Isolated pits 


v) Crevice corrosion 


Loss of wall thickness over an area of more 
than 20 percent of either the interior or 
exterior total surface area of the cylinder 
(see Fig. 6) 


Loss of wall thickness over an area of less 
than 20 percent of either the interior or 
exterior total surface area of the cylinder 
(see Fig. 6) except for the other types of 
local corrosion described below 


Corrosion forming, a narrow longitudinal 
or circumferential line or strip or isolated 
craters or pits which are almost connected 
(see Fig. 7) 


Corrosion forming isolated craters, without 
significant alignment (see Fig. 8) 


Corrosion associated with taking place in, or 
immediate around, an aperture 


If the original surface of the metal is no 
longer recognizable 


or 


If the depth of penetration exceeds 
10 percent of the original thickness of wall 


or 


Ifthe wall thickness is less than the minimum 
designed wall thickness 


If the depth of penetration exceeds 
20 percent of the thickness of the cylinder 
wall 


or 


If the wall thickness is less than the designed 
thickness”) 


Ifa total length of corrosion in any direction 
exceeds the diameter of the cylinder and the 
depth exceeds 10 percent of the original wall 
thickness” 


If the diameter of the pits is greater than 
5 mm, refer to the ‘local corrosion’ row. 


If the diameter of the pits is greater than 
5 mm, the latter, the cylinder should be 
assessed as carefully as possible in order 
to check that the remaining thickness of the 
wall or base is adequate for the intended use 
of the cylinder 


If, after thorough cleaning, the depth of 
penetration exceeds 20 percent of the 
original wall thickness 


» When applying the rejection criteria given in Table 3, the conditions of use of the cylinders, the severity of the defects and safety factors in the design 


shall be taken into consideration. 


” If corrosion has reached limits of depth or extent, the remaining wall thickness shall be checked with an ultrasonic device. The wall thickness may 
be less than the minimum design wall thickness, that is small (depth and extent) isolated pits (see Fig. 8), where authorized by the relevant regulations 
taking into consideration the severity of the defect and safety factors. 


11 


IS 8451 : 2018 


Fic. 4 CuT OR GROOVE 


Fic. 5 CRACK 


Fic. 6 GENERAL/LOCAL CORROSION 


12 


IS 8451 : 2018 


Fic. 7 CHAIN PITTING AND CORROSION 


Fic. 8 ISOLATED Pits 


13 


IS 8451 : 2018 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 6, 11.2 ) 


PROCEDURE TO BE ADOPTED WHEN DEVALVING AND WHEN IT IS SUSPECTED THAT 


A CYLINDER VALVE IS OBSTRUCTED 


C-1 CHECK FOR OBSTRUCTED VALVE 


The following procedures shall be carried out only 
by trained personnel. In view of the potential of the 
hazards in cylinders, this operation can lead to injury 
from stored energy release, fire and toxic hazards, 
hence personnel can take such precautions as deemed 
necessary for the work to be performed. When the gas, 
if any, has been released and the pressure within the 
cylinder reduced to atmospheric pressure, and, in the 
case of liquefied gases, when there is no frost or dew on 
the outside of the cylinder, the valve may be removed 
after an additional check is made to establish that there 
is free passage through the valve. 


As indicated in 6, a systematic check shall be made 
to establish that the passage through the valve is 
unobstructed. The method adopted shall be a recognized 
procedure such as one of the following or one that 
provide equivalent safeguards: 


a) By introducing gas at a pressure up to 5 bar and 
checking its discharge; 


b) By using device shown in Fig. 9 to hand pump air 
into the cylinder; and 


c) For cylinder of liquefied gases, first check to 
establish that the total weight of the cylinder is 
the same as the tare stamped on the cylinder, if 
there is a positive difference, the cylinder may 
contain either liquefied gas under pressure or 
contaminants. Lack of a positive difference does 
not rule out the presence of a gas under pressure. 


14 


C-2 VALVE UNOBSTRUCTED 


Only when it is established that there is no obstruction 
to gas flow in the cylinder valve, the valve may be 
removed. 


C-3 VALVE OBSTRUCTED 


When a cylinder is found to have an obstructed gas 
passage in the valve, the cylinder shall be set aside and 
handled by specially trained personnel in this task as 
follows: 


a) By sawing or drilling the valve body until 
interception is made with the gas passage between 
the valve body stem and valve body spindle seat. 
The operation shall be properly cooled particularly 
when handling oxidizing gases; and 


b) By loosening or piercing the pressure relief device 
in a controlled manner. 


The preceding methods are applicable for cylinders of 
non-toxic, non-flammable and non-chlorofluorocarbon 
(CFC) gases. Appropriate safety precautions should 
be taken to ensure that no hazard results from the 
uncontrolled discharge of any residual gas. 


Where the contents are toxic, flammable, oxidizing or 
CFC, the preferred method is to partially unscrew the 
valve within a glanded cap, secured and joined to the 
cylinder and vented to a safe discharge. The principals 
of a suitable device are illustrated in Fig. 10. This 
procedure shall be performed in a controlled manner in 
such a way as to avoid personal injury. 


KEY 
1 Rubber tube (internal diameter 8 mm, external diameter 4 Bonded 
13 mm) ground to olive shape and bonded 5 Hand pressure 
2 Tube (internal diameter 3 mm, external diameter 8 mm) All dimensions in millimetre 


3 Rubber bulb 
Fic. 9 TYPICAL DEVICE FOR DETECTING OBSTRUCTED CYLINDER VALVE 


KEY 

1 Drive for devalving machine 5 Pressure gauge 

2 Gas-tight gland 6 Vent valve 

3 Gas-tight seal 7 Direction of rotation 
4 Cylinder frame and clamping device 8 Gas disposal system 


NOTE - Operate remotely using de-valving machine 
All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 10 TYPICAL DEVICE FOR THE REMOVAL OF A DAMAGED GAs CYLINDER VALVE 


15 


IS 8451 : 2018 


IS 8451 : 2018 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 11.3 ) 


VOLUMETRIC EXPANSION TESTING OF GAS CYLINDERS 


D-1 GENERAL 


This annex describes methods for the hydrostatic 
stretch testing of cylinders intended for the storage and 
transport of compressed gases. Two methods, namely, 
water jacket method and non-jacket method, have been 
covered. 


D-2 WATER JACKET METHOD 


D-2.1 Apparatus 


The arrangement of apparatus for the test may be of the 
type indicated in Fig. 11. 


D-2.1.1 Graduated Tube 


The graduated tube used for the measurement shall be 
of such diameter that a permanent change in volume of 
the cylinder of the order of 1/20 000 the total cylinder 
capacity may be readily observed. Also the length of 
tube shall be such that its capacity exceeds the total 
volumetric expansion of the cylinder under test. The 
diameter shall be uniform and sufficiently small to 
permit an accurate reading of the expansion. 


D-2.1.2 Pressure Gauge 


Two pressure gauges or a duplicate gauge shall be used 
and shall be capable of reading to within one percent 
of the test pressure for pressures up to and including 


— GRADUATED SCALE 
„— GLASS TUBE 


15 kgf/cm? and within two percent for pressures above 
15 kgf/cm’. 


D-2.2 Procedure before Testing 


The water jacket shall be filled with water to a 
convenient level on the graduated glass tube. Also 
arrangement for expelling entrapped from the water 
jacket shall be made. 


D-2.3 Precautions 


Care shall be taken to prevent any leakage through the 
joint between the cylinder neck and the water jacket 
cover. Change of temperature of the water in the jacket 
during the test shall be avoided. 


D-2.4 Readings 
Reading of the water level in the graduated tube shall 
be taken: 
a) Before the test pressure has been applied to the 
cylinder (C,), 
b) After the test pressure has been applied for 30 s 
(C,), and 
c) After the release of the test pressure (C,). 


The difference between C, and C, represents the total 
volumetric expansion and the difference between C, 
and C, represents the permanent expansion. 


77 GAS CYLINDER UNDER TEST 
FILLED WITH WATER 


— OUTER GAS CYLINDER 
j FILLED WITH WATER 


FROM WATER 
SUPPLY 


Fic. 11 WATER JACKET METHOD 


CYLINDER 
UNDER TEST 


IS 8451 : 2018 


> GRADUATED 
SCALE 


FROM WATER 
SUPPLY 


Fic. 12 NON-JACKETMETHOD 


D-3 NON-JACKET METHOD 


D-3.1 Apparatus 


The arrangement of apparatus for the test may be of the 
type indicated in Fig. 12. 


D-3.1.1 Graduated Tube 


The graduated tube used for the measurement shall be 
of such diameter that a permanent change in volume of 
the cylinder of the order of 1/20 000 the total cylinder 
capacity may be readily observed. Also the length of 
tube shall be such that its capacity exceeds the total 
volumetric expansion of the cylinder under test. The 
diameter shall be uniform and sufficiently small to 
permit an accurate reading of the expansion. 


D-3.1.2 Pressure Gauge 


Two pressure gauges or a duplicate gauge shall be 
used and shall be capable of reading to within one 
percent of the test pressure for pressure up to and 
including 15kgf/cm? and within two percent for 
pressure above 15kgf/cm?. 


D-3.2 Procedure before Testing 


Before connections are made for testing, the cylinder 
shall be completely filled with water and also 
arrangement for expelling entrapped air from the 
cylinder shall be made. 


D-3.3 Connections 


All connections shall be air-free and water tight. 


17 


D-3.4 Precautions 


The water used shall be air free and the joints shall be 
leak proof as far as possible. However, if necessary, 
care shall be taken to ensure that the quantity of water 
in the system is always constant by returning any 
water leaking past the joints to the system. Piping 
shall be as short as possible and of as small a volume 
as practicable. Pump shall be of sufficient capacity to 
build the required pressure in a reasonable period of 
time. 


D-3.5 Readings 


A reading (C,) of the water level in the graduated tube 
shall be taken when the apparatus has been completely 
filled with air-free water and the valve to the water 
supply has been closed. 


D-3.5.1 After the test pressure has been applied for 
30 s, a second reading (C,) of the water level shall be 
taken. A final reading (C,) shall be taken after removal 
of the internal pressure by opening the release valve. 


D-3.5.2 The difference between C, and C, represents 
the total volumetric expansion. However, the apparent 
total volumetric expansion calculated in this manner 
needs to be corrected by deducting an amount equal 
to 4.12 x 10° PV, where P is the test pressure in 
kgf/cm? and V is the volume of water under compression 
in cm?, The difference between C, and C, represents the 
permanent volumetric expansion without the necessity 
of correcting for the compressibility of water. 


IS 8451 : 2018 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 11.2 ) 


INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF VALVES AND THEIR JUNCTIONS RECOMMENDED 


PROCEDURES 


E-1 All threads shall be checked to ensure that the thread 
diameters, form, length, and taper are satisfactory. 


E-2 If threads show sign of distortion, deformation or 
burring, these faults shall be rectified. Excessive thread 
damage or the serious deformation of the valve body, 
hand-wheel, spindle or other components is the cause 
for replacement. 


E-3 Maintenance of the valve shall include general 
cleaning together with replacement of elastomers and 
worn or damaged components, packing and safety 
devices, where necessary. 


18 


E-4 Where the use of lubricants/elastomers is 
permitted, only those approved for the gas service shall 
be used, particularly for oxidizing gas service. 


E-5 After the valve has been reassembled, it shall 
be checked for correct operation and shall undergo 
internal and external leak checks at intended operating 
pressure. This may be done prior to the valve being 
refitted to the cylinder or during and after the first gas 
change subsequent to the inspection and test of the 
cylinder. 


IS 8451 : 2018 


ANNEX F 
( Clause 15.5 ) 

Year Colour Shape 
a) (2) (3) 
2013 Red Circle 
2014 Blue Circle 
2015 Yellow Circle 
2016 Green Circle 
2017 Black Circle 
2018 Aluminium Circle 
2019 Red Hexagon 
2020 Blue Hexagon 
2021 Yellow Hexagon 
2022 Green Hexagon 
2023 Black Hexagon 
2024 Aluminium Hexagon 
2025 Aluminium Circle 
2026 Red Hexagon 
2027 Blue Hexagon 
2028 Yellow Hexagon 
2029 Green Hexagon 
2030 Black Hexagon 
2031 Aluminium Hexagon 
2032 Red Square 
2033 Blue Square 
2034 Yellow Square 
2035 Green Square 
2036 Black Square 
2037 Aluminium Square 


NOTES 
1 Colour and shape of test date ring on cylinders to be tested during the year indicated in column. 
2 The sequence of colour and shape of test date rings is to be repeated on an 18-year cycle. Hence 2018 is a repeal of 2000. 


19 


IS 8451 : 2018 


ANNEX G 


( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, 
Nagpur 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, 


New Delhi 
Ashok Leyland Limited, Chennai 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 
Bhiwadi Cylinders Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 

GSPC Gas Co Ltd, Ahmedabad 

Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 
Indraprastha Gas Limited, Delhi 

International Industrial Gases Ltd, Kolkata 
Inox India Limited, Vadodara 

Kabsons Gas Equipments Ltd, Hyderabad 
Kosan Industries Ltd, Mumbai/Surat 

LINDE India Ltd, Kolkata 

LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 
Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 

Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 

Research & Development Estt (Engineers), Pune 
SICGIL India Ltd, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers 
(SIAM), New Delhi 


Representative (s) 
Suri N. T. SHAHU (Chairman) 
SHRI ASHENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI ANISH PATEL 
Suri K. R. SAHASRANAM (Alternate) 


Suri M. Ravi 


SHRI VED PRAKASH GAUTAM (4/fernate) 


SHRI. SUMIT Roy 
SHRI A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MANVINDER SINGH 
SHRI RAJNEESH CHOPRA (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
SHRI A. K. KHAMKAR (Alternate-I) 
SERI H. D. KHATRI (Alternate-II) 


Suri K. S. R. PRASAD 


SHRI ALOK K. GUPTA. 
Suri P. N. KANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH TIWARI 
Suri S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 
SHRI ALOK SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA K. GARG 
SHRI NIKHILESH K. GARG (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK PATWARDHAN 
SHRI DEEPAK ACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
Suri. S. GopALAIAH (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL K. DEY 
Suri S. B. BOLMAL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU 
SHRI PRADEEP (Alternate) 


SHRI K. K. THAKUR 
Suri A. K. BERA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MURALI 
SHRI ARUN Nayak (Alternate) 


SHRI J. P. TIWARI 
SHRI K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MARAGATHAVEL 
Suri NAUZER Dapasuoy(Alternate) 


SHRI K. K. GANDHI 
Suri AMIT Kumar (Alternate) 


Organization 
RDCIS, Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 


Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi 
Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 

The Automotive Research Association of India,Pune 
Trans Valves (India) Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 

Vanaz Engineers Ltd, Pune 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 8451 : 2018 


Representative (s) 
SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
DR ANJANA Deva (Alternate) 
Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


SHRI PALLIPALAYAM GOWRISHANKAR 
SHRI SHAILENDRA DEWANGAN (Alternate) 


SHRI Y. K. BEHANI 

Suri R. BEHANI (Alternate) 
Dr S. S. THIPSE 

Suri S. D. RARIKAR (Alternate) 
SHRI A. K. JAIN 

Suri P. K. MATHUR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. J. VISPUTE 
Suri A.S. LATKE (Alternate) 


SHRI A. RENGARAJAN, SCIENTIST ‘E’ & HEAD (MED) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI CHANDAN GUPTA 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Dissolved Acetylene Cylinders, Generators, Acetylene Pipe Lines and 
High Pressure Gas Cylinders Subcommittee, MED 16 : 3 


Organization 
LINDE India Limited, Kolkata 
Adani Gas Ltd., Ahmedabad 


Al-Can Exports Private Limited, Distt Thane 

All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, 
New Delhi 

Ashok Leyland Ltd, Chennai 

Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Esteem Gases Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 


Hindalco Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, Delhi 


21 


Representative(S) 
SHRI VUTUKURU RAMANA (Convener) 


SHRI PEEYUSH TRIPATHI 
SHRI AMIT MALIK (Alternate) 


SHRI Vay K. PARIKH 
Suri D. C. Dave ( Alternate ) 
SHRI ANISH PATEL 
Suri K. R. SAHASRANAM (Alternate) 


Suri M. Ravi 
SHRI VED PRAKASH GAUTAM (Alternate ) 


SHRI. SUMIT Roy 
SHRI A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI. SAKET TIKU 
Suri Upay KAMATH (Alternate) 


SHRI P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. K. KHAMKAR (A/ternate-1) 
Sarı H. D. Kuatri (Alternate-2) 


SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 
Suri. V. Ramaswamy (Alternate 1) 
SHRI SUDHIR JAN (Alternate 2) 


SHRI ALOK K. GUPTA. 
Suri P. N. KAntH (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH TIWARI 
Suri S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 
SHRI ALOK SHARMA (Alternate) 


IS 8451 : 2018 


Organization 


International Industrial Gases Limited, Howrah 


IOC, R&D, Faridabad 
Jai Maruti Gas Cylinders Gases Limited, Gwalior 


KVK Corporation, Mumbai 

Luxfer Uttam India Pvt Ltd, Faridabad 

Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 

Natural Gas Society, Noida 

Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, 
Nagpur 

Protego India Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai 

Rama Cylinders Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

Sahuwala High Pressure Cylinder (P) Limited, 
Visakhapatnam 

SICGIL India Limited, Chennai 

Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers 
(SIAM), New Delhi 

Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


22 


Representative(S) 
Suri D. K. GARG 
Suri N. K. GARG (Alternate) 
SHRI UMISH SRIVASTAVA 


SHRI ASHOK K. NIGAM 
SHRI Manu Kumar Nica (Alternate ) 


SHRI R. CHANDGOTHIA 
SHRI V. CHANDGOTHIA (Alternate ) 


SHRI KARAN BHATIA 
SHRI SANDEEP BHASIN (Alternate) 


SARI J. P. TIWARI 
SHRI K. SUDHAKARAN ( Alternate ) 


SHRI VIPIN CHANDRA CHITTODA 
SHRI VIVEK Josui (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHENDRA SINGH 


SHRI PRASAD JAWAJI 
SHRI BAL BHANDAVLE (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY S. MANDE 
Suri PrRAMop W Sancwal (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. Gupta 
SHRI Srinivas Rao ( Alternate ) 


SHRI S. MARAGATHAVEL 
Suri NAUZER DADABHOY ( Alternate ) 


Suri K. K. GANDHI 
SHRI AMIT Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI PALLIPALAYAM GOWRISHANKAR 

SHRI SHAILENDRA DEWANGAN (Alternate) 
SHRI Y. K. BEHANI 

Suri R. BEHANI (Alternate) 


Dr S. S. THIPSE 
Suri M. K. CHOUDHARI (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (10296). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


