Indian Standard aa 


Tae aed — ata Haie 
wa, sik wa, Not & aA at 
sipa A Gog Uh AM Wat 


Automotive Vehicles — Uniform 
Provisions Concerning the 
Approval of Vehicles of 
Categories M, and N, with Regard 
to Braking 


ICS 43.040.40 


© BIS 2015 


Rds AM ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HM FH, 9 Fags AHL art, ae fereil-110002 
= a MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2015 Price Group 11 


Automotive Braking Systems, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee, TED 4 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Automotive 
Braking Systems, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Transport Engineering Division Council. 


Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles of category M, and N; is also covered in IS 11852 : 2011 
‘Uniform provision concerning the approval of vehicles of categories M, N and T (second revision)’ which is 
based on ECE R13. Manufactures of category M, and N, vehicles have option to test their vehicle using either of 
these standards till the time both standards are acceptable. 


This standard is aligned with ECE R13H. However keeping in view Indian context this standard is having following 
differences as compared to ECE: 


a) Coefficient of adhesion of road surface to be 0.9 in line with 2-wheeler GTR. 
b) Additional India specific requirements are added as below: 


1) Axle load variation and tolerance to be considered during testing; 

2) Criteria for extension of approval to be used for selection of vehicle for testing and extension of 
approvals added; 

3) Tolerance on test speed added to + 2 percent; and 

4) Max speed in type ‘0’ test restricted to 120 km/h. 


NOTE — The maximum speed is restricted to 120 km/h due to lack of test tracks in India. As soon as the NATRIP will be 
ready with test tracks for testing at a speed specified in ECE the standard will be reviewed for incorporating the test 
speed in this standard. 


5) Test to be conducted at 90 percent of vehicle maximum speed, if the maximum vehicle speed is less 
than test speed. 

c) The requirements permitting only asbestos free liners to be kept in abeyance. This is to be considered 
aligning with national policy. It is also recommended, since mandating policy is with CMVR-TSC, such 
requirements need not be considered as part of standard, that is fitment requirements of ABS for certain 
category of vehicles. 


An informative Annex J has been incorporated in this document indicating corresponding clauses of this document 
and UNECE R 13H. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex H. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15986 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — UNIFORM PROVISIONS 
CONCERNING THE APPROVAL OF VEHICLES OF 
CATEGORIES M, AND N, WITH REGARD 
TO BRAKING 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies uniform alternative 
provisions concerning the approval of vehicles of 
categories M} and N, as defined in IS 14272 with regard 
to braking as per IS 11852. 


1.2 This standard does not cover, 


a) vehicles with a design speed not exceeding 
25 km/h; and 


b) vehicles fitted for invalid drivers. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


ISAISO/AIS No. Title 


11852 : 2011 Uniform provisions concerning the 
approval of vehicles of categories M, 
N and T (second revision) 
Automotive vehicles — Types — 
Terminology (first revision) 

ISO 9128 : 2006 Road vehicles — Graphical symbols 


to designate brake fluid types 


14272 : 2011 


AIS 004 Electromagnetic radiation from 
automotive vehicle — Permissible 
levels and methods of tests. 

3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Approval of a Vehicle — The approval of a vehicle 
type with regard to braking. 


3.2 Vehicle Type — A category of vehicles which do 
not differ in such essential respects as: 


a) Maximum mass (see 3.11); 
b) Distribution of mass among the axles; 


c) Maximum design speed; 

d) A different type of braking equipment, with 
more particular reference to the presence or 
otherwise of equipment for braking a trailer 
or any presence of electric braking system; 


e) Engine type; 

f) Number and ratios of gears; 
g) Final drive ratios; and 

h) Tyre dimensions. 


3.3 Braking Equipment — The combination of parts 
whose function is progressively to reduce the speed of 
a moving vehicle or bring it to a halt, or to keep it 
stationary, if it is already halted; these functions are 
specified in 5.1.2. The equipment consists of the 
control, the transmission, and the brake proper. 


3.4 Control — The part actuated directly by the driver 
to furnish to the transmission the energy required for 
braking or controlling it. This energy may be the 
muscular energy of the driver, or energy from another 
source controlled by the driver, or a combination of 
these various kinds of energy. 


3.5 Transmission — The combination of components 
comprised between the control and the brake linking 
them functionally. The transmission may be 
mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic, electric or mixed. 
Where the braking power is derived from or assisted 
by a source of energy independent of the driver, the 
reserve of energy in the system is likewise part of the 
transmission. 


The transmission is divided into two independent 
functions: (a) control transmission; and (b) energy 
transmission. Whenever the term ‘transmission’ is used 
alone in this standard, it means both the ‘control 
transmission’ and the ‘energy transmission’: 


3.5.1 Control Transmission — The combination of the 
components of the transmission which control the 
function and the necessary reserve(s) of energy; 


3.5.2 Energy Transmission — The combination of the 
components which supply to the brakes the necessary 
energy for their function including the reserve(s) of 
energy necessary for the operation of the brakes. 


IS 15986 : 2015 


3.6 Brake — The part in which the forces opposing 
the movement of the vehicle develop. It may be a 
friction brake (when the forces are generated by friction 
between two parts of the vehicle moving relatively to 
one another); an electrical brake (when the forces are 
generated by electro-magnetic action between two parts 
of the vehicle moving relatively to but not in contact 
with one another); a fluid brake (when the forces are 
generated by the action of a fluid situated between two 
parts of the vehicle moving relatively to one another); 
or an engine brake (when the forces are derived from 
an artificial increase in the braking action, transmitted 
to the wheels, of the engine). 


3.7 Different Types of Braking Equipment — 
Equipment which differs in such essential respects as, 


a) components having different characteristics; 

b) a component made of materials having 
different characteristics, or a component 
differing in shape or size; and 

c) adifferent assembly of the components. 


3.8 Component of the Braking Equipment — One 
of the individual parts which, when assembled, 
constitutes the braking equipment. 


3.9 Progressive and Graduated Braking — Braking 
during which, within the normal operating range of 
the device and during actuation of the brakes (see 3.16). 


3.9.1 The driver can at any moment increase or decrease 
the braking force by acting on the control. 


3.9.2 The braking force varies proportionally as the 
action on the control (Monotonic function). 


3.9.3 The braking force can be easily regulated with 
sufficient precision. 


3.10 Laden Vehicle — Except where otherwise stated, 
a vehicle so laden as to attain its maximum mass (see 
3.11). 


3.11 Maximum Mass — The maximum mass stated 
by the vehicle manufacturer to be technically 
permissible (this mass may be higher than the 
permissible maximum mass laid down by the statutory 
authority). 


3.12 Distribution of Mass Among the Axles — The 
distribution of the effect of the gravity on the mass of 
the vehicle and/or its contents among the axles. 


3.13 Wheel/Axle Load — The vertical static reaction 
(force) of the road surface in the contact area on the 
wheel/wheels of the axle. 


3.14 Maximum Stationary Wheel/Axle Load — The 
stationary wheel/axle load achieved under the condition 
of the laden vehicle. 


3.15 Hydraulic Braking Equipment with Stored 
Energy — Braking equipment where energy is 
supplied by a hydraulic fluid under pressure, stored in 
one or more accumulator(s) fed from one or more 
pressure pump(s), each fitted with a means of limiting 
the pressure to a maximum value. This value shall be 
specified by the manufacturer. 


3.16 Actuation — Both application and release of the 
control. 


3.17 Electric Regenerative Braking — A braking 
system which, during deceleration, provides for the 
conversion of vehicle kinetic energy into electrical 
energy. 


3.17.1 Electric Regenerative Braking Control — A 
device which modulates the action of the electric 
regenerative braking system. 


3.17.2 Electric Regenerative Braking System of 
Category A— An electric regenerative braking system 
which is not part of the service braking system. 


3.17.3 Electric Regenerative Braking System of 
Category B — An electric regenerative braking system 
which is part of the service braking system. 


3.17.4 Electric State of Charge — The instantaneous 
ratio of electric quantity of energy stored in the traction 
battery relative to the maximum quantity of electric 
energy which could be stored in this battery. 


3.17.5 Traction Battery — An assembly of 
accumulators constituting the storage of energy used 
for powering the traction motor(s) of the vehicle. 


3.18 Phased Braking — A means which may be used 
where two or more sources of braking are operated 
from a common control, whereby one source may be 
given priority by phasing back the other source(s) so 
as to make increased control movement necessary 
before they begin to be brought into operation. 


3.19 Nominal Value — Definitions for braking 
reference performance are required to put a value on 
the transfer function of the braking system, relating 
output to input for vehicles individually. Nominal value 
is defined as the characteristic which can be 
demonstrated at type approval and which relates the 
braking rate of the vehicle on its own to the level of 
the braking input variable. 


3.20 Automatically Commanded Braking — A 
function within a complex electronic control system 
where actuation of the braking system(s) or brakes of 
certain axles is made for the purpose of generating 
vehicle retardation with or without a direct action of 
the driver, resulting from the automatic evaluation of 
on-board initiated information. 


3.21 Braking Signal — Signal or communication 
indicating brake activation as specified in 5.2.22. 


3.21.1 Selective Braking — A function within a 
complex electronic control system; where actuation of 
individual brakes is made by automatic means in which 
vehicle retardation is secondary to vehicle behaviour 
modification. 


3.22 Emergency Braking Signal — Signal or 
communication indicating emergency braking as 
specified in 5.2.23. 


4 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL 


4.1 The application for approval of a vehicle type with 
regard to braking shall be submitted by the vehicle 
manufacturer or by his duly accredited representative. 


4.2 It shall be accompanied by the under mentioned 
documents in triplicate and by the following 
particulars: 


a) A description of the vehicle type with regard 
to the items specified in 3.2. The numbers and/ 
or symbols identifying the vehicle type and 
the engine type shall be specified; 

b) A list of the components, duly identified, 
constituting the braking equipment; 


c) A diagram of assembled braking equipment 
and an indication of the position of its 
components on the vehicle; 

d) Detailed drawings of each component to 
enable it to be easily located and identified. 


4.3 A vehicle, representative of the vehicle type to be 
approved, shall be submitted to the Testing Agency 
conducting the approval tests. 


5 SPECIFICATIONS 


5.1 General 
5.1.1 Braking Equipment 


5.1.1.1 The braking equipment shall be so designed, 
constructed and fitted as to enable the vehicle in normal 
use, despite the vibration to which it may be subjected, 
to comply with the provisions of this standard. 


5.1.1.2 In particular, the braking equipment shall be 
so designed, constructed and fitted as to be able to resist 
the corroding and ageing phenomena to which it is 
exposed. 


5.1.1.3 The effectiveness of the braking equipment 
shall not be adversely affected by magnetic or electrical 
fields (This shall be demonstrated by compliance with 
AIS 004). 


5.1.1.4 The braking equipment shall be in line with 
the general automotive industry standard. 


IS 15986 : 2015 


5.1.1.5 A failure detection signal may interrupt 
momentarily (< 10 ms) the demand signal in the control 
transmission, provided that the braking performance 
is thereby not reduced. 


5.1.2 Functions of the Braking Equipment 


The braking equipment defined in 3.3 shall fulfill the 
following functions. 


a) Service braking system — The service braking 
system shall make it possible to control the 
movement of the vehicle and to halt it safely, 
speedily and effectively, whatever its speed 
and load, on any up or down gradient. It shall 
be possible to graduate this braking action. 
The driver shall be able to achieve this braking 
action from his driving seat without removing 
his hands from the steering control. 

b) Secondary braking system — The secondary 
braking system shall make it possible by 
application of the service brake control to halt 
the vehicle within a reasonable distance in the 
event of failure of the service braking system. 
It shall be possible to graduate this braking 
action. The driver shall be able to obtain this 
braking action from his driving seat without 
removing his hands from the steering control. 
For the purposes of these provisions it is 
assumed that not more than one failure of the 
service braking system can occur at one time. 

c) Parking braking system — The parking 
braking system shall make it possible to hold 
the vehicle stationary on an up or down 
gradient even in the absence of the driver, the 
working parts being then held in the locked 
position by a purely mechanical device. The 
driver shall be able to achieve this braking 
action from his driving seat. 


5.1.3 The requirements of Annex G shall be applied to 
the safety aspects of all complex electronic vehicle 
control systems which provide or form part of the 
control transmission of the braking function included 
those which utilize the braking system(s) for 
automatically commanded braking or selective braking. 


However, systems or functions, which use the braking 
system as the means of achieving a higher level 
objective, are subject to Annex G only insofar as they 
have a direct effect on the braking system. If such 
systems are provided, they shall not be deactivated 
during type approval testing of the braking system. 


5.1.4 Provisions for the periodic technical inspection 
of braking systems 


5.1.4.1 It shall be possible to assess the wear condition 
of the components of the service brake that are subject 


IS 15986 : 2015 


to wear, for example friction linings and drums/discs 
(in the case of drums or discs, wear assessment may 
not necessarily be carried out at the time of periodic 
technical inspection). The method by which this may 
be realized is defined in 5.2.11.2. 


5.1.4.2 It shall be possible to verify, in a simple way, 
the correct operational status of those complex 
electronic systems which have control over braking. If 
special information is needed, this shall be made freely 
available. 


5.1.4.2.1 At the time of type approval, the means 
implemented to protect against simple unauthorized 
modification of the operation to the verification means 
chosen by the manufacturer (for example warning 
signal) shall be confidentially outlined. Alternatively, 
this protection requirement is fulfilled when a 
secondary means of checking the correct operational 
status is available. 


5.1.4.3 It shall be possible to generate maximum 
braking forces under static conditions on a rolling road 
or roller brake tester. 


5.2 Characteristics of Braking Systems 


5.2.1 The set of braking systems with which a vehicle 
is equipped shall satisfy the requirements laid down 
for service, secondary and parking braking systems. 


5.2.2 The systems providing service, secondary and 
parking braking may have common components so 
long as they fulfill the following conditions. 


a) There shall be at least two controls, 
independent of each other and readily 
accessible to the driver from his normal 
driving position. Every brake control shall be 
designed such that it returns to the fully off 
position when released. This requirement 
shall not apply to a parking brake control 
when it is mechanically locked in an applied 
position; 

b) Control of the service braking system shall 
be independent of the control of the parking 
braking system; 

c) Effectiveness of the linkage between the 
control of the service braking system and the 
different components of the transmission 
systems shall not be liable to diminish after a 
certain period of use; 

d) Parking braking system shall be so designed 
that it can be actuated when the vehicle is in 
motion; this requirement may be met by the 
actuation of the vehicles service braking 
system, even partially, by means of an 
auxiliary control. 


e) 


g) 


h) 


aD) 


k) 


Without prejudice to the requirements of 5.1.2 
(c), the service braking system and parking 
braking system may use common components 
in their transmission(s), provided that in the 
event of a failure of the transmission(s) the 
requirements for the secondary braking are 
still ensured. 

In the event of breakage of any component 
other than the brakes (as defined in 3.6) and 
the components referred to in 5.2.2 (k), or of 
any other failure of the service braking system 
(malfunction, partial or total exhaustion of an 
energy reserve), that part of the service 
braking system which is not affected by the 
failure, shall be able to bring the vehicle to a 
halt in the conditions prescribed for secondary 
braking. 

If service braking is ensured by the action of 
the driver’s muscular energy assisted by one 
or more energy reserves, secondary braking 
shall, in the event of failure of that assistance, 
be capable of being ensured by the driver’s 
muscular energy assisted by the energy 
reserves, if any, which are unaffected by the 
failure, the force applied to the service brake 
control not exceeding the prescribed 
maximum. 

If the service braking force and transmission 
depend exclusively on the use, controlled by 
the driver, of an energy reserve, there shall be 
at least two completely independent energy 
reserves, each provided with its own 
transmission, likewise independent; each of 
them may act on the brakes of only two or 
more wheels so selected as to be capable of 
ensuring by themselves the prescribed degree 
of secondary braking without endangering the 
stability of the vehicle during braking; in 
addition, each of the aforesaid energy reserves 
shall be equipped with a warning device as 
defined in 5.2.14. 


If the service braking force and transmission 
depend exclusively on the use of an energy 
reserve, one energy reserve for the 
transmission is deemed to be sufficient , 
provided that the prescribed secondary 
braking is ensured by the action of the driver’s 
muscular energy acting on the service brake 
control and the requirement of the 5.2.5 are 
met. 

Certain parts, such as the pedal and its bearing, 
the master cylinder and its piston or pistons, 
the control valve, the linkage between the 
pedal and the master cylinder or the control 


valve, the brake cylinders and their pistons, 
and the lever-and-cam assemblies of brakes, 
shall not be regarded as liable to breakage if 
they are amply dimensioned, are readily 
accessible for maintenance, and exhibit safety 
features at least equal to those prescribed for 
other essential components (such as the 
steering linkage) of the vehicle. Any such part 
as aforesaid whose failure would make it 
impossible to brake the vehicle with a degree 
of effectiveness at least equal to that 
prescribed for secondary braking shall be 
made of metal or of a material with equivalent 
characteristics and shall not undergo notable 
distortion in normal operation of the braking 
systems. 


5.2.3 The failure of a part of a hydraulic transmission 
system shall be signalled to the driver by a device 
comprising a red tell-tale signal lighting up before or 
upon application of a differential pressure of not more 
than 1.55 MPa between the active and failed brake 
equipment, measured at the master cylinder outlet and 
remaining lit as long as the failure persists and the 
ignition (start) switch is in the ‘on’ (run) position. 
However, a device comprising a red tell-tale signal 
lighting up when the fluid in the reservoir is below a 
certain level specified by the manufacturer is permitted. 
The tell-tale signal shall be visible even by daylight; 
the satisfactory condition of the signal shall be easily 
verifiable by the driver from the driver’s seat. The 
failure of a component of the device shall not entail 
total loss of the braking equipment’s effectiveness. 
Application of the parking brake shall also be indicated 
to the driver. The same tell-tale signal may be used. 


5.2.4 Where use is made of energy other than the 
muscular energy of the driver, there need not be more 
than one source of such energy (hydraulic pump, air 
compressor, etc), but the means by which the device 
constituting that source is driven shall be as safe as 
practicable. 


5.2.4.1 In the event of failure in any part of the 
transmission of a braking system, the feed to the part 
not affected by the failure shall continue to be ensured, 
if required for the purpose of halting the vehicle with 
the degree of effectiveness prescribed for secondary 
braking. This condition shall be met by means of 
devices which can easily be actuated when the vehicle 
is stationary, or by automatic means. 


5.2.4.2 Furthermore, storage devices located down- 
circuit of this device shall be such that in the case of a 
failure in the energy supply after four full-stroke 
actuations of the service brake control, under the 
conditions prescribed in B-1.2, it is still possible to 
halt the vehicle at the fifth application, with the degree 


IS 15986 : 2015 


of effectiveness prescribed for secondary braking. 


5.2.4.3 However, for hydraulic braking systems with 
stored energy, these provisions can be considered to 
be met provided that the requirements of B-1.3 are 
satisfied. 


5.2.5 The requirements of 5.2.2, 5.2.3 and 5.2.4 shall 
be met without the use of any automatic device of a 
kind such that its ineffectiveness might pass unnoticed 
through the fact that parts normally in a position of 
rest come into action only in the event of failure in the 
braking system. 


5.2.6 The service braking system shall act on all wheels 
of the vehicle and shall distribute its action 
appropriately among the axles. 


5.2.7 In the case of vehicles equipped with electric 
regenerative braking systems of category B, the braking 
input from other sources of braking may be suitably 
phased to allow the electric regenerative braking system 
alone to be applied, provided that both the following 
conditions are met: 


a) Intrinsic variations in the torque output of the 
electrical regenerative braking system (for 
example as a result of changes in the electric 
state of charge in the traction batteries) are 
automatically compensated by appropriate 
variation in the phasing relationship as long 
as the requirements of B-1.3.2 or E-5.3 
(including the case with the electric motor 
engaged) are satisfied (see Note). 


NOTE — The authority, which is to grant approval, 
shall have the right to check the service braking system 
by additional vehicle test procedures. 


b) Wherever necessary, to ensure that braking 
rate [see Note below 5.2.7 (a)] remains related 
to the driver’s braking demand, having regard 
to the available tyre/road adhesion, braking 
shall automatically be caused to act on all 
wheels of the vehicle. 


5.2.8 The action of the service braking system shall be 
distributed between the wheels of one and the same 
axle symmetrically in relation to the longitudinal 
median plane of the vehicle. Compensation and 
functions, such as anti-lock, which may cause 
deviations from this symmetrical distribution, shall be 
declared. 


5.2.8.1 Compensation by the electric control 
transmission for deterioration or defect within the 
braking system shall be indicated to the driver by means 
of the yellow warning signal specified in 5.2.21.1.2. 
This requirement shall apply for all conditions of 
loading when compensation exceeds the following 
limit: 


IS 15986 : 2015 


a) A difference in transverse braking pressures 
on any axle, 
1) Of 25 percent of the higher value for 
vehicle decelerations => 2 m/s’; and 
2) A value corresponding to 25 percent at 2 
m/s? for decelerations below this rate. 


b) An individual compensating value on any 
axle, 
1) > 50 percent of the nominal value for 
vehicle decelerations > 2 m/s’; and 
2) a value corresponding to 50 percent of 
the nominal value at 2 m/s? for 
decelerations below this rate. 


5.2.8.2 Compensation as defined above is permitted 
only when the initial brake application is made at 
vehicle speeds greater than 10 km/h. 


5.2.9 Malfunctions of the electric control transmission 
shall not apply the brakes contrary to the driver’s 
intentions. 


5.2.10 The service, secondary and parking braking 
systems shall act on braking surfaces connected to the 
wheels through components of adequate strength. 


Where braking torque for a particular axle or axles is 
provided by both a friction braking system and an 
electrical regenerative braking system of category B, 
disconnection of the latter source is permitted, 
providing that the friction braking source remains 
permanently connected and able to provide the 
compensation referred to in 5.2.7 (a). 


However, in the case of short disconnection transients, 
incomplete compensation is accepted, but within 1s, 
this compensation shall have attained at least 75 percent 
of its final value. 


Nevertheless, in all cases, the permanently connected 
friction braking source shall ensure that both the service 
and secondary braking systems continue to operate 
with the prescribed degree of effectiveness. 


Disconnection of the braking surfaces of the parking 
braking system shall be permitted only on condition 
that the disconnection is controlled exclusively by the 
driver from his driving seat, by a system incapable of 
being brought into action by a leak. 


5.2.11 Wear of the brakes shall be capable of being 
easily taken up by means of a system of manual or 
automatic adjustment. In addition, the control and the 
components of the transmission and of the brakes shall 
possess a reserve of travel and, if necessary, suitable 
means of compensation such that, when the brakes 
become heated, or the brake linings have reached a 
certain degree of wear, effective braking is ensured 
without immediate adjustment being necessary. 


5.2.11.1 Wear adjustment shall be automatic for the 
service brakes. Automatic wear adjustment devices 
shall be such that after heating followed by cooling of 
the brakes, effective braking is still ensured. In 
particular the vehicle shall remain capable of normal 
running after the tests conducted in accordance with 
B-1.5. 


5.2.11.2 It shall be possible to easily check this wear 
on service brake linings from the outside or underside 
of the vehicle utilizing only the tools or equipment 
normally supplied with the vehicle, for instance, by 
the provision of appropriate inspection holes or by 
some other means. Alternatively, acoustic or optical 
devices warning the driver at his driving position when 
lining replacement is necessary are acceptable. The 
removal of front and/or rear wheels is permitted for 
this purpose. The yellow warning signal specified in 
5.2.21.1.2 may be used as the optical warning signal. 


5.2.12 In hydraulic-transmission braking systems, the 
filling ports of the fluid reservoirs shall be readily 
accessible; in addition, the receptacles containing the 
reserve fluid shall be so designed and constructed that 
the level of the reserve fluid can be easily checked 
without the receptacles having to be opened, and the 
minimum total reservoir capacity is equivalent to the 
fluid displacement resulting when all the wheel 
cylinders or caliper pistons serviced by the reservoirs 
move from a new lining, fully retracted position to a 
fully worn, fully applied position. If these latter 
conditions are not fulfilled, the red warning signal 
specified in 5.2.21.1.1 shall draw the driver’s attention 
to any fall in the level of reserve fluid liable to cause a 
failure of the braking system. 


5.2.13 The type of fluid to be used in hydraulic 
transmission braking systems shall be identified by the 
symbol in accordance with Figs. 1 or 2 of ISO 9128 
and the symbol DOT3/DOT4/ DOTS, as appropriate. 
The symbols shall be affixed in a visible position in 
indelible form within 100 mm of the filling ports of 
the fluid reservoirs; additional information may be 
provided by the manufacturer. 


5.2.14 Warning Device 


5.2.14.1 Any vehicle fitted with a service brake 
actuated from an energy reservoir shall, where the 
prescribed secondary braking performance cannot be 
obtained by means of this brake without the use of the 
stored energy, be provided with a warning device, 
giving an optical or acoustic signal when the stored 
energy, in any part of the system, falls to a value at 
which without re-charging of the reservoir and 
irrespective of the load conditions of the vehicle, it is 
possible to apply the service brake control a fifth time 
after four full-stroke actuations and obtain the 


prescribed secondary braking performance (without 
faults in the service brake transmission device and with 
the brakes adjusted as closely as possible). This 
warning device shall be directly and permanently 
connected to the circuit. When the engine is running 
under normal operating conditions and there are no 
faults in the braking system, as is the case in type 
approval tests, the warning device shall give no signal 
except during the time required for charging the energy 
reservoir(s) after start-up of the engine. The red 
warning signal specified in 5.2.21.1.1 shall be used as 
the optical warning signal. 


5.2.14.2 However, in the case of vehicles which are 
only considered to comply with the requirements 
of 5.2.4.1 by virtue of meeting the requirements 
of C-1.3, the warning device shall consist of an acoustic 
signal in addition to an optical signal. These devices 
need not operate simultaneously, provided that each 
of them meets the above requirements and the acoustic 
signal is not actuated before the optical signal. The 
red warning signal specified in 5.2.21.1.1 shall be used 
as the optical warning signal. 


5.2.14.3 This acoustic device may be rendered 
inoperative while the parking brake is applied and/or, 
at the choice of the manufacturer, in the case of 
automatic transmission the selector is in the ‘Park’ 
position. 


5.2.15 Without prejudice to the requirements of 5.1.2 
(c), where an auxiliary source of energy is essential to 
the functioning of a braking system, the reserve of 
energy shall be such as to ensure that, if the engine 
stops or in the event of a failure of the means by which 
the energy source is driven, the braking performance 
remains adequate to bring the vehicle to a halt in the 
prescribed conditions. In addition, if the muscular effort 
applied by the driver to the parking braking system is 
reinforced by a servo device, the actuation of parking 
braking shall be ensured in the event of a failure of the 
servo device, if necessary by using a reserve of energy 
independent of that normally supplying the servo 
device. This reserve of energy may be that intended 
for the service braking system. 


5.2.16 The pneumatic/hydraulic auxiliary equipment 
shall be supplied with energy in such a way that during 
its operation the prescribed deceleration values can be 
reached and that even in the event of damage to the 
source of energy the operation of the auxiliary 
equipment cannot cause the reserves of energy feeding 
the braking systems to fall below the level indicated in 
5.2.14. 


5.2.17 In the case of a motor vehicle equipped to tow a 
trailer with electric service brakes, the following 
requirements shall be met: 


IS 15986 : 2015 


a) The power supply (generator and battery) of 
the motor vehicle shall have a sufficient 
capacity to provide the current for an electric 
braking system. With the engine running at 
the idling speed recommended by the 
manufacturer and all electrical devices 
supplied by the manufacturer as standard 
equipment of the vehicle switched on, the 
voltage in the electrical lines shall at 
maximum current consumption of the 
electrical braking system (15 A) not fall below 
the value of 9.6V measured at the connection. 
The electrical lines shall not be capable of 
short circuiting even when overloaded. 

b) Inthe event of a failure in the motor vehicle’s 
service braking system, where that system 
consists of at least two independent units, the 
unit or units not affected by the failure shall 
be capable of partially or fully actuating the 
brakes of the trailer. 

c) The use of the stop-lamp switch and circuit 
for actuating the electrical braking system is 
permissible only if the actuating line is 
connected in parallel with the stop-lamp and 
the existing stop-lamp switch and circuit are 
capable of taking the extra load. 


5.2.18 Additional Requirements for Vehicles Equipped 
with Electric Regenerative Braking Systems 


5.2.18.1 Vehicles fitted with an electric regenerative 
braking system of category A 


5.2.18.1.1 The electric regenerative braking shall only 
be activated by the accelerator control and/or the gear 
neutral position. 


5.2.18.2 Vehicles fitted with an electric regenerative 
braking system of category B 


5.2.18.2.1 It shall not be possible to disconnect, 
partially or totally, one part of the service braking 
system other than by automatic means. This should 
not be construed as a departure from the requirements 
of 5.2.10. 


5.2.18.2.2 The service braking system shall have only 
one control device. 


5.2.18.2.3 The service braking system shall not be 
adversely affected by the disengagement of the 
motor(s) or by the gear ratio used. 


5.2.18.2.4 If the operation of the electric component 
of braking is ensured by a relation established between 
information coming from the control of the service 
brake and the braking force to the wheels which of it 
results, a failure of this relation leading to the non- 
respect of the prescriptions of distribution of braking 


IS 15986 : 2015 


among the axles (see Annex D or Annex E, which is 
applicable) shall be warned to the driver by an optical 
warning signal at the latest when the control is actuated 
and having to remain lit as long as this defect exists 
and that the switch of ‘contact’ is in the position ‘go’. 


5.2.18.3 For vehicles fitted with an electric regenerative 
braking system of either category, all the relevant 
prescriptions shall apply except 5.2.18.1.1. In this case, 
the electric regenerative braking may be actuated by 
the accelerator control and/or the gear neutral position. 
Additionally, the action on the service braking control 
shall not reduce the above braking effect generated by 
the release of the accelerator control; 


5.2.18.4 The operation of the electric braking shall not 
be adversely affected by magnetic or electric fields. 


5.2.18.5 For vehicles equipped with an anti-lock 
device, the anti-lock device shall control the electric 
braking system. 


5.2.18.6 The state of charge of the traction batteries is 
determined by the method set out in B-4 (see (see 
Note). 


NOTE — By agreement with the technical service, state of 
charge assessment shall not be required for vehicles, which 
have an on-board energy source for charging the traction 
batteries and the means for regulating their state of charge. 


5.2.19 Special Additional Requirements for the Electric 
Transmission of the Parking Braking System 


5.2.19.1 In the case of a failure within the electric 
transmission, any unintended actuation of the parking 
braking system shall be prevented. 


5.2.19.2 In the case of an electrical failure in the control 
or a break in the wiring within the electric control 
transmission between the control and the ECU directly 
connected with it, excluding the energy supply, it shall 
remain possible to apply the parking braking system 
from the driver’s seat and thereby be capable of holding 
the laden vehicle stationary on an 8 percent up or down 
gradient. Alternatively, in this case, an automatic 
actuation of the parking brake is allowed when the 
vehicle is stationary, provided that the above 
performance is achieved and, once applied, the parking 
brake remains engaged independently of the status of 
the ignition (start) switch. In this alternative, the 
parking brake shall be automatically released as soon 
as the driver starts to set the vehicle in motion again. 
The engine/manual transmission or the automatic 
transmission (park position) may be used to achieve 
or assist in achieving the above performance. 


5.2.19.2.1 A break in the wiring within the electrical 
transmission, or an electrical failure in the control of 
the parking braking system shall be signalled to the 
driver by the yellow warning signal specified in 


5.2.21.1.2. When caused by a break in the wiring within 
the electrical control transmission of the parking 
braking system, this yellow warning signal shall be 
signalled as soon as the break occurs. In addition, such 
an electrical failure in the control or break in the wiring 
external electronic control unit(s) and excluding energy 
supply shall be signalled to the driver by flashing the 
red warning signal specified in 5.2.21.1.1 as long as 
the ignition (start) switch is in the ‘on’ (run) position 
including a period of not less than 10 s there after and 
the control is in the ‘on’ (activated) position. Where 
actuation of the parking brake is normally indicated 
by a separate red warning signal satisfying all the 
requirements of 5.2.21.2, the signal shall be used to 
satisfy the above requirements for a red signal. 


5.2.19.3 Auxiliary equipment may draw its energy from 
the energy reserve of the electric transmission of the 
parking braking system, provided that the actuation of 
the parking braking system will not be affected. In 
addition, where the energy reserve is also used by the 
service braking system, the requirements of 5.2.20.6 
shall apply. 


5.2.19.4 After the ignition/start switch which controls 
the electrical energy for the braking equipment has been 
switched off and/or the key removed, it shall remain 
possible to apply the parking braking system, whereas 
releasing shall be prevented. 


5.2.20 Special Additional Requirements for Service 
Braking Systems with Electric Control Transmission 


5.2.20.1 With the parking brake released, the service 
braking system shall be able to generate a static total 
braking force at least equivalent to that produced during 
the Type 0 test, even when the ignition/start switch has 
been switched off and/or the key has been removed. It 
should be understood that sufficient energy is available 
in the energy transmission of the service braking 
system. 


5.2.20.2 In the case of a single temporary failure (< 40 
ms) within the electric control transmission (for 
example non-transmitted signal or data error) there 
shall be no distinguishable effect on the service braking 
performance. 


5.2.20.3 A failure with in the electric transmission (see 
Note) not including its energy reservoir affects the 
function and performance of systems addressed in the 
standard indicated to the driver by the red or yellow 
warning signal specified in 5.2.21.1.1 and 5.2.21.1.2 
respectively, as appropriate. When the service braking 
performance can no longer be achieved (red warning 
signal), failures resulting from a loss of electrical 
continuity (for example breakage, disconnection) shall 
be signaled to the driver as soon as they occur, and the 
prescribed residual braking performance shall be 


fulfilled by operating the service braking control in 
accordance with B-2.2. 


NOTE — At the time of approval, compliance with this 
requirement shall be confirmed by the vehicle manufacturer. 


5.2.20.4 In the event of a failure of the energy source 
of the electric control transmission, starting from the 
nominal value of the energy level, the full control range 
of the service braking system shall be guaranteed after 
twenty consecutive full stroke actuations of the service 
braking control. During the test, the braking control 
shall be fully applied for 20 s and released for 5 s on 
each actuation. It should be understood that during the 
above test sufficient energy is available in the energy 
transmission to ensure full actuation of the service 
braking system. This requirement shall not be 
construed as a departure from the requirements of 
Annex C. 


5.2.20.5 When the battery voltage falls below a value 
nominated by the manufacturer at which the prescribed 
service braking performance can no longer be 
guaranteed and/or which precludes at least two 
independent service braking circuits from each 
achieving the prescribed secondary or residual braking 
performance, the red warning signal specified in 
5.2.21.1.1(a) shall be activated. After the warning signal 
has been activated, it shall be possible to apply the 
service braking control and obtain at least the residual 
performance prescribed in B-2.2. It should be 
understood that sufficient energy is available in the 
energy transmission of the service braking system. 


5.2.20.6 If the auxiliary equipment is supplied with 
energy from the same reserve as the electric control 
transmission, it shall be ensured that ,with the engine 
running at a speed not greater than 80 percent of the 
maximum power speed, the supply of the energy shall 
be sufficient to fulfill the prescribed deceleration values 
by either provision of an energy supply which is able 
to prevent discharge of this reserve when all auxiliary 
equipment is functioning or by automatically switching 
off pre-selected parts of the auxiliary equipment at a 
voltage above critical level referred to in 5.2.20.5 such 
that further discharge of reserve is prevented. 
Compliance may be demonstrated by calculation or 
by a practical test .This paragraph does not apply to 
vehicles where the prescribed deceleration values can 
be reached without the use of electrical energy 


5.2.20.7 If the auxiliary equipment is supplied with 
energy from the electric control transmission following 
requirements to be fulfilled: 


a) Inthe event of a failure in the energy source, 
whilst the vehicle is in motion, the energy in 
the reservoir shall be sufficient to actuate the 
brakes when the control is applied; and 


IS 15986 : 2015 


b) Inthe event of a failure in the energy source, 
whilst the vehicle is stationary and the parking 
braking system applied, the energy in the 
reservoir shall be sufficient to actuate the 
lights even when the brakes are applied. 


5.2.21 The general requirements for optical warning 
signals whose function is to indicate to the driver 
certain specified failures or defect within the braking 
equipment of the motor vehicle, are set out in the 
following sub-paragraph. Other than as described 
in 5.2.21.5 these signals be used exclusively prescribed 
by this standard. 


5.2.21.1 Motor vehicles shall be capable of providing 
optical brake failure and defect warning signals, as 
follows: 


5.2.21.1.1 A red warning signal, indicating a failure 
within the vehicle braking equipment which precludes 
achievement of the prescribed service braking 
performance and/or which precludes the functioning 
of at least one of two independent service braking 
circuits; 


5.2.21.1.2 Where applicable, a yellow warning signal 
indicating an electrically detected defect within the 
vehicle braking equipment, which is not indicated by 
the red warning signal described in 5.2.21.1.1. 


5.2.21.2 The warning signals shall be visible, even by 
daylight; the satisfactory condition of the signals shall 
be easily verifiable by the driver from the driver’s seat; 
the failure of a component of the warning devices shall 
not entail any loss of the braking system’s performance. 


5.2.21.3 Except where stated otherwise, 


a) a specified failure or defect shall be signaled 
to the driver by the above-mentioned warning 
signal(s) not later than on actuation of the 
service braking control; 

b) warning signal(s) shall remain displayed as 
long as the failure/defect persists and the 
ignition (start) switch is in the ‘on’ (run) 
position; and 

c) warning signal shall be constant (not 
flashing). 


5.2.21.4 The warning signal(s) mentioned above shall 
light up when the electrical equipment of the vehicle 
(and the braking system) is energized. With the vehicle 
stationary, the braking system shall verify that none of 
the specified failures or defects are present before 
extinguishing the signals. Specified failures or defects 
which should activate the warning signals mentioned 
above, but which are not detected under static 
conditions, shall be stored upon detection and be 
displayed at start-up and at all times when the ignition 


IS 15986 : 2015 


(start) switch is in the ‘on’ (run) position, as long as 
the failure or defect persists. 


5.2.21.5 Non-specified failures (or defects) or other 
information concerning to the brakes and/or running 
gear of the power-driven vehicle may be indicated by 
the yellow signal specified in 5.2.21.1.2, provided that 
all the following conditions are fulfilled: 


a) 
b) 


Vehicle is stationary; 

After the braking equipment is first energized 
and the signal has indicated that , following 
the procedures detailed in 5.2.21.4, no 
specified failures(no defects) vehicle 
identified; and 

Non-specified faults or other information shall 
be indicated only by the flashing of the 
warning signal. However, the warning signal 
shall be extinguished by the time when the 
vehicle speed exceeds 10 km/h. 


c) 


5.2.22 Generation of a Signal to Illuminate Stop Lamps 


5.2.22.1 Activation of the service braking system by 
the driver shall generate a signal that will be used to 
illuminate stop lamps. 


5.2.22.2 Activation of the service braking system by 
‘automatically commanded braking’ shall generate the 
signal mentioned above. However, when the retardation 
generated is less than 0.7 m/s? the signal may be 
suppressed (see Note). 

NOTE — At the time of approval, compliance with this 


requirement shall be confirmed by the manufacturers through 
a declaration. 


5.2.22.3 Activation of part of the service braking system 
by selective braking shall not generate the signal 
mentioned above (see Note). 


NOTE — During a selective braking event, the function may 
change to automatically command braking. 


5.2.22.4 Electric regenerative braking systems, which 
produce a retarding force upon release of the throttle 
pedal, shall not generate a signal mentioned above. 


5.2.23 When a vehicle is equipped with the means to 
indicate emergency braking, activation and de- 
activation of the emergency braking signal shall meet 
the specifications below: 


a) The signal shall be activated by the application 
of the service braking system at a deceleration 
of or above 6 m/s’; 

The signal shall be de-activated at the latest 


when the deceleration has fallen 


10 


below 2.5 m/s’. 
b) The following conditions may also be used: 


1) By the application of the service braking 
system in such a manner that it would 
produce, in an unladen condition and 
engine disconnected, under the test 
conditions of Type 0 as described in 
Annex B, a deceleration of or above 
6 m/s’; 

The signal shall be de-activated at the 
latest when the deceleration has fallen 
below 2.5 m/s’. 

or 

2) The signal may be activated when the 

service braking system is applied at a 

speed above 50 km/h and the antilock 

system is fully cycling (as defined 

in E-2.7). 

The signal shall be deactivated when the 

antilock system is no longer fully cycling. 


6 TESTS AND TEST METHODS 


6.1 Braking tests which the vehicles submitted for 
approval are required to undergo, and the braking 
performance required, are described in Annex B 


6.2 The procedure described in Annex F may be applied 
in the event of a modification of vehicle type resulting 
from the fitting of brake linings of another type to 
vehicles which have been approved in accordance with 
this standard. 


7 MODIFICATION OF VEHICLE TYPE OR 
BRAKING SYSTEM AND EXTENSION OF 
APPROVAL 


7.1 Every modification of the vehicle type or of its 
braking equipment with regard to the characteristics 
in Annex A shall be notified to the testing agency which 
approved the vehicle type. That testing agency may 
then either, 


a) consider that the modifications made are 
unlikely to have an appreciable adverse effect 
and that in any case the vehicle still meets the 
requirements; or 

b) require a further report from the testing 


agency responsible for carrying out the tests. 


7.2 Confirmation or refusal of approval, specifying the 
alterations, shall be communicated by the procedure 
specified in 4.3, to the parties to the agreement which 
apply this standard. 


IS 15986 : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 7.1) 


INFORMATION ON TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 
TO BE SUBMITTED BY THE MANUFACTURER 


SI No. Technical Specification 


Trade name or mark of the vehicle...................c00000008 
VehiCletly Pes aroni a a e seanisgas bead eva a taste a E a E dea R EE E ENEE 
Manufacturer’s name and address: .........cccccccccccccccccecessesesecececccceseseceeeueuseeeeececesceseeeueaues 


A U Nme 


Mass of vehicle: 
4.1 Maximum mass of vehiclet........ eee i n E N E aN 
4.2. “Minimum mass of VEHICLE? vesser an e E EE ERR EEE 
Distribution of mass of each axle (maximum value): ............eecececccesseesssnnseceeeeeeecceeceeeeeeeees 
6 Make and type of brake linings: 00... ee eee eeeeececeeseeceaeeeseeceaeceseessaeceseeessessaeenseees 
6.1 Brake linings tested to all relevant prescriptions of Annex Cu... eee ee eeeeeeeeeees 
7 Engine Type 
8 Number and ratios of gears 
9 Final drive ratio(s) 
10 If applicable, maximum mass of trailer which may be coupled 
10.1 Unbraked trailer oerien aa earo ar niara EaR 
Li,  TyrediMensionSe ie a A RAA E TE E EEAO 
11.1. Temporary-use spare wheel/tyre dimensions: .........eseseesessesessestsrrsstesressrseresresrersresresrrsee 
11.2. Vehicle meets the technical requirements of AIS 110: Yes/No 
12 Maximum designed speed 
13 Brief description of braking equipment: .......sssssssesssessssessessrseresresressrrsresrereresreneessreeees 
t4- -Mass'of vehicle: when tested niei eee ear O E E E E i 


O | immo Unladen (ke) 
Axle No ee 


Axle No2 fee 
ae ar (aS 


15 Vehicle is / is not equipped to tow a trailer with electrical braking systems. 


16 Vehicle is / is not equipped with an anti-lock system. 
16.1. The vehicle fulfils the requirement of Annex E: Yes / No 
16.2. Category of anti-lock system: category 1 /2/3 


17 Adequate documentation according to annex G was supplied in respect of the following 
system(s): ........... Yes / No/ Not applicable 


18 Vehicle submitted for approval on: .0.... eee ee cece cesceeeaecesceesneceaeeescessaeseseessaeseaeeeseeesaes 


11 


IS 15986 : 2015 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 5.2.4.2, 5.2.4.3, 5.2.7, 5.2111, 5.2.18.6, 5.2.20.3, 5.2.20.5, 5.2.23, 
6, D-3.1, E-5.2, F-1.3, F-2.1.1, F-3.1, F-3.2, F- 4.3.2, F- 4.4.1.1 and F- 4.4.2.1) 
BRAKING TESTS AND PERFORMANCE OF BRAKING SYSTEMS 


B-1 BRAKING TESTS 


B-1.1 General 


B-1.1.1 The performance prescribed for braking 
systems is based on the stopping distance and the mean 
fully developed deceleration. The performance of a 
braking system shall be determined by measuring the 
stopping distance in relation to the initial speed of the 
vehicle and/or by measuring the mean fully developed 
deceleration during the test. 


B-1.1.2 The stopping distance shall be the distance 
covered by the vehicle from the moment when the 
driver begins to actuate the control of the braking 
system until the moment when the vehicle stops; the 
initial speed shall be the speed at the moment when 
the driver begins to actuate the control of the braking 
system; the initial speed shall not be less than 98 percent 
of the prescribed speed for the test in question. 


The mean fully developed deceleration (d,,) shall be 
calculated as the deceleration averaged with respect to 
distance over the interval v, to v, , according to the 
following formula: 


2 2 
Vb — Ve 


ee ee ee 
25.92 (S, —S,) 


where 
v, = initial vehicle speed, in km/h; 
v, = vehicle speed at 0.8 v,, in km/h; 
V, = vehicle speed at 0.1 v,, in km/h; 
Sẹ = distance travelled between v, and v,, in m; 


and 


distance travelled between v, and v, in m. 


The speed and distance shall be determined using 
instrumentation having an accuracy of +1 percent at 
the prescribed speed for the test. The d,, may be 
determined by other methods than the measurement 
of speed and distance; in this case, the accuracy of the 
d,, Shall be within +3 percent. 


B-1.2 For the approval of any vehicle, the braking 
performance shall be measured during road tests 
conducted in the following conditions. 


B-1.2.1 The vehicle’s condition as regards mass shall 
be as prescribed for each type of test and be specified 
in the test report; 


12 


B-1.2.2 The test shall be carried out at the speeds 
prescribed for each type of test; if the maximum design 
speed of a vehicle is lower than the speed prescribed 
for a test, the test shall be performed at the 90 percent 
of vehicle’s maximum speed; 


B-1.2.3 During the tests, the force applied to the brake 
control in order to obtain the prescribed performance 
shall not exceed the maximum force laid down; 


B-1.2.4 The road shall have a surface affording good 
adhesion, unless specified otherwise in the relevant 
annexes; 


B-1.2.5 The tests shall be performed when there is no 
wind liable to affect the results; 


B-1.2.6 At the start of the tests, the tyres shall be cold 
and at the pressure prescribed for the load actually 
borne by the wheels when the vehicle is stationary; 


B-1.2.7 The prescribed performance shall be obtained 
without locking of the wheels at speeds exceeding 15 
km/h, without deviation of the vehicle from a 3.5 m 
wide lane, without exceeding a yaw angle of 15° and 
without abnormal vibrations. 


B-1.2.8 For vehicles powered completely or partially 
by an electric motor (or motors), permanently 
connected to the wheels, all tests shall be carried out 
with these motor(s) connected 


B-1.2.9 For vehicles as described in B-1.2.8, fitted with 
an electric regenerative braking system of category A, 
behavior tests defined in B-1.4.3.1 shall be carried out 
on a track with a low adhesion coefficient (as defined 
in E-5.2.2); 


B-1.2.9.1 Moreover, for vehicles fitted with an electric 
regenerative braking system of category A, transient 
conditions as gear changes or accelerator control 
release shall not affect the behavior of the vehicle in 
condition described in B-1.2.9; 


B-1.2.10 In the tests provided in B-1.2.9 and B-1.2.9.1 
wheel locking is not allowed. However, steering 
correction is permitted if the angular rotation of the 
steering control is within 120° during the initial 2 s 
and not more than 240° in all. 


B-1.2.11 For a vehicle with electrically actuated service 
brakes powered from traction batteries (or an auxiliary 
battery) which receive(s) energy only from an 


independent external charging system, these batteries 
shall, during braking performance testing, be at an 
average of not more than 5 percent above that state of 
charge at which the brake failure warning prescribed 
in 5.2.20.5 is required to be given. 


If this warning is given, the batteries may receive some 
recharge during the tests, to keep them in the required 
state of charge range. 


B-1.3 Behavior of the Vehicle During Braking 


B-1.3.1 In braking tests, and in particular in those at 
high speed, the general behaviour of the vehicle during 
braking shall be checked. 


B-1.3.2 Behaviour of the vehicle during braking on a 
road on which adhesion is reduced shall meet the 
relevant requirements of Annex D and/or Annex E. 


B-1.3.2.1 In the case of a braking system according to 
5.2.7 where the braking for a particular axle (or axles) 
is comprised of more than one source of braking torque, 
and any individual source can be varied with respect 
to the other(s), the vehicle shall satisfy the requirements 
of Annex D, or alternatively, Annex E under all 
relationships permitted by its control strategy (see 
Note). 


NOTE — The manufacturer shall provide the testing agency 
with the family of braking curves permitted by the automatic 
control strategy. These curves may be verified by the testing 
agency” 
B-1.4 Type 0 Test (Ordinary Performance Test with 
Cold Brakes) 


B-1.4.1 General 


B-1.4.1.1 The average temperature of the service brakes 
on the hottest axle of the vehicle measured inside the 
brake linings or on the braking path of the disc or drum 
is between 65°C and 100°C prior to any brake 
application. 


B-1.4.1.2 The test shall be conducted in the following 
conditions: 


a) The vehicle shall be laden, the distribution of 
its mass among the axles being that stated by 
the manufacturer; where provision is made for 
several arrangements of the load on the axles 
the distribution of the maximum mass among 
the axles shall be such that the mass on each 
axle is proportional to the maximum 
permissible mass for each axle; 

b) Every test shall be repeated on the unladen 
vehicle; there may be, in addition to the driver, 
a second person on the front seat who is 
responsible for noting the results of the test; 


c) 


In the case of a vehicle equipped with an 


13 


IS 15986 : 2015 


electric regenerative braking system, the 
requirements depend on the category of this 
system: 

1) Category A — Any separate electric 
regenerative braking control which is 
provided, shall not be used during the 
Type 0 tests. 

2) Category B — The contribution of the 
electric regenerative braking system to 
the braking force generated shall not 
exceed that minimum level guaranteed by 


the system design. 


This condition is deemed to be satisfied, if 
the state of charge of the batteries is in one of 
the following conditions: 


i) At the maximum charge level 
recommended by the manufacturer, as 
listed in the vehicle specification; 

ii) Ata level not less than 95 percent of the 

full charge level, where the manufacturer 

has made no specific recommendation; 
and 

iii) At a maximum level resulting from 

automatic charge control on the vehicle. 


d) The limits prescribed for minimum 
performance, both for tests with the vehicle 
unladen and for tests with the vehicle laden, 
shall be those laid down hereunder; the 
vehicle shall satisfy both the prescribed 
stopping distance and the prescribed mean 
fully developed deceleration, but it may not 
be necessary to actually measure both 
parameters; 

e) The road shall be level; unless otherwise 
specified each test may comprise up to six 
stops including any needed for 
familiarization. 


B-1.4.2 Type 0 test with engine disconnected, service 
braking in accordance with B-2.1.1(A). 


The test shall be carried out at the speed prescribed, 
the figures prescribed in this connection being subject 
to a certain margin of tolerance. The minimum 
performance prescribed shall be attained. 


B-1.4.3 Type 0 test with engine connected, service 
braking in accordance with B-2.1.1(B). 


B-1.4.3.1 The test shall be carried out with the engine 
connected, from the speed prescribed in B-2.1.1(B). 
The minimum performance prescribed shall be 
attained. This test is not run if the maximum speed of 
the vehicle is = 125 km/h. 


B-1.4.3.2 The maximum practical performance figures 


IS 15986 : 2015 


shall be measured, and the behavior of the vehicle shall 
be in accordance with B-1.3.2. However, if the 
maximum speed of the vehicle is greater than 200 km/ 
h, the test speed shall be 120 km/h. 


B-1.5 Type I Test (Fade and Recovery Test) 
B-1.5.1 Heating Procedure 


B-1.5.1.1 The service brakes of all vehicles shall be 
tested by successively applying and releasing the brakes 
a number of times, the vehicle being laden, in the 
conditions shown in the table below: 


Conditions 
See SS 
V, V, t n 
km/h km/h s 
80 percent V a < 120 KAA 45 15 
where 
V, = initial speed, at beginning of braking; 
V, = speed at end of braking; 
Vinax= Maximum speed of the vehicle; 
n = number of brake applications; and 
At = duration of a braking cycle: time elapsing 


between the initiation of one brake 
application and the initiation of the next. 


B-1.5.1.2 If the characteristics of the vehicle make it 
impossible to abide by the duration prescribed for Ar, 
the duration may be increased; in any event, in addition 
to the time necessary for braking and accelerating the 
vehicle, a period of 10 s shall be allowed in each cycle 
for stabilizing the speed V, . 


B-1.5.1.3 In these tests, the force applied to the control 
shall be so adjusted as to attain a mean deceleration of 
3 m/s? during every brake application; two preliminary 
tests may be carried out to determine the appropriate 
control force. 


B-1.5.1.4 During brake applications, the highest gear 
ratio (excluding overdrive, etc) shall be continuously 
engaged. 


B-1.5.1.5 For regaining speed after braking, the 
gearbox shall be used in such a way as to attain the 
speed V, in the shortest possible time (maximum 
acceleration allowed by the engine and gearbox). 


B-1.5.1.6 For vehicles not having sufficient autonomy 
to carry out the cycles of heating of the brakes, the 
tests shall be carried out by achieving the prescribed 
speed before the first braking application and thereafter 
by using the maximum acceleration available to regain 
speed and then braking successively at the speed 
reached at the end of each 45 s cycle duration. 


14 


B-1.5.1.7 For vehicles equipped with an electric 
regenerative braking system of category B, the 
condition of the vehicle batteries at the start of the test, 
shall be such that the braking force contribution 
provided by the electric regenerative braking system 
does not exceed the minimum guaranteed by the system 
design. This requirement is deemed to be satisfied if 
the batteries are at one of the state of charge conditions 
as listed in B-1.4.1.2.(c). 


B-1.5.2 Hot Performance 


B-1.5.2.1 At the end of the Type I test (see B-1.5.1) 
the hot performance of the service braking system shall 
be measured in the same conditions (and in particular 
at a mean control force no greater than the mean force 
actually used) as for the Type 0 test with the engine 
disconnected (the temperature conditions may be 
different). 


B-1.5.2.2 This hot performance shall not be less than 
75 percent of that prescribed (see Note), nor less than 
60 percent of the figure recorded in the Type 0 test 
with the engine disconnected. 

NOTE — This corresponds to a stopping distance of 


0.1 v + 0.008 0 v? and a mean fully developed deceleration of 
4.82 m/s’. 


B-1.5.2.3 For vehicles fitted with an electric 
regenerative braking system of category A, during 
brake applications, the highest gear shall be 
continuously engaged and the separate electric braking 
control, if any, not used. 


B-1.5.2.4 In the case of vehicles equipped with an 
electric regenerative braking system of category B, 
having carried out the heating cycles according 
to B-1.5.1.6, the hot performance test shall be carried 
out at the maximum speed which can be reached by 
the vehicle at the end of the brake heating cycles, unless 
the speed specified in B-2.1.1 (A) can be reached. 


For comparison, a later Type 0 test with cold brakes 
shall be repeated from this same speed and with a 
similar electric regenerative braking contribution, as 
set by an appropriate state of battery charge, as was 
available during the hot performance test. 


Following the recovery process and test, further 
reconditioning of the linings shall be permitted before 
the test is made to compare this second cold 
performance with that achieved in the hot test, against 
the criteria of B-1.5.2.2 or B-1.5.2.5. 


B-1.5.2.5 In the case of a vehicle which satisfies the 
60 percent requirement specified in B-1.5.2.2, but 
which cannot comply with the 75 percent requirement 
of B-1.5.2.2 (see Note), a further hot performance test 
may be carried out using a control force not exceeding 


that specified in B-2. The results of both tests shall be 
entered in the report. 
NOTE — This corresponds to a stopping distance of 


0.1 v + 0.008 0 v? and a mean fully developed deceleration of 
4.82 m/s”. 


B-1.5.3 Recovery Procedure 


Immediately after the hot performance test, make four 
stops from 50 km/h with the engine connected, at 
a mean deceleration of 3 m/s”. Allow an interval of 
1.5 km between the start of successive stops. 
Immediately after each stop, accelerate at maximum 
rate to 50 km/h and maintain that speed until making 
the next stop. 


B-1.5.3.1 Vehicles equipped with an electrical 
regenerative braking system of category B may have 
their batteries re-charged or replaced by a charged set, 
in order to complete the recovery procedure. 


B-1.5.4 Recovery Performance 


At the end of the recovery procedure, the recovery 
performance of the service braking system shall be 
measured in the same conditions as for the Type 0 test 
with the engine disconnected (the temperature 
conditions may be different), using a mean force on 
the control, which is not more than the mean control 
force used in the corresponding Type 0 test. 


This recovery performance shall not be less than 70 
percent, nor more than 150 percent, of the figure 
recorded in the Type O test with the engine 
disconnected. 


B-1.5.4.1 For vehicles equipped with an electrical 
regenerative braking system of category B, the recovery 
test shall be made with no regenerative braking 
component, i.e. under the conditions of B-1.5.4. 


After the further reconditioning of the linings, a second 
repeat Type 0 test shall be made from the same speed 
and with no electric regenerative braking contribution 
as in the recovery test with the engine/motors 
disconnected, and comparison shall be made between 
these test results. 


The recovery performance shall not be less than 70 
percent, nor more than 150 percent of the figure 
recorded in this final repeat Type 0 test. 


B-2 PERFORMANCE OF BRAKING SYSTEMS 


B-2.1 Service Braking System 


B-2.1.1 The service brakes shall be tested under the 
conditions shown in the following table: 


15 


IS 15986 : 2015 


Para- Condition (A) Condition (B) 
meters Type 0 Test With Type 0 Test With 
Engine Disconnected Engine Connected 
(1) (2) (3) 
v 100 80 percent V nax 
or < 120 
ss 0.1v + 0.006 0 v? 0.1v + 0.006 7 v? 
d Z 6.43 5.76 
f 6.5 - 50 6.5 - 50 
where 
v = test speed, in km/h; 
s = stopping distance, in m; 
d,, = mean fully developed deceleration, in m/s?; 
f = force applied to foot control, in daN; and 
Vmax = Maximum speed of the vehicle, in km/h. 


B-2.1.2 In the case of a motor vehicle authorized to 
tow an unbraked trailer, the minimum performance 
prescribed for the corresponding motor vehicle for the 
Type 0 test with engine disconnected shall be attained 
with the unbraked trailer coupled to the motor vehicle 
and with the unbraked trailer laden to the maximum 
mass declared by the motor vehicle manufacturer. 
However, the minimum combination performance shall 
be not less than 5.4 m/s? both in laden and unladen 
conditions. 


The combination performance shall be verified by 
calculations referring to the maximum braking 
performance actually achieved by the motor vehicle 
alone (laden) during the Type 0 test with the engine 
disconnected, using the following formula (no practical 
tests with a coupled unbraked trailer are required): 


where 

dwr = calculated mean fully developed 
deceleration of the motor vehicle when 
coupled to an unbraked trailer, in m/s? ; 

dy = maximum mean fully developed 
deceleration of the motor vehicle alone 
achieved during the Type-0 test with 
engine disconnected, in m/s?; 

Py = mass of the motor vehicle (laden); and 

PR = maximum mass of an unbraked trailer 


which may be coupled, as declared by 
the motor vehicle manufacturer. 


IS 15986 : 2015 


B-2.2 Secondary Braking System 


B-2.2.1 The performance of the secondary braking 
system shall be tested by the Type 0 test with the engine 
disconnected from an initial vehicle speed of 100 km/ 
h and a force applied to the service brake control not 
less than 6.5 daN and not exceeding 50 daN. 


B-2.2.2 The secondary braking system shall give a 
stopping distance not exceeding the following value: 


0.1 v + 0.0158 v? (m) 


and a mean fully developed deceleration not less than 
2.44 m/s? (corresponding to the second term of the 
above formula). 


B-2.2.3 The secondary braking effectiveness test shall 
be conducted by simulating the actual failure 
conditions in the service braking system. 


B-2.2.4 For vehicles employing electric regenerative 
braking systems, the braking performance shall 
additionally be checked under the two following failure 
conditions: 


a) Fora total failure of the electric component 
of the service braking output; and 

b) Inthe case where the failure condition causes 

the electric component to deliver its maximum 


braking force. 


B-2.3 Parking Braking System 


B-2.3.1 The parking braking system shall be capable 
of holding the laden vehicle stationary on a 20 percent 
up or down gradient. 


B-2.3.2 On vehicles to which the coupling of a trailer 
is authorized, the parking braking system of the motor 
vehicle shall be capable of holding the combination of 
vehicles stationary on a 12 percent up or down gradient. 


B-2.3.3 If the control device is hand control, the force 
applied to it shall not exceed 40 daN. 


B-2.3.4 If it is a foot control device, the force exerted 
on the control shall not exceed 50 daN. 


B-2.3.5 A parking braking system which has to be 
actuated several times before it attains the prescribed 
performance is admissible. 


B-2.3.6 To check compliance with the requirement 
specified in 5.2.2 (d), a Type 0 test shall be carried out, 
with the engine disconnected, at an initial test speed 
of 30 km/h. The mean fully developed deceleration on 
application of the control of the parking brake system 
and the deceleration immediately before the vehicle 
stops, shall not be less than 1.5 m/s’. The test shall be 
carried out with the laden vehicle. The force exerted 
on the braking control device shall not exceed the 
specified values. 


16 


B-3 RESPONSE TIME 


B-3.1 Where a vehicle is equipped with a service 
braking system which is totally or partially dependent 
on a source of energy other than the muscular effort of 
the driver, the following requirements shall be satisfied: 


a) In an emergency manoeuvre, the time 
elapsing between the moment when the 
control device begins to be actuated and the 
moment when the braking force on the least 
favourable placed axle reaches the level 
corresponding to the prescribed performance 
shall not exceed 0.6 s; and 

b) In the case of vehicles fitted with hydraulic 
braking systems, the requirements of B-3.1 (a) 
are considered to be satisfied if, in an 
emergency man oeuvre, the deceleration of the 
vehicle or the pressure at the least favorable 
brake cylinder, reaches a level corresponding 


to the prescribed performance within 0.6 s. 


B-4 PROCEDURE FOR MONITORING THE 
STATE OF BATTERY CHARGE 


This procedure is applicable to vehicle batteries used 
for traction and regenerative braking. The procedure 
requires the use of a bi-directional dc watt-hour meter. 


B-4.1 Procedure 


If the batteries are new or have been subject to extended 
storage, they shall be cycled as recommended by the 
manufacturer. A minimum 8 h soak period at ambient 
temperature shall be allowed after completion of 
cycling. 


B-4.2 A full charge shall be established using the 
manufacturer’s recommended charging procedure. 


B-4.3 When the braking tests of B-1.2.11, B-1.4.1.2(c), 
B-1.5.1.6, B-1.5.1.7 and B-1.5.2.4 are conducted the 
watt-hours consumed by the traction motors and 
supplied by the regenerative braking system shall be 
recorded as a running total which shall then be used to 
determine the state of charge existing at the beginning 
or end of a particular test. 


B-4.4 To replicate a level of state of charge in the 
batteries for comparative tests, such as those of 
B-1.5.2.4, the batteries shall be either recharged to that 
level or charged to above that level and discharged into 
a fixed load at approximately constant power until the 
required state of charge is reached. Alternatively, for 
vehicles with battery powered electric traction only, 
the state of charge may be adjusted by running the 
vehicle. Tests conducted with a battery partially 
charged at their start shall be commenced as soon as 
possible after the desired state of charge has been 
reached. 


IS 15986 : 2015 


ANNEX C 
(Clauses 5.2.14.2, 5.2.20.4 and E-7.1.1.8) 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO ENERGY SOURCES AND ENERGY STORAGE DEVICES 


(ENERGY ACCUMULATORS), HYDRAULIC BRAKING 
SYSTEMS WITH STORED ENERGY 


C-1 CAPACITY OF ENERGY STORAGE 
DEVICES (ENERGY ACCUMULATORS) 


C-1.1 General 


C-1.1.1 Vehicles on which the braking equipment 
requires the use of stored energy provided by hydraulic 
fluid under pressure shall be equipped with energy 
storage devices (energy accumulators) of a capacity 
meeting the requirements of C-1.2 or C-1.3. 


C-1.1.2 However, the energy storage devices shall not 
be required to be of a prescribed capacity, if the braking 
system is such that in the absence of any energy reserve 
it is possible with the service brake control to achieve 
a braking performance at least equal to that prescribed 
for the secondary braking system. 


C-1.1.3 In verifying compliance with the requirements 
of C-1.2, C-1.3 and C-2.1, the brakes shall be adjusted 
as closely as possible and, for C-1.2, the rate of full- 
stroke actuations shall be such as to provide an interval 
of at least 60 s between each actuation. 


C-1.2 Vehicles equipped with a hydraulic braking 
system with stored energy shall meet the following 
requirements: 


a) After eight full-stroke actuations of the service 
brake control, it shall still be possible to 
achieve, on the ninth application, the 
performance prescribed for the secondary 
braking system; and 

b) Testing shall be performed in conformity with 

the following requirements: 

1) Testing shall commence at a pressure that 

may be specified by the manufacturer but 

is not higher than the cut-in pressure (see 


Note); and 


NOTE — The initial energy level shall be stated 
in the test report. 


2) The energy storage device(s) shall not be 
fed; in addition, any energy storage 
device(s) for auxiliary equipment shall 


be isolated. 


C-1.3 Vehicles equipped with a hydraulic braking 
system with stored energy which cannot meet the 
requirements of 5.2.4.1 shall be deemed to satisfy that 
paragraph, if the following requirements are met: 


17 


a) After any single transmission failure it shall 
still be possible after eight full-stroke 
actuations of the service brake control, to 
achieve, at the ninth application, at least the 
performance prescribed for the secondary 
braking system; and 

b) Testing shall be performed in conformity with 
the following requirements: 
1) With the energy source stationary or 
operating at a speed corresponding to the 
engine idling speed, any transmission 
failure may be induced. Before inducing 
such a failure, the energy storage 
device(s) shall be at a pressure that may 
be specified by the manufacturer but not 
exceeding the cut-in pressure; and 

2) The auxiliary equipment and its energy 

storage devices, if any, shall be isolated. 


C-2 CAPACITY OF HYDRAULIC FLUID 
ENERGY SOURCES 


C-2.1 The energy sources shall meet the requirements 
set out in the following paragraphs. 


C-2.1.1 Definitions 


C-2.1.1.1 ‘p,’ represents the maximum system 
operational pressure (cut-out pressure) in the energy 
storage device(s) specified by the manufacturer. 


C-2.1.1.2 ‘p,’ represents the pressure after four full- 
stroke actuations with the service brake control, starting 
at p,, without having fed the energy storage device(s). 


C-2.1.1.3 ‘£? represents the time required for the 
pressure to rise from p, to p, in the energy storage 
device(s) without application of the brake control. 


C-2.1.2 Conditions of Measurement 


C-2.1.2.1 During the tests to determine the time ¢, the 
feed rate of the energy source shall be that obtained 
when the engine is running at the speed corresponding 
to its maximum power or at the speed allowed by the 
over-speed governor. 


C-2.1.2.2 During the test to determine the time f, energy 
storage device(s) for auxiliary equipment shall not be 
isolated other than automatically. 


C-2.1.3 Interpretation of Results — In the case of all 
vehicles, the time ¢ shall not exceed 20 s. 


IS 15986 : 2015 


C-3 CHARACTERISTICS 
DEVICES 


OF WARNING 


With the engine stationary and commencing at a 
pressure that may be specified by the manufacturer but 


does not exceed the cut-in pressure, the warning device 
shall not operate following two full-stroke actuations 
of the service brake control. 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 5.2.18.2, B-1.3.2, E-1.2, E-3.1.3 and E-7.1.1.5) 


DISTRIBUTION OF BRAKING AMONG THE AXLES OF VEHICLES 


D-1 GENERAL 


Vehicles which are not equipped with an anti-lock 
system as defined in Annex E shall meet all the 
requirements of this annex. If a special device is used, 
this shall operate automatically. 


D-2 SYMBOLS 


i = axle index (i= 1, front axle; i= 2, rear axle); 


Pi = normal reaction of road surface on axle i 
under static conditions; 

Ni = normal reaction of road surface on axle i 
under braking; 

Ti = force exerted by the brakes on axle i under 
normal braking conditions on the road; 

fi = Ti/Ni, adhesion utilised by axle i (see Note); 

J = deceleration of the vehicle; 

g = acceleration due to gravity: g = 9.81 m/s’; 

z = braking rate of vehicle = J/g; 

P = mass of vehicle; 

h = height of centre of gravity specified by the 
manufacturer and agreed by the Testing 
agency conducting the approval test; 

E = wheel base; and 

k = theoretical coefficient of adhesion between 


tyre and road. 


NOTE — Adhesion utilization curves of a vehicle means curves 
showing, for specified load conditions, the adhesion utilized 
by each axle i plotted against the braking rate of the vehicle 


D-3 REQUIREMENTS 


D-3.1 For all states of load of the vehicle, the adhesion 
utilization curve of the rear axle shall not be situated 
above that for the front axle for all braking rates 
between 0.15 and 0.8 (see Note); and For k values 
between 0.2 and 0.8: 


z=0.1 + 0.7 (k - 0.2) (see Fig. 1) 


18 


NOTE — The provisions of D-3.1 do not affect the 
requirements of Annex B relating to the braking performance. 
However, if, in tests made under the provisions of D-3.1, 
braking performances are obtained which are higher than those 
prescribed in Annex B, the provisions relating to the adhesion 
utilization curves shall be applied within the areas of Fig. 1 
defined by the straight lines k = 0.8 and z = 0.8. 


D-3.2 In order to verify the requirements of D-3.1, the 
manufacturer shall provide the adhesion utilization 
curves for the front and rear axles calculated by the 
formulae: 


f,=T,+N,=T, + [P] + z(A/E).P.g] 
f, =T, Ny =T, + [P, - z.(hIE).P.g] 


The curves shall be plotted for both the following load 
conditions: 


a) Unladen, plus the driver on board; 

b) Laden; where provision is made for several 
possibilities of load distribution, the one 
whereby the front axle is the most heavily 
laden shall be the one considered; and 

c) For vehicles fitted with an electric 


regenerative braking system of category B, 
where the electric regenerative braking 
capacity is influenced by the electric state of 
charge, the curves shall be plotted by taking 
account of the electric braking component 
under the minimal and maximum conditions 
of delivered braking force. This requirement 
is not applicable if the vehicle is equipped 
with an anti-lock device which controls the 
wheels connected to the electric braking then 
the requirements of Annex E shall apply. 


D-4 REQUIREMENTS TO BE MET IN CASE OF 
FAILURE OF THE BRAKING DISTRIBUTION 
SYSTEM 


When the requirements of this annex are fulfilled by 
means of a special device (for example controlled 
mechanically by the suspension of the vehicle), it shall 


IS 15986 : 2015 


1-0 


| 


0.8 


0.6 


0.4 


0.2 


z== 0.1+0.-7 (k -0-2) 


Fic. 1 ADHESION UTILIZATION CURVES 


be possible, in the event of the failure of its control, 
(for example by disconnecting the control linkage), to 
stop the vehicle under the conditions of the Type 0 test 
with the engine disconnected to give a stopping 
distance not exceeding 0.1 v + 0.010 0 v? (m) and a 
mean fully developed deceleration not less than 
3.86 m/s’. 


D-5 VEHICLE TESTING 


During the type-approval testing of a vehicle, the 
technical inspection authority shall verify conformity 
with the requirements contained in the present annex, 
by carrying out the following tests: 


D-5.1 Wheel — Lock Sequence Test (see D-7) 


If the wheel-lock sequence test confirms that the front 
wheels lock before or simultaneously with the rear 
wheels, conformity with D-3 has been verified and 
testing is complete. 


D-5.2 Additional Tests 


If the wheel-lock sequence test indicates that the rear 
wheels lock before the front wheels, then the vehicle: 


a) 


shall be subjected to additional testing, as 
follows: 


19 


1) Additional wheel-lock sequence tests; 
and/or 

2) Torque wheel tests (see D-8) to determine 

brake factors to generate adhesion 

utilization curves; these curves shall 


satisfy the requirements in D-3.1. 
b) may be refused type-approval. 
D-5.3 The results of the practical tests shall be 
appended to the type-approval report. 


D-6 WHEEL-LOCK 
PROCEDURE 


SEQUENCE TEST 


D-6.1 General Information 


a) The purpose of this test is to ensure that lockup 
of both front wheels occurs at a lower 
deceleration rate than the lockup of both rear 
wheels when tested on road surfaces on which 
wheel lockup occurs at braking rates between 
0.15 and 0.8. 

A simultaneous lockup of the front and rear 
wheels refers to the condition when the time 
interval between the lockup of the last 
(second) wheel on the rear axle and the last 
(second) wheel on the front axle is < 0.1 s for 
vehicle speeds > 30 km/h. 


b) 


IS 15986 : 2015 


D-6.2 Vehicle Conditions 


a) Vehicle load — Laden and unladen; and 


b) Transmission 
disconnected. 


position 


Engine 


D-6.3 Test Conditions and Procedures 


a) Initial brake temperature — Between 65°C 
and 100°C average on the hottest axle. 

b) Test speed: 
1) 65 km/h for a braking rate < 0.50; and 
2) 100 km/h for a braking rate > 0.50. 

c) Pedal force: 

1) Pedal force is applied and controlled by 
a skilled driver or by a mechanical brake 
pedal actuator. 

2) Pedal force is increased at a linear rate 
such that the first axle lockup occurs not 
less than 0.5 s and not more than 1.5 s 
after the initial application of the pedal. 

3) The pedal is released when the second 
axle locks, or when the pedal force 
reaches 1 kN, or 0.1 s after the first 
lockup, whichever occurs first. 

d) Wheel lockup — Only wheel lockups above a 
vehicle speed of 15 km/h are considered. 

e) Test surface — This test is conducted on road 
test surfaces on which wheel lockup occurs 

at braking rates between 0.15 and 0.8 

f) Data to be recorded — The following 
information shall be automatically recorded 
in phase continuously throughout each test 
run such that values of the variables can be 
cross referenced in real time: 

1) Vehicle speed; 

2) Instantaneous vehicle braking rate (for 
example, by differentiation of vehicle 
speed); 

3) Brake pedal force (or hydraulic line 
pressure); and 

4) Angular velocity at each wheel. 

g) Each test run shall be repeated once to confirm 


the wheel lockup sequence: if one of these 
two results indicates a failure to comply, then 
a third test run under the same conditions will 
be decisive. 


D-6.4 Performance Requirements 


a) Both rear wheels shall not reach a locked 
condition prior to both front wheels being 
locked at vehicle braking rates between 0.15 
and 0.8. 


20 


b) If, when tested to the procedure specified 
above, and at vehicle braking rates between 
0.15 and 0.8 the vehicle meets one of the 
following criteria, then it passes this wheel 


lockup sequence requirement: 
1) 
2) 


No wheels lock; 

Both wheels on the front axle and one or 
no wheels on the rear axle lock; and 

3) 
If wheel lockup commences at a braking rate 
less than 0.15 and more than 0.8 then the test 
is invalid and should be repeated on a different 
road surface. 


Both axles simultaneously lock. 


c) 


d) If, either laden or unladen, at a braking rate 
between 0.15 and 0.8 both wheels on the rear 
axle and one or no wheels on the front axle 
lock, then it fails the wheel lockup sequence 
test. In this latter case, the vehicle shall be 
submitted to the ‘torque wheels’ test 
procedure to determine the objective brake 
factors for calculation of the adhesion 
utilization curves. 


D-7 TORQUE WHEEL TEST PROCEDURE 


D-7.1 General Information 


The purpose of this test is to measure the brake factors 
and thus determine the adhesion utilization of the front 
and rear axles over a range of braking rates between 
0.15 and 0 .8. 


D-7.2 Vehicle Conditions 
a) 


b) Transmission 
disconnected. 


Vehicle load — Laden and unladen; and 


position 


Engine 


D-7.3 Test Conditions and Procedures 


a) 


Initial brake temperature — Between 65°C 
and 100°C average on the hottest axle. 

Test speeds — 100 km/h and 50 km/h. 
Pedal force — Pedal force is increased at a 
linear rate between 100 and 150 N/s for the 
100 km/h test speed, or between 100 and 200 
N/s for the 50 km/h test speed, until the first 
axle locks or until a pedal force of 1 KN is 
reached, whichever occurs first. 


b) 
c) 


d) Brake cooling — Between brake applications, 
the vehicle is driven at speeds up to 100 km/ 
h until the initial brake temperature specified 
in D-7.3 (a) is reached. 

Number of runs — With the vehicle unladen, 
run five stops from a speed of 100 km/h and 


five stops from a speed of 50 km/h, while 


e) 


g) 


h) 


D 


alternating between the two test speeds after 

each stop. With the vehicle laden, repeat the 

five stops at each test speed while alternating 
between the two test speeds. 

Test surface — This test is conducted on a 

road test surface affording good adhesion. 

Data to be recorded — The following 

information shall be automatically recorded 

in phase continuously throughout each test 
run such that values of the variables can be 
cross referenced in real time: 

1) Vehicle speed; 

2) Brake pedal force; 

3) Angular velocity of each wheel; 

4) Brake torque at each wheel; 

5) Hydraulic line pressure in each brake 
circuit, including transducers on at least 
one front wheel and one rear wheel 
downstream of any operative 
proportioning or pressure limiting 
valve(s); and 

6) Vehicle deceleration. 


Sample rate — All data acquisition and 
recording equipment shall support a minimum 
sample rate of 40 Hz on all channels. 
Determination of front versus rear brake 
pressure — Determine the front versus rear 
brake pressure relationship over the entire 
range of line pressures. Unless the vehicle has 
a variable brake proportioning system, this 
determination is made by static tests. If the 
vehicle has a variable brake proportioning 
system, dynamic tests are run with the vehicle 
both laden and unladen. Fifteen snubs from 
50 km/h are made for each of the two load 
conditions, using the same initial conditions 
specified in D-7. 


D-7.4 Data Reduction 


a) 


b) 


The data from each brake application 
prescribed in D-7.3 (e) above is filtered using 
a five-point, on-centre moving average for 
each data channel. 

For each brake application prescribed in D- 
7.3(e), determine the slope (brake factor) and 
pressure axis intercept (brake hold-off 
pressure) of the linear least squares equation 


21 


c) 


d) 


e) 


2) 


h) 


IS 15986 : 2015 


best describing the measured torque output 
at each braked wheel as a function of 
measured line pressure applied at the same 
wheel. Only torque output values obtained 
from data collected when the vehicle 
deceleration is within the range of 0.15 g to 
0.80 g are used in the regression analysis. 
Average the results of D-7.4 (b) to calculate 
the average brake factor and brake hold-off 
pressure for all brake applications for the front 
axle. 

Average the results of D-7.4 (b) to calculate 
the average brake factor and brake hold-off 
pressure for all brake applications for the rear 
axle. 


Using the relationship between front and rear 
brake line pressure determined in D-7.3 (j) 
and the dynamic tyre rolling radius, calculate 
the braking force at each axle as a function of 
front brake line pressure. 

Calculate the braking rate of the vehicle as a 
function of the front brake line pressure using 
the following equation: 


z=[(T,+T,)=+ (P. 8)] 


Where 

Z = braking rate at a given front 
brake line pressure; 

Ti, T, = braking forces at the front and 
rear axles respectively, 
corresponding to the same 
front brake line pressure; and 

P = vehicle mass. 


Calculate the adhesion utilized at each axle 
as a function of braking rate using the 
following formulae: 


f,=T, + [P, + z(WE).P.g] 
f,=T, + [P, - z(WE).P.g] 


NOTE — The symbols are defined in D-2. 


Plot f, and f, as a function of z, for both laden 
and unladen load conditions. These are the 
adhesion utilization curves for the vehicle, 
which shall satisfy the requirements in D-5.2 
(a) (2). 


IS 15986 : 2015 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 5.2.7, 5.2.18.2, 5.2.23, B-1.2.9, B-1.3.2, D-1 and D-3) 


TEST REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICLES FITTED WITH ANTI-LOCK SYSTEMS 


E-1 GENERAL 


E-1.1 This annex defines the required braking 
performance for road vehicles fitted with anti-lock 
systems. 


E-1.2 The anti-lock systems known at present comprise 
a sensor or sensors, a controller or controllers and a 
modulator or modulators. Any device of a different 
design which may be introduced in the future, or where 
an anti-lock braking function is integrated into another 
system, shall be deemed to be an anti-lock braking 
system within the meaning of this annex and Annex 
D, if it provides performance equal to that prescribed 
by this annex. 


E-2 DEFINITIONS 


E-2.1 Anti-Lock System — It is a part of a service 
braking system which automatically controls the degree 
of slip, in the direction of rotation of the wheel(s), on 
one or more wheels of the vehicle during braking. 


E-2.2 Sensor — A component designed to identify 
and transmit to the controller the conditions of rotation 
of the wheel(s) or the dynamic conditions of the 
vehicle. 


E-2.3 Controller — A component designed to evaluate 
the data transmitted by the sensor(s) and to transmit a 
signal to the modulator. 


E-2.4 Modulator — A component designed to vary 
the braking force(s) in accordance with the signal 
received from the controller. 


E-2.5 Directly Controlled Wheel — A wheel whose 
braking force is modulated according to data provided 
at least by its own sensor (see Note). 
NOTE — Anti-lock systems with select-high control are 
deemed to include both directly and indirectly controlled 


wheels; in systems with select-low control, all sensed wheels 
are deemed to be directly controlled wheels. 


E-2.6 Indirectly Controlled Wheel — A wheel whose 
braking force is modulated according to data provided 
by the sensor(s) of other wheel(s) (see Note 
under E-2.5). 


E-2.7 Full Cycling — The anti-lock system is 
repeatedly modulating the brake force to prevent the 
directly controlled wheels from locking. Brake 
applications where modulation only occurs once during 
the stop shall not be considered to meet this definition. 


22 


E-3 TYPES OF ANTI-LOCK SYSTEMS 


E-3.1 A vehicle is deemed to be equipped with an anti- 
lock system within the meaning of E-2.1, if one of the 
following systems is fitted: 


E-3.1.1 Category 1 Anti-Lock System — A vehicle 
equipped with a category 1 anti-lock system shall meet 
all the requirements of this annex. 


E-3.1.2 Category 2 Anti-Lock System — A vehicle 
equipped with a category 2 anti-lock system shall meet 
all the requirements of this annex, except those 
of E-5.3.5. 


E-3.1.3 Category 3 Anti-Lock System — A vehicle 
equipped with a category 3 anti-lock system shall meet 
all the requirements of this annex, except those 
of E-5.3.4 and E-5.3.5. On such vehicles, any 
individual axle which does not include at least one 
directly controlled wheel shall fulfill the conditions of 
adhesion utilization and the wheel-locking sequence 
of Annex D, instead of the adhesion utilization 
requirements prescribed in E-5.2. However, if the 
relative positions of the adhesion utilization curves do 
not meet the requirements of D-3.1, a check shall be 
made to ensure that the wheels on at least one of the 
rear axles do not lock before those of the front axle or 
axles under the conditions prescribed in D-3.1, with 
regard to the braking rate and the load respectively. 
These requirements may be checked on high and low- 
adhesion road surfaces (about 0.8 and 0.3 maximum) 
by modulating the service braking control force. 


E-4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


E-4.1 Any electrical failure or sensor anomaly that 
affects the system with respect to the functional and 
performance requirements in this annex, including 
those in the supply of electricity, the external wiring 
to the controller(s), the controller(s) (see Note) and 
the modulator(s) shall be signaled to the driver by a 
specific optical warning signal. The yellow warning 
signal specified in 5.2.21.1.2 shall be used for this 
purpose. 

NOTE — The manufacturer shall provide the testing agency 


with documentation relating to the controller(s) which follows 
the format set out in Annex G 


E-4.1.1 Sensor anomalies, which cannot be detected 
under static conditions, shall be detected not later than 


when the vehicle speed exceed 10 km/h (see Note). 
However, to prevent erroneous fault indication when a 


sensor is not generating a vehicle speed output, due to 
non-rotation of a wheel, verification may be delayed 
but detected not later than when the vehicle speed 
exceeds 15 km/h. 


NOTE — The warning signal may light up again while the 
vehicle is stationary, provided that it is extinguished before 
the vehicle speed reaches 10 km/h or 15 km/h, as appropriate, 
when no defect is present. 


E-4.1.2 When the anti-lock braking system is energized 
with the vehicle stationary, electrically controlled 
pneumatic modulator valve(s) shall cycle at least once. 


E-4.2 In the event of a single electrical functional 
failure which only affects the anti-lock function, as 
indicated by the above-mentioned yellow warning 
signal, the subsequent service braking performance 
shall not be less than 80 percent of the prescribed 
performance according to the Type 0 test with the 
engine disconnected. This corresponds to a stopping 
distance of 0.1 v + 0.0075 v? (m) and a mean fully 
developed deceleration of 5.15 m/s?. 


E-4.3 The operation of the anti-lock system shall not 
be adversely affected by magnetic or electrical fields 
(see Note) (This shall be demonstrated by compliance 
with AIS 004, as applicable). 


NOTE — Until uniform test procedures have been agreed, the 
manufacturers shall provide the testing agency with their test 
procedures and results. 


E-4.4 A manual device may not be provided to 
disconnect or change the control mode (see Note) of 
the anti-lock system. 


NOTE — It is understood that devices changing the control 
mode of the anti-lock system are not subject to E-4.4 if in the 
changed control mode condition all requirements to the 
category of anti-lock systems, with which the vehicle is 
equipped, are fulfilled 


E-5 SPECIAL PROVISIONS 


E-5.1 Energy Consumption 


Vehicles equipped with anti-lock systems shall 
maintain their performance when the service braking 
control device is fully applied for long periods. 
Compliance with this requirement shall be verified by 
means of the following tests: 


E-5.1.1 Test Procedure 


E-5.1.1.1 The initial energy level in the energy storage 
device(s) shall be that specified by the manufacturer. 
This level shall be at least such as to ensure the 
efficiency prescribed for service braking when the 
vehicle is laden. The energy storage device(s) for 
pneumatic auxiliary equipment shall be isolated. 


E-5.1.1.2 From an initial speed of not less than 50 km/h, 
on a surface with a coefficient of adhesion of 0.3 (see 


23 


IS 15986 : 2015 


Note) or less, the brakes of the laden vehicle shall be 
fully applied for a time ¢, during which time the energy 
consumed by the indirectly controlled wheels shall be 
taken into consideration and all directly controlled 
wheels shall remain under control of the anti-lock 
system. 

NOTE — Until such test surfaces become generally available, 

tyres at the limit of wear, and higher values up to 0.4 may be 


used at the discretion of the testing agency. The actual value 
obtained and the type of tyres and surface shall be recorded. 


E-5.1.1.3 The vehicle’s engine shall then be stopped 
or the supply to the energy transmission storage 
device(s) cut off. 


E-5.1.1.4 The service braking control shall then be fully 
actuated four times in succession with the vehicle 
stationary. 


E-5.1.1.5 When the brakes are applied for the fifth time, 
it shall be possible to brake the vehicle with at least 
the performance prescribed for secondary braking of 
the laden vehicle. 


E-5.1.2 Additional Requirements 


E-5.1.2.1 The coefficient of adhesion of the road 
surface shall be measured with the vehicle under test, 
by the method described in E-7.1.1. 


E-5.1.2.2 The braking test shall be conducted with the 
engine disconnected and idling, and with the vehicle 
laden. 


E-5.1.2.3 The braking time ¢ shall be determined by 
the formula: 


=V +7 
(but not less than 15 s) 


where ¢ is expressed, in seconds and Vmax represents 
the maximum design speed of the vehicle expressed, 
in km/h, with an upper limit of 160 km/h. 


E-5.1.2.4 If the time ¢ cannot be completed in a single 
braking phase, further phases may be used, up to a 
maximum of four in all. 


E-5.1.2.5 If the test is conducted in several phases, no 
fresh energy shall be supplied between the phases of 
the test. 


From the second phase, the energy consumption 
corresponding to the initial brake application may be 
taken into account, by subtracting one full brake 
application from the four full applications prescribed 
in E-5.1.1.4 (and E-5.1.1.5 and E-5.1.2.6) for each of 
the second, third and fourth phases used in the test 
prescribed in E-5.1.1 as applicable. 


E-5.1.2.6 The performance prescribed in E-5.1.1.5 
shall be deemed to be satisfied if, at the end of the 


IS 15986 : 2015 


fourth application, with the vehicle stationary, the 
energy level in the storage device(s) is at or above that 
required for secondary braking with the laden vehicle. 


E-5.2 Utilization of Adhesion 


E-5.2.1 The utilization of adhesion by the anti-lock 
system takes into account the actual increase in braking 
distance beyond the theoretical minimum. The anti- 
lock system shall be deemed to be satisfactory when 
the condition € = 0.75 is satisfied, where € represents 
the adhesion utilized, as defined in E-7.1.2. 


E-5.2.2 The adhesion utilization (€) shall be measured 
on road surfaces with a coefficient of adhesion of 0.3 
(see Note) or less, and of about 0.8 (dry road), with an 
initial speed of 50 km/h. To eliminate the effects of 
differential brake temperatures it is recommended that 
Zaz, be determined prior to the determination of k. 
NOTE — Until such test surfaces become generally available, 
tyres at the limit of wear, and higher values up to 0.4 may be 


used at the discretion of the testing agency. The actual value 
obtained and the type of tyres and surface shall be recorded. 


E-5.2.3 The test procedure to determine the coefficient 
of adhesion (k) and the formulae for calculation of the 
adhesion utilization (€) shall be those laid down in E-7. 


E-5.2.4 The utilization of adhesion by the anti-lock 
system shall be checked on complete vehicles equipped 
with anti-lock systems of categories 1 or 2. In the case 
of vehicles equipped with category 3 anti-lock systems, 
only the axle(s) with at least one directly controlled 
wheel shall satisfy this requirement. 


E-5.2.5 The condition € = 0.75 shall be checked with 
both laden and unladen.(see Note 1). 


The laden test on the high adhesion surface may be 
omitted if the prescribed force on the control device 
does not achieve full cycling of the anti-lock system. 


For the unladen test, the control force may be increased 
up to 100 daN if no cycling is achieved with its full 
force value. (see Note 2) . If 100 daN is insufficient to 
make the system cycle, then this test may be omitted. 


NOTES 


1 Until a uniform test procedure is established, the tests required 
by this paragraph may have to be repeated for vehicles equipped 
with electrical regenerative braking systems, in order to 
determine the effect of different braking distribution values 
provided by automatic functions on the vehicle. 

2 ‘Full force’ means the maximum force laid down in Annex 
B; a higher force may be used if required to activate the anti- 
lock system. 


E-5.3 Additional Checks 


The following additional checks shall be carried out 
with the engine disconnected, with the vehicle laden 
and unladen: 


24 


E-5.3.1 The wheels directly controlled by an anti-lock 
system must not lock when the full force (see E-5.2.5, 
Note 2) is suddenly applied on the control device, on 
the road surfaces specified in E-5.2.2. As per E-5.2.2, 
at an initial speed of v = 40 km/h and at a high initial 
speed v = 0.8 v,,,, < 120 km/h; 


E-5.3.2 When an axle passes from a high-adhesion 
surface (ky) to a low-adhesion surface (k,), where 
k,, = 0.5 and ky / k, = 2, (see Note 2) with the full 
force (see Note 2 below E-5.2.5) applied on the control 
device, the directly controlled wheels shall not lock. 
The running speed and the instant of applying the 
brakes shall be so calculated that, with the anti-lock 
system fully cycling on the high-adhesion surface, the 
passage from one surface to the other is made at high 
and at low speed, under the conditions laid down 
in E-5.3.1; (see Note 1) 


NOTES 


1 The purpose of these tests is to check that the wheels do not 
lock and that the vehicle remains stable; it is not necessary, 
therefore, to make complete stops and bring the vehicle to a 
halt on the low-adhesion surface. 


2 ką is the high-adhesion surface coefficient. k, is the low- 
adhesion surface coefficient. ky and k, are measured as laid 
down in E-7. 


E-5.3.3 When a vehicle passes from a low-adhesion 
surface (k) to a high-adhesion surface (ky) where 
kyz 0.5 and ky / k, 2 2, (see Note 2 below E-5.3.2) 
with the full force (see E-5.2.5, Note 2) applied on the 
control device, the deceleration of the vehicle shall rise 
to the appropriate high value within a reasonable time 
and the vehicle shall not deviate from its initial course. 
The running speed and the instant of applying the brake 
shall be so calculated that, with the anti-lock system 
fully cycling on the low-adhesion surface, the passage 
from one surface to the other occurs at approximately 
50 km/h; 


E-5.3.4 The provisions of this clause shall only apply 
to vehicles equipped with anti-lock systems of 
categories 1 or 2. When the right and left wheels of the 
vehicle are situated on surfaces with differing 
coefficients of adhesion (ky and k,,), where k,2 0.5 
and ky / k, 2 2, (see E-5.3.2, Note 2) the directly 
controlled wheels shall not lock when the full force 
(see E-5.2.5, Note 2) is suddenly applied on the control 
device at a speed of 50 km/h; 


E-5.3.5 Furthermore, laden vehicles equipped with 
anti-lock systems of category 1 shall, under the 
conditions of E-5.3.4 satisfy the prescribed braking 
rate in E-8. 


E-5.3.6 However, in the tests provided in E- 5.3.1, E- 
5.3.2, E-5.3.3, E-5.3.4 and E-5.3.5, brief periods of 
wheel-locking shall be allowed. Furthermore, wheel- 


locking is permitted when the vehicle speed is less than 
15 km/h; likewise, locking of indirectly controlled 
wheels is permitted at any speed, but stability and steer 
ability shall not be affected and the vehicle shall not 
exceed a yaw angle of 15° or deviate from a 3.5 m 
wide lane; 


E-5.3.7 During the tests provided in E-5.3.4 and E- 
5.3.5, steering correction is permitted, if the angular 
rotation of the steering control is within 120° during 
the initial 2 s, and not more than 240° in all. 
Furthermore, at the beginning of these tests the 
longitudinal median plane of the vehicle shall pass over 
the boundary between the high and low-adhesion 
surfaces and during these tests no part of the (outer) 
tyres shall cross this boundary” (see E-5.2.5, Note 1). 


E-6 SYMBOLS AND DEFINITIONS 


Symbol Notes 
E Wheelbase 
E€ The adhesion utilised of the vehicle: quotient 


of the maximum braking rate with the anti- 
lock system operative (z,, ) and the coefficient 
of adhesion (k) 

£, The € — value measured on axle i (in the case 
of a motor vehicle with a Category 3 anti- 
lock system) 


Ey The € — value on the high-adhesion surface 
EL The € — value on the low-adhesion surface 
F Force (N) 

Fam Normal reaction of road surface under 
dynamic conditions with the anti-lock system 
operative 

Fiayn Fayn ON axle i in case of power-driven vehicles 

F; Normal reaction of road surface on axle i 
under static conditions 

Fy Total normal static reaction of road surface 
on all wheels of power-driven vehicle 

Funa Total normal static reaction of road surface 

(see on the unbraked and non-driven axles of the 

Note) power-driven vehicle 

Fwa Total normal static reaction of road surface 

(see onthe unbraked and driven axles of the 

Note) power-driven vehicle 

Fyy 0.01 Fima + 0.015 Fua 

(see 

Note) 

g Acceleration due to gravity (9.81 m/s?) 

h Height of centre of gravity specified by the 


manufacturer and agreed by the technical 
service conducting the approval test 


25 


IS 15986 : 2015 


Notes 


Coefficient of adhesion between tyre and road 


k, k — factor of one front axle 

ky k — value determined on the high-adhesion 
surface 

k; k — value determined on axle i for a vehicle 
with a category 3 anti-lock system 

k, k — value determined on the low-adhesion 
surface 

Kox Walue of adhesion for 100 percent slip 

ky k — factor of the power-driven vehicle 

Keak Maximum value of the curve ‘adhesion versus 
slip’ 

k, k — factor of one rear axle 

P Mass of individual vehicle (kg) 

R Ratio of kpeak to klock 

t Time interval (s) 

ta Mean value of t 

tain Minimum value of t 

Z Braking rate 

Za Braking rate z of the vehicle with the anti- 
lock system operative 

Zn Mean braking rate 

Zmax Maximum value of z 

Zmars Z Of the power-driven vehicle on a split surface 


NOTE — F,,,, and Fpa in case of two-axled motor vehicles: 
these symbols may be simplified to corresponding F, — 
symbols. 


E-7 UTILIZATION OF ADHESION 


E-7.1 Method of Measurement 


E-7.1.1 Determination of the coefficient of adhesion 
(k) 


E-7.1.1.1 The coefficient of adhesion (k) shall be 
determined as the quotient of the maximum braking 
forces without locking the wheels and the 
corresponding dynamic load on the axle being brakes. 


E-7.1.1.2 The brakes shall be applied on only one axle 
of the vehicle under test, at an initial speed of 50 km/ 
h. The braking forces shall be distributed between the 
wheels of the axle to reach maximum performance. 
The anti-lock system shall be disconnected, or 
inoperative, between 40 km/h and 20 km/h. 


E-7.1.1.3 A number of tests at increments of line 
pressure shall be carried out to determine the maximum 
braking rate of the vehicle (z 


me) s 


During each test, a constant input force shall be 
maintained and the braking rate will be determined by 


IS 15986 : 2015 


reference to the time taken (t) for the speed to reduce 
from 40 km/h to 20 km/h using the formula: 


z= 0.566 -+t 
z. = maximum value of z ; t is in second. 


max 


E-7.1.1.3.1 Wheel lock may occur below 20 km/h. 


E-7.1.1.3.2 Starting from the minimum measured value 
of t, called tnin then select three values of t comprised 
within fmin and 1.05 tnin and calculate their arithmetical 
mean value f,,, then calculate: 


z„ = 0.566 +t, 


If itis demonstrated that for practical reasons the three 
values defined above cannot be obtained, then the 
minimum time f,,,, may be utilized. However, the 
requirements of E-7.1.3 shall still apply. 


E-7.1.1.4 The braking forces shall be calculated from 
the measured braking rate and the rolling resistance of 
the unbraked axle which is equal to 0.015 and 0.010 
of the static axle load for a driven axle and a non-driven 
axle, respectively. 


E-7.1.1.5 The dynamic load on the axle shall be that 
given by the formulae in Annex D. 


E-7.1.1.6 The value of k shall be rounded to three 
decimal places. 


E-7.1.1.7 Then, the test shall be repeated for the other 
axle(s) as defined in E-7.1.1.1 to E-7.1.1.6. 


E-7.1.1.8 For example, in the case of a two-axle rear- 
wheel drive vehicle, with the front axle (1) being 
braked, the coefficient of adhesion (k) is given by: 


k,=([(z,x P x g—0.015F,) + {F+ (h+ E) zx PX g}] 
NOTE — The other symbols (P, h, E) are defined in Annex D. 


E-7.1.1.9 One coefficient will be determined for the 
front axle k; and one for the rear axle k,. 


E-7.1.2 Determination of the adhesion utilized (€) 


E-7.1.2.1 The adhesion utilized (€) is defined as the 
quotient of the maximum braking rate with the anti- 
lock system operative (za) and the coefficient of 
adhesion (ky ), that is., 


ES ziS ka 


E-7.1.2.2 From an initial vehicle speed of 55 km/h, 
the maximum braking rate (z,, ) shall be measured with 
full cycling of the anti-lock braking system and based 
on the average value of three tests, as in E-7.1.1.3, 
using the time taken for the speed to reduce from 45 
km/h to 15 km/h, according to the following formula: 


za = 0.8494 1, 


26 


E-7.1.2.3 The coefficient of adhesion ky shall be 
determined by weighting with the dynamic axle loads 
according to the following formula: 


ky = Ck, X Fayn) T (k, xX F ayan)? + (P.g)] 
where 
Fay = [Fe + {Zap X PX 8 x (WE)}] 
F ayn [F - {Zap X P x g x (hE)}] 


E-7.1.2.4 The value of € shall be rounded to two 
decimal places. 


E-7.1.2.5 In the case of a vehicle equipped with an 
anti-lock system of categories | or 2, the value of Z,;, 
shall be based on the whole vehicle, with the anti-lock 
system in operation, and the adhesion utilized (€) is 
given by the same formula quoted in E-7.1.2.1. 


E-7.1.2.6 In the case of a vehicle equipped with an 
anti-lock system of category 3, the value of z,, shall 
be measured on each axle which has at least one directly 
controlled wheel. For example, for a two-axle rear- 
wheel drive vehicle with an anti-lock system acting 
only on the rear axle (2), the adhesion utilized (€) is 
given by: 


€,=[(z,, x P x g - 0.010 F) 
+ {k, (F, -zu x Pxgx(h+E)}] 
This calculation shall be made for each axle having at 
least one directly controlled wheel. 


E-7.1.3 If € >1.00, the measurements of coefficients 
of adhesion shall be repeated. A tolerance of 10 percent 
is accepted. 


E-8 PERFORMANCE 
ADHESION SURFACES 


E-8.1 The prescribed braking rate referred to in E-5.3.5 
may be calculated by reference to the measured 
coefficient of adhesion of the two surfaces on which 
this test is carried out. These two surfaces shall satisfy 
the conditions prescribed in E-5.3.4. 


ON DIFFERING 


E-8.2 The coefficient of adhesion (ky and k,) of the 
high and low adhesion surfaces, respectively, shall be 
determined in accordance with the provisions 
in E-7.1.1. 


E-8.3 The braking rate (zmas) for laden vehicles shall 
be: 


ZMALS 2 


> 
MALS T 


0.75 x [(4 k, +k, ) +5] and z k, 


E-9 METHOD OF SELECTION OF THE LOW 
ADHESION SURFACE 


E-9.1 Details of the coefficient of adhesion of the 


surface selected, as defined in E-5.1.1.2, shall be given 
to the testing agency. 


E-9.1.1 These data shall include a curve of the 
coefficient of adhesion versus slip (from 0 to 100 
percent slip) for a speed of approximately 40 km/h. 


E-9.1.1.1 The maximum value of the curve will 
represent K eak and the value at 100 percent slip will 
represent k,,.,- 

E-9.1.1.2 The ratio R shall be determined as the 


quotient of the Kpeak and kiock: 
R=k „+k 


peak = Mock 


E-9.1.1.3 The value of R shall be rounded to one 
decimal place. 


E-9.1.1.4 The surface to be used shall have a ratio R 
between 1.0 and 2.0 (see Note). 


IS 15986 : 2015 


NOTE — Until such test surfaces become generally available, 
a ratio R up to 2.5 is acceptable, subject to discussion with the 
testing agency. 
E-9.2 Prior to the tests, the testing agency shall ensure 
that the selected surface meets the specified 
requirements and shall be informed of the following: 


a) Test method to determine R; 

b) Type of vehicle; and 

c) Axle load and tyres (different loads and 
different tyres have to be tested and the results 
shown to the testing agency which will decide 
if they are representative for the vehicle to be 
approved). 


E-9.2.1 The value of R shall be mentioned in the test 
report. The calibration of the surface has to be carried 
out at least once a year with a representative vehicle to 
verify the stability of R. 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 6.2) 


INERTIA DYNAMOMETER TEST METHOD FOR BRAKE LININGS 


F-1 GENERAL 


F-1.1 The procedure described in this annex may be 
applied in the event of a modification of vehicle type 
resulting from the fitting of brake linings of another 
type to vehicles which have been approved in 
accordance with this standard. 


F-1.2 The alternative types of brake linings shall be 
checked by comparing their performance with that 
obtained from the brake linings with which the vehicle 
was equipped at the time of approval and conforming 
to the components identified in the relevant information 
document, a model of which is given in Annex A. 


F-1.3 The testing agency responsible for conducting 
approval tests may at its discretion require comparison 
of the performance of the brake linings to be carried 
out in accordance with the relevant provisions 
contained in Annex B. 


F-1.4 Application for approval by comparison shall 
be made by the vehicle manufacturer or by his duly 
accredited representative. 


F-1.5 In the context of this annex ‘vehicle’ shall mean 
the vehicle type approved according to this standard 
and for which it is requested that the comparison shall 
be considered satisfactory. 


27 


F-2 TEST EQUIPMENT 


A dynamometer having the following characteristics 
shall be used for the tests: 


a) It shall be capable of generating the inertia 
required by F-3.1, and have the capacity to 
meet the requirements prescribed by B-1.5 
with respect to the Type I fade test; 


b) Brakes fitted shall be identical with those of 
the original vehicle type concerned; 

c) Air cooling, if provided, shall be in 
accordance with F-3.4. 

d) Instrumentation for the test shall be capable 


of providing at least the following data; 


1) A continuous recording of disc or drum 
rotational speed; 

2) Number of revolutions completed during 
a stop, to resolution not greater than one 
eighth of a revolution; 

3) Stop time; 

4) A continuous recording of the 
temperature measured in the centre of the 
path swept by the lining or at mid- 
thickness of the disc or drum or lining; 

5) A continuous recording of brake 


application control line pressure or force; 


IS 15986 : 2015 


6) A continuous recording of brake output 
torque. 


F-3 TEST CONDITIONS 


F-3.1 The dynamometer shall be set as close as 
possible, with +5 percent tolerance, to the rotary inertia 
equivalent to that part of the total inertia of the vehicle 
braked by the appropriate wheel(s) according to the 
following formula: 


I=M R 
where 
I = rotational inertia, in kgm?; 
R = dynamic tyre rolling radius, in m; and 
M = that part of the maximum mass of the vehicle 


braked by the appropriate wheel(s). In the 
case of a single-ended dynamometer, this 
part shall be calculated from the design 
braking distribution when deceleration 
corresponds to the appropriate value given 
in B-2.1.1(A). 


F-3.2 The initial rotational speed of the inertia 
dynamometer shall correspond to the linear speed of 
the vehicle as prescribed in B-2.1.1(A) and shall be 
based on the dynamic rolling radius of the tyre. 


F-3.3 Brake linings shall be at least 80 percent bedded 
and shall not have exceeded a temperature of 180°C 
during the bedding procedure, or alternatively, at the 
vehicle manufacturer’s request, be bedded in 
accordance with his recommendations. 


F-3.4 Cooling air may be used, flowing over the brake 
in a direction perpendicular to its axis of rotation. The 
velocity of the cooling air flowing over the brake shall 
be not greater than 10 km/h. The temperature of the 
cooling air shall be the ambient temperature. 


F-4 TEST PROCEDURE 


F-4.1 Five sample sets of the brake lining shall be 
subjected to the comparison test; they shall be 
compared with five sets of linings conforming to the 
original components identified in the information 
document concerning the first approval of the vehicle 
type concerned. 


F-4.2 Brake lining equivalence shall be based on a 
comparison of the results achieved using the test 


28 


procedures prescribed in this annex and in accordance 
with the following requirements. 


F-4.3 Type 0 Cold Performance Test 


F-4.3.1 Three brake applications shall be made when 
the initial temperature is below 100°C. The temperature 
shall be measured in accordance with the provisions 
of F-2 (d) (4). 


F-4.3.2 Brake applications shall be made from an initial 
rotational speed equivalent to that given in B-2.1.1 (A), 
and the brake shall be applied to achieve a mean torque 
equivalent to the deceleration prescribed in that 
paragraph. In addition, tests shall also be carried out 
at several rotational speeds, the lowest being equivalent 
to 30 percent of the maximum speed of the vehicle 
and the highest being equivalent to 80 percent of that 
speed. 


F-4.3.3 The mean braking torque recorded during the 
above cold performance tests on the linings being tested 
for the purpose of comparison shall, for the same input 
measurement, be within the test limits +15 percent of 
the mean braking torque recorded with the brake linings 
conforming to the component identified in the relevant 
application for vehicle type approval. 


F-4.4 Type I Test (Fade Test) 
F-4.4.1 Heating Procedure 


Brake linings shall be tested according to the procedure 
given in B-1.5.1. 


F-4.4.2 Hot Performance 


F-4.4.2.1 On completion of the tests required under 
F-4.4.1, the hot braking performance test specified in 
B-1.5.2 shall be carried out. 


F-4.4.2.2 The mean braking torque recorded during 
the above hot performance tests on the linings being 
tested for the purpose of comparison shall, for the same 
input measurement, be within the test limits +15 
percent of the mean braking torque recorded with the 
brake linings conforming to the component identified 
in the relevant application for vehicle type approval. 


F-5 INSPECTION OF BRAKE LININGS 


Brake linings shall be visually inspected on completion 
of the above tests to check that they are in satisfactory 
condition for continued use in normal service. 


IS 15986 : 2015 


ANNEX G 
(Clause 5.1.3 and E-4.1) 


SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS TO BE APPLIED TO THE SAFETY ASPECTS OF COMPLEX 
ELECTRONIC VEHICLE CONTROL SYSTEMS 


G-1 GENERAL 


This annex defines the special requirements for 
documentation, fault strategy and verification with 
respect to the safety aspects of complex electronic 
vehicle control systems (see G-2.3) as far as this 
standard is concerned. 


This annex may also be called, by special paragraphs 
in this standard, for safety related functions which are 
controlled by electronic system(s). 


This annex does not specify the performance criteria 
for “The system’ but covers the methodology applied 
to the design process and the information which shall 
be disclosed to the testing agency, for type approval 
purposes. 


This information shall show that ‘The system’ respects, 
under normal and fault conditions, all the appropriate 
performance requirements specified elsewhere in this 
standard. 


G-2 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this annex the following definitions 
shall apply. 


G-2.1 Safety Concept — It is a description of the 
measures designed into the system, for example within 
the electronic units, so as to address system integrity 
and thereby ensure safe operation even in the event of 
an electrical failure. 


The possibility of a fall-back to partial operation or 
even to a back-up system for vital vehicle functions 
may be a part of the safety concept. 


G-2.2 Electronic Control System — A combination 
of units, designed to co-operate in the production of 
the stated vehicle control function by electronic data 
processing. 


Such systems, often controlled by software, are built 
from discrete functional components such as sensors, 
electronic control units and actuators and connected 
by transmission links. They may include mechanical, 
electro-pneumatic or electro-hydraulic elements. 


‘The system’, referred to herein, is the one for which 
type approval is being sought. 


G-2.3 Complex Electronic Vehicle Control Systems 
— Those electronic control systems which are subject 
to a hierarchy of control in which a controlled function 
may be over-ridden by a higher level electronic control 
system/function. 


29 


A function which is over-ridden becomes part of the 
complex system. 


G-2.4 Higher-Level Control — Systems/functions are 
those which employ additional processing and/or 
sensing provisions to modify vehicle behaviour by 
commanding variations in the normal function(s) of 
the vehicle control system. 


This allows complex systems to automatically change 
their objectives with a priority which depends on the 
sensed circumstances. 


G-2.5 Units — The smallest divisions of system 
components which shall be considered in this annex, 
since these combinations of components will be treated 
as single entities for purposes of identification, analysis 
or replacement. 


G-2.6 Transmission Links — The means used for 
inter-connecting distributed units for the purpose of 
conveying signals, operating data or an energy supply. 


This equipment is generally electrical but may, in some 
part, be mechanical, pneumatic, hydraulic or optical. 


G-2.7 Range of Control — It refers to an output 
variable and defines the range over which the system 
is likely to exercise control. 


G-2.8 Boundary of Functional Operation — The 
boundaries of the external physical limits within which 
the system is able to maintain control. 


G-3 DOCUMENTATION 


G-3.1 Requirements 


The manufacturer shall provide a documentation 
package which gives access to the basic design of “The 
system’ and the means by which it is linked to other 
vehicle systems or by which it directly controls output 
variables. 


The function(s) of “The system’ and the safety concept, 
as laid down by the manufacturer, shall be explained. 


Documentation shall be brief, yet provide evidence that 
the design and development has had the benefit of 
expertise from all the system fields which are involved. 


For periodic technical inspections, the documentation 
shall describe how the current operational status of “The 
system’ can be checked. 


G-3.1.1 Documentation shall be made available in two 
parts: 


IS 15986 : 2015 
a) The formal documentation package for the 
approval, containing the material listed in G- 
3 (with the exception of that of G-3.4.4) which 
shall be supplied to the testing agency at the 
time of submission of the type approval 
application. This will be taken as the basic 
reference for the verification process set out 
in G-4. 
Additional material and analysis data 
of G-3.4.4, which shall be retained by the 
manufacturer, but made open for inspection 
at the time of type approval. 


b) 


G-3.2 Description of the Functions of ‘The System’ 


A description shall be provided which gives a simple 
explanation of all the control functions of ‘The system’ 
and the methods employed to achieve the objectives, 
including a statement of the mechanism(s) by which 
control is exercised. 


G-3.2.1 A list of all input and sensed variables shall be 
provided and the working range of these defined. 


G-3.2.2 A list of all output variables which are 
controlled by “The system’ shall be provided and an 
indication given, in each case, of whether the control 
is direct or via another vehicle system. The range of 
control (see G-2.7) exercised on each such variable 
shall be defined. 


G-3.2.3 Limits defining the boundaries of functional 
operation (see G-2.8) shall be stated where appropriate 
to system performance. 


G-3.3 System Layout and Schematics 
G-3.3.1 Inventory of Components 


A list shall be provided; collating all the units of “The 
system’ and mentioning the other vehicle systems 
which are needed to achieve the control function in 
question. 


An outline schematic showing these units in 
combination shall be provided with both the equipment 
distribution and the interconnections made clear. 


G-3.3.2 Functions of the Units 


The function of each unit of ‘The system’ shall be 
outlined and the signals linking it with other units or 
with other vehicle systems shall be shown. This may 
be provided by a labeled block diagram or other 
schematic, or by a description aided by such a diagram. 


G-3.3.3 Interconnections 


Interconnections within ‘The system’ shall be shown 
by acircuit diagram for the electric transmission links, 
by an optical-fibre diagram for optical link by a piping 
diagram for pneumatic or hydraulic transmission 


30 


equipment and by a simplified diagrammatic layout 
for mechanical linkages. 


G-3.3.4 Signal Flow and Priorities 


There shall be a clear correspondence between these 
transmission links and the signals carried between 
units. 


Priorities of signals on multiplexed data paths shall be 
stated, wherever priority may be an issue affecting 
performance or safety as far as this standard is concerned. 


G-3.3.5 Identification of Units 


Each unit shall be clearly and unambiguously 
identifiable (for example, by marking for hardware and 
marking or software output for software content) to 
provide corresponding hardware and documentation 
association. 


Where functions are combined within a single unit or 
indeed within a single computer, but shown in multiple 
blocks in the block diagram for clarity and ease of 
explanation, only a single hardware identification 
marking shall be used. 


The manufacturer shall, by the use of this identification, 
affirm that the equipment supplied conforms to the 
corresponding document. 


G-3.3.5.1 The identification defines the hardware and 
software version and, where the latter changes such as 
to alter the function of the unit as far as this standard is 
concerned, this identification shall also be changed. 


G-3.4 Safety Concept of the Manufacturer 


G-3.4.1 The manufacturer shall provide a statement 
which affirms that the strategy chosen to achieve “The 
system’ objectives will not, under non-fault conditions, 
prejudice the safe operation of systems which are 
subject to the prescriptions of this standard. 


G-3.4.2 In respect of software employed in ‘The 
system’, the outline architecture shall be explained and 
the design methods and tools used shall be identified. 
The Manufacturer shall be prepared, if required, to 
show some evidence of the means by which they 
determined the realization of the system logic, during 
the design and development process. 


G-3.4.3 The manufacturer shall provide the testing 
agency with an explanation of the design provisions 
built into ‘The system’ so as to generate safe operation 
under fault conditions. Possible design provisions for 
failure in ‘The system’ are for example: 


a) Fall-back to operation using a partial system; 

b) Change-over to a separate back-up system; 
and 

c) Removal of the high level function. 


In case of a failure, the driver shall be warned for 
example by warning signal or message display. When 
the system is not deactivated by the driver, for example, 
by turning the ignition (run) switch to ‘off’, or by 
switching off that particular function, if a special switch 
is provided for that purpose, the warning shall be 
present as long as the fault condition persists. 


G-3.4.3.1 If the chosen provision selects a partial 
performance mode of operation under certain fault 
conditions, then these conditions shall be stated and 
the resulting limits of effectiveness defined. 


G-3.4.3.2 If the chosen provision selects a second 
(back-up) means to realise the vehicle control system 
objective, the principles of the change-over 
mechanism, the logic and level of redundancy and any 
built in back-up checking features shall be explained 
and the resulting limits of back-up effectiveness 
defined. 


G-3.4.3.3 If the chosen provision selects the removal 
of the higher level function, all the corresponding 
output control signals associated with this function 
shall be inhibited, and in such a manner as to limit the 
transition disturbance. 


G-3.4.4 The documentation shall be supported, by an 
analysis which shows, in overall terms, how the system 
will behave on the occurrence of any one of those 
specified faults which will have a bearing on vehicle 
control performance or safety. 


This may be based on a failure mode and effect analysis 
(FMEA), a fault tree analysis (FTA) or any similar 
process appropriate to system safety considerations. 


The chosen analytical approach(es) shall be established 


31 


IS 15986 : 2015 


and maintained by the manufacturer and shall be made 
open for inspection by the testing agency at the time 
of the type approval. 


G-3.4.4.1 This documentation shall itemize the 
parameters being monitored and shall set out, for each 
fault condition of the type defined in G-3.4.4, the 
warning signal to be given to the driver and/or to 
service/technical inspection personnel. 


G-4 VERIFICATION AND TEST 


G-4.1 The functional operation of “The system’ as laid 
out in the documents required in G-3 shall be tested 
according to G.4.1.1 and G-4.1.2. 


G-4.1.1 Verification of the function of ‘The System’ 


As the means of establishing the normal operational 
levels, verification of the performance of the vehicle 
system under non-fault conditions shall be conducted 
against the manufacturer’s basic benchmark 
specification unless this is subject to a specified 
performance test as part of the approval procedure of 
this or another standard. 


G-4.1.2 Verification of the Safety Concept of G-3.4 


The reaction of “The system’ shall, at the discretion of 
the type approval authority, be checked under the 
influence of a failure in any individual unit by applying 
corresponding output signals to electrical units or 
mechanical elements in order to simulate the effects 
of internal faults within the unit. 


G-4.1.2.1The verification results shall correspond with 
the documented summary of the failure analysis, to a 
level of overall effect such that the safety concept and 
execution are confirmed as being adequate. 


IS 15986 : 2015 


ANNEX H 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Automotive Braking Systems, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee, TED 4 


Organization Representative(s) 

National Automotive Testing and R&D Dr N. KaruppalaAH (Chairman) 
Infrastructure Project (NATRIP), Indore 
Ashok Leyland Ltd, Chennai SHRI S. ARUN 

SHRI A. JosEPH SELVARAJ (Alternate) 
Association of State Road Transport Undertakings, New Delhi Suri S. K. PATRA 

Suri D. C. Misura (Alternate) 
Automotive Component Manufacturers Association of India, Suri K. N. D. NAMBUDRIPAD 

New Delhi Suri A. K. Gupta (Alternate) 

Automotive Research Association of India, Pune Suri S. S. SANDHU 


SHRI A. AKBAR BaApusua (Alternate) 


Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune Suri T. M. BALARAMAN 
Suri V. M. MANEL (Alternate) 


Bosch Chassis Systems India Limited, Pune Suri R. N. KULKARNI 
Suri D. N. MANbore (Alternate) 


Brakes India Ltd, Chennai Suri P. VENUGOPAL 
Suri K. KANABIRAN (Alternate) 


Central Farm Machine Training & Testing Institute, Suri M. L. MEHTA 
Budni Suri P. K. Panpy (Alternate) 
Central Institute of Road Transport, Pune ProF A.V. SARDESAI 


Suri N. R. Kacare (Alternate) 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi Suri P. V. PARDEEP KUMAR 
Dr NEERAJ SHARMA (Alternate) 


Controllerate of Quality Assurance (OFV), Jabalpur Suri K K Gupta 
Suri S. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


Force Motors Ltd, Pune Suri A. M. KULKARNI 
Suri R. M. KANITKAR (Alternate) 


Hero Honda Motors Ltd, Dharuhera SHRI HARJEET SINGH 
SHRI HARSH AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


Hindustan Composites Ltd, Mumbai Dr V. G. NAIK 
Suri T. N. VENKATRAMANI (Alternate) 
ICAT, Manesar Suri U. V. BHAT 
Suri K. P. SincH (Alternate) 
Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehra Dun Suri A. K. AIGAL 
Knorr-Bremse System for Commercial Vehicles India (Pvt) Ltd, SHRI MANOHAR M HEGDE 
Pune Suri ARuN Bisut (Alternate) 
Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Nashik Suri Z. A. MUJAWAR 
Shri P. V. Jadhav (Alternate) 
Maruti Udyog Ltd, Gurgaon Suri I. V. Rao 
SHRI DEEPAK SAWKAR (Alternate) 
Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises, New Delhi Suri V. C. MATHUR 
Suri B. N. Das (Alternate) 
Representing Ministry of Road Transport and Highway, SHRI SHRIKANT R MARATHE 
New Delhi 
NATRIP, Indore Dr. P. P. CHATTARAJ 


SHRI SHRIHARI (Alternate) 


Ordinance Factory Board, Jabalpur SHRI UMESH KUMAR 
Suri VIKAS Purwar (Alternate) 


32 


Organization 


Rane Brake Linings Ltd, Chennai 


Royal Enfield, Chennai 


Scooter India Ltd, Lucknow 


Society of Indian Automobile Mfrs, New Delhi 


Sundaram Brake Linings Ltd, Chennai 


Sundaram Clayton Ltd, Chennai 


Swaraj Mazda Ltd, Ropar 


Tata Motors Limited, Pune 


Tata Auto Comp System Ltd. (TACO), Pune 
Toyota Kirloskar Motors Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 


Tractor Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


TVS Motor Co Ltd, Hosur 


Vehicle Research & Development Establishment, Ahmednagar 


Volvo India Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 15986 : 2015 


Representative(s) 


Suri S. BADRINARAYANAN 
Suri L. Ramasamy (Alternate) 


Suri N. KRISHNAN 
Suri R. ANBUSELVAN (Alternate) 


Suri P. D. Josui 
Suri C. M. Menta (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. GANDHI 


Suri S. BALAJI 
SHRI R. RAMKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SELVAMANI 
SHRI G. NARAYANAMURTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI S. R. AGARHARI 


SHRI S. M. PANSE 
Suri M. V. SRIDHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ViJAY R PALUSKAR 


SHRI V. RAMESH 
SHRI S. SAKTHIVELAN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. LAKSHMIPATHY 
Shri K. Kannibaran (Alternate) 


SHRI S. RAMIAH 


SHRI K KAMRAJ 
SHRI SAM SHAIKH (Alternate) 


SHRI S. V. SUDERSON 
Suri D. BALAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Suri T. V. Sincu, Scientist F and Head (TED) 
[Representinc Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Shri P. S. Mujral 


Scientist E (TED), BIS 


Panel for the formulation of Indian Stanparps ON BRAKES TED 4/P-1 


Organization 
Force Motors Ltd, Pune 
Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 
Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune 
Brakes India Ltd, Chennai 
Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Nashik 
National Automotive Testing and R&D 
Infrastructure Project (NATRIP), New Delhi 
Sundaram Clayton Ltd, Chennai 
Tata Motors Ltd., Pune 
Volvo India Ltd., 
VRDE, Ahmednagar 


33 


Representative(s) 
Suri R. M. KanirKar (Convener) 
SHRI A. AKBAR BADUSHA 
Suri T. M. BALARAMAN 
SHRI P. VENUGOPAL 
Suri Z. A. MUJAWAR 


Dr N. KARUPPAIAH 


SHRI G. NARAYANAMURTHY 
Suri P. K. BANERJEEE 
SHRI S. V. SUDERSON 


SHRI K. KAMRAJ 


IS 15986 : 2015 


ANNEX J 
(Foreword) 
CLAUSE WISE REFERENCES OF ECE R13H AND THIS STANDARD 
Clause No/ Title Corresponding Clause/ 
Annex of ECE Annex of this standard 
(1) (2) (3) 
1 Scope 1 
NA References 2 
2 Definitions 3 
3 Application for approval 4 
4 Approval NA 
5 Specifications 5 
6 Tests 6 
7 Modification of vehicle type or braking system and extension of 7 
approval 
8 Conformity of production NA 
9 Penalties for non-conformity of production NA 
10 Production definitely discontinued NA 
11 Names and addresses of testing agency responsible for conducting NA 


approval tests, and of administrative departments 

Annex 1 Communication concerning the approval or extension or refusal or Annex A 
withdrawal of approval or production definitely discontinued of a vehicle 
type with regard to braking pursuant to this standard 


Annex 3 Braking tests and performance of braking systems Annex B 
Annex 3 Procedure for monitoring the stability of battery charge Annex B 
Appendix | B-4 
Annex 4 Provisions relating to energy sources and energy storage devices (energy Annex C 
accumulators) 
Annex 5 Distribution of braking among the axles of vehicles Annex D 
Annex 5 Wheel-lock sequence test procedure Annex D 
Appendix 1 D-7 
Annex 5 Torque wheel test procedure Annex D 
Appendix 2 D-8 
Annex 6 Test requirements for vehicles fitted with anti-lock systems Annex E 
Annex 6 Symbols and definitions Annex E 
Appendix 1 E-6 
Annex 6 Utilization of adhesion Annex E 
Appendix 2 E-7 
Annex 6 Performance on differing adhesion surfaces Annex E 
Appendix 3 E-8 
Annex 6 Method of selection of the low adhesion surface Annex E 
Appendix 4 E-9 
Annex 7 Inertia dynamometer test method for brake linings Annex F 
Annex 8 Special requirements to be applied to the safety aspects of complex Annex G 


electronic vehicle control systems 


34 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 04 (0697). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


AMENDMENT NO. 1 JULY 2020 
TO 


IS 15986 : 2015 AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — 

UNIFORM PROVISIONS CONCERNING THE 

APPROVAL OF VEHICLES OF CATEGORIES 
M1 AND N1 WITH REGARD TO BRAKING 


(Page 1, clause 1.1) — Substitute following text for the existing: 


‘1.1 This standard specifies uniform provisions concerning the vehicles of 
categories M1 and N1 as defined in IS14272 with regard to braking. 


NOTE — Alternate performance requirements for vehicle category N1 is given in IS 11852. 
Vehicle manufactures may opt for compliance to IS 11852 instead IS 15896.’ 


(Page 1, clause 2) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 


‘2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which through reference in this 
text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS/ISO/AIS No. Title 

11852 : 2019 Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles 
of categories M2, M3, N and T (third revision) 

14272 : 2011 Automotive vehicles — Types — Terminology (first 
revision) 

ISO 9128: 2006 Road vehicles — Graphical symbols to designate brake 
fluid Types 

AIS 004 Electromagnetic radiation from automotive vehicle — 


Permissible levels and methods of tests.’ 


(Page 10, clause 5.2.22.4) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 


“5.2.22.4 Electric regenerative braking systems, as defined in 3.17, which produce 
a retarding force upon release of the accelerator control, shall generate a signal 
mentioned above, according to the following provisions : 


Vehicle decelerations Signal generation 
< 0.7 m/s? The signal shall not be generated 
> 0.7 m/s? and < 1.3 m/s? The signal may be generated 
> 1.3 m/s? The signal shall be generated 
NOTE — In all cases the signal shall be de-activated at the latest when the deceleration has 
fallen below 0.7 m/s’. 
(TED 04) 


Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


