( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS : 6151( Part I ) - 1971

STORAGE MANAGEMENT
PART
Storage

CODE

t

TERMINOLOGY
Commodities

and Marketing Structures for Agricultural Sectional Committee, AFDC 28

Chairman smu SEIRI IcRwiNa
Men&rs

Rcpremting Central Public Works Department

Indian Produce Association, Calcutta SHRXV. S. AGGARWAL RAI BAAADURG. V. SWAIKA ( A&rnate ) AGRICULTURAL ENGINEER ( IMPLE- Directorate of Agrieulturc, Government of Punjab
fiHR1 B. v. Apre

The Builders' Association of India, Bombay SARI K. K. MADHOK ( Altmate ) Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of SHIU S. K. BZXIEMR Food, Agricuiture, Community Develbpmenr & Cooperation ) , Faridabad SZIRI R. N. t%YrURvEDI ( ~tcmutc ) Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquarters COL BHA~AT SINGH COL R. R. RAO ( BltGtxutl ) DIREST ( STORAGE AND INSPEC- Directorate of. Storage 8t Inspection ( Ministry of Food, Agnculture, Commumty_ Development & Cooperation ) Farmaids Corporation, New Delhi Sam V. K. GUPTA Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine and DR D. S. KhTIiURIA Storage .- ( Ministry of Food. Agriculture. ComDevelopment 8 `* Co-ope&tion ), %%?bad Natio& Dziperative Development Corporation, SRRI S. T. -

YEN-IS )

Grain Storage, Research & Training Centre, Hapur DR K. KRISHNAYURTHY Agriculture Department, Government of West Bengal .%RI J. N. MAHALANOBIS SHRI T. K. MAZUMDER ( Abmaf~ 1' dcntral Food Technological Research Institute SHRI s. K. ?rlAJUYDKR ( CSIR ), Mysore Planning Commission SHRI K. V. NATARAJAN Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICXR 1. DR s. PRADHAN New Delhi DR RATI-.- LAL ( .4hmatc ! Food Corporation of India, New Delhi SHR! I. c. PLYRI SHRI 0. PI. B~,TPAICAlwnatc I

SHRIJ. P. MITAL ( Alternate)

_-

- _-.

-

~-INDIA&
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 `.Ev BAHADUR DEL!+!

I&STITUTION
SHAH Ii0002 ZAPAR MARG

lSr6151(Partl:)-1971 ( Cmtinwdfrom page I
Members Smr P. R-AS Representing
( Altmaie) Howe ( India ) Private Limited, New Delhi M.illers' Association, Pradesh Rice Vijayawada Dcfiice Institute of Stores, Preservation and Packaging ( Ministry of Defence ) Central Warehousing Corporation, Chamber of Commerce, Hapur New Delhi

SHRI R.A&%EswwAR DAYAL SHRXBHAGWATIP-AD JNN &RI S. R. ROESSLER Smu H. NANDI ( Ahnate ) SHRI ADIJS~MILLISUBBARAO SHEUS~tnssxzm !3t~oR DR H. G. KHA~SA( Alternate)

Andhra

SHRI N. S. SOWN
SHRI L. H. PATXL( Altcma&) STATE MARKETINGO~mm.

Agriculture & Co-operation of Maharashtra

Department, &vemment

'

Agriculture Department, Governmen t ofTami1 Nadu ASS~STAIUT MARKETING OnnxR ( Alternate ) SIJ~E~DING ENGINEER ( ELEC- Central Public Works Department TRXCAL ) (FOOD STORAGE EL&CTRmAL CXRCLE) OF Central Public Works Department SUPERINTENDING SURVEVOR WORKS ( FOOD) Ministry of Food, A `culture, Community DevelopSHRX M. L. TANEJA &&eration ment B: (Department of Agriculture ) National Seeds Corporation, New Delhi SHRI s. s. VIRDI SHRI S. L. RAINA ( Alternate ) The Roller Flour Millers' Federation of India, New SliRI S. P. VIRaaANI Delhi SHRI S. M. MAZUMDAR f,rllbmnt~ ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oJ'icio Member) DR HARI BHAGWAN: Deputy Director ( Agri & Food )

.

Secretary SHRI MANOHAR T. SANTWANI
Assistant Director ( Agri 8: Food ), IS1

Storage Management
Corwener

Subcommittee,

AFDC 28 : 9

SHRI M. R. SXKA Members SRRI V. S. AGGARWAL DR_N. S. AGR~WAL SHIU S. N. BANERFE DR D. S. KA~~UA DR 0. S. Bxhmm
bUXTOR

Food Corporation

of India, New Delhi

(

Altmute \

Indian Produce Association, Calcutta Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development & Co-operation, New Delhi Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine and Storage, New Delhi Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana Food and Supplies Department, Government Punjab of

SHRI S. S. BEDI ( Alternate )

( Continued on pdge 9 )

2

IS:6151 (PartI)-

STORAGE

MANAGEMENT
Th'lINOLOtY

CODE

PART I

B.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 June 1971, after the draft finahzed by the Storage and Marketing Structures for Agricultural Commodities Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Scientific storage of agricultural commodities demands proper care of different commodltres, construction of appropriate type of storage structures suitable for different commodities, hygienic transport, receipt, distribution and delivery of these commodities, maintenance of warehouse inspection records, etc. Standardization of the requirements and procedures for storage management would help in overcoming problems of recurring nature like general and specific care of agricultural commodities, calculation of storage space for various commodities, occupancy or storage structures and calculation of cost of storage and construction. Such a code would, therefore, lead to overall improvement in storage at farmer's, trade and government level and ultimately to overall economy in the storage of various agricultural commodities. 0.3 Various terms relating to storage are being frequently used by various agencies concerned with storage in the country. In order to have a uniform terminology and to give an authoritative definition of these terms the Storage and Marketing Structures for Agricultural Commodities Sectional Committee decided to formulate this standard. 0.4 This code is being formulated in three parts. The other two parts will be as follows: Part II General care in. handling and storage of agricultural produce and inputs Part III Specific care in handling and storage of agricultural produce and inputs. O.!+IFor the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated; expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS: 2 - 1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that,of the specified value in this standard.
*&lcs

for roudug

oE nurncrical values ( mised ) .

1.1 This code ( Part I ) prescribes the definitions for various terms most frequently used in storage management.

2.1 Aeration -The process of forced ventilation of A%PI* for making conditions less conducive for development of pests. The quantity of air may vary with the type and condition of AGPI. The quantity of air required for aeration 1s roughly calculated on the basis of 75 ml/I&e/minute ( see 2.12 and 2.51). 2.2 Agria Produce -Produce products, oilseeds, sugar, etc. such as cereals, pubes, milled

2.3 Agricpltaral Inputs - Farm equipment, cides put in for production and protection produce. 2.5 Alley Way purposes.

seeds, fertilizers and pestiof agricultural crops and

2.4 Airtight Storage - Storage in a structure which is impermeable to air. Free space Jeft around the stacks of bags for operational

2.6 &eillary Structures - Structures such as office room, store room for keeping equipment; rooms for watch and ward purposes, built for effective control over the storage premises. 2.7 Angle of Repose ( Angle of ~~&rual friction ) - An angle formed with the horizontal plane at which the loose grain when piled will retain The angle varies with commodities and variable factors such its position. as moisture content, particle size, degree of packing, etc. 22 Bag Storage Structure - Structure bags made of cotton, polythene, jute, etc. 23 Bdk Storage strucixrt loose form. Structure in which AGPI are stored in are stored in or other

in which AGPI

receptacle made of cement concrete 2.X0 Bin -A material in which AGPI are stored in loose form. 2.x1 Balk weight 2.12 Degasissgvapours. 2.l3 Delivery-

or metal

Weight of AGPI in kilograms per cubic metre. of pesticidal

Process of freeing a receptacle or structure Issue of AGPI from a receptacle or structure.

*A@xlltaral produoe8na inputs.

ESr6lSl-(Part

I)-1BYl

Process by which the pests of stored agricultural 2.l4 Dish&Ha*produce arc eliminated or reduced to minimum safe level.

2.15 lhyhg - process by which moisture content of AGPI a safe level for storage.

is reduced to

2.16 Dssnnage - Barriers like wooden crates, polythene sheets or matting pr&d& under AGPI for preventing damage due to seepage of moisture. 2.17 Wasting - Process of application of pesticidal dusts with a dusting machine 0n walls, bags and floor for disinfestation or prevention of infestation. 2.18 Dust Masrk dust. Covering for face for protection against pesticidal

storage structure which has its 2.19 Flat Storage stractpre -Bulk height smaller than other dimensions like width or diameter. 2.28 F-a&on - Process of employment of fumigants for disinfestation.

Covers made of plastic or rubberized cloth 2_2l FBmigation Csversused for covering stacks of AGPI for fumigation. 2x?Gask%ask-fumigants. Covering for face for protection against vap0urs of
-A

2.23 Godown ( Ware H-3 either in bags or in bulk.

structure used for storage of AGPI

AGPI like pesticides and fertilizers which by 2.24 Hazardem AGPItheir inherent nature, are either inflammable or are liable to pose a risk of contaminating f&grains and require special care in storage. Presence of harmful insect pests, that is adults 0f 2.25 r.&MatioalSitopRil~~O~W, Rhiz+mtia dominica, Bruchidr, Sitotroga cerealella, larvae of c&m cwtclla, C0rcya cephalOtia; and larvae and adults of Trogodemra granarium. -Degree cd infestation when, number of rimjm Hq .Ir$estation above 3 and/or minor pests above 9 for every 500 g of sample are present. 235.1
insect pests

2.W.2 Mode&e InfGstatim- Degree of infestation when major insect pests up to 3 and/or minor insect pests from 4 to 8 for every 500 g of sample are present. This degree of infestation calls fix immediate control maures l&c furaigation to prevent heavy infestation. of infestation when no major pests 2.253 Neglig% Infatatiim - Ikg~'t~ but minor pests up to 3 for every 500 g of sample are present. 5

lS:6BI(PaltI)-wn 2.26 Loading Poirtt - The place from where stocks of AGPI for being loaded in a conveyance. are Lifted,

Storage for such long periods required by 2.27 Long Term %mge-large scale trade stock& and government agencies desiring to keep buffer stocks or to maintain food banks. Duration of such storage is more than one year. 2.26 Loss in Storage-Quantitative and qualitative storage due to damage by pests, moisture or heat. 2Z9
Sitotroga

loss of AGPI

in

Major Insect Pests - Principal storage pests like Situphiltts o'ytae, cereal&a, Rhkopertha dominica, Trogoderma granarium, Cudra cautella, However, they and Bruchids which cause significant damage to a grain. may vary %om grain to grain that is Tribolium castaneum in milled products. 23 Minor Insect Tribal&m castaneum, Laemophloeus minutes,

significant damage.

which

pests like Plodia Pests - Minor storage Laetheticus orycae, Oryzaephilus surinamensis only casually

spp., and take a serious form to cause

like foodgrains, which are 2.31 Non-hazardous AGPI - Commodities neither inflammable nor pose risk of contaminating other commodities. -Utilization of the capacity of a storage structure 2.32 Occupancy expressed in terms of percentage of the total effective storage capacity and reckoned as the average for 12 calendar months. 2.33 OveraII Uniform worn by the workers for disinfestation work. 2.34 Net-plinth Area - Net plinth area of a structure actually available for storage of AGPI. The area is utilized for calculation of rated capacity of the structure ( see 2.37 ). 2.35 Receipt - Receipt of agricultural wagons or steamer for storage. produce through trucks, carts,

2.36 Rxsral Storage - Short term storage at farmer's level normally handling up to average 15 tonnes of AGPI or approximately volume of 20 m3. 236.1 house. 2.36.2 house.
Indoors Storage Outdoors Storage -

Storage

of agricultural

commodities commodities

inside a outside a

Storage of agricultural

2.37 Rated Capacity - Net storage -capacity of a structure in tonnes deducting alley\vays and top space from the total covered plinth area. The capacity varres with height of stack and may be computed by the formula: (Net plinth area in sq. metres-20 percent) x stack height in bags 0.65

IS:6151( Part I)-1971
2.38 Safe M&&me Level - The moisture level which will not encourage development of micro-organisms and mites. 2.39 Short Term Storage -Storage of AGPT as generally cultivators, for a period less than one year. practised by

2.48 silo - A unit consisting of several tall bins having height greater than their diameter used for storage and handling of AGPI in bulk and fitted with necessary mechanical equipment and accessories. 260.1 Storage Block AGPI. A portion of the silo used for the storage of and

2.40.2 Head H&se - A portion of the silo which houses elevator motheraccessories such as weighing and cleaning machines for AGPI.

The structure on top of bins of a silo for 2.4Q.2 Distribution &lh~ housing system for distribution of AGPI into bins. 2.4%.4 Marine Tower - A structure located on the quay side for either loading or unloading of AGPI into and from ships. This may be stationary or portable. `I 2.40.5 Collection Galleg - A portion of the silo at or below ground level for housing collection equipment. 2.40.6 Garner - An intermediate hopper for storage of AGPI desired flow for further handling of AGPI. to ensure

2.40.7 Truck or Wagon Dumb - A structure consisting of a series of receiving hoppers where the AGPI are dumped by trucks or wagons. 2.41 Stack -A containers. regularly stacked pile of filled up bags or other

2.42 Stack Height -Height of a stack in terms of number of bags from floor. It varies with AGPI and conditions. 2.45 Smoking pesticides. Process of disinfestation by creating smokes of

2.44 Spra+g - Process of application tion or prevention of infestation.

of pesticidal sprays for disinfestamites, rodents, birds,

2.45 Stored Grain Pests - Pests like insects, micro-organisms, etc, infesting stored AGPI.

2.46 Sweepings - Sweepings containing dirt, dust, refractions, etc, and also sound grain collected as a result of either sweeping and round about a storage structure or rail heads or ship boards. 7

iSr6151(PartI)-1971 2.47 Texnperature Sensing Devices

electrical resistance themlometers inside a structure.

--Devices like thermocouples or used for measuring temperature of AGPI

2.48 Temperature

Gradient - Temperature difference between different portions of stored AGPI ( specially middle and periphery) or different surfaces of a structure ( especially metallic ) resulting in moisture condensation in cooler regions.

2.39 Transit Storage - Storage for a short term in which a commodity is~practically on the move. The transit storage is mainly done at seaports or godowns of retailers. 230 Unloading conveyance.
PointThe place where AGPI

are unloaded from a

251 Ventilation - Process of letting off foul air from a storage structure and letting in fresh air. , -Process of making a structure waterproof by 2.52 Waterproofing means of waterproof compounds or by any other means to guard against deterioration of grain due to seepage of ground or rain water inside a structure.

E

ii4knbefs SHRI GGRBA~SINGH

w-*8

The Punjab State Co-operative Supply & Marketing Federation Limited, Chandigarh THEcCIVILENGIXEW(.~~J~~~M~~) . The Roller Flour Milled Federation of India, New &RI R. P. JAXN
Delhi ---_

SHRI hGENNAHDAN BRA= SEIXU S. T. KXUSHUANI SHRI J. P. MITAL ( Al&mute) DR K. KRISEEN.~~RTEN
SKRXS. K. Mquswn DB s. PRAD3AN SFXRI P. RAMDAa Sniu ABusuxuLi SUBBA RAO -&sKvF

( Alternak ) Nat&;:

DyCperative

Development

Corporation,

.

SERI M~NGALD~SN~THUBIUI

Grain Storage Research and Training Centrc, Hapur The Grain, Rice and Oilseeds.Merchants' Asaociauon, Bombay Central Food Technological Research Institute ( CSIR ) , Mysore Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR), New Dtfhi Central Warehousing Corporation, New De&i ASX&&n, Andhra Pradesh Rice Millers' .. Limited, New Delhi

Nati~!~~&orporation UPYANAIIEULU ( Altcmurs )

9

