**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



SP 48 (1991) : Guide for requirements and testing of 
electric iron [ETD 32: Electrical Appliances] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



SP 48 : 1991 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR REQUIREMENTS 
AND TESTING OF ELECTRIC IRONS 

(First Reprint APRIL 1993) 
UDC 648-424(036) 



(8) BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI 110002 

March 1991 Price Gimp 12 



CONTENTS 



Page 

Foreword ... ... — 1 

1 Scope ... ... — 1 

2 Terminology ... ... 1 

3 Sapbty Precautions .,. ... ... 5 

4 General Notbs on Tests ... ... ... 5 

5 Rating ... ... ... 6 

6 Classification ... ... ... 6 

7 Marking ... ... ... 6 

8 Protection Against Electric Shock .. ... 7 

9 Input ... ••• — 8 

10 Tbmp*rature-Ri$b ••• ... •• 8 

11 Operation Under Overload Conditions ... ... 9 

12 Electrical Insulation and Leakage Current at Opbrating 
Tbmpbrature ... .. ... 9 

13 Moisture Resistance ... ... ... 11 

14 Endurance ... ... ... 12 

15 Abnormal Operation ... ... ... 12 

16 Stability and Mechanical Hazards ... ... 12 

17 Mechanical Strength ... ... ... 13 

18 Construction ... ... ... 15 

19 Internal Wiring ... ... ... 16 

20 Components ... — ... 17 

21 Supply Connections and External Flexiblb Cables and Cords 17 

22 Provision for Earthing ... ... ... 20 

23 Screws and Connections ... ... ... 20 

24 Creepage Distances and Clearances ... ... 21 

25 Resistance to Heat, Fire and Cracking ... ... 24 

26 Resistance to Rusting ... ... ... 29 

27 Finish ... ... ... 29 

28 Mbasurembnt of Heating-up Timb ... ... ... 33 

29 Measurement of Solb Plate Tbmperaturb ... ... 34 

30 Mbasurembnt of Temperature Distribution ... ... 35 

31 Measurement of Initial Overswing Temperature and 
Hbating-up Excess Temperature ... ... ... 35 

32 Measurement of Cyclb Fluctuation of Temperature of the 
Hot-Test Point ... ... ... 36 

33 Measurement of Tbmperaturb Drop Under Load .. 36 

34 Tbsts ... ... ... 36 

35 Testing Equipment Required for Elbctric Iron as per 

IS 366 : 1985 ... ... ... 38 



ISBN 81-7061.033-8 



SP 48 : 1991 



Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR REQUIREMENTS 
AND TESTING OF ELECTRIC IRONS 

0. FOREWORD 



The general requirements and related methods 
of tests for electrical appliances are presently 
covered in IS 302 : 1979. Requirements of 
individual appliances are covered in a series of 
standards which make reference to IS 302 : 1979 
wherever applicable* The small scale industry has 
expressed the need for a comprehensive docu- 
ment to cover all details in one publication even 
at the cost of repetition, for individual appliances, 
such as electric irons, electric immersion 
water heaters, electric stoves and electric 
radiators; to facilitate ebsy references for use of 
Indian Standards at the shop floor level. This 
special publication is prepared " to meet this 
demand and covers electric irons. 



In case of any deviations between the require- 
ments of Guide and those specified in IS 366 : 
1985, the provisions of the latter shall prevail 
upon and shall be applicable. 

Assistance has been derived from the following 
Indian Standards while preparing this guide: 

IS 302 : 1979 General and safety require- 
ments for household and similar electrical 
appliances (fifth revision ) 

IS 366 : 1985 Specification for electric irons 
( third revision) 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This guide covers the general and safety 
requirements as well as procedures to conduct 
tests on electric irons used for household and 
similar purpose. 

NOTE — For proper understanding wherever the 
word 'Appliance' appears, it would mean electric 
iron. 

1.2 This guide does not apply to the following: 

a) Rotary irons; 

b) Irons intended to be used in vehicles or 
on board ships or aircraft; 

c) Steam irons; 

d) Spray irons; and 

e) Irons intended to be used in locations 
where special conditions prevail, such as 
the presence of a corrosive or explosive 
atmosphere ( dust, vapour or gas ). 

2 TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this guide, the following 
definitions shall apply. Where the terms 
voltage and current are used, they imply the 
rms values, unless otherwise specified. 

2.1 Rated Voltage 

The voltage ( for three-phase supply, the 
voltage between phases ) assigned to the appli- 
ance by the manufacturer. 



2.2 Rated Voltage Range 

The voltage range assigned to the appliance 
by the manufacturer, expressed by its lower 
and upper limits. 

2.3 Rated Input 

The input under conditions of adequate heat 
discharge or under normal load and at normal 
operating temperature, assigned to the appli- 
ance by the manufacturer. 

2.4 Rated Current 

The current assigned to the . appliance by the 
manufacturer. 

2.5 Rated Frequency 

The frequency assigned to the appliance by the 
manufacturer. 

2.6 Rated Frequency Range 

The frequency range assigned to the appliance 
by the manufacturer, expressed by its lower 
and upper limits. 

2.7 Power Supply Cord 

A flexible cable or cord, for supply purposes, 
fixed to, or assembled with the appliance 
according to one of the following methods: 

a) Type X attachment which denotes a 
method of attachment such that the 
flexible cable or cord may easily be 



1 



SP 48 : 1991 



replaced, without the aid of special 
purpose tools, by a flexible cable or cord 
not requiring any special preparation. 

b) Type M attachment which denotes a 
method of attachment such th^t the 
flexible cable or cord may easily be repla- 
ced, without the aid of special purpose 
tools, by a special cable or cord with, for 
example, a moulded-on cord guard or 
crimped terminations. 

c) Type Y attachment which denotes a 
method of attachment such that the 
flexible cable or cord can only be re- 
placed with the aid of special purpose 
tools normally available only to the 
manufacturer or his agents. 

NOTE — Type Y attachments may be used 
either with common flexible cables or cords or 
with special cables or cords. 

d) Type Z attachment which denotes a 
method of attachment such that the 
flexible cable or cord cannot be replaced 
without breaking or destroying a part 
of the appliance. 

2.8 Basic Insulation 

An insulation applied to live parts to provide 
basic protection against electric shock. 

NOTES 

1 Basic insulation does not necessarily include 
insulation used exclusively for functional purposes. 

2 The insulating properties of lacquer, enamel, 
ordinary paper, cotton, oxide film on metal parts, 
beads and sealing compound shall not be relied upon 
to give the required protection against accidental 
contact with live parts. 

2.9 Supplementary Insulation 

An independent insulation applied in addition 
to the basic insulation, in order to ensure 
protection against electric shock in the event 
of a failure of the basic insulation. 

2.10 Double Insulation 

An insulation comprising both basic insulation 
and supp lementary insulation. 

2.11 Reinforced Insulation 

A single insulation system applied to live parts 
which provides a degree of protection against 
electric shock equivalent to double insulation 
under the conditions specified in this standard. 

NOTE — The term 'insulation system' does not 
imply that the insulation must be one homogeneous 
piece. It may comprise several layers which cannot 
be tested singly as supplementary or basic 
insulation. 

2.12 Class I Appliance 

An appliance in which protection against 
electric shock does not rely on basic insulation 



only, but includes an additional safety precau- 
tion in that accessible conductive parts are 
connected to the protective earthing conduc- 
tor in the fixed wiring of the installation in 
such a way that accessible conductive parts 
cannot become live in the event of a failure of 
the basic insulation. 

NOTES 

1 Class I appliances may have parts with double 
insulation or reinforced insulation, or parts operat- 
ing at safety extra-low voltage. 

2 For appliances intended for use with a flexible 
cord or cable, this provision includes a protective 
conductor as part of the flexible cord or cable. 

2.13 Class II Appliance 

An appliance in which protection against elec- 
tric shock does not rely on basic insulation 
only, but in which additional safety precautions, 
such as double insulation or reinforced insula- 
tion, are provided, there being no provision 
for protective earthing or reliance upon instal- 
lation conditions. 

Such an appliance may be one of the following 
types: 

a) An appliance having a durable and 
substantially continuous enclosure of 
insulating material which envelops all 
metal parts, with the exception of small 
parts, such as name plates, screws and 
rivets, which are isolated from live 
parts by insulation at least equivalent 
to reinforced insulation; such an applia- 
nce is called an insulation-encased Class 
II appliance. 

b) An appliance having a substantially 
continuous metal enclosure, in which 
double insulation is used throughout, 
except for those parts where reinforced 
insulation is used, because the applica- 
tion of double insulation is manifestly 
impracticable; such an appliance is 
called a metal-encased Class II 
appliance. 

c) An appliance which is a combination 
of the Types (a) and (b) above. 

NOTES 

1 The enclosure of an insulation-encased Class II 
appliance may form a part or the whole of the 
supplementary insulation or of the reinforced 
insulation. 

2 If an appliance with double insulation and/or 
reinforced insulation throughout has an earthing 
terminal or earthing contact, it is considered to be 
Class I construction. 

3 Class II appliances may have parts operating at 
safety extra-low voltage. 

2.14 Class III Appliance 

An appliance in which protection against 
electric shock relies on supply at safety extra- 
low voltage and in which voltages higher than 



SP 48 11991 



those of safety extra-low 
generated* 

NOTE — Appliances intended to be operated at 
safety extra-low voltage and having internal 
circuits which operate at a voltage other than safety 
extra-low voltage, are not included in the classifica- 
tion {md are subject to additional requirements; 
these requirements are under consideration. 

2.15 Extra-Low Voltage 

A voltage supplied from a source within the 
appliance and, when the appliance is operated at 
its rated voltage, not exceeding 32 V between 
conductors and between conductors and earth 
or, for three-phase supply, not exceeding 18* 5 V 
between conductors and neutral, the extra-low 
voltage circuit being separated from other cir- 
cuits by basic insulation only. 

2.16 Low Voltage 

A voltage not exceeding 250 V under normal 
conditions. 

2.17 Medium Voltage 

A voltage exceeding 250 V but not exceeding 
650 V under normal conditions. 

2.18 Safety Extra-Low Voltage 

A nominal voltage not exceeding 32 V between 
conductors and between conductors and earth 
or, for three-phase supply, not exceeding 
18-5 V between conductors and neutral, the 
no-load voltage not exceeding 38 V and 22 V 
respectively. 

NOTES 

1 When safety extra-low voltage is obtained from 
the supply mains, it must be through a safety 
isolating transformer or a convertor with separate 
windings. 

2 The voltage limits specified are based on the 
assumption that the safety isolating transformer 
is operated at its rated supply voltage. 

2.19 Safety Isolating Transformer 

A transformer, the input winding of which is 
electrically separated from the output windings 
by an insulation at least equivalent to double 
insulation or reinforced insulation, and which 
is designed to supply a distribution circuit, 
an appliance or other equipment at safety 
extra-low voltage. 

2.20 Portable Appliance 

Either an appliance which is moved while in 
operation or an appliance which may easily be 
moved from one place to another while 
connected to the supply. 

2.21 Hand-Held Appliance 

A portable appliance intended to be held in 
the hand during normal use, the motor, if any, 
forming an integral part of the appliance. 



voltage are not 2.22 Conditions of Adequate Heat Discharge 



The conditions that apply when a heating 
appliance is operated under normal conditions 
of use. 

2.23 Continuous Operation 

Operation under normal load or in accordance 
with conditions of adequate heat discharge for 
an unlimited period. 

2.24 Detachable Part 

A part which can be removed without the aid 
of a tool. 

2.25 Thermostat 

A temperatdre-sensing device, the operating 
temperature of which may be either fixed or 
adjustable, and which, during normal opera- 
tion, keeps the temperature of an appliance, 
or of parts of it, between certain limits by 
automatically opening and closing a circuit. 

2.26 Temperature Limiter 

A temperature-sensing device, the operating 
temperature of which may be either fixed or 
adjustable, and which, during normal operation, 
operates by opening or closing a circuit when 
the temperature of an appliance or of parts of 
it, reaches a predetermined value. 

NOTE — It does not make the reverse operation 
during the normal duty cycle of the appliance. It 
may or may not require manual resetting. 

2.27 Thermal Cut-Out 

A device which, during abnormal operation, 
limits the temperature of an appliance or of 
parts of it, by automatically opening the circuit 
or by reducing the current, and which is so 
constructed that its setting cannot be altered 
by the user. 

2.28 Self-Resetting Thermal Cut-Out 

A thermal cut-out which automatically restores 
the current after the relevant part of the 
appliance has cooled down sufficiently. 

2.29 Non-self-Resetting Thermal Cut-Out 

A thermal cut-out which requires resetting by 
hand, or replacement of a part, in order to 
restore the current. 

2.30 Tool 

A screwdriver, a coin or any other object 
which may be used to operate a screw or 
similar fixing means. 

2.31 Creepage Distance 

The shortest path between two conductive 
parts, or between a conductive part and the 
bounding surface of the appliance, measured 
along the surface of the insulating material. 



SP 48 : 1991 



2.32 Clearance 

The shortest distance between two conductive 
parts, or between a conductive part and the 
bounding surface of the appliance, measured 
through air. 

NOTE — The bounding surface of the appliance is 
the outer surface of the enclosure, considered as 
though metal foil were pressed into contact with 
accessible surfaces of insulating material. 

2.33 All-Pole Disconnection 

For single-phase ac appliances and for dc 
appliances, disconnection of both supply 
conductors by a single switching action or, for 
appliances to be connected to more than two 
supply conductors, disconnection of all supply 
conductors, except the earthed ( grounded ) 
conductor, by a single switching action. 

NOTE — The protective earthing conductor is not 
considered to be a supply conductor. 

2.34 Visibly Glowing Heating Element 

A heating element which, when the appliance 
is assembled ready for use, is partly or 
completely visible from the outside of the 
appliance, and the temperature of which is at 
least 650°C after the appliance has been 



operated in accordance with conditions of 
adequate heat discharge until steady conditions 
have been established, the supply voltage being 
such that the input is equal to the minimum 
rated input. 

NOTE — This definition is mainly intended for 
testing with test probes regarding accessibility of 
live parts. 

2.35 Accessible Parte or Accessible Surface 

A live part or a live surface which can be 
touched by means of the standard test finger 
shown in Fig. 1. 

2.36 Body 

The term includes all accessible metal parts, 
shafts of handles, knobs, grips and the like and 
metal foil in contact with all accessible surfaces 
of insulating material; it does not include 
inaccessible metal parts. 

2.37 Steady State Condition 

The steady state condition is considered to 
have been reached when the difference between 
two consecutive readings of temperature-rise 
over the ambient taken at half an hour interval 
has not exceeded 1°C, 




SECTION 
CC 



Both joints of this finger may be bent through an angle of 90°, but in one and the same direction only. 

Tolerances : 

On angles : ± 5° 

On linear dimensions : 

Less than 25 mm : _ jj.^ 

Over 25 mm : ± 0*2 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Standard Test Finger 
4 



SP 48: 1991 



2.38 Type Tests 

Tests carried out to prove conformity with the 
requirements of the standard. These are intend- 
ed to prove the general qualities and design 
of a given type of appliance. 

2.39 Acceptance Tests 

Tests carried out on samples taken from a lot 
for the purpose of acceptance of the lot. 

2.40 Routine Tests 

Tests carried out on each item to check the 
essential requirements which are likely to vary 
during production. 

2.41 Electric Irons 

A portable appliance, which has an electrically 
heated sole plate and is used for ironing textile 
material. 

2.42 Thermostatic Iron 

An iron fitted with a thermostat, the setting of 
which may be adjusted manually to alter the 
sole plate temperature over a range and main- 
tain it within certain limits. 

2.43 Iron with Self-Resetting Thermal Cut-Out 

V 

An iron fitted with a self-resetting thermal cut- 
out with a fixed setting to limit the maximum 
temperature of the sole plate. 

2.44 Iron with Non-self-Resetting Thermal 
Cut-Out 

An iron fitted with a non-self-resetting cut-out, 
such as a fusible link for disconnecting the 
heating element, if the iron attains excessive 
temperature. 

2.45 Dry Iron 

An iron having neither means to produce and 
supply steam nor to spray water on the textile 
material while ironing. 

2.46 Sole Plate 

The flat surface of the iron, which is heated 
electrically and pressed against textile material 
while ironing. 

2.47 Mid-Point 

The mid-point of the sole plate of an electric 
iron is the point on the centre line of the sole 
plate surface, midway between the tip and the 
head of the iron. 

2.48 Stand 

The stand of an electric iron is the separate 
stand, if one is delivered with the iron, other- 
wise it is the head stored or similar incorpotat- 
ed device. 



2.49 Antomatic Iron 

An electric iron fitted with temperature control 
device, the setting of which can be adjusted 
manually to alter the sole plate temperature 
over a range and maintained within certain 
limits. 

NOTE — Electric iron with a thermal cut-out is not 
treated as an automatic iron. 

3 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 

3.1 Before testing the electric iron, it should be 
checked for the possible mechanical defects 
and electrical connections. The purpose of 
this check is to ascertain the absence of 
defects which may: 

a) harm the electric iron during the test, 

b) hinder the proper operation of the 
electric iron, and 

c) result in safety hazards to the testing 
personnel. 

3.2 Safety precautions shall be taken for all the 
tests for access of current and heat encounter* 
ed. All tests shall be performed by experienced 
personnel only. 

4 GENERAL NOTES ON TESTS 

4.1 The type tests on electric iron are carried 
out on two samples as delivered which shall 
withstand all the relevant tests. 

NOTES 

1 If it is evident from the design of the appliance 
that a particular test is not applicable, it shall not 
be conducted. 

2 If the appliance is designed for different supply 
voltage; both for ac and dc; more than two samples 
shall be tested. 

3 If it is necessary to dismantle a Class II applia- 
nce for the relevant tests, one additional sample 

shall be required. 

4 The testing of components may necessitate 
the submission of additional samples of these 
components. When the submission of such samples 
is necessary, they should be submitted together with 
the appliance. 

4.2 The tests are carried out in the order of 
the clauses except that: 

a) the test for the provision of a stand 
which is attached or incorporated or be 
delivered with a separate stand, complia- 
nce of which is checked by inspection 
and is done before carrying out the 
temperature- rise test. 

b) Test for measurement of heating up 
time, measurement of sole plate tempera- 
ture, measurement of temperature distri- 
bution, measurement of initial overswing 
temperature and heating up excess 
temperature, measurement of cyclic 
fluctuation of temperature of the hottest 
point and temperature drop under load 
are made before the endurance test. 



SP 48 : 1991 



4.3 The tests are carried out with the 
appliance, or any movable part of it, placed in 
the most unfavourable position which may 
occur in normal use. 

4.4 If the test results are influenced by the 
temperature of the ambient air, the room 
temperature, in general, is maintained at 
27 ± 5°C. If, however, the temperature attained 
by any part is limited by a temperature sensi- 
tive device, or is influenced by the tempera- 
ture at which a change of state occurs, for 
example, the temperature of boiling water, the 
room temperature, in case of doubt, is main- 
tained at 27 ± 2°C and a relative humidity of 
65 ± 5 percent. 

4.5 Appliances for ac only are tested with ac, 
at rated frequency, if marked. Those for dc only 
are tested with dc and those for ac/dc are 
tested at the more unfavourable supply. 

Appliances for ac which are not marked with 
rated frequency are tested at SO Hz. 

Appliances marked with a rated frequency 
range shall be tested at the most unfavourable 
frequency within the range. 

Appliances designed for more than one rated 
voltage shall be tested at the most unfavoura- 
ble voltage. 

4.6 Unless otherwise specified, appliances 
designed for one or more rated voltage ranges 
are tested at the most unfavourable voltage 
within the relevant range(s). 

NOTE — Where reference is made to maximum or 
minimum rated input, the rated input related to the 
upper limit or lower limit respectively of the 
rated voltage range is meant. 

4.7 Appliances provided with a thermostat, 
a regulating device or a similar control, are 
tested with these controls adjusted to their 
most unfavourable setting, if the setting can be 
altered by the user. 

NOTE — If the adjusting means of the control is 
accessible without the aid of a tool, the provisions 
apply whether the setting can be altered by hand or 
with the aid of a tool; if the adjusting means is not 
accessible without the aid of a tool, the provisions 
apply only if the setting can be altered by hand. 

Adequate sealing is regarded as preventing 
alteration of the setting by the user. 

4.8 Unless otherwise specified, appliances 
intended to be supplied by means of a flexible 
cable or cord are tested with the appropriate 
flexible cable or cord connected to the appli- 
ance. In case plug -ts-not provided with the 
flexible cable or cord, plug of appropriate 
rating shall be fitted for the purpose of 
conducting the tests. 

4.9 When, for heating appliances, it is specified 
that the appliance has to be supplied at a 
voltage such that the input is greater than the 
rated input, this voltage applies only to heating 



elements without appreciable positive tempera- 
ture coefficient of resistance. This voltage is 
determined as follows: 

'First, the rated voltage is supplied until 
the heating element reaches its operating 
temperature. The supply voltage is then 
rapidly increased to the value necessary to 
give the input required for the relevant test 
and the test is made as specified, the value 
of the supply voltage being maintained 
throughout the test.' 

NOTE — In general, the temperature coefficient is 
considered to be appreciable if, at rated voltage the 
input of the appliance in cold condition differs by 
more than 25 percent from the input at operating 
temperature. 

4.10 Measuring Instruments 

The measurement of voltage, current and 
power shall be carried out with such instru- 
ments which do not themselves appreciably 
effect the values to be measured. The meters 
employed shall be of accuracy Class I or better 
according to relevant parts of IS 1248 series. 

4.11 The following are the conditions under 
which the appliance is operated: 

a) Iron with a thermostat is operated with 
the thermostat at the highest setting; 
other irons are operated so that the 
temperature at the centre of the sole 
plate is maintained at 250 ± 10°C by 
switching on and off; 

b) Irons are operated on their stand; which 
may be attached or incorporated in the 
stand. 

5 RATING 

5.1 The rated voltage shall not exceed 250 V. 
The preferred value shall be 240 V. 

5.2 The rating in watts should preferably be 
chosen from the following: 

450 W, 600 W, 750 W, 1 000 W. 

6 CLASSIFICATION 

6.1 The electric irons are classified according 
to: 

a) protection against electric shock— Class I 
appliances, and 

b) degree of protection against moisture — 
ordinary appliances. 

NOTE — The class numbers are not intended to 
reflect the safety level of the appliances, but only the 
means by which the safety is obtained. 

7 MARKING 

7.1 Electric irons shall be marked with the 
following information: 

a) Indication of the source of manufacture; 



SP 48:1991 



b) Rated voltage in volts; 

c) Rated input in watts; and 

d) Country of manufacture. 

7.2 When symbols are used, they shall be as 
follows:' 



V 


volts 


A 


amperes 


Hz 


hertz 


W 


watts 


#N* 


alternating current 


kg 


kilograms 



The symbol for nature of supply shall be placed 
next to the marking for rated voltage. 

7.3 Terminals intended exclusively for the 
neutral conductor shall be indicated by the 
letter «N\ 

Earthing terminals shall be indicated by the 
symbol l 

These indications shall not be placed on screws, 
removable washers or other parts which might 
be removed when conductors are being 
connected. 

7.4 The different positions of regulating devices 
and the different positions of switches on 
stationary appliances shall be indicated by 
figures, letters or other visual means. 

If figures are used for indicating the different 
positions, the 'off* position shall be indicated 
by the figure '0* and the position for a greater 
output, input, speed, cooling effect, etc, shall be 
indicated by a higher figure. 

The figure 4 0' shall not be used for any other 
indication. 

7.5 Thermostats, regulating devices and the 
like, intended to be adjusted during installation 
or in normal use, shall be provided with an 
indication for the direction of adjustment to 
increase or to decrease the value of the 
characteristic being adjusted. 

NOTE — An indication of + and - is considered to 
be sufficient. 

7.6 For electric iron marked with more than 
one rated voltage or voltage range, the rated 
input for each of these voltages or range shall 
be marked. 

The upper and lower limits of the rated input 
shall be marked on the electric iron so that the 
relation between input and voltage appears 
distinctly unless the difference between the 
limits of a rated voltage range does not exceed 
10 percent of the mean value of the range in 
which case the marking for rated input may be 
related to the mean value of the range. 



7.7 An instruction sheet giving the following 
instructions shall be provided with each electric 
iron: 

a) Precautions to be taken for the proper 
use of electric iron; and 

b) In case an insulation sleeve is provided 
over the insulation of the supply cord, 
instructions to the effect that while re- 
placing the supply cord, an insulation 
sleeve made of fibre glass or equivalent 
material should be used over the cable 
insulation. 

7.8 Marking required by this standard shall be 
legible and durable. 

Marking specified in 7.1 to 7.3 shall be on a 
main part of the electric iron. 

Marking on, and indications for switches 
thermostats, thermal cut-outs and other control 
devices shall be placed jn the vicinity of these 
components; they shall not be placed on 
removable parts if these parts can be replaced 
in such a way that the marking is misleading. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by 
rubbing the marking by hand for IS seconds 
with a piece of cloth soaked with water and 
again for IS seconds with a piece of cloth 
soaked with petroleum spirit. 

After all the tests of this standard, the marking 
shall be easily legible, it shall not be easily 
possible to remove marking plates and they 
shall show no curling. 

In considering the durability of the marking, 
the effect of normal use is taken into account. 
Thus, for example, marking by means of paint 
or enamel other than vitreous enamel on con- 
tainers that are likely to be cleaned frequently 
is not considered to be durable. 

8 PROTECTION AGAINST ELECTRIC 
SHOCK 

8.1 Electric iron shall be so constructed and 
enclosed that there is adequate protection 
against accidental contact with live parts. 

The insulating properties of lacquer, enamel r 
ordinary paper, cotton, oxide film on metal 
parts, beads and sealing compound shall not be 
relied upon to give the required protection 
against accidental contact with live parts. 

The enclosure of electric iron shall have no 
openings other than those necessary for the use 
and working of the appliance, giving access to 
live parts. 

NOTE — If a manufacturer instructs the user to re- 
move a part during normal operation or user main- 
tenance, that part is regarded as a detachable par 
even if a tool has to be used for its removal. 



SP 48:19*1 

Compliance is checked by inspection and tefct 
with the standard test finger shown in Fig. 1. 

8.2 In addition, apertures in Class I appliances, 
other than those in metal parts connected to 
an earthing terminal or earthing contact are 
tested with the test pin shown in Fig. 2. The 
test finger and the test pin are applied, without 
appreciable force, in every possible position. 

8.2.1 For electric iron provided with movable 
devices, such as those intended for varying the 
heat distribution the test is made with the 
devices adjusted to their most unfavourable 
position within tfteir range of adjustment. 

Apertures preventing the entry of the finger are 
further tested by means of a straight jointless 
test finger of the same dimensions, which is 
applied with a force of 20 N; if this finger 
enters, the test with the finger shown in Fig. 1 
is repeated, the finger being introduced through 
the aperture. If the unjointed test finger does 
not enter, the force applied is increased to 
30 N. If then the guard is so displaced or the 
aperture so distorted that the test finger shown 
in Fig. 1 can be inserted without force, the test 
with the latter finger is repeated. An electrical 
contact indicator is used to show contact. 

It shall not be possible to touch bare live parts 
or live parts protected by lacquer, enamel, 
ordinary paper, cotton, oxide film, beads or 
sealing Compound only, with the test finger. In 
addition, it shall not be possible to touch bare 
live parts with the test pin when testing aper- 
tures as indicated above. 

NOTES 

1 The standard test finger must be so designed that 
each of the jointed sections can be turned through an 
angle of 90° with respect to the axis of the finger in 
the same direction only. 

2 It is recommended that a lamp be used for the 
indication of contact with live parts and the voltage 
rating of the lamp shall be in the range of 40 to 75 
volts. 



8.2.2 Electric iron* handles and knobs which 
are held or actuated in normal use shall 
not become live in the event of an insulation 
fault. If these handles, levers or knobs are of 
metal and if their shaft or fixings are likely to 
become live in the event of an insulation fault, 
they shall either be adequately covered by 
insulating material or their accessible parts 
shall be separated from their shafts or fixings 
by supplementary insulation. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 

8.2.2.1 Handles, which in normal use, are 
continuously held in the hand shall be so 
constructed that when gripped as in normal 
use, contact between the operator's hand and 
metal parts which may become live in the 
event of an insulation fault is unlikely. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 

9 INPUT 

9.1 The input of the electric iron at rated 
voltage and at normal operating temperature 
shall not deviate from the rated input by more 
than ± 10 percent. 

Compliance is checked by measuring the input 
of the electric iron, operated at rated voltage 
and in accordance with conditions of 
adequate heat discharge. 

NOTE — For electric iron marked with a rated 
voltage range having limits differing by more than 
10 percent of the mean value of the range, the 
permissible deviations appiy for both limits of the 
range. 

10 TEMPERATURE-RISE 

10.1 Electric iron and their surroundings shall 
not attain excessive temperatures in normal 
use. 

Compliance is checked by determining the 
temperature rise of the various parts under the 
conditions specified in 10.2 to 10.5. 



10^ 

l 



25. -2* 



-20- 



r4-C8 s # 



* .6 



M** 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 2 Test Pin 



8 



SP 48: 1991 



10.2 Electric iron is placed in a test corner and 
operated for 30 minutes. The test corner con- 
sists of two walls at right angles, a floor and, 
if necessary, a ceiling, all of dull-black painted 
plywood having a thickness of 20 mm. The 
appliance is positioned in the test corner as 
follows: 

Electric iron is placed on the floor of the test 
corner at a distance of about IS cm from the 
walls of the test corner. 

NOTE — This distance includes the natural projec- 
tions such as bolts, appliance inlets, etc, of the 
electric iron. 

10.3 Temperature-rises are determined by 
means of the fine wire thermocouples so 
chosen and positioned that they have the 
minimum effect on the temperature of the part 
under test. 

Thermocouples used for determining the 
temperature-rise of the surface of walls, ceiling 
and floor are embedded in the surface or 
attached to the back of small blackened disks 
of copper or brass, IS mm in diameter and 
1 mm thick, which are flush with the surface. 

So far as is possible, the appliance is positioned 
so that parts likely to attain the highest 
temperatures touch the disks. 

10.3.1 In determining the temperature-rises of 
handles, knobs, grips and the like, considera- 
tion is given to all parts which are gripped in 
normal use and if of insulating material, to 
parts in contact with hot metal. 

10.3.2 The temperature-rise of the internal 
wiring is taken over the insulation or the insula- 
tion sleeve (of fibre glass or equivalent material) 
where the same has been provided over the 
insulation of the supply cord. 

10.4 Electric iron is operated for a period of 
30 minutes, in accordance with conditions of 
adequate heat discharge, with all heating ele- 
ments in circuit, the supply voltage being such 
that the input is 1*15 times the maximum rated 
input. 

10.5 During the test, thermal cut-outs shall not 
operate, the temperature-rises shall not exceed 
the values shown in Table 1 and sealing com- 
pound, if any, shall not flow out. 

Table 1 Temperature-Rise 

Rubber insulation of internal and external 35°C 

wiring including power supply cords: 

Handles, grips and the like which, in normal 35°C 

use, are continuously held 
( moulded material ) 

Pins of appliance inlets: 

for hot conditions 115 

for cold conditions 25 

Knobs, grips and the like which, in normal 45°C 

use, are held for short periods only 
(moulded material ) 



11 OPERATION UNDER OVERLOAD 
CONDITIONS 

11.1 Electric iron shall be so designed and 
constructed that they withstand overloads 
liable to occur in normal use. 

In particular, heating wires, internal wiring 
and the general assembly shall not show such 
deformation that creepage distances and 
clearances are reduced below the values 
specified. Contacts and connections shall not 
have worked loose. 

Electric iron is placed on a horizontal support, 
away from walls. 

11.2 The electric iron is subjected to 15 cycles, 
each cycle comprising an operating period 
until steady conditions are established in 
accordance with conditions of adequate heat 
discharge, and a cooling period sufficient to 
allow the appliance to cool down to approxi- 
mately room temperature. 

Throughout the operating period, the supply 
voltage being such that the input is: 

1-27 times the rated input or 1*21 times the 
rated input plus 12 W, whichever is greater. 

If a self-resetting thermal cut-out or a non-self- 
resetting thermal cut-out which is accessible 
and can be reset without the aid of a tool, *the 
operating period is considered to be ended. 
The appliance is then allowed to cool down 
and the cut-out is reset for the next cycle. 

During the test, non-self-resetting thermal cut- 
outs which are only accessible with the aid of 
a tool or which require the replacement of a 
part shall not operate and no vapour or ignit- 
able gas shall accumulate in the appliance. 

NOTE — Forced cooling may be used for the pur- 
pose of shortening the cooling period. 

12 ELECTRICAL INSULATION AND 
LEAKAGE CURRENT AT OPERATING 
TEMPERATURE 

12.1 The electrical insulation of the appliance 
at operating temperature shall be adequate 
and the leakage current in normal use shall not 
be excessive. 

12.2 Compliance is checked by the leakage 
current test and high-voltage test. The electric 
iron is operated under the condition of 
adequate heat discharge under normal load 
until a steady condition is established. 

The electric iron is operated at the supply 
voltage being such that the input is 1*15 times 
the maximum rated input. The tests are made 
while the appliance is connected to the supply. 



SP 48:1991 



12.3 Leakagt Cirreot Test 

The leakage current is measured between any 
pole of the supply, and accessible metal parts. 
The measuring circuits shall be as per Fig. 3. 

The resistance of the measuring circuit is 
2 000 ± 100 Q. 

The test is made with ac, unless the appliance 
is for dc only, in which case the test is made 
with dc. 

The leakage current which may flow from the 
live parts to the accessible metal parts shall not 
exceed 300 M A ( peak ), that is, 210 M A ( rms ). 

NOTE — Appliance shall be well insulated from 
earth during leakage current measurements. Earthing 
connections shall not be made during the leakage 
current test. 

12.4 High Voltage Test 

12.4.1 The insulation is subjected for one minute 



to a voltage of substantially sine-wave form, 
•having a frequency of 50 Hz or 60 Hz. The 
connections are as shown in Fig. 4. The test 
voltage is applied between live parts and the 
body. 

12.4.2 The value of the test voltage is: 

500 V for basic insulation subjected in 
normal use to a safety extra-low voltage; 

1 000 V for other basic insulation; 

2 750 V for supplementary insulation; and 

3 750 V for reinforced insulation. 

12.4.3 Initially, not more than half the prescrib- 
ed voltage is applied, then it is raised rapidly 
to the full value. 

No flashover or breakdown shall occur during 
the test. Glow discharges without drop in vol- 
tage are neglected. 

The high voltage transformer used for the test 
has a rating of at least 500 VA. 




Fig. 3 Diagram for Leakage Current Measurement at Operating Tempbrature for 
Three-Phase Connection ( Other Than Class II ) 



HIGH- VOLTAGE TRANSFORMER 





ISOLATING TRANSFORMERS*! 



m 



THREE-PHASE 
SUPPLY 



{ 



Fig. 4 Diagram for Electric Strength Test at Operating Tbmperature 



10 



SP 48:1991 



12.4.4 If the secondary winding of the isolating 
transformer is not provided with . a tap at the 
mid-point, the output winding of the high- 
voltage .transformer can* be connected to tne 
mid-point of a potentiometer having a total 
resistance not exceeding 2 000 Q, and connected 
across the output winding of the isolating 
transformer. 

12.4.5 When applied as a routine test, the high 
voltage test may also be carried out as a flash 
test. The appliance may not be connected to 
the supply and an ac voltage one and a half 
times shall be applied for a period of 5 seconds 
( see 12.4.2 )• 

12.4.6 In case electric irons are taken from 
shelf and subjected to leakage current and high 
voltage test in isolation, the tests shall be con- 
ducted after 10 minutes of preheating. 

13 MOISTURE RESISTANCE 

13.1 Appliances shall be proof against humid 
conditions which may occur in normal use. 

Compliance is checked by the humidity treat- 
ment followed immediately by the high voltage 
test and leakage current test. 

The humidity treatment is carried out in a 
humidity cabinet containing air with a relative 
humidity of not less than 95 percent. The 
temperature of the air at all places where sam- 
ples can be located, is maintained at any con- 
venient value between 15°C and 35°C. 

Before the electric iron is placed inside the 
humidity cabinet the sample is brought to a 
temperature between 15°C and 35°C. The sample 
is then kept in the cabinet for 48 hours for 
ordinary appliances. 

In most cases, the sample may be brought to 
the specified temperature by keeping it at this 
temperature for at least 4 hours before the 
humidity treatment. A relative humidity of 
approximately 95 percent can be obtained by 
placing in the humidity cabinet a saturated 
solution of sodium sulphate (Na,S0 4 ) or 
potassium nitrate (KNOs), in water, having 
a sufficiently large contact surface with the air. 

In order to achieve the specified conditions 
within the cabinet, it is necessary to ensure 
constant circulation of the air within and, in 
general, to use a cabinet which is thermally 
insulated. 

13.2 After this treatment, the electric iron shall 
show no damage and also withstand high voltage 
test and leakage current. 

The test is made on the cold .electric iron not 
connected to the supply after the humidity 
treatment in the humidity cabinet or in the 
room in which one sample is brought to the 
prescribed temperature. A test voltage is then 



applied, which is 1*06 times the rated voltage, 
or the upper limit of the rated voltage range. 

13.3 The leakage current measured after the 
application of the test voltage shall not exceed 
600 pA ( peak ), that is, 420 pA ( rms ). In 
general, electric iron may be operated up to 
10, minutes before leakage current test 
measurement. 

13.4 Immediately after the leakage current test, 
the insulation is subjected for one minute to a 
voltage of substantially sine-wave form having 
frequency of 50 Hz to 60 Hz. The value of test 
voltages are given below: 



SI 
No. 


Points of Application of 
Test Voltage 


Test 
Voltage, V 


1 


Between live parts and parts of 
the body that are separated 
from live part by: 






basic insulation only 


1000 




reinforced insulation 


3 750 


2 


Between live parts of different 
polarity 


1000 



3 For parts with double insula- 
tion, between metal parts sepa* 
rated from live parts by basic 
insulation only and 

live parts 1 000 

the body 2 500 

4 Between metal enclosures or 1 000 
covers lined with insulation 
material and metal foil in con- 
tact with the inner surface of 

the lining, if the distance 
between live parts and these 
metal enclosures or covers, 
measured through the lining, is 
less than the appropriate clea- 
rance as specified in clause 24 

5 Between metal foil in contact 2 500 
with handles, knobs, grips and 

the like and their shafts, if 
these shafts can become live in 
the event of an insulation fault 

6 Between the body and either 1 000 
the power supply cord wrapped 

with metal foil or a metal rod 
of the same diameter as the . 
power supply cord, inserted in 
its place, luted in inlet bushings 
of insulating material, cord 
guards, cord anchorages and the 
like 

Initially, not more than half the prescribed 
voltage is applied, then it is raised rapidly to 
the full value. 

No flashover or breakdown shall occur during 
the test. 



11 



SP48rl9H 



14 ENDURANCE 

14.1 Electric iron shall be so constructed that, 
in normal use, there will be no electrical or 
mechanical failure that might impair compli- 
ance with this standard. The insulation shall 
not be damaged and contacts and connections 
shall not work loose as a result of heating, 
vibration, etc. 

14.2 The electric iron shall be supported on its 
stand and shall be operated at l a IS times the 
maximum rated input. In case of automatic 
irons , the thermostat shall be at the maximum 
setting. For irons without thermostat, or self- 
resetting thermal cut-outs, the temperature of 
the sole plate shall be maintained between 
205°C and 260°C by suitable cooling means such 
as a jet of air or a cooling plate. The iron is 
operated for 200 hours under these conditions. 

After this test the electric iron shall withstand 
high voltage test as given in 12.4. 

15 ABNORMAL OPERATION 

15.1 Electric iron shall be so designed that the 
risk of fire, mechanical damage impairing safety 
or protection against electric shock as a result 
of abnormal or careless operation is obviated as 
far as possible. 

15.2 Non-thermostatic iron is checked by the 
test specified below in (a) and if necessary by the 
test specified in (b) without adequate heat dis- 
charge. The electric iron shall be placed on the 
floor of the tfest corner, supported on its stand. 

a) Electric irons are tested until steady 
conditions are established at a supply 
voltage such that the input is 0-85 times 
the rated input. 

If a non-self-resctting thermal cut-out 
operates, or if the current is otherwise 
interrupted before steady conditions are 
established, the operating period is consi- 
dered to be ended and the test specified 
in (b) is not made. 

If interruption of the current does not 
occur, the appliance is switched off as 
soon as steady conditions are established, 
and is allowed to cool down to approxi- 
mately room temperature. The appliance 
is then subjected to the test specified 
below in (b). 

b) The test of (a) is repeated, but with a 
supply voltage such that the input is 1*24 
times the rated input. 

NOTE — In case of doubt, a test is made with the 
most unfavourable supply voltage between the limits 
specified in (a) and (b). 



15.3 The thermostatic electric iron is operated 
at such a voltage that the input is equal to 1*24 
times the maximum rated input. The iron is 
operated under conditions of adequate heat 
discharge but with the thermostat short circui- 
ted. In case more than one temperature control 
is provided, these shall be short circuited in 
turn. 

15.4 If, in any of the tests, a non-self-resetting 
thermal cut-out operates, a heating element 
ruptures or if the current is otherwise interrupt- 
ed before steady conditions are established, 
the heating period is considered to be ended, 
but if the interruption is due to the rupture of 
heating element or of an intentionally weak 
part, the relevant test is repeated on a second 
sample which shall then also comply with the 
conditions specified in 15.5 and 15.6. 

NOTES 

1 Rupture of a heating element or of an intention- 
ally weak part in the second sample will not in itself 
entail a rejection. 

2 Fuses, thermal cut-outs, overcurrent releases or 
the like, incorporated into the appliance, may be used 
to provide the necessary protection. 

15.5 During the tests of 15.2 and 15.3 the appli- 
ance shall not emit flames or molten metal, or 
poisonous or ignitable gas in hazardous 
amounts, enclosures shall not deform to such 
an extent as will impair compliance with this 
standard and temperature-rises shall not exceed 
the values shown in the following table. 



Parts 

Walls, ceiling and floor of the 
test corner 

Insulation of the supply cable 
or cord 



Temperature- 
Rise °C 

150 



150 



15.6 After the tests, the insulation of appliances 
other than those of Class III, when cooled down 
to approximately room temperature, shall with- 
stand an electric strength test, the test voltage 
being: 

1 000 V for basic insulation, 

2 750 V for supplementary insulation, and 

3 750 V for reinforced insulation. 

16 STABILITY AND MECHANICAL 
HAZARDS 

16.1 The electric iron shall be stable. Compli- 
ance is checked by the following tefst: 

The electric iron with the stand which is 
attached or incorporated shall be placed on 
its stand on a plane inclined at an angle of 
10° to the horizontal, the cable or cord 
resting in the most . unfavourable position. 



12 



If the iron overturns in one or more posi- 
tions, it is subjected to the temperature test 
in the overturned positions. 

An iron supplied with a separate stand shall 
be placed on its stand on a plane inclined 
at ah angle of 15' to the horizontal. Light 
blows are applied to the stand to overcome 
static friction between iron and stand. If the 
iron overturns or slips off the stand in one 
or more position, it is subjected to the test of 
temperature-rise in all the positions the iron 
will take up after overturning or slipping off 
the stand. 

During the test, the temperature-rise shall 
not exceed the values shown in Table 1. 

17 MECHANICAL STRENGTH 

17.1 Electric iron shall have adequate mechani- 
cal strength and be so constructed as to with- 
stand such rough handling as may be expected 
in normal use. 

Compliance is checked by applying blows to the 
sample, by means of the spring-operated 
impact-test apparatus shown in Fig. 5. 

The apparatus consists of three main parts, 
the body, the striking element and the spring- 
loaded release cone. 

The body comprises of the housing, the striking 
element guide, the release mechanism and all 
parts rigidly fixed thereto. The mass of ihis 
assembly is 1 250 g. 

The striking element comprises the hammer 
head, the hammer shaft and the cocking knob. 
The mass of this assembly is 250 g. 

The hammer head has a hemispherical face of 
polyamide having a Rockwell hardness of 
HR 100, with a radius of 10 mm; it is fixed to 
the hammer shaft in such a way that the dis- 
tance from its tip to the plane of the front of 
the cone, when the striking element is on the 
point of release, is 20 mm. 

The cone has a mass of 60 g and the cone 
spring is such that it exerts a force of 20 N 



-RELEASE CONE 



•RELEASE BAR 



V 



CONE SPRING 



SP 48: 1991 

when the release jaws are on the point of 
releasing the striking element. 

The hammer spring is adjusted so that the pro- 
duct of the compression, in millimetres, and the 
force exerted, in newtons, equals 1 000, the 
compression being approximately 20 mm. With 
this adjustment, the impact energy is 0*5 + 
0-05 Nm. 

The release mechanism springs are adjusted so 
that they exert just sufficient pressure to keep 
the release jaws in the engaged position. 

The apparatus is cocked by putting the cocking 
knob until the release jaws engage with the 
groove in the hammer shaft. 

The blows are applied by pushing the release 
cone against the sample in a direction perpendi- 
cular to the surface at the point to be tested. 

The pressure is slowly increased so that the 
cone moves back until it is in contact with the 
release bars, which then move to operate the 
release mechanism and allow the hummer to 
strike. 

The sample as a whole is rigidly supported and 
three blows are applied to every point of the 
enclosure, that is, likely to be weak. 

To ensure that the sample is rigidly supported, 
it may be necessary to place it against a solid 
wall of brick, concrete or the like, covered by 
a sheet of a polyamide which is tightly fixed to 
the wall, care being taken that there is no 
appreciable air gap between the sheet and the 
wall. The sheet must have a Rockwell hardness 
of HR 100, a thickness of at least 8 mm and a 
surface area such that no part of the sample is 
mechanically overstressed due to insufficient 
supporting area. 

If necessary, the blows are also applied to hand- 
les, knobs and the like, and to signal lamps and 
their covers, but only if the lamps or covers pro- 
trude from the enclosure by more than 10 mm or 
if their surface area exceeds 4 cm 1 . Lamps within 
the appliance, and their covers, are tested only 
if they are likely to be damaged in normal use. 

-RELEASE MECHANISM 
SPRING 



' * . » ■ I I , I 1 . ■ ' ■ ' 



V'ii'tiii. 






RELEASE JAW 



++*JU+im' t III III I IIIHHIt 



,r,gF " TF pj r [|prtf rr rf r r f i r y r E 



-HAMMER HEAD 





HAMMER SPRING / 

^ HAMMER SHAFT 

Fig. 5 Impact Test Apparatus 



COCKING KNOB 



13 



SP 48: 1991 



After the test the sample shall show no damage, 
in particular live parts shall not have become 
exposed so as to impair compliance with 
protection against electric shock, moisture resis- 
tance or creepage distances and clearances. In 
case of doubt, supplementary or reinforced 
insulation is subjected to high voltage test as 
given in 12.4. 

Damage to the finish, small dents that do not 
reduce creepage distances and clearances below 
the values specified, and small chips which do 
not adversely affect the protection against 
electrical shock or moisture are neglected. 

Cracks not visible to the naked eye and surface 
cracks in mouldings and the like are ignored. 

If a decorative cover is backed by an inner cover, 
fracture of the decorative cover is neglected if 
the inner cover withstands the test after 
removal of the decorative cover. 

17.2 The test may be carried out by alternative 
method specified below. 

17.2.1 The appliance is held against a solid wall 
of bricks, concrete or the like, and the test 
apparatus is so arranged that the pivot of the 
pendulum is vertically above the point of impact 
of the hammer. The striking element is then 
allowed to fall from such a height of 250 mm. 
There blows are applied to every part of the 
enclosure which is likely to be weak, including 
handles, levers and the like, but excluding 



signal lamps and their covers if these do not 
protrude from the enclosure by more than 
3 mm or have a surface not exceeding 3 cm*. 
Lamps within an appliance and their covers are 
tested only if they arc likely to be damaged in 
normal use. 

The sample as a whole is rigidly supported and 
three blows are applied to every point of the 
enclosure, that is, likely to be weak. 

17.2.1.1 A typical impact apparatus is shown in 
Fig. 6. 

17.2.1.2 The str iking element has a hemispherical 
face of radius 10 mm made of hardwood, polya- 
mide or similar material weighing 0*15 kg. It is 
rigidly fixed to the lower end of a steel tube 
with an external diameter of 9 mm and thick- 
ness 0-5 mm which is pivoted at its upper end 
in such a way that it swings only in the vertical 
plane of the axis of the striking element. The 
axis of the piovt is 1 m above the axis of the 
striking element. The design of the apparatus is 
such that a force between 1-0 N and 2'0 N has 
to be applied to the face of the hammer to 
maintain the pendulum in a horizontal position. 

17.3 In addition to the test specified in 17.1 
or 17.2 the compliance is checked by the 
following test: 

The sample is suspended by its handle, with 
the sole plate in the horizontal position, on 



RIGID r p 'V0T 

SUPPORT -7 | / 




ADJUSTABLE 
CATCH 



HEIGHT 
OF FALL 



POINT OF CONTACT 
APPLIANCE 

ZZ3 



-rigjd support 
Fig. 6 Apparatus for Impact Test 



14 



SP 48:1991 



a machine by which it is dropped 1 000 
times, at a rate not exceeding 20 falls per 
minute, from a height of 40 mm on to a 
rigidly supported steel plate having a thick- 
ness of at least IS mm and a mass of at least 
15kg(weFig.7). 

The machine is so designed that the iron 
rests on the steel plate for approximately 
IS percent of the duration of the test, and 
the sample is so mounted that there is no 
additional weight which would influence the 
impact energy. 

During the test, the iron is operated so that 
he sole plate temperature is maintained as 
specified for conditions of adequate heat 
discharge. 

After the test, a thermostatic iron shall not 
change its calibration by more than +10°C or 
— 20 P C. There shall be no exposure of live 
parts caused by breakage or distortion of the 
enclosure. 

18 CONSTRUCTION 

18.1 Electric iron shall be of the appropriate 
class with respect to protection against electric 
shock. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by 
the tests of protection against electric shock. 

18.2 Electric iron shall have the appropriate 
degree of protection against moisture. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by 
the tests of moisture resistance. 

18.3 Electric iron which can be adjusted to suit 
different voltages shall be so constructed that 



accidental changing of the setting is unlikely to 
occur. 

18.4 Electric iron shall be so constructed that; 
accidental changing of the setting of thermo- 
stats or other control devices is unlikely to occur 
if this might result in a hazard. 



Compliance with the requirements 
and 18.4 is checked by manual test. 



of 18.3 



18.5 It shall not be possible to remove parts 
which ensure the required degree of protection 
against moisture without the aid of a tool. 

Compliance is checked by manual test. 

18.6 Handles, knobs and grips shall be fixed 
in a reliable manner so that they will not work 
loose in normal use if loosening might result in 
a hazard. 

If handles and knobs are used to indicate the 
position of switches or similar components, it 
shall not be possible to fix them in a wrong 
position if this might result in a hazard. 

Compliance is checked by inspection, by 
manual test and by trying to remove the handle, 
knob, grip or lever by applying an axial force 
for 1 minute. 

18.7 Components which may require replace- 
ment, such as thermostat and knobs, shall be 
suitably fixed. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and, if 
necessary, by manual test. 

18.8 Materials which burn fiercely, such a 
celluloid, shall not be used in the construction 
of electric iron. 



ROLLER 




STEEL PLATE 

Fig. 7 Apparatus for Drop Tbst 



15 



SP 48 : 1991 



18.9 Wood, cotton, silk, ordinary paper, ther- 
mocole, wool and similar fibrous or hygroscopic 
material shall not be used as insulation, unless 
impregnated and dried. 

Asbestos is considered to be fibrous material 
within the meaning of this standard. 

Insulating material is considered to be impreg- 
nated if the interstices between the fibres of 
the material are substantially filled with a 
suitable insulant. 

18.10 Reinforced insulation shall only be used 
when it is manifestly impracticable to provide 
separate basic insulation. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 

Appliance inlets and switches are examples 
where reinforced insulation may be used. 

18.11 Sleeving may, however, be used as 
supplementary insulation on internal wiring if 
it is retained in position by positive means. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by 
manual test. 

Routine servicing includes replacement of 
power supply cords, switches and the like. 

Lining metal enclosures with a coating of* 

lacquer, or with other material in the form 

of a coating which can be easily removed by 

scraping, is not considered to meet this 
requirement. 

A sleeve is considered to be fixed by positive 
means if it can only be removed by breaking 
or cutting, or if it is clamped at both ends. 

18.12 Inside the electric iron, the sheath 
( jacket ) of a flexible cable or cord shall only 
be used as supplementary insulation where it 
is not subject to undue mechanical or thermal 
stresses and if its insulating properties are not 
less than those specified in IS 9968 ( Part 1 ) : 
1981 for the sheaths of flexible cables and cords. 

18.13 Handles shall be so constructed that, 
when gripped as in normal use, contact 
between the operator's hand and parts having a 
temperature-rise exceeding the value allowed 
for handles which, in normal use, are held for 
short periods only, is unlikely. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and if 
necessary, by determining the temperature-rise. 

18.14 Current-carrying parts and other metal 
parts, the corrosion of which might result in a 
hazard, shall be resistant to corrosion under 
normal conditions of use. 

Compliance is checked by verifying that after 
the abnormal test, the relevant parts show no 
sign of corrosion. 



Attention must be paid to the compatibility 
of the materials of terminals and terminations 
and to the effect of heating. 

Stainless steel and similar corrosion-resistant 
alloys and plated steel are considered to be 
satisfactory for the purpose of this requirement. 

18.15 Electric irons shall be either provided 
with a stand which is attached or incorporated 
or be delivered with a separate stand. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 

18.16 Electric irons shall be provided with a 
thermostat or thermal cut-out in case the sole 
plate temperature exceeds 260°C. 

19 INTERNAL WIRING 

19.1 Wireways shall be smooth and free from 
sharp edges. 

19.1.1 Wires shall be protected so that they do 
not come into contact with burrs; cooling fins, 
etc, which may cause damage to their 
insulation. 

19.1.2 Holes in metal through which insulated 
wires pass shall have smooth well-rounded 
surfaces or be provided with bushings. 

19.1.3 Wiring shall be effectively prevented 
from coming into contact with moving parts. 

19.1.4 Internal wiring and electrical connec- 
tions between different parts of the appliance 
shall de adequately protected or enclosed. 

19.1.5 Compliance with the requirements are 
checked by inspection. 

19.2 Beads and similar ceramic insulators on 
live wires shall be so fixed or supported that 
they do not appreciably change their position; 
they shall not rest on sharp edges or sharp cor- 
ners. If beads are inside flexible metal conduits, 
they shall be contained within an insulating 
sleeve, unless the conduit cannot move in 
normal use. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by 
manual test. 

19.3 Internal wiring and heating conductors 
shall be either so rigid and so fixed or so 
insulated that, in normal use, creepage dis- 
tances and clearances cannot be reduced below 
the specified value. 

The insulation, if any, shall be such that it 
cannot be damaged in normal use. 

Compliance is checked by inspection, and by 
manual test. 

19.4 Conductors identified by the green colour 
shall not be connected to terminals other than 
earthing terminals. 



16 



SP 48: 1991 



20 COMPONENTS 

20.1 Electric irons shall not be fitted with: 

a) switches in flexible cables or cords; 

b) devices which, in the event of a fault in 
the appliance, cause the interruption of 

.the supply by applying a short circuit; 
and 

c) thermal cut-outs which can be reset by 
a soldering operation. 

Compliance with the above requirements is 
checked by inspection. 

20.2 The following component parts that are 
generally used in appliances are covered by 
Indian Standards given against them: 

Component Applicable Indian Standard 

a) Cable and IS 9968 ( Part 1 ) : 1988 
cords Elastomer insulated 

cables : Part 1 For work- 
ing voltages up to and 
including 1 100 V (first 
revision ) 

b) Switches IS 3854 : 1988 Specifica- 

tion for switches for 
domestic and similar 
purposes {first revision ) 

c) Appliance- IS 3010 ( Part 1 ) : 1965 
connectors Specification for app- 
liance-connectors and 
appliance-inlets ( non- 
reversible three-pin 
type ): Part 1 Appliance- 
connectors 

d) Appliance- IS 3010 ( Part 2 ) : 1965 
inlets Specification for applia- 
nce connectors and 
appliance-inlets ( non- 
reversible three-pin 
type ) : Part 2 Applia- 
nce-inlets 

e) Three-pin IS 1293 : 1988 Specifica- 
plugs and tion for plugs and soc- 
socket-out- ket-outlets of rated vol- 
lets tage up to and including 

250 V and rated current 
up to and including 16 A 
( second revision ) 

f) Resistance IS 3725 : 1966 Specifica- 

wires, tapes tion for resistance 

and strips wires, tapes and strips 

for heating for heating elements 
elements 

21 SUPPLY CONNECTIONS AND 
EXTERNAL FLEXIBLE CABLES AND 
CORDS 

21.1 The electric iron shall be. provided with 
either an appliance inlet or supply cord which 
shall be not less than 2 m long. It shall not 



be provided with more than one means of 
supply. 

21.2 Appliance inlet shall: 

a) be so located or enclosed that live parts 
are not accessible during insertion or 
removal of the connector; 

b) be so placed that the connector can be 
inserted without difficulty; and 

c) be so placed that, after insertion of the 
connector, the appliance is not support- 
ed by the connector for any position of 
normal use on a flat surface. 

Power supply cords shall be assembled by Type 
X, Y or M attachment. 

Power supply cords may be provided with a 
plug. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 

21.3 Power supply cords shall not be inferior 
to ordinary tough rubber sheathed flexible 
cord. 

Polyvinyl chloride insulated flexible cables or 
cords shall not be used. 

For Class I appliances, the power supply cord 
shall be provided with a green core, which is 
connected to the internal earthing terminal 
of the appliance and to the earthing contact of 
the plug. The colour of the cores intended for 
live and neutral connection shall be red and 
black, respectively. 

Power supply cords shall not be exposed to 
sharp points within, or cutting edges of, the 
surface of the appliance. 

Power supply cord shall have a nominal cross- 
sectional area not less than those shown in the 
following table: 



v Rated Current of Appliance 
A 


Nominal Cross- 
Sectional Area 




mm 1 


Up to and including 3 

Over 3 up to and includ- 
ing 10 

Over 10 up to and includ- 
ing 13-5 


0-50 
0-75 

1 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by 
measurements. 



21.5 Electric iron shall be provided with a cord 
guard at the inlet opening for the power supply 
cord, unless the inlet or bushing is provided 
with a smoothly rounded bell-mouthed opening 
having a radius of curvature at least equal to 
1-5 times the overall diameter of the cable or 
cord with the largest cross-sectional area to be 
connected. 



17 



SP 48: 1991 



Cord guard shall: 

a) be so designed as to protect the cable or 
cord against excessive bending where it 
enters into the appliance; 

b) be of insulating material; 

c) be fixed in a reliable manner; 

d) project outside the appliance for a dis- 
tance beyond the inlet opening of at 
least five times the overall diameter or, 
for flat cords, at least five times the 
major overall dimension, of the cable or 
cord delivered with the appliance or they 
shall comply with the flexing test; and 



e) be integral with the power supply 
except for type X attachment. 



cord 



Compliance is checked by inspection, and by the 
test given in 21.6. 



21.6 Test for Cord Guard 

The appliance is tested with the cable or cord, 
which has a length of approximately 10 cm. 

The part of the iron comprising the cable entry 
fitted with the cord guard and the flexible cable 
or cord for which the iron is designed, is fixed 
to the oscillating member of an apparatus 
similar to that shown in Fig. 8. 

21.6.1 The sample is so mounted that the axis 
of oscillation is tangential to the outer surface 
of the part in which the cord guard is secured, 
and when the oscillating member is at the 
middle of its travel, the axis of the cable or 
cord, where it leaves the cord guard, is 
vertical. 

21.6.2 A load having a mass equal to that of 
the iron but not less than 2 kg or more than 
6 kg is attached to the cable or cord. 



EACH A5 OR 90 



ELECTRODE 
HANDLE 




FLEXIBLE CORD 



Y/////////////S/A\y//////////////A 



LC. WE1SHI 



/ 



u 



Fto. 8 Tbst Apparatus for Flexiblb Cords and Thbir Anchorages 

18 



SP 48 : 1991 



21.6.3 The oscillating member is moved back- 
wards and forwards through an angle of 90° 
(45° on either side of the vertical), the 
number of flexings being 20 000 and the rate of 
flexing 60/min. After 10 000 flexings, the sample 
is turned through 90° about the centre line of 
the cord guard. 

21.6.4 After the test, the cord guard shall not 
have worked loose and neither the cord guard 
nor the flexible cable or cord shall show any 
damage within the meaning of this specifica- 
tion except that not more than 10 percent of 
the total number of conductor strands may 
have been broken. 

NOTE — A flexing is one movement eithe- backward 
or forward. 

21.7 Electric iron provided with a power supply 
cord shall have cord anchorages such that the 
conductors are relieved from strain, includ- 
ing twisting where they are connected within 
the appliance, and that the insulation of the 
conductors is protected from abrasion. 

21.7.1 Cord anchorages shall be so designed or 
located that: 

a) replacement of the cable or cord is easily 
possible; 

b) it is clear how the relief from strain and 
the prevention of twisting are to be 
obtained; 

c) they are suitable for the different type of 
cable or cord which may be connected, 
unless the appliance is so designed that 
only one type of cable or cord can be 
fitted; 

d) the cable or cord cannot touch the 
clamping screws of the cord anchorage, 
if these screws are accessible or electri- 
cally connected to accessible metal parts; 

e) the cord is not clamped by a metal screw 
which bears directly on the cord; 

f ) at least one part of the cord anchorage is 
securely fixed to the appliance; 

g) screws, if any, which have to be operated 
when replacing the cable or cord, do not 
serve to fix any other component, unless, 
when omitted or incorrectly mounted, 
they render the appliance inoperative or 
clearly incomplete or unless the parts 
intended to be fastened by them cannot 
be removed without the aid of a tool 
during the replacement of the cable or 
cord; and 

h) for Classs I appliances, . they are of insu- 
lating material or are provided with an 
insulating lining, if otherwise an insula- 
tion fault on the cable or cord could 
make accessible metal parts live. 



21.7.2 For Type M and Type Y attachments, 
the coxes of the power supply cord shall 
be insulated from accessible metal parts by 
insulation complying with the requirements for 
basic insulation for Class I appliances and 
complying with the requirements for supple- 
mentary insulation for Class II appliances. This 
insulation shall consist of: 

a) a separate insulating barrier fixed to the 
cord anchorage; 

b) a special sleeve or grommet fixed to the 
cable or cord; or 

c) for Class I appliances, the sheath of a 
sheathed cable or cord. 

21.7.3 For Type M and Type Y attachments, 
cord anchorages shall be so designed that: 

a) the replacement of the power supply 
cord does not impair compliance with 
this standard; 

b) the cable or cord does not touch clamp- 
ing screws of the cord anchorage, if these 
screws are accessible or electrically 
connected to accessible metal parts; 

c) the cable or cord is uot clamped by a 
metal screw which bears directly on the 
cable or cord; 

d) knots in the cord are not to be used, 
unless specifically allowed in individual 
appliance standard; and 

e) labyrinths or similar means are permitted 
provided that it is clear how the power 
supply cord is to be assembled. 

21.7.4 It shall not be possible to push the cable 
or cord into the iron to such an extent that the 
cable or cord, or internal parts of the appliance, 
could be damaged. 

21.7.5 The cable or cord is then subjected 25 
times to a pull of the value shown below. The 
pulls are applied in the most unfavourable 
direction without jerks, each time for one 
second. 

Immediately afterwards, the cable or cord is 
subjected for one minute to a torque of the 
value shown in the following table: 

Mass of Appliance Pull Torque 

kg N Nm 

Up to and including 1 30 0*1 

Over 1 up to and including 3*5 60 0*25 

During the tests, the cable or cord shall not be 
damaged. 

21.7.6 After the tests, the cable or cord shall 
not have been longitudinally displaced by more 
than 2 mm and the conductors shall not have 
moved over a distance of more than 1 mm in 
the terminals, nor shall there be appreciable 
strain at the connection. 



19 



SP 48 : 1991 



21.7.7 Creepage distances and clearances shall 
not be reduced below the specified value. 

21.7.8 For the measurement of the longitudinal 
displacement, a mark is made on the cable or 
cord while it is subjected to the pull, at a dis- 
tance of approximately 2 cm from the cord 
anchorage or other suitable point, before 
starting the tests. 

21.7.9 After the tests, the displacement of the 
mark on the cable or cord in relation to the 
cord anchorage or other point is measured 
while the cable or cord is subjected to the pull. 

22 PROVISION FOR EARTHING 

22.1 Accessible metal parts of Class I appli- 
ances, which may become live in the event of 
an insulation fault, shall be permanently and 
reliably connected to an earthing terminal or 
termination within the appliance, or to the 
earthing contact of the appliance inlet. 

22.1.1 Earthing terminals and ear hing con- 
tacts shall not be electrically connected to the 
neutral terminal, if any. 

22.1.2 If accessible metal parts are screened 
from live parts by metal parts which are connect- 
ed to the earthing terminal or termination or, 
to the earthing contact, they are not, for the 
purpose of this requirement, regarded as likely 
to become live in the event of an insulation 
fault. Metal parts behind a decorative cover 
which does not withstand the test of mechanical 
strength are considered to be accessible metal 
parts. 

22.2 The connection between the earthing ter- 
minal or earthing contact and parts required to 
be connected thereto, shall be of low resistance. 

22.2.1 Compliance is checked by the following 
test: 

A current derived from an ac source having 
a no-load voltage not exceeding 12 V, and 
equal to 1*5 times the rated current of the 
appliance or 25 A, whichever is greater, is 
passed between the earthing terminal or 
earthing contact, and each of the accessible 
metal parts in turn. 

The voltage drop between the earthing 
terminal of the electric iron or the earthing 
contact of the appliance inlet, and the accs- 
sible metal part is meassured, and the resis- 
tance calculated from the current and this 
voltage drop. 

In no case shall the resistance exceed 0-1 Q. 
The resistance of the flexible cable or cord is 
not included in the resistance measurement. 



Care is taken that the contact resistance 
between the tip of the measuring probe and 
the metal part under test does not influence 
the test results. 

23 SCREWS AND CONNECTIONS 

23.1 Screwed connections, electrical or other- 
wise, shall withstand the mechanical stresses 
occurring in normal use. 

23.1.1 Screws transmitting contact pressure and 
screws which are likely to be tightened by the 
user and have a nominal diameter less than 
3 mm, shall screw into metal. 

Screws shall not be of metal which is soft or 
liable to creep, such as zinc or aluminium. 

23.1.2 Screws of insulating material shall have a 
nominal diameter of at least 3 mm; they shall 
not be used for any electrical connection. 

23.1.3 Screws shall not be of insulating material 
if their replacement by a metal screw could 
impair supplementary insulation or reinforced 
insulation, neither shall screws which may be 
removed when replacing a power supply cord or 
undertaking other routine servicing, be of insu- 
lating material if their relacement by a metal 
screw could impair basic insulation. 

23.1.4 Compliance is checked by inspection and, 
for screws and nuts transmitting contact pres- 
sure, or which are likely to be tightened by the 
user, by the following test. 

The screws or nuts are tightened and loosened; 

10 times for screws in engagement with a 
thread of insulating material, and 

5 times for nuts and other screws. 

Screws in engagement with a thread of insu- 
lating material are completely removed and 
reinserted each time. 

23.1.5 When testing terminal screws and nuts, a 
conductor of the cross-sectional area of 0*75 
mm 1 is placed in the terminal. 

23.1.6 The test is made by means of a suitable 
test screwdriver, spanner or key applying a 
torque as shown in the following table, the 
appropriate column being: 

Col I For metal screws without heads, if 
the screw when tightened does not 
protrude from the hole. 

Col II For other metal screws and for nuts; 
and 

For screws of insulating material: 

a) having a hexagonal head with the 
dimension across flats exceeding 
the overall thread-diameter; or 



20 



SP 48:19*1 



b) with a cylindrical head and a 
socket for a key, the socket 
having a cross-corner dimension 
exceeding the overall thread- 
diameter; or 

c) with a head having a slot or cross 
slots, the length of which 
exceeds 1*5 times the overall 
thread-diameter. 

Col III For other screws of insulating 
material. 

Nominal Diameter Torque, Nm 

of Screw < ^ — * 

mm Coll Colli Col III 

Up to and including 2-8 0-2 0.4 0-4 

Over 2-8 up to and in- 0-25 0-5 0-5 
eluding 3-0 

Over 30 up to and in- 0-3 0*6 06 
eluding 3*2 

Over 3-2 up to and in- 0-4 0-8 0*6 
eluding 3*6 

Over 3-6 up to and in- 0-7 12 0*6 
eluding 4*1 

Over 41 up to and in- 0*8 1*8 0-9 
eluding 4*7 

Over 4*7 up to and in- 0*8 20 10 
eluding 5*3 

Over 5*3 up to and in- — 2*5 1*25 

eluding 6-0 

The conductor is moved each time the screw or 
nut is loosened. 

23.1.6.1 During the test, no damage impairing 
the further use of screwed connections shall 
occur. 

23.1.6.2 Screws or nuts which are likely to be 
tightened by t f ie user include screws intended 
to be operated when replacing the power supply 
cord. 

23.1.6.3 The shape of the blade of the test screw- 
driver must suit the head of the screw to be 
tested. The screws and nuts must not be tighten- 
ed in jerks. 

23.2 Screws in engagement with a thread of 
insulating material shall have a length of 
engagement sufficient to ensure a reliable 
connection. 



Correct introduction of the screw into the screw 
hole or nut shall be ensured. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by the 
test of 23.1, the torque applied being, however, 
increased to 1*2 times the torque specified. 

The requirement with regard to correct intro- 
duction is met if introduction of the screw in a 
slanting manner is prevented, for example, by 
guiding the screw by the part to be fixed, by a 
recess in the female thread or by the use of 
a screw with the leading thread removed. 

23.3 Screws which make a mechanical connec- 
tion between different parts shall be secured 
against loosening, if the connection carries 
current. 

Rivets used for current carrying connections 
shall be secured against loosening, if these 
connections are subject to torsion in normal 
use. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by 
manual test. 

For electric irons provided with an appliance 
inlet, the measurements are made with an 
appropriate connector inserted; and also without 
conductors; for other appliances, they are made 
on the appliance as delivered. 

24 CREEPAGE DISTANCES AND 
CLEARANCES 

24.1 Creepage distances and clearances shall 
not be less than the values shown in Table 2. 

NOTES 

1 If a barrier is interposed and if it is in two parts 
which are not cemented together, the creepage dis- 
tance is also measured through the joint. 

2 If a barrier is interposed, clearances are measur- 
ed over the barrier or if the barrier is in two parts 
with mating surfaces which are not cemented to- 
gether through the joint. 

The clearances between terminals and accessible 
metal parts are also measured with the screws or 
nuts unscrewed as far as possible, but the .clear- 
ances shall then be not less than 50 percent of 
the values shown in the Table 2. 

Distances through slots or openings in external 
parts of insulating material are measured to 
metal foil in contact with the accessible surface 
the foil is pushed into corners and the like by 
means of the standard test finger shown in 
Fig. 1, but it is not pressed into openings. 

24.2 The methods of measuring creepage dis- 
tances and clearances to be used in interpreting 
the requirements of this report are indicated 
in Cases 1 to 11. These cases do not differentiate 
between gaps and grooves or between types of 
insulation. 



21 



SP 48 : 1991 

Table 2 Creepage Distances and Clearances 

( Clause 24.1 ) 



61 
No. 

(1) 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Distances Creepage Clearance 



(2) 



Creepage 
Distance 

(3) 



(4) 

20 

2'5 



i) Between live parts of diffe- 
rent polarity : 

if protected against depo- 20 

sition of dirt 
if not protected against 3 

deposition of dirt 

ii) Between live parts and 
other metal parts over 
basic insulation : 

if protected against depo- 
sition of dirt 

if of ceramic material or 2*5 2*5 

pure mica and the like 

if of other material 30 25* 

if not protected against 40 30 

deposition of dirt 

at the end of tubular 10t VOt 

sheathed-type heating 
element 

iii) Between metal parts sepa- 40 4*0 

rated by supplementary 
insulations 

iv) Between live parts in 60 60 

recessses in the mounting 
face of the appliance and 
the surface to which it is 
fixed 

•If the parts are rigid and located by mouldings, or 
if the design is otherwise such that there is no likeli- 
hood of a distance being reduced by distortion or 
movement of the parts, this value may be reduced to 20. 

tlf over ceramic, pure mica and the like protected 
against deposition of dirt. 

tlf protection against deposition of dirt. 



In the illustrations 



g indicates insulating material, 
J indicates conducting parts, 



- - - - - — indicates clearance, and 

»i. ; i. » .mh.j» i i 1 

RSKv&fr.v3 indicates creepage distance. 




Condition — Path under consideration includes a paral- 
lel- or converging-sided groove of any 
depth with a width less than X — 1 mm. 

Rule — Creepage distance and clearance are mea- 

sured directly across the groove as shown. 




Condition — Path under consideration includes a paral- 
lel-sided groove of any depth and equal to 
more than X — 1 mm. 

Rule — Clearance is the *line of sight* distance. 

Creepage path follows fhs contour of the 
groove. 



The following assumptions are made: 

a) Any corner is assumed to be bridged with 
an insulating link of jf-mm width moved 
into the most unfavourable position ( see 
Case 3 ). 

b) Where the distance across the top of a 
groove is jf-mm or more, a creepage 
distance is measured along the contours 
of the grooves ( see Case 2 ). 

c) Creepage distances and clearances mea- 
sured between parts moving in relation to 
each other are measured when these 
parts are in their most unfavourable 
positions. 



Case 3 




Condition — Path under consideration includes a 
V-shaped groove with a width greater than 
X — 1 mm. 

Rule — Clearance is the 'line of sight' distance. 
Creepage path follows the contour of the 
groove but 'short-circuits' the bottom of 
the groove by X - 1 mm. 



22 



Case 4 





Condition — Path under consideration includes a rib. 

Condition — Path under consideration includes an un- 

K U l e _ Clearance is the shortest direct air path cemented joint with a groove on one side 

over the top of the rib. Creepage path less than X - 1 mm wide and the groove 

follows the contour of the rib. on the other side equal to or more than 

X — 1 mm wide. 

Rule — Clearance and creepage paths are as 

shown. 



Case 5 



Case 8 



< Xmm 





C^^-^^ff^^S^SS^^ Condition- Creepage. distance through uncemented 
X — 1 mm wide on each side. 



joint is less than creepage distance over 
barrier. 



Rule — Creepage and clearance path is the 'line of Rule 

sight* distance shown. 



-Clearance is the shortest direct air path 
over the top of the barrier. 




Condition — Path under consideration includes an un- 
cemented joint with grooves equal to or 
more than X — 1 mm wide on each side. 

Rule —Clearance is the 4 line of sight* distance. 

Creepage path follows the contour of the Gap between head of screw and wall of recess wide 
grooves enough to be taken into account. 




23 



SP 48 : 1991 



Case 10 




Gap between head of screw and wall of recess too 
narrow to be taken into account. Measurement of 
creepage distance is from screw to wall when the 
distance is equal to X -» 1 mm. 

Case 11 




Clearance is the distance d + D. 
Creepage distance is also d + D. 



25 RESISTANCE 
TRACKING 



TO HEAT, FIRE AND 



25.1 External parts of insulating material, the 
deterioration of which might cause the appliance 
to fail to comply with this standard, shall be 
sufficiently resistant to heat. 

25.1.1 Compliance is checked by subjecting 
enclosures and other external parts of insulating 
material to a ball-pressure test by means of the 
apparatus shown in Fig. 9. 

25.1.2 The surface of the part to be tested is 
placed in the the horizontal position and a steel 
ball of 5 mm diameter is pressed against this 
surface by a force of 20 N. The test is made in 
a heating cabinet at a temperature of 75 ± 2°C. 

25.1.3 After one hour, the ball is removed from 
the sample which is thus cooled down within 10 
seconds to approximately room temperature by 
immersion in cold water. The diameter of the 
impression caused by the ball is measured. This 
shall not exceed 2 mm. 

25.1.4 The test is not made on parts of ceramic 

material. 



25.2 Insulating parts retaining live parts in 
position shall be resistant to abnornal heat and 
to fire. 

25.2.1 Compliance is checked ty the following, 
test: 

'A test is made as described in 25.1 but at a 
temperature of 125 ± 2 °C or at a temperature 
which is 40 ± 2 °C in excess of the temperature- 
rise of the relevant part determined during the 
temperature-rise test whichever is higher.' 

25.2.2 In addition, the insulating parts are sub- 
jected to a test made with an electrically heated 
conical mandrel in an apparatus as shown in 
Fig. 10. 

25.2.2.1 The mandrel is inserted into a conical 
hole reamed in the part to be tested in such a 
way that portions of the conical part of the 
mandrel of equal length protrude from both sides. 
The sample is pressed against the mandrel with a 
force of 12 N. The means by which the force is 
applied is then locked to prevent any further 
movement. However, if the sample starts to 
soften or to melt during the test, a force just 
sufficient to keep the sample in contact with the 
mandrel is applied to the sample in the horizon- 
tal direction. 

25.2.2.2 The mandrel is heated to a temperature 
of 300°C in approximately 3 minutes and is 
maintained within 10°C of this value for 
2 minutes. The temperature is measured by 
means of a thermocouple inside the mandrel. 

25.2.2.3 During the period of 5 minutes, sparks 
of about 6 mm in length are produced at the 
upper surface of the sample where the mandrel 
protrudes and the sample is in contact with the 
mandrel. The sparks are produced by means of 
a high frequency generator, the electrodes of 
which are moved around the mandrel so as to 
cover the whole area of the sample near the 
mandrel. 

25.2.2.4 Neither the sample, nor any gases pro- 
duced during the heating shall be ignited by the 
sparks. 

25.3 Alternate Method of Test for Fire-Resisting 
Properties 

25.3.1 Preparation of Sample 

The specimen shall consist of a portion broken 
from the moulding and shall weigh not less than 
6 g nor more than 10 g, and shall be not more 
than 10-0 mm in thickness measured from an 
externally cured face. 

25.3.2 Apparatus 

The specimen shall be tested in the heating 
tube of an apparatus of the general type, shown 
in Fig. 11, the pilot flame being located 20 mm 
above the upper end of the specimen. 



24 



SP 48 : 1991 




SPHERICAL 

TEST SAMPLE 
Fig. 9 Apparatus for Ball-Pressure Tbst 



TERMINALS FOR 
THERMOCOUPLE 




TERMINALS FOR THERMOCOUPLE^ 



0*2 



1 1-1 vjsjuj 








.SL 






to 



Fig. 10 Hot Mandrel Apparatus 



25 



SP 48: 1991 



UTD22 



:*-4 




500 METAL 
TUBINO 



S0 HOLE FOR 
THERMOCOUPLE 



U- 730 J 

ELEVATION AA 




- GROUNO TRULY AND SQUARE 

ELEVATION withbaseso as to prevent 

THE ESCAPE 0FPR00UCT90F 
COMBUSTION 



11 A Details of Conical Cover 



(TOBEOF REFRACTORY MATERIAL) 
REFRACTORY CEMENT- 




IRON CUP 
IRON BAND 

HEAT RESISTING INSULATION 

PACKING 0* ASBESTOS WOOLO* 
MAGNESIA ASBESTOS 

FIRECLAYORSIUCAJUBE 
ASBESTOS CEMENT SHEETING 



ANGLE IRON 



BRASS BOLT 



9 HOLES, 30 DRILLED IN CAP 
SCREWONORSLIOING FITCAP" 



SBCTIONOROVEN 

11B Details of Test Oven 
Fig. 11 Apparatus for Ignition Tbst — Continued 



26 



SP 48 : 1991 



SPUTCONCAICOVER 




11C Sketch of Assembled Apparatus 
Fig. 11 Apparatus for Ignition Test 



27 



SP 48 : 1991 



25.3.2.1 A support for the specimen shall be pro- 
vided in the heating tube and this may suitably 
consist of a light stirrup of nichrome wire, 
supported by a length of nichrome wire passing 
over the pilot flame tube. The support shall be 
such that the specimen is fixed centrally in the 
heating tube, with its largest dimension vertical. 

The apparatus shall be heated by passing a 
suitably regulated electric current through a 
nichrome resistance wire surrounding the heat- 
ing tube. 

25.3.2.2 Measurement of temperature of tube 

The temperature of the tube shall be taken as 
shown by a thermocouple situated at the level 
of the centre of the specimen knd equidistant 
from the inner surface of the heating tube and 
the specimen. The wires, of which the thermo- 
couple is made, shall be not larger than 1*25 mm 
and not smaller than 0*462 mm in diameter and 
shall be bare for a length of 25 mm from the 
junction. 

25.3.3 Test for Flammability 

The temperature of the tube shall be raised to 
300°C and the specimen shal 1 be inserted in the 
tube. The temperature shall than be readjusted 
to 300°C within a period of 3 minutes, and 
this temperature shall be maintained until a 
period of 5 minutes has elapsed from the time 
of insertion of the specimen. During this period 
a conical cover at the top shall limit the opening 
to approximately 6-5 cm 1 while the air intake 
orifice at the bottom shall be open approxima- 
tely 0-65 cm*. At the end of the period of 
5 minutes, the specimen shall be removed from 
the tube. The material shall not be deemed non- 
flammable if at any time during the test, the 
specimen flames or gives off flammable vapours 
in sufficient quantities to ignite at the pilot 
flame. 

25.4 Insulating parts retaining live parts in posi- 
tion shall be of material resistant to tracking, if 
they are exposed to excessive deposition of mois- 
ture of dirt in normal use, unless the creepage 
distances are at least equal to twice the specified 
value. 

25.4.1 For materials other than ceramic, com- 
pliance is checked by the following test: 

4 A flat surface of the part to be tested, if possi- 
ble, at least 15 mm x 15 mm, is placed in the 
horizontal position. 

Two electrodes of platinum or other sufficiently 
non-corrodible material, with the dimensions 
shown in Fig. 12 arc placed on the surface of 
ihe sample in the manner shown in this figure, 
so that the rounded edges are in contact with 
the sample over their whole length. 



The force exerted on the surface by each elec- 
trode is about 1 N. 

The electrodes are connected to a 50 Hz supply 
such that the no-load voltage is of substantially 
sine-wave form and has a value of 175 V, which 
shall not be reduced by more than 17*5 V when 
the electrodes are short-circuited. The total 
impedance of the circuit when the electrodes 
are short-circuited is adjusted by means of a 
variable resistor, so that the current is equal to 
1*0 ± 0*1 A with a power factor between 0*9 
and 1. An overcurrent relay is included in the 
circuit, the relay being so designed that, when 
the current has reached a value of 0*5 A, the 
circuit is interrupted after a period which is as 
short as possible, but not less than 2 seconds. 

The surface of the sample is wetted by allowing 
drops of a solution of ammonium chloride in 
distilled water to fall centrally between the 
-electrodes. The solution has a volume resistivity 
of 400 Q cm at 25°C, corresponding to a con- 
centration of about 0*1 percent. The drops have 
a volume of 20 i§ mm» and fail from a height 
of 30 mm to 40 mm. 




20 



•5 +0-1 



TEST SPECIMEN 
SUPPORT 



2+0-1 



7 



»> 



K. 



SLIGHTLY ROUNDED EDGE 



0-1 TOW- 
All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 12 Arrangement and Dimensions of 
the Electrodes for thb Tracking Test 



28 



SP 48: 1991 



The time interval between one drop and the 
next is 30 ± 5 seconds. 

No flashover or breakdown between electrodes 
shall occur before a total of 50 drops has fallen. 
The t£s* is made at three places on the sample. 

NOTES 

1 Care be taken that the electrodes are clean and 
correctly positioned before each test is started. 

2 In the case of doubt, the test is repeated, if neces- 
sary on a new sample. 

3 The test is not made on insulating parts of com- 
mutators or brush-caps. 

26 RESISTANCE TO RUSTING 

26.1 Ferrous parts, the rusting of which might 
cause the appliance to fail to comply with this 
standard, shall be adequately protected against 
rusting. 

26.1.1 Compliance is checked by the following 
test: 

All grease is removed from the parts to be 
tested by immersion in carbon tetrachloride 
or trichlorethane for 10 minutes. 

The parts are then immersed for 10 minutes 
in a 10 percent solution of ammonium chlo- 
ride in water at a tempeiature between 15°C 
and 35°C. ' 

Without drying but after shaking off any 
drops, the parts are placed for 10 minutes in 
a box containing air having not less than 90 
percent relative humidity and temperature 
between 15°C and 35°C. 

After the parts have been dried for 10 minut- 
es in a heating cabinet at a temperature of 
100 ± 5°C, their surfaces shall show no 
signs of rust. 

Traces of rust on sharp edges and any yello- 
wish film removable by rubbing are ignored. 

For small helical spring and the like, and for 
parts exposed to abrasion, a layer of grease 
may provide sufficient protection against 
rusting. Such parts are only subjected to the 
test if there is doubt about the effectiveness 
of the grease film, and the test is then made 
without previous removal of the grease. 

27 FINISH 

27.1 The external finish used on metal compo- 
nents shall be of a heat and moisture resisting 
nature and shall not be adversely affected by 
variation in temperature under normal operat- 
ing conditions. The external finish used on 
metal components shall be of a heat and 
moisture resisting nature and shall not be 
adversely affected by variation in temperature 
under normal operating conditions or during 
the endurance test. The nickel and chromium 



electroplated coating shall conform to the 
following requirements: 

10 micrometres ( microns ) of nickel, and 

0*2 micrometres ( microns ) of chromium. 

27.2 In addition to test for thickness of nickel 
and chromium plating, the electroplated surface 
are subjected to the following tests: 

a) adhesion test 

b) corrosion test 

27.3 Adhesion Test 

27.3.1 Adhesion of the coating shall be tested 
by either by the file test or by the quenching 
method specified in 27.3.3 and 27.3.4. There 
shall not be any detachment of the coating 
from the substrate, or any separation between 
layers of the *coating. 

27.3.2 The coating shall be sufficiently adherent 
to the basis metal and the separate layers of a 
multilayer coating shall be sufficiently adherent 
to each other, to pass the ; test prescribed below. 

27.3.3 File Test for Adhesion 

The file test shall be carried out as follows: 

Saw a piece off a plated article, hold it in a 
vice and apply a coarse file to the cut edge 
in such a manner as to raise the deposit. 
File with direction from the basis metal to 
the coating at an angle of approximately 45° 
to the coated surface. 

There shall be no separation between the 
coating and the basis metal nor between the 
layers of a multiple coating. 

27.3.4 Quenching Test for Adhesion 

Heat a plated article for 1 h in an oven at a 
temperature of 300°C with a tolerance 
of ± 10°C. Then quench in water at room tem- 
perature. The appearance of blisters or peeling 
shall give evidence of inadequate adhesion. 

CAUTION— This test may have an adverse 
effect on the mechanical proper- 
ties of the articles tested. 

27.4 Corrosion Resistance Test 

27.4.1 Coated articles shall be subjected to one 
of the corrosion tests appropriate for the 
service grade number 1. 

After the articles have been subjected to the 
appropriate corrosion test, the rating shall be 
assigned, to each tested article representing the 
relative freedom from defects at which the 
coating is penetrated, with the resulting corro- 
sion of the basis metal. The rating shall be at 
least 8, for service grade number 1 with test 
duration of 8 hours for acetic acid salt spray. 



29 



SP48M991 



27.4.2 Corrosion tests, wjien carried out in 
accordance with the tests prescribed in Table 3, 
are a means of controlling continuity of the 
coating and the duration of the tests does not 
necessarily have a fixed relationship with the 
service life of the finished article. 

Table 3 Duration of Corrosion Test 



the area of the crack in any one square exceeds 

2-5 mm 1 . 

27.4.5.2 If the sample consists of more than one 
individual article, and gross differences in the 
degree of corrosion are evident between these 
individual articles, the sample shall be consi- 
dered unsuitable for assessment. 



Duration of Hoars for 
Ser? ice Grade Number 



AciticAcM Silt Spray 2146 Initial Ratin S Number 



27.4.3 Corrosion Spot 

A surface corrosion defect at which the coating 
is penetrated as indicated by appearance of basis 
metal, corrosion products or lifting of the 
coating. Discoloration or other surface defects, 
which do not penetrate the coating, do not 
count as corrosion spots. The size of a corro- 
sion spot is the area of the penetration through 
the coating and not that of associated staining. 

21 A. 4 Examination of Sample After Test 

27.4.4.1 The sample should be examined in its 
condition at the end of the test or after rinsing 
in running water, if it is necessary to remove 
the residue of the test medium. Corrosion pro- 
ducts may be removed subsequently, to enable 
the size of individual corrosion spots to be 
assessed. 

27.4.4.2 For the purpose of evaluation, divide 
the area of the significant surface of the sample 
hypothetically into squares of 5 mm size. This 
is easily done by placing a graticule, made of 
fully flexible transparent plastics material, on 
the sample so as to give the most favourable 
result, that is, the highest rating. 

27.4.4.3 Count the number (N) of 5 mm squares 
in the significant area of the sample and the 
number (it) of such squares containing one or 
more corrosion spots. When evaluating the total 
area of sample, squares more than half 
occupied should be counted as full squares and 
those less than half occupied [should be ignored. 

27.4.4.4 If a spot appears to lie in more than 
one square, it should be counted only once in 
the evaluation, but cracks traversing more than 
one square should be counted for each square 
entered. 

27.4.5 Suitability of Samples for Evaluation 

27.4.5.1 If ten or more corrosion spots can be 
included in any two adjacent 5 mm squares, or 
any spots are present of area greater than 
2-5 mm*, the sample shall be considered unsuit- 
able for assessment. For long cracks traver- 
sing more than one S-mm square, the sample 
shall be considered unsuitable for assessment if 



Determine the frequency of the spots as a 
percentage from the expression: 

Frequency - 100 x -^ (see 27.4.4.3 ) 

Allocate a rating number to the sample accord- 
ing to the following table: 

Frequency, Percent Rating Number 



( No corrosion spots ) 


10 


Over 


up to 0-25 


9 


Over 0-25 


i » » 0-5 


8 


Over 0-5 


»» »• * 


7 


Over 1 


3 


6 


Over 2 


99 99 ^ 


5 


Over 4 


99 99 © 


4 


Over 8 


99 99 16 


3 


Over 16 


32 
99 99 •''*• 


2 


Over 32 


99 99 04 


1 


Over 64 








27.5 Determination of Chromium Thickness by 
Coulometric Method 

27.5.1 Principle 

The method is based on the measurement of 
the quantity of electricity required to dissolve 
anodically an electrodeposited coating over a 
known area. 

27.5.2 Test Solution 

Dilute 62 ml of orthophosphoric acid ( sp gr 
1-75 ) to one litre. 

27.5.3 Procedure 

27.5.3.1 Clean the area to be tested with a 
cloth, wetted with an organic solvent for grease 
removal, if necessary. 

27.5.3.2 Press an electrolytic cell, fitted with a 
flexible sealing ring and incorporating an 
annular cathode on to the coating so that a 
circle of known area is exposed to the test solu- 
tion. Introduce the test solution into the cell; 
insert and operate the stirrer if appropriate to 
the instrument used and the thickness of the 
deposit. 



30 



SP 48: 1991 



27.5.3.3 Make the electrical connections with 
the specimen being anodic. Continue electolysis 
until dissolution of the chromium coating is 
complete, as indicated by sudden change in 
anode potential, and record the quantity cf 
e lectricity consumed. 

27.5.3.4 Examine the specimen and ensure that 
chromium removal is complete over the area of 
the cell. 

27.5.4. Calculation 

Calculate the thickness of the chromium coating 
from the following formula assuming 100 per- 
cent current efficiency: 

Thickness, >*m ■■ -~ x 12-6 

where 

Q is quantity of electricity consumed, in 
coulombs; and 

A is the area tested, in mm*. 

27.6 Alternative Method for Determination of 
Chromium Thickness 



dissolve a unit thickness at the temperature of 
testing (see Fig. 13 ). 



27.6.1 Reagent 

Chromium Stripping Solution 

Dissolve 20 g of antimony trioxide ( Sb,0 8 ) in 
one litre of concentrated hydrochloric acid of 
sp gr 1*16. 

27.6.2 Preparation of Surface for Testing 

Rub the test piece with a mild abrasive. Deg- 
rease it by rubbing with a damp cloth sprinkled 
over with fine pumice powder, magnesium oxide 
or acetone. Dry it in air. 

27.6.3 Method of Testing 

27.6.3.1 Immerse the degreased specimen or the 
surface to be tested in chromium stripping 
solution. In case of bulky articles, the test may 
be localized by using a glass ring about 25 mm 
in diameter and 25 mm in * height clamped in 
close contact with ther est piece and the joint 
made good by pressing plasticine around the 
outside lower periphery of the ring. 

27.6.3.2 To stop action on some parts of an 
article, the attack may be localized to a selected 
area by coating the remaining surface with 
nitrocellulose varnish. 

27.6.3.3 Record the time, from the appearance 
of black film over the surface under test to the 
cessation of gassing, by means of a stop watch. 
Note down the temperature of the solution. 

27.6.3.4 The thickness of deposit is obtained by 
simple proportion from the time required to 



































































































lor 
































































































10 " 
















































O 14. 
































































































A I} . 
















































Ill 
















































10 10- 
















































z lo 
















































UJ a - 
















































2 9 m 
















































P 6- 
































































































A m 




























































































> 
















































10 






\r 








ao 








as 








*o 






V. 



TEMPERATURE IN °C 

Fig. 13 Tims Required to Dissolve 0000 3 mm 
Chromium at Different Temperatures 

27.7 BNF Jet Test for Determination of Thickness 
of Nickel Plating 



27.7.1 Principle of Method 

Allow a jet of corroding solution to impinge on 
a small area of the surface to be tested, and 
measure the time required to penetrate the 
plating layer. This time is a function of the 
thickness of the plating layer and of the tem- 
perature. The thickness may then be obtained 
from a suitably calibrated curve in which the 
time is plotted against the temperature for a 
given thickness. 

27.7.2 Apparatus 

27.7.2.1 The apparatus ( see Fig. 14 ) shall have 
the following features: 

a) Constant head device (A) — with a thermo- 
meter to indicate the temperature of 
the reagent solution. 

b) On-off stop-cock ( £„). 

c) Jet ( C ) — enclosed in glass guard tube 
and connected to the funnel by rubber 
tubing. 

d) Sliding clamp ( D ) 

c) Clamp for test specimen ( E ) 

f ) Dish to receive used solution ( F ) 

g) Bas#\vith levelling screws ( G ) 

h) A stop-watch —. with 'Stop' and *Go* 
arrangement to measure the time of pene- 
tration. 

27.7.2.2 The solution shall be delivered in jet 
form under a constant head of 254 mm through 
a nozzle, that is, a glass capillary tube of 1-5 mm 
bore and 102 mm minimum length drawn out 
into a smooth taper. 



31 



SP 48: 1991 



-THERMOMETER 




JET AND GUARD 
TUBE 



Fig. 14 Apparatus for BNF Jbt Test 



27.7.2.3 To have a correct velocity of flow, the 
dimensions of the tapered portion shall be such 
that: 

D 7 shall lie between 0-030 and 0-045 

where 

D mm internal diameter of capillary tube, 

d — internal diameter of the tip of nozzle, 
and 

L ■» length of taper. 

27.7.2.4 The jet delivers 10 ml of water at 20°C 
in 27 to 29 seconds under a head of 254 mm. 

27.7.3 Reagents 

27.7.3.1 Test solution 

Dissolve 300 g of ferric chloride ( FeCl 8 , 6H,0 ) 
and 100 g of copper sulphate ( CuSO<, 5H 2 ) 
in one litre of distilled water. 

27.7.3.2 Concentrated hydrochloric acid 
sp gr 1*16 

•27.7.4 Preparation of Surface for Testing 

27.7.4.1 Degrease the test piece by rubbing with 
a damp cloth on which light magnesium oxide 



has deen sprinkled. Rinse with acetone and dfy 
it in air. Do not use any abrasive. 

27.7.4.2 In case of testing nickel deposit, dip 
the article in a mixture of equal volumes of con- 
centrated hydrochloric acid (spgrl*16) and 
water, to remove the slightly protective film on 
the surface of nickel. 

27.7.5 Method of Testing 

27.7.5.1 Clamp the degreased specimen so that 
the surface under test makes an angle of about 
45 degrees to the horizontal, and keep it about ~ 
6-5 mm below the tip of the nozzle ( see Fig. 14 ). 
Clamp the specimen in such a way that there is 
no relative movement between the jet and the 
test piece and there is free run of the solution 
into the dish placed below. The liquid flowing 
over specimen should present a smooth unbro- 
ken wide surface free of ripples and turbulences. 

27.7.5.2 Open the stop-cock and also start the 
stop-watch at exactly the same moment. Stop 
both after 5 seconds and inspect sample for 
penetration. Repeat the process until the first 
sign of penetration is seen. 



32 



SP 48: 1991 



27.7.5.3 Total time taken divided by the time 
required to penetrate 0-002 5 mm of deposits at 
the particular temperature of testing ( obtained 
from Fig. 15 ) gives thickness of deposited 
coatings. 



Basic Metal 

b) Nickel 

c) Steel 





v 


\ 


\[ 


Is" 




>, 


> 


\ 


<0 -.ft ^ . . ... .. 


I -S&T 


8 -xSE 


» zgst 


s < 


2,^ % " 


F s^. ^ 


^-* - 


5su 


KV 


S3* 




^^s^ 


"^^^^ 




JE,. - „ .. _ _ 



TEMPERATURE IN °C 

Fig. 15 Timb Required to Pbnbtratb 
0002 5 mm at Different Tbmperatures 

27.7.5.4 To get accurate results, it is desirable 
to have perforation time limit of 2 seconds. It 
shall, therefore, be necessary to make a preli- 
minary test or tests. 

27.7.5.5 In case it is desired to know that a 
coating applied is more than the minimum thick- 
ness specified, the reagent shall be made to 
impinge on the surface for a time corresponding 
to the specified minimum thickness and exami- 
ned for penetration spot. 

27.7.5.6 It is recommendecTthat the test in case 
of any particular deposit of metal should be 
standardized against deposits of known thick- 
ness made from solution in question. 

27.7.6 Indications 

27.7,6.1 Indications in case of penetration of 
copper coatings 

Penetration of the copper coatings shall be 
indicated by the following signs: 

Basic Metal Mark 

a) Aluminium and 

zinc base alloys Black spot 



Mark 

White spot 
Copper spot 
( see Note ) 



NOTE — This spot is not readily detectable as it is 
of the same colour as the surrounding surface. To 
help distinguish, put 2 drops of either of the follow- 
ing solutions: 

a) One gram of antimony oxide added to 100 ml of 
concentrated hydrochloric acid of sp gr 1*16, 

b) Chromium stripping solution diluted with equal 
volume of water. 

27.7.6.2 Indications in case of penatration of nickel 
coatings 

Penetration of nickel coatings shall be indicated 
by the following signs: 



Basic Metal 


Mark 


Steel 


Copper spot ( see Note ) 


Copper 


Copper spot which 9hows 
up at once 


Brass 


Brownish yellow spot 


Aluminium 


Central black spot with 
a halo of copper 


Zinc base alloys 


Black spot similar to 



that of aluminium 

NOTE — This copper spot is not formed until the 
flow is stopped for a few seconds. Owing to the solu- 
bility of metallic copper in the excess of the solution 
a luminary copper coloured blush may form due to 
pores, but a definite central perforation point should 
be obtained. 

27.7.6.3 Indications in case of penetration of bright 
nickel coatings 

The usual end points given by the coating some- 
times show a darkening of the test spot by non- 
adherent blackish matter, which may need to be 
wiped off at intervals with a stub of paper. 

For bright nickel deposited from baths contain- 
ing sulplionic acid and other organic additives, 
multiply thickness, obtained by jet test by a 
correction factor 1*5. 

28 MEASUREMENT OF HEATING-UP TIME 

28.1 The iron is placed on the three-pointed 
metallic supports while under measurement. The 
three-pointed supports are constructed so that 
they support the sole plate of the iron horizon- 
tally at least 100 mm above the base surface on 
which the iron is placed. The thermocouple is 
attached at the mid-point of the sole plate ( see 
Fig. 16 ). 



33 



SP48:19tl 



THERMOCOUPLE LEADS 




SILVER OISC 

CERAMIC PIPE 
SPRING 
ADJUSTING NUT 



»to 




SMALL HOLE FOR 
LEADS 



SILVER OISC 



CERAMIC PIPE 



NOTE — A thermocouple is soldered at the centre of the silver disc. The silver disc is fixed to the end of the 
ceramic pipe with heat-resistant adhesive. 

Fig. 16 2-Way of Attaching Thermocouples 



28.2 Starting from ambient temperature, the 
iron is heated-up with the voltage corresponding 

to rated input, the thermostat, if any, set at .™. r _ „ . 

the highest temperature. Where a rated voltage given in Table 
range is specified, this voltage shall correspond 
to the voltage corresponding to mean rated 
input. 

28.3 The heating-up time which is the time 
necessary for the temperature to exceed the 
ambient temperature by 180°C is measured, and 
is expressed in minutes and seconds. The 
heating up time shall not exceed 8 minutes. 

29 MEASUREMENT OF SOLE PLATE 
TEMPERATURE 

29.1 The iron is placed on the three metallic 
supports and the thermocouple is attached at 
the mid-point of the sole plate ( see Fig. 16 ). 
The iron is switched on and heated with a vol- 
tage corresponding to rated input. 

29.2 For thermostatic iron the highest and 
the lowest temperatures are measured during five 
successive cycles of temperature variation after 
the iron has reached the steady state conditions. 
The mefen value of the five highest and lowest 
temperature is the sole plate temperature for 



the setting. This test is repeated fo* each setting 
of the thermostat. The recomended ironing 
temperature ranges for different textiles are 
given in Table 4. 



Table 4 Recommended Ironing Temperature 
Ranges 


Fabric 

Nylon 

Rayon 

Silk 

Wool 

Cotton/Linen 




Temperature ( °C ) 

70 to 90 
100 " 120 
130 M 150 
.160 " 180 
190 "210 



29.3 For irons with self-resetting thermal cut- 
out, the measurement are carried out in the 
same way as for thermostatic type. 

29.4 For other types of irons, the highest sole 
plate temperature shall be measured after the 
iron has reached steady state conditions. 

NOTES 

1 The steady state temperature is considered to be 
achieved if the temperature at the mid-point of the 
sole plate does not vary by more than 1°C per hour. 



34 



SP 48: 1991: 



2 For those irons whose thermostat settings are 
indicated by a sector the settings shall be at the 
centre of the range. 

3 The adjustment of the thermostat control to ob- 
tain the required setting shall be made in the direc- 
tion of increasing temperature. 

30 MEASUREMENT OF TEMPERATURE 
DISTRIBUTION 

30.1 The iron is placed on the three metallic 
supports and is heated up with the voltage at 
the corresponding rated input until the sole 
plate temperature at the mid-point exceeds 
200° C. Then after switching off the supply, the 
iron is placed for a suitable period on a sheet 
of white paper spread over flannel cloth which 
covers a wooden board. After removal of the 
iron, darkening of the paper indicates the 
temperature distribution over the sole plate. 
The hottest point is determined as the centre 
of the darkest area. 

NOTE — Positive phototype paper, which is unex- 
posed and developed, white tracing paper, or white 
blotting paper is recommended as the white paper 
for this measurement. 

30.2 After this the iron is placed on the three 
metallic supports and a thermocouple is 
attached at each of the following four points 
of the sole plate: 

a) The hottest point, 

b) The mid-point of the sole plate, 

c) The point on the longitudinal centre line 
20 mm from the tip of the sole plate, and 

d) The point on the longitudinal centre line 
20 mm from the heal and of the sole 
plate. 

30.2.1 For a thermostatic iron, the thermo- 
stat is set so that the temperature at the mid- 
point is maintained ,at approximately 



150°C under the steady-state conditions, and 
the measurement is performed after the iron 
has reached the steady-state conditions. 

30.2.2 For other types of iron, the temperature 
at the mid-point is maintained at approximately 
150°C for at least 15 minutes by switching the 
supply on and off before taking temperature 
measurements. 

30.3 The varying temperature is recorded for 
10 minutes and the average temperature for the 
10 minutes is determined for each of the four 
points. The mean of the four average tempera- 
tures is then determined, and the difference 
between each average temperature and the 
mean temperature is also calculated. The four 
temperature differences are recorded as the 
indication of the temperature distribution over 
the sole plate. 

30.4 Any of the four temperature differences 
recorded in the above test shall not differ bv 
more than 10°C. 

31 MEASUREMENT OF INITIAL 
OVERSWING TEMPERATURE AND 
HEATING-UP EXCESS TEMPERATURE 

31.1 The iron is placed on the three metallic 
supports and a thermocouple is attached at the 
hottest point. The iron is then switched on and 
the thermostat is adjusted so that an average 
temperature of about 120°C is maintained at 
the measuring point under the steady-state 
conditions. The iron is allowed to cool down 
to room temperature. The iron is switched on 
again and, using a recording-type instrument, 
the time and temperature are measured at the 
hottest point for switching on over nine succes- 
sive cycles to produce a graph of the type 
shown in Fig. 17. 




9 10 

MINUTES 

Fig. 17 Variation of Solb-Plate Tbmperaturb After Switching on 



35 



SP 48: 1991 



31.2 From the 
determined: 



graph the following are 



a) The initial overswing temperature, which 
is the first peak temperature between 
the first and second cut-puts of the 
thermostat; 

b) The mean peak temperature, which is 
the mean value of the last five peak 
temperatures; and 

c) The heating up excess temperature, 
which is the difference between the 
initial overswing temperature and the 
mean peak temperature. 

31.3 The initial overswing temperature shall 
not be more than 165°C and the heating-up 
excess temperature shall not exceed 30°C. 

32 MEASUREMENT OF CYCLE 
FLUCTUATION OF TEMPERATURE OF 
THE HOT-TEST POINT 

32.1 The procedure for the temperature 
measurement is the same as in 31, except 
that highest and lowest temperatures of each 
cycle are measured for five successive cycles 
after the iron has reached the steady-state 
conditions. The mean value for the highest 
temperatures and that for the lowest tempera- 
tures are determined. One half of the difference 
between the mean values is the cyclic fluctua- 
tion of the temperature of the hottest point and 
is expressed in Celsius degrees. 

NOTE — This measurement may be combined with 
the measurements in 31. 

32.2 The cyclic fluctuation of the temperature 
of the hottest point shall not exceed 12*5°C. 

33 MEASUREMENT OF TEMPERATURE 
DROP UNDER LOAD. 

33.1 Measurement of Temperature and Average 
Input Power Under Idling Operation 

The iron is placed on the three metallic 
supports and a thermocouple is attached at the 
mid-point of the sole plate. The iron is then 
switched on and the thermostat is adjusted so 
that an average temperature of 200 ± 10°C is 
maintained under the steady-state conditions. 

After the iron has reached the steady-state 
conditions, the highest and the lowest tempera- 
tures for Ave successive cycles are measured, 
and the mean temperature T\ for them is deter- 
mined. At the same time, the average power 
W x of the input consumed under the steady- 
state conditions is determined by dividing the 
electric energy in watthours consumed in the 
course of at least five regulating cycles by the 
total duration of these cycles. 



33.2 Measurement of Temperature and Average 
Input Power Under Load 

The iron is placed on the supports of the 
measuring apparatus illustrated in Fig. 18 and 
switched on with the same thermostat as 
for 33.1. 

The flow rate of cooling water is adjusted so 
that the temperature difference between out- 
going water and incoming water does not 
exceed 10°C after steady condition is reached. 

The height of the pointed supports is deter- 
mined in a preliminary test in such a way that 
the average input power absorbed by the iron 
is about 50 percent of the rated input. 

After ten successive cycles of operation of the 
thermostat, it is assumed that steady condition 
is reached. The average power W of the input 
and the mean temperature T Q of the sole 
plate under load are determined, as for the 
idling case in 33.1. 

33.3 For irons with self-resetting thermal cut- 
out, the measurements at 33.1 and 33.2 shall be 
carried out in the same way as that of a 
thermostatic type. For other types of irons, 
the above measurements are carried out similar- 
ly after the iron has reached the steady-state 
conditions. 

33.4 Calculation of Temperature Drop Under 
Load 

The measured temperature drop under load is 
the difference T% « T x — J , T t and T, being 
respectively the mean temperature under idling 
and load determined in 33.1 to 33.3. 

The temperature drop per 100 W load is 
calculated by the formula: 



7100 



rx loo 



where 



We — the average input power under load,, 
and 

W\ = the average input power under idling. 

33.5 The temperature drop under load shall 
not exceed 10°C. 

34 TESTS 

34.1 Categories Of Tests 

Tests are classified as type, acceptance and 
routine. 



36 



SP 48: 1991 







1 . Copper base plate 

2. Edge of the base plate 

3. Cooling pipes 

4. Pointed supports 

5. Silver disc with a 
thermocouple 



6. Silicone oil 

7. Cooling water pipes 

8. Slot in the base plate 
for thermocouple 
leads 

9. Thermocouple leads 



NOTE— The base plate (1) is made of copper plate 10 mm to 15 mm thick. Around the periphery of the 
base plate, the edge (2) about 10 mm high is soldered, so that the plate forms a shallow vessel for silicon oil. 
Cooling pipes of copper (3) are soldered to the lcuer surface of the base plate, and are connected to cooling 
water pipes (7). Three pointed supports (4) are provided on the base plate. The height of the supports can be 
adjusted from 1 mm to 2 mm. The silver disc with a theimccouple (5) is placed at the mid-point of the 
soleplate, and it must not touch the base plate. The base plate of the apparatus is held horizontally and is filled 
with silicone oil 3 mm to 4 mm deep. 

Fig. 18 Apparatus for Measuring Temperature Drop Under Load 



37 



SP 48 : 1991 



34.2 Type Tests 

The following tests shall constitute the type tests 
and shall be carried out on two samples of irons 
of the same type and rating selected preferably 
at random from a regular production lot. Before 
commencement of the tests, the irons shall be 
visually examined and inspected for obvious 
visual defects in respect of components, parts 
and their assembly, construction, mechanical 
hazards, markings, provision of suitable termi- 
nals for supply connections, earthing and the 
effectiveness of screws and connections. The 
external surface finish shall be even and free 
from finishing defects. 

a) Protection against electric shock, 

b) Input, 

c) Temperature-rise, 

d) Operation under overload conditions, 

e) Electrical insulation and leakage current 
at operating temperature, 

f) Moisture resistance, 

g) Insulation resistance and electric strength 
( after humidity treatment ), 

h) Endurance, 

j) Abnormal operation, 
k) Stability, 

m) Mechanical strength , 
n) Construction, 
p) Cord grip and cord guard, 
q) Provisions for earthing connection, 

r) Screws and connections, 

s) Creepage distances and clearances, 

t) Resistance to: 

i) heat, fire and tracking, and 
ii) rusting, 

u) Finish, 

v) Measurement of heating-up time, 

w) Measurement of temperature distribution 

x) Measurement of overswing temperature 
and heating up excess temperature, 

y) Measurement of cyclic fluctuation of 
temperature of hottest point, and 

z) Measurement of temperature drop under 
load. 

34.3 Acceptance Tests 

The following shall constitute the acceptance 
tests: 

a) Protection against electric shock, 

b) Input, 

c) Temperature-rise, 



d) Electrical insulation and leakage current 
at operating temperature, 

e) Moisture resistance, 

f) Insulation resistance and electric 
strength ( after humidity treatment ), 

g) Earthing connection , 
h) Heating-up time, and 

j ) Measurement of sole plate temperature. 

34.4 Routine Tests 

The following shall constitute the routine tests: 

a) Protection against electric shock, 

b) High voltage, and 

c) Earthing connection. 

35 TESTING EQUIPMENT REQUIRED FOR 
ELECTRIC IRON AS PER IS 366 : 1985 

Test fingers and test pins complete with 50 V ac 
supply and indicator lamps. 

Auto transformer, input 230 V, output 0-270 V. 

Voltmeter, 0-300V ac, accuracy class 1-0. 

Milli ammeter 0-3 mA, accuracy class 1*0, resis- 
tance Of 2 000 ±100*} for leakage current test. 

Wattmeter 0-1 500 W, accuracy class 1-0. 

Wooden test corner, 25 mm thick plywood 
2' x 2' x 2'. 

Thermocouple with temperature gauge ( digital ) 
0-300°C, least count 0-l°C. 

Isolating transformer of unity ratio with a 
centre tap 230/250 V, 2 kVA. 

High voltage tester, 0-5 kV, ac, 0-5 kVA. 

Humidity chamber thermostatically controlled 
with hygrometer and thermometer of 0-100°C 
range. 

Wooden inclined plane with an adjustment of 
0-1 5°C with horizontal plane. 

Impact test apparatus, spring-operated or pen- 
dulum type. 

Cord grip test equipment. 

Torque screw driver. 

Vernier calipers or feeler gauges. 

Step down transformer primary 220/230 V, 
secondary 12 V, current 30 A, Min. 

Ammeter 0-30 A, accuracy class 1*0, voltmeter 
0-1 V, accuracy class 1 ; 0. 

Thermostatically controlled electric oven, 
0-200°C, least count 1°C. 

Ball pressure test apparatus. 

Drop test equipment. 

Flexing test apparatus. 

Tripod stand with four thermocouple and four 
temperature gauge ( digital ) for all tempera- 
ture related test. 



38 



SP 48 : 199 J 



Tri pod stand with one thermocouple and one Flat file for adhesion test. 

ttaKJ?" gaUgC ( di 8 it * I ) forheatin « u P Measuring tape to measure length of supply 



time test. cord> 



BNF Jet test apparatus, stop-watch for checking Apparatus for measuring temperature drop 

electroplating thickness. •* der load 

Corrosion resistance chamber for corrosion Various chemicals for tests on resistance to 

resistance test. rusting and electroplating. 



39 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau cf Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS Is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standard! Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
In any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Reftsioa of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if 
any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be 
sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc : No. ETD 32 (3908) 



toned Since Publication 
Amend No. Date of Issue Tezt Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg C331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 [331 13 73 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VH M, V. I. P. Road, Maaiktola C 37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 (37 86 26, 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIOARH 160036 Jg g JJ* 53 16 * 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 [g* °* J£ * j JJ JJ 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) (632 92 95, 632 78 58. 

BOMBAY 400093 (632 78 91, 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE 
PARIDABAD, OHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR 
LUGKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Primed at Dos Kay Printer! , New Delhi, India 



