Waa HAF IS 14458 (Part 4) : 2018 
Indian Standard 


ura aa at Rin kan — 
antes feta 


am 4 aes yep ver fa at dant a frat 


Retaining Wall for Hill Areas — 
Guidelines 
Part 4 Construction of Banded Dry Stone Masonry Walls 


ICS 93.020 


© BIS 2018 


ARA AA A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AR HAT, 9 Terme TAT HM, Ae fercit-110002 
ME MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2018 Price Group 3 


Hill Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 56 


FOREWORD 


The Indian Standard (Part 4) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft was finalized by Hill 
Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Retaining walls are structures, which support the backfill and maintain the difference in elevation of the two 
ground surfaces. They are generally located at the toe of cut slopes on valley side of a hill road section or excavated 
platform. Retaining walls are effectively utilised to tackle the problems of landslide in hill area by providing 
support to the fill slopes or cut slopes. 


In general, 1 m of extra width in filling and requiring retaining wall at the end may cost more than excavating the 
same width by cutting inside the hill. However, considering maintenance cost, progressive slope instability and 
environmental degradation resulting from unprotected excavation, the use of retaining walls becomes essential. 
This standard (Part 4) is therefore formulated to provide necessary guidelines for construction of banded dry 
stone masonry retainingwalls for stability of hill slopes this standard is being published in different parts. The 
following parts have already been published: 


(Part 1) : 1998 Selection of type of wall, 

(Part 2) : 1997 Design of retaining/breast walls, 

(Part 3) : 1998 Construction of dry stone walls 

(Part 5) : 2018 Construction of cement stone masonry walls 


Other parts being formulated are: 


a) Construction of gabion walls, 

b) Construction of RCC crib walls, 

c) Design of RCC cantilever walls/buttressed walls/L-type walls, and 
d) Design and construction of reinforced earth retaining walls. 


Presently various types of retaining walls such as dry stone, gabion, banded dry stone masonry, cement stone 
masonry or other such retaining walls are preferred for heights up to 4m. The choice of a particular wall is 
dependent on the nature of ground, available budget and availability of construction materials. However, it is 
preferable to construct cement mortar masonry wall or RCC walls, when the height of retaining walls exceeds 4 m. 


In most cases, the failures of retaining walls are often resulted, if the provisions of drainage are inadequate 
especially during rains. But, in case of a banded dry stone masonry walls, the drainage is almost unrestricted and 
may not create problems. Inadequate section of walls and poor quality construction are other reasons for failure of 
banded dry stone walls. This standard (Part 4), therefore, provides suitable guidelines to the field engineers for 
construction of banded dry stone retaining walls. Strict supervision is essential for long life of these types of walls. 


The composition of Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result ofa test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 14458 (Part 4) : 2018 


Indian Standard 


RETAINING WALL FOR HILL AREAS — GUIDELINES 
PART 4 CONSTRUCTION OF BANDED DRY STONE MASONRY WALLS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 4) deals with the construction 
aspects of banded dry stone masonry retaining walls. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard given below contains provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute part of this 
standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent edition ofthe standard indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
1123 : 1975 Method of identification of natural 
building stones (first revision) 
3 GENERAL 


3.1 A banded dry stone retaining wall is a gravity wall, 
which shall be considered safe if, the following 
expected conditions of loading are satisfied: 


a) Itshall be safe against overturning, 


b) The shear stress at the base shall be less than 
shearing strength available, 

c) The pressure at the toe shall remain less than 
the safe bearing capacity of thefoundation 
material, and 

d) No tensile stress develops at the heel. 


It may be assumed that there is adequate frictional bond 
between the cement stone bands and the packed dry 
stones from face to back and from top to base, so that 
entire section of the retaining wall acts as one integral 
unit. This can be achieved by selection of suitable stones 
and proper construction of cement stone bands. 


3.2 Retaining walls are not normally intended to 
support the soil behind it against slope failures. They 
are mainly meant to support the active or passive earth 
pressure from the assumed failure wedge above the base 
of the wall. Separate treatment and specific design 
approaches are required to stabilize the existing or 
probable failure planes in addition to the retaining walls. 


3.3 The stability of retaining walls mainly depends upon 
the allowable bearing pressure of the foundation material 
particularly under the toe. The compressive strength of 
well compacted natural soil is usually adequate to support 
3m to 4m height of retaining walls. The sliding at the 
base depends on the coefficient of friction between the 


wall base and the foundation soil. The total earth pressure 
above any level along the height of the retaining wall 
reduces parabolically from base upward, whereas the 
wall thickness reduces linearly. Therefore in most cases, 
the critical section in the wall is at the base. 


3.4 It should be assured that the quality of construction 
of the wall is maintained and does not suffer due to 
lack of supervision, non-availability of skilled labour, 
improper mixing of mortar, lack of post-construction 
curing and also sometimes paucity of water in the area. 


3.5 After excavation at the toe for road or terrace 
purpose, the construction of the retaining wall should be 
taken up as early as possible with least time gap in order 
to prevent even minor de-stressing of cut slope material. 


3.6 A series of retaining walls, one above the other on 
an unstable or marginally stable slope results in 
accumulation of earth pressure on to the lower walls 
leading to destabilization of the slope (see Fig. 1). 


3.7 The causes of wall failure commonly noticed in 
the hills as a result of poor construction are: 


a) Differential settlement of the foundation 
during rains, 

b) Poor bonding between dry stones and masonry 
bands within the wall, 

c) Roots of big trees pushing the wall from 
behind, 

d) Designed section not fully adopted during 
construction, 

e) Poor backfill material and inadequate 
compaction in the backfill, 

f) Not providing specified inverted filters in the 
backfill, and 


g) Lack of toe protection for walls. 
4 MATERIAL 


Stones, the main material required for the construction 
of banded dry stone masonry retaining wall, are 
generally available in large quantity in hills. To select 
and utilize them for their satisfactory performance, it 
shall be necessary to know the various properties which 
can be determined according to relevant Indian 
Standards. The strength of rocks depends on its mineral 
constituents, which form the basis of classification and 
identification of rocks. Identification of stones,may be 
done in accordance with IS 1123. In general, fresh or 
fairly fresh igneous rocks like granite, syenite, 
charnockite, basalt, etc, form good host rock for 


IS 14458 (Part 4) : 2018 


UNSLABLE 


Fic. 1 DESTABILIZATION OF SLOPE BY SERIES OF RETAINING WALLS 


masonry stones. Other rock types like quartzite, well 
lithified sandstones, limestones, massive granitic 
gneisses and other such hard rocks can also be used as 
masonry stones. 


5 BASE SLOPE 


An inward slope of the base provides good keying of 
the wallinto the hill and also helps to reduce the toe 
pressure, besides greatly increasing the sliding strength 


of the wall at the base (see Fig. 2). Aminimum inward 
slope of 1 (Vertical) in 6 (Horizontal) in the base shall 
be provided and it shall not be more than 1 (Vertical) 
in 3 (Horizontal). Base slope is very effective in seismic 
stability of walls. 


6 STONE WORK 


Fresh to fairly fresh rough rectangular flat stones are 
more preferred as they give better contact and friction 


at joints. However, the available boulders can be shaped 
into rectangular pattern and used. There shall be no 
dumping of stones. Dry stones shall be hand placed 
tight and well interlocked with each other. The dry 
stones used for construction shall have amaximum size 
of 300 mm x 300 mm x 200 mm with a weight of about 
40 kg and the minimum size of 100 mm x 100 mm x 
200 mm with a weight of about 5 kg. The largest 
dimension stones shall be placed across the length of 
the retaining wall for maximum stability. The stones 
shall be placed well packed within the bands of cement 
stone masonry. 


7 PLACEMENT OF BACKFILL 


The backfill behind the wall shall consist of inverted 
filter for a thickness of 700 mm-800 mm. The inverted 
filter shall have materials ranging in size from boulder 
to sand, with boulders placed immediately behind the 
wall and sand towards the hill side. The filter should 


HEIGHT OF WALL 


H 


TOE DRAIN 


SURFACE 


IS 14458 (Part 4) : 2018 


consist of three zones: about 300 mm thick layer of 
small boulders (30 mm-40 mm in size) close to the wall, 
200 mm to 250 mm thick gravel fill (5 mm to10 mm in 
size) in the middle and 200 mm to 250 mm thick coarse 
sand (2 mm to 4 mm in size) further inside. The material 
of inverted filter should be properly packed behind the 
retaining wall in layers of 200 mm to 300 mm to cover 
the whole height, leaving about 500 mm to 700 mm 
space towards the top of the retaining wall. On the top 
close to the surface, natural soil or impervious clay soil 
shall be placed and compacted well to prevent ingress 

of surface water directly into the filter. The surface 

material should be filled in such a way that it forms a 

minimum slope angle of 10° or more. Grass or other 

green plantation may be grown on the top slope surface. 

The inverted filter is essentially required as it will help 

to drain out the subsurface water. A typical sketch of 
retaining wall with backfill material and the top layer 

is shown in Fig. 2. 


NATURAL. _ 
SOIL 


SCALE 


Fic. 2 TYPICAL SKETCH OF RETAINING WALL WITH BACKFILL MATERIAL AND THE TOP LAYER 


3 


IS 14458 (Part 4) : 2018 


8 DRAINAGE 


Since about 80 percent ofthe banded dry stone retaining 
walls are made up of dry boulders placed one over the 
other, the collected seepage water in the backfill will 
be freely drained out. Therefore, there is no separate 
need of providing weep holes in the wall. 


9 TOE PROTECTION 


If the retaining wall is located on the hill side end of 
road/terrace, a 500 mm size curved toe drain (see Fig. 2) 
may be provided with a gradient of 1 (vertical) : 20 
(horizontal). This will help to collect the drained water 
through the wall and safely dispose it off. However, if 
the wall is located on the valley side end ofthe terrace 
or no toe drain is provided, the toe of retaining wall 
should be suitably protected following anyone of the 
methods suggested in Fig. 3, as otherwise, the toe 
erosion may lead to destabilization of the wall. 


10 CEMENT STONE MASONRY BANDS 


The banded dry stone masonry wall should be provided 
with a minimum of 500 mm thick cement masonry 
bands at regular intervals of 2 m centre to centre in 
horizontal and vertical directions. The space in between 
the bands shall be packed tightly with dry stones 
(see 6 for details). 


If the foundation is weak or the soil not well compacted, 
a 200 mm to 300 mm thick RCC raft shall be provided 
just below the bottom-most cement stone masonry band. 
For increasing the shearing resistance between the raft 
and the ground below, a series of 10 mm to 16 mm 


FALLING RAIN WATER 


a 
OIL AND SOFT ROCK 


MAY ERODE OR CREEP AWAY 


3A Without Toe 


3B Dissipation of Water Energy 


diameter steel bars shall be driven into the soil below 
RC band up to a depth of 2 m at 500 mm centre-to- 
centre using a jack hammer. The free end of the bars 
shall be tied to the reinforcements of RC band. Further 
it is advisable that the reinforcements from the raft shall 
penetrate into the bottom-most cement stone masonry 
band of the retaining wall for better bonding between 
the raft and the masonry section 


11 APPROACH TO DESIGN OF RETAINING 
WALLS 


The level of efforts required for designing retaining 
walls are different depending on the resources available. 
However, depending upon the height of retaining walls, 
the following approach can be used. 


11.1 Design Consideration 


The banded dry stone masonry retaining walls up to 
3 m height can be designed by the following thumb rule: 


a) Top width = 0.50 m, and 
b) Base width = 0.65 to 0.70 times the height of 
walls. 


In general, it is not desirable to construct banded dry 
stone walls for heights more than 3 m. However, the 
height can be increased to a maximum of 4 m in 
exceptional cases. 


11.2 Depth of Foundation 


The depth of foundation of the retaining walls may be 
kept at 0.50 m to 0.75 m. 


WALL WITH TOE 
BUILT AS PART 
OF WALL 


TOE BUILT SEPARATELY 
SERVES AS SUPPORT 
TO WALL 


3C Toe Built Separatly Serves as Support to Wall 


Fic. 3 TOE PROTECTION FOR RETAINING WALLS 


IS 14458 (Part 4) : 2018 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Hill Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 56 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Advance Technology & Engg. Service, New Delhi 
Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, Shillong 


CSIR - Central Institute of Mining & Fuel Research, Roorkee 


CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


CSIR — Central Soil & Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Defence Terrain Research Laboratory (DRDO), New Delhi 
Department of Science & Technology, New Delhi 
Directorate General of Border Roads, New Delhi 


G. B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment Development, 
Almora 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 


Housing & Urban Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Indian Metrological Department, New Delhi 


Konkan Railway Corporation, Mumbai 
Maccaferri Environment Solution Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


National Highway Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, Hepali 
National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee 


Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd, Rishikesh 

SJVN Ltd, Shimla 

Snow Avalanche Study and Establishment (DRDO), Chandigarh 
THDC India Ltd, Rishikesh 

Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun 

BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 

Dr R. ANBALAGAN (Chairman) 
Dr M. SHARMA 
Suri J. K. PRASAD 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR 

Suri Asay CHAURASIA (Alternate) 
SHRI SHEO PRASAD SINGH 

SHRIPREM CHAND MATHUR (Alternate) 
Dr R. K. GoEL 

SHRI ANIL Swarup (Alternate) 
Dr KISHOR KUMAR 

Dr PANKAJ GUPTA 
Dr ManisH GUPTA 

Suri Hari Dev (Alternate) 
Director HCD (NW& S) 

DIRECTOR (SARDAR SAROVAR) (Alternate) 
Dr L. K. SINHA 
SHRI BHOOP SINGH 
Bric V. S. KATTARYA 

Bric R. K. Sharma (Alternate) 
SHRI KIREET KUMAR 


Suri M. S. Bopas 

Dr T. B. Gosuat (Alternate) 
CHAIRMAN AND MANAGING DIRECTOR 
Dr P. K. CHampati Ray 

Dr AJANTA Goswami (Alternate ) 
Dr M. N. VILADKAR 

Dr MAHENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 
Dr O. P. MISHRA 

Dr H. S. ManDaL (Alternate) 
SHRI RAJESH AGARWAL 
SHRIMATI MINI KORULLA 
Dr Ram KUMAR 

Suri R. P. Sinn (Alternate) 
SHRI S. MURUGAPPAN 
Suri R. D. SINGH 

Dr SUDHIR Kumar (Alternate) 
SHRI SUMIT JAIN 
Suri A. K. CHADHA 
CoL P. MATHUR 
Suri T. S. ROUTELA 


Dr S. K. BARTARYA 


Suri SANJAY Pant, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (Civil Engg) 


[Representating Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI Manos KUMAR RAJAK 
Scientist ‘C’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


5 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 56 (10720). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


