(Reaffirmed 2000)

IS : 11538- 1986

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN AND INSTALLATION OF FARM DRAINAGE PUMPING PLANTS
Composition
Chairman DR A. M. MICHAEL Members DR A. K. B~ATTACHA~YA ( Alternate to Dr A. M. Michael ) Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar DR M. C. AGARWAL Tocklai Experimental Station, Jorhat DR BHUPAL SINGH G. B. Pant University of Agricultural and DR H. S. CHAUHAN Technology, Pantnagar DR SEWA RAM ( Alternate ) CIIIEF ENGINEER PWD Irrigation (North), Government of Karnataka, Belgaum SUPERINTENDING ENQINEER D1nEC$o~~~N~ ) ( Alternate ) Irrigation Research and Development, Pune EXECUTIVWENGINEER ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR ( FCM ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi SHRI V. S. HI(PDE Hulgul Group Cooperative Society, Sirsi SHRI N. G. JOSHI Indian Hume Pipe Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. D. KHEPA~ Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana DR SITA RAM SINGH ( Alternate ) SRRI V. PATTABIII Hyderabad Industries Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI A. K. GWPTA ( Alternate ) Dn H. PURN.~PRAQNACHAR University of Agricultural Sciences, Bangalore DR R. K. RAT Rajendra Agricultural University, Patna DR T. K. SARKAR Damodar Valley Corporation, Calcutta SHRI G. K. SRINIVASAN Wavin India Limited, Madras SHI~I K. R. RANQARAJAN ( Alternate ) Khadi and Village Industries Commission, Bombay SHRI V. VASUDEVAN SHRI B. P. SRIVASTAVA ( _&tern& ) SHRI T. PURNANANDAM, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ofi& Member ) Director ( Agri & Food ) Secretary SHRI R. N. SHARYA Joint Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

of the Farm

Drainage

Sectional

Committee,

AFDC

47

Representing Indian Agricultural New Delhi Research Institute ( ICAR ),

@ Copyright 1986
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Cofiyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 11538 - 1986

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN AND INSTALLATION OF FARM DRAINAGE PUMPING PLANTS

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 January 1986, after the draft finalized by the Farm Drainage Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. and practices useful plants for drainage

0.2 This standard is intended to provide principles to engineers in the planning and design of pumping of farm land.

0.3 In preparation of this standard, assistance has been taken from ASAE EP 369-1974 `Design of agricultural drainage pumping plants,' issued by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers, USA. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether this standard is complied with, the final expressing the results of a test or analysis, dance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of the rounded off value should be the same in this standard. a particular requirement of value, observed or calculated shall be rounded off in accorsignificant places retained in as that of the specified value

1. SCOPE 1.1 This pumping
standard covers the guidelines for design plants for farm drainage purposes.
This standard does not cover the pumping

and

installation

of

NOTE -

plant for deep well drainage.

2. CLASSIFICATION

OF WATER

STORAGE

SYSTEM
as follows: both

2.1 Water

storage

system for pumping

plants shall be classified and temporarily

a) Open Storage Tank - For collecting surface and ground water. b) Sumps *Rules

storing

For storing

ground

water only.

for rounding

off numerical

values ( revised ).

2

IS : 11538 - 1986
NOTE Under the monsoonic rainfall situation, surface drainage component would be much more than the subsurface one. On the other hand, during post monsoon period, pumping requirement would essentially consist of subsurface component and capacity of pumps would be much lower. A drainage pumping plant under such situtation would require design of two pumping plants; larger one to meet monsoon requirement and smaller one for post monsoon period.

3. PLANNING 3.1 The drainage

OF AREA

TO BE PUMP

DRAINED

system of the area served by the pumping plants should be planned to meet both drainage needs of the area as well as efficient operation of the pumps. 3.1.1 Runoff from high ground, suitable outlet, should be excluded around the area or by channelling when removable by gravity flow to a from the pumped area by diversion through the area.

3.1.2 Protection of pumped area against overflow or back water from the outlet should be provided by perimeter dikes designed against overtopping, wave action, erosion and instability of high water stages. Direct disposal of stored water by gravity in the storage reservoir could be made by the pipe outlets through the embankment. These outlets should be protected by gates to prevent backflow during the high exterior water stages and permit outflow during low water stages. This would reduce load on pumping system. 3.1.3 The following: drainage system of the pumped area should provide the with

a) An optimum the designed

storage tank/sump water stage depth of water table.

commensurate

b) In case of surface drainage system, use of undeveloped swamp or low land near or adjoining the pumping plant to supplement tank/sump water storage for reduction of the pumping rate. c) Drainage channels discharging water to the water should be suitably designed to avoid channel scour. tank/sump

3.1.4 Pumping plant location should be at or near the point of lowest Site elevation of the pumped area and accessible to an adjacent outlet. adjustments should be made as necessary to provide foundations without excessive use of piling, freedom from flooding of operating equipment, ready access to fuel or power supply and protection from vandalism. 3.2 The outlet channel handling the discharge. the applicable statutory 4. PUMPING from the pumped area shaI1 be If it is to discharge in an irrigation requirements should be followed. adequate for canal system,

PLANT

CAPACITY
be determined from the

4.1 The

drainage

pumping rate and frequency should requirement and temporary storage. 3

IS : 11538 - 1986 4.1.1 The drainage requirement soils, land use, types of crops and requirements may be expressed as removed per unit of area per unit be computed on the basis of local 4.1.2 Pumping plant capacity should be based on surface coefficients respectively. 5. PUMP SELECTION AND would vary with climate, topography, Such cost effectiveness of the system. a coefficient or quantity of water to be Drainage coefficient should of time. data ( see also 4 of IS : 10907-1984" ). drainage designed

for surface and/or subsurface and/or subsurface drainage

INSTALLATION

5.1 The selection of the drainage pump would usually be based on designed discharge and total head as well as type of power available. 5.2 Pump performance varies with head, speed, discharge and power reThe effect of these factors on efficiency of the pumping lationships. operation may be obtained from pump manufacturer's performance curves or pump characteristics for each kind and size of pump made. 5.2.1 Cavitation is caused as a result of absolute pressure dropping below the vapour pressure of the liquid which passes through suction and impeller inlet. It results in pump vibration and noise, reduces pump discharge and efficiency and causes pump deterioration. Performance curves are useful for guidance in making proper selection and to ensure These curves would help to avoid proper operation without cavitation. the following at the time of pump selection: a) Heads much higher than those at optimum efficiency. b) Capacities much lower than capacity at peak efficiency. suction heads c) Suction lifts abnormally higher, or net positive ( NPSH ) lower than the rated for the pump. d) Speeds higher than those recommended

for the pump.

5.3 Total head ( ZYt) is sum of static head ( H ), velocity head ( Hv ) and friction head ( Hf ) and is total energy that a pump should impart at designed discharge. 5.3.1 Static head or lift, is the vertical distance between the free water surface at the suction side of the pump and the free water surface at the discharge pipe side of the pump when discharge pipe is submerged, or at the centre of the discharge pipe when discharge pipe is not submerged. For the purpose of designing, His to be considered from the lowest level on the suction side to the highest water level on the discharge pipe side.
*Code for design of farm drainage tile or pipe system. 4

IS:11538 -1986 5.3.2 Velocity head ( Hv ) in m, for various can be calculated as follows: Hv =G
where pump sizes and capacities

-0.083 g

V = column
Q = pump D = diameter,

velocity capacity,

at discharge ma/s;

end, m/s;

m; and due to gravity.

g = acceleration

5.3.3 When water or any other liquid moves through a pipe line, the This resistance depends on the latter offers some resistance to the flow. diameter, length, type and condition of the pipe and its fittings and velocity of flow. The values of head loss due to friction in pipes may be obtained on the basis of IS : 2951 ( Part 1 )-1965". Head loss due to friction for PVC pipes may be obtained from the supplier. 5.3.3.1 When calculating pipe losses allowances should be included for tees, bends, valves, and other fittings and obstructions in a particular pipe line. The values can be obtained from IS : 2951 ( Part 2 )-1965t and added to the value obtained for straight pipes ( see 5.3.3 ). 5.4 Size of pump ( diameter of the discharge pipe at the pump can be calculated on the basis of the following formula: outlet )

D
where

=

~ l-l3 ( v>
m; m/s.

( Q)+

D

=' size

of the pump, capacity,

Q = pump

m3/s; and

V = column velocity,

5.4.1 The column velocity of a pump may range between 2.0 to 3.7 m/s, however 3 m/s may be used as an initial estimate in developing the pumping plant design. 5.5 The discharge pipe should be of adequate capacity and water tight.
Part 1 Head Part 2 Head

*Recommendation for estimation of flow of liquids in closed conduits: loss in straight pipes due to frictional resistance. $Recommendation for estimation of flow of liquids in closed conduits: loss in valves and fittings. 5

IS:11538 - 1986 5.5.1 The discharge pipe may be gradually enlarged the pump by several pipe sizes to decrease velocity head decrease the power cost.
away from and thereby

NOTE - The friction losses in the discharge pipe can be reduced greatly by use of larger diameter pipe, usually 5 to 15 cm larger than the pump discharge flange. The transition can be made through a short expanding section of pipe at the pump flange, usually over a length of 60 cm ( see Fig 1 ).

FIG.

1

DIAGRAM INDICATING USE OF LARGERPIPE TO REDUCE FRICTION Loss

5.5.2 Submerged discharges are recommended to keep heads as low as A non-return or flap valve should be used at the pipe end to possible. prevent backflow through the pump. Erosion protection from discharging water should be considered when outletting into a earthen channel. 5.5.3 A siphon may be used whenever drainage water is pumped over a dike for both reduction in total head and reduction in power cost. 5.5.3.1 Priming head shall be greater than operating head. The pump should be able to deliver a full cross section of water over the crest at a velocity over I.5 m/s. However, a limit on maximum lift of the siphon and maximum velocity of flow at the crest should be maintained to prevent reducing inside pressure at the crest to avoid cavitation. Discharge pipe should be sufficiently submerged to prevent air entrainThe pipe section at the crest should have sufficient strength to ment. resist external atmospheric pressure. 5.5.3.2 A siphon breaker shall be installed at the highest point in pipeline to prevent reverse flow during a power interruption ( see Fig. 2 ). The siphon breaker would be actuated when power stops or flow reverses. The non-return flap valve at the end of the discharge pipe may serve in lieu of a siphon breaker for small pumping plants. 5.5.3.3 An air release valve is required to insure smooth priming the siphon. This is preferably installed at the top of the bend CJutkt the discharge pipe and near the water surface. of of

6

IS : 11538- 1986 5.6 Typical drainage pump installations and head relationships that should be considered in their design is shown in Fig. 2. In installation, guidance may be taken from IS : 9694 ( Part 2 )-1980*.

ATER

LEVEL

L-

PUMPING WATER LEVEL

GH

WATER

LEVEL LEVEL

UMPING LOW

WATER

WATER

LEVEL

FIG. 2

TYPICAL DRAINAGEPUMPINSTALLATION - Contd

installation, *Code of practice for selection, horizontal centrifugal pumps for agricultural purposes:

operation and maintenances Part 2 Installation.

of

7

_

VACUUM

BREAKER

LENGTH

OF

DlSCHARGE

AIR

ESCAPE

VALYE

\

fY
Y HIGH WATER LEVEL Z LEVEL A OUTSIDE DISCHARGE PUMPING WATER ks LEVEL S AVERAGE SIPHON HEAD DIA OF PIPE HEAD TOCENTRE OF ELBOW DISCHARGE HEAD LINE

LOW

WATER

1

FIG.

2

TYPJCAL

DRAINAGE

PUMP INSTALLATIONS

tS : 11538 - 1986 6. STORAGE 6.1 The auxiliary designed excessive volume of drainage runoff to be stored in the tank/sump and areas will vary from a maximum expected total runoff of the storm to a minimum set by the pumping rate that would prevent numbers of pump starts and stops by the power source.

6.2 For manual operation of the pumps, pump starts may be limited to The volume of storage two per day for convenience of the operator. for two starts per day should be calculated on the basis of following formula: S= where S = volume of storage, ma, and Q = pump capacity, ma/s. 11235Q

6.3 For automatic operation of pumps, cycles of operation should be limited to about 10 per hour. This occurs when inflow is equal to oneMinimum storage may be calculated as half of the pump capacity. follows: S = 90 Q where S = volume of storage, ma, and Q = pump capacity, 7. TANK/SUMP DESIGN ma/s.

7.1 The shape, size, and position of the storage tank/sump with respect to the pump affect the efficiency of the pumping operation. 7.2 Efficient pump operation requires special sump dimensions and pump clearance for smooth free flow of water in the suction intake pipe. Essential clearances are shown in Fig. 3. Sump water level should be maintained above a minimum submergance of the pump suction intake and is determined by the greater of the following independent conditions: Water cover over the propeller pump self-priming. should be sufficient to keep the by

b)

Net positive suction head ( NPSH ) should be as determined the pump manufacturer to overcome cavitation. 9

IS : 11538- 1986
c) as usually recommended Submergence, literature for vortex suppression, determined the following formula, is maintained: in manufacturers' approximately from

where xMinimum submergence, ma/s; and bell diameter, m. to prevent too frequent m; Q = Pump d) capacity,

d = Pump suction

Water storage capacity should be sufficient pump starts and stops.

7.2.1 Sump dimensions for automatic operation can be varied to fit field condition and be in line with economical installation. Generally the sump should not be deep but large and shallow. For efficient automatic operation, storage depth of sump of O-7 to 1.0 m below the bottom of the pump is recommended. Greater sump storage depth usually add to both In some soils, installation and operation costs of the pumping plant. wide and frequent fluctuations in water depth cause serious bank sloughing and channel erosion. 7.2.2 In case of large circular sump, rotational by placing the pump near the wall. effect can be minimized

7.2.3 Floor of the approach channel and sump should be level for a distance of 5 times of diameters of the suction bell measured from the centreline of the pump. Approach velocity to the pump should be kept to 0'3 m/s unless the sump configuration has been checked for eddy Trash rack openings below minimum currents by the manufacturer. static water level should permit water passage at designed velocity. 7.2.4 Side the diameter wall clearance of the suction of pumps should bell. not be less than centrelines to that 24 times should necessary

7.2.5 Minimum clearance be the sum of the diameters 7.2.6 Back wall clearance for maintaining the pumps.

between adjacent pump of the suction bells. of pumps may be reduced

7.2.7 Where ditch storage is provided, size of culvert inlet passing water to the sump should be sufficient to handle the maximum pump discharge at a velocity not exceeding 0.6 m/s. 7.2.8 Drain tile outlets discharging into a sump should be located as far from the pump as possible so as to minimize effect of turbulence and air entrainment. 10

FIG. 3 8. POWER SOURCE

RECOMMENDEDSUMP CLEARANCES

8.1 Driving units fueled engines. an adequate and site at reasonable

for pump may Electric motors reliable source cost. Internal

be electric motors, diesel, petrol or gas provide an economical installation when of electric power is available close to the combustion engines should be used when 11

IS:11538-

1986
or is too costly. `Use of solar energy should be and easily conform to

the source of electric power is not reliable alternate sources of energy like wind mills and considered wherever feasible.

8.2 Electric power is convenient for pump drainage operation Motors and controls should adapted to automatic operation. requirements of the relevant Indian Standards.

8.3 Diesel and petrol engines may be adapted for variation in speed over a broad range and are limited only by the range of critical speeds which produce dangerous torsional vibrations. 9. DRIVE

HEADS

9.1 Drive

heads are required to connect the power source to the pump. Loss of efficiency through these units range from none in direct connections to about 5 percent in gear connections, and up to 10 percent in multiple belt connections. Proper direction of pump rotation should be maintained in all drive applications. 9.1.1 vertical Direct connected position. hollow shaft electric required motors to are connect suited used in a

9.1.2 A combustion

right angle gear engines to vertical heads

drive is pumps.

internal to small

9.1.3 Multiple V-belt pump installations.

and flat pulley heads are

10. AUTOMATIC 10.1 Automatic
a) b) c) d) e) f)

OPERATION

operation is used primarily with electrical power sources. Points to be considered in applying such equipment are given below: Evaluation advantages of added sought. installation and part maintenance of owner rules. of controls. maintenance engines systems or costs against if

Possible lack of interest on the operation is too much automated. Controls Possibility Hazards compatible of winter of moisture getting

operator

with state electricity operation

into or submergence in cold climates. and

Greater requirement including lubrication

of operator vigilance and trash rack cleaning.

10.2 Automatic controls are available for internal combustion Such such as an electric starting system for air cooled engines. are not readily adaptable to most pump installations. 10.3 Protective controls shall be supplied I2 for all installations.

IS : 11538- 1986 10.3.1 Automatic or electric units should have safety shut-off against overload, low voltage, and excessive heating. 10.3.2 Internal combustion engines should have controls which protect against overheating, low oil pressure and excessive speed. 10.3.3 Auxiliary warning devices, such as signal lights and siren on the pump house should be provided for attention of the owner or operator. 11. HOUSING 11.1 Type of housing for pumping plants depends upon importance size of the plant, type of power used and plant location. and

11.1.1 Factors influencing need for housing are air temperature, wind, humidity, precipitation and flooding fuel storage, safety, vendalism and plant appearance. 11.1.2 Materials used for housing should be fire resistant, durable and easily maintained. waterproof,

11.1.3 Size of housing should be sufficient for the containment and Provision should be made for removing the servicing of the equipment. pumps when required. 12. TRASH RACKS 12.1 Trash racks should be provided to prevent entry of floating debrish/ trash into sumps where damage to pumps might otherwiseoc cur. 12.1.1 Trash racks should be set not less than 24 times the suction bell diameter in front of the centerline of the pumps. 12.1.2 Velocity 0.6 m/s. 12.1.3 of flow through the trash rack should not exceed

Recommended up to 400 450-600
760-l 060

trash rack bar spacing is as follows:
Bar Spacing, mm

Pump Diameter, mm

20 25 to 38
50

1 060 and above

65 to 75

12.1.4 Trash racks should be sloped so that cIeaning by hand is easily done or they should be equipped with mechanical_cleaner. 12.1.5 Where trash racks are not feasible, galvanized basket strainers may be used on small pumps to prevent entry of small gravel and debris. 13

INDIAN ON FARM IS: 8967 8967

STANDARDS

DRAINAGE

( Part 1 )-1978 ( Part 2 )-I983

Farm drainage Part 2 Perforated concrete

clay tiles:

Part 1 Tiles with open joints

tiles with collar joints

8968-1973 9271-1979 9633-1980 9696-1980 9979-1981 10907-1984

Farm drainage Farm drainage Farm drainage Code of practice

tiles

plastic pipes asbestos cement pipes for installation for farm drainage tile or pipe system

Code for design and laying of mineral filter for tile drain system Code for design of farm drainage tile or pipe drain system

