( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 1885 ( Part 59 ) - 1986

Indian Standard
ELECTROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY
PART 69 EDUCATIONAL OR TRAINING EQUIPMENT AND SYSTEMS

Basic Standards on Electronics and Telecommunication Sectional Committee, LTDC 1
Chairman Pnov S. SAMPATH Representing Chairman, Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council, IS1

Mmnbrrs DR KAILASH CH~D~A SHRI B. A. CHETTY DIREOTO~ National Physical Laboratory (CSIR ), New Delhi Department of Electronics, New Delhi Deparf;yhFt of Science & Technology, New

JOINT DIREOTOR, STDS ( S & T )-IV Railway Board ( Ministry of Transport ) JOINT DIRECTOR, STDS ( S & T )/ TELE ( Alternate ) SHRI 0. P. KHUSHU Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi WG-CDR S. S. MOTIAL Directorate of Technical Development & ~~$urt~ (Air ), Ministry of Defence, SQN-LDR K. N. SAB~PATE KUMAR ( Altrrnatce) Sn~r S. MnTnnaw.4rd~ Department of Telecommunications, New Delhi SERI T. C. RA~HAVAN ( Altrrnatr ) COL B. K. RAI ( RETIRED ) Institution of Electronics & Telecommunication Engineers, New Delhi MAJ-GEN J. C. AHLVWALIA ( RETIRED ) ( Altcrnatc ) Ministry of Defence (R & D ) SHRI B. S. RAO SERI P.C. NAGPAL (Alternate) LT-GEN D. SWAROOP ( RETIRED ) Vice-Chairman Electronics and Telecommu nication Division Council, IS1 SHRI N. SRINIVASAN, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Membrr ) Director ( Electronics ) ( Semtar) ) ( Continued m pats 2 ) Q Copyright INDIAN STANDARDS 1987 INSTITUTION

This ' p$blication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher ,&a11 be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. *

IS : 1885 ( Part 59 ) - 1986 ( Continued from page 1) Recording Sectional Committee,
Chairman
SHRI N. J. NAIB

LTDC

23

Representing Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi

Members (Alternate Shri N. J. Nair ) SHRI K. CHANDRACHUDAN SHRI M. P. SAMA ( Alternate)
SHRI

V. N. MATHUB

to
Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi

SHRI V. P. GANATRA Vimal Enterprises Ltd, Umbergam SHRI Y. P. GANATRA (Aftcrnatc ) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, SHRI K. L. GARB New Delhi SHRI R. V. NARAYANAN ( Alternate j Peko Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay; and SHRI A. DAS GUPTA '

SHRI T. S. BUXI ( Alternate ) Gramophone Co of India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI D. K. GUPTA SHRI J. K. MAITRA (Alternate ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi SHRI R. G. GUPTA ~ _Sm ( Alternqte ) JOINT DIEEOTOB STD ( S 8s T ) TELX~. Railway Board, New Delhi JOINT DIBE~TOI~ STD~ ( 9 & T ) LAB ( Ahnatr ) Film & TV Institute of India, Pune MANAQER ( MAINTENANCE) Natiogmai Physical Laboratory ( CSIR DR V. MOHANAN

The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers Association ( RETMA ), Bombay

),

New

SHRI B. C. MUKHERJEE National Test House, Calcutta SHRI J. K. BHATTACEARYA (Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-COL S. P. MuR~AI SHRI K. BERA ( Alternate ) Bharat Electronicr Ltd, Bangalore SHRI S. C. PATEL Electronic Component Industries Association SHRI SUNIL PATEL ( ELCINA ), New Delhi Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute SHRI K. D. PAVATE ( CSIR ), Pilani SHRI M. R. KAPOOR ( Alternate ) Directorate General Doordarshan, New Delhi SHRI VIRENDRA VIJAY SHRI P. K. CHOUDHURY ( Altematc ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-ojicio Mem6rr ) SEXI N. SRINIVASAN,

Director

( Electronics)

Senatag
SRRI PAVAN KUMAR Deputy Director ( Electronics), IS1

IS t 1885 ( Part 59 ) - 1986

Indian Standard
ELEETROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY
PART 59 EDUCATIONAL OR TRAINING EQUIPMENT AN6 -SYSTEMS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 59 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 18 June 1986, after the draft finalized by the Basic Standards on Electronics and Telecommunication Sectional Committee in consultation with the Recording Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This standard covers terms and definitions intended to be used by practitioners in the field of audio-visual and electronic technology ( for information and communication ).

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 59 ) covers terms and definitions relating to audio visual and electronic technology ( for information and communication ) for use in educational or training equipment ,and systems. 2. TERMS 2.1 Audio AND DEFINITIONS Equipment

2.1.1 Audio Equifimcnt - Devices used for processing sound signals, such as microphones, amplifiers, recorders and reproducers. 2.1.2 Audio Magnetic Tape Recorder - A magnetic recording/reproducing apparatus in which the recording medium is in the form of a magnetic tape. The magnetic tape may be handled by any one of a number of methods, for example, reel to reel, cassette, or cartridge. 2.1.3 Audiostriped Card RccorderjAudiocard Recorder - A special form of audio tape recorder which records and plays only audiostriped cards. 2.1,.4 Audiopage Recorder - A special form of audio tape recorder record#,and plays only audiopages. which

IS I 1885 ( Part 59 ) - 1986 2.1.5 Audio Tape Deck - An apparatus consisting of a tape transport system, magnetic replay head, preamplifier(s) and associated controls. 2.1.6 Record Player - A mechanical device of a reproducing equipment consisting of a turntable with its driving system, a tone arm and a pick-up head. 2.1.7 Audio Magnetic Tape Player - A magnetic reproducing apparatus in which the recorded medium is in the form a magnetic tape. The tape may be handled by any one of a number of methods, for example, reel-to-reel, cassette, or cartridge. 2.1.8 Dictating Machine - A machine designed to record speech and some times also to reproduce it, SO that a written record can be produced. 2.1.9 Audio Tape Duplicator -A recording system capable of making one or more copies of a recorded magnetic tape of blank tape(s), usually at higher than normal reproducing speed. 2.1.10 Audio Desk/Audio Console controlled audio equipment. 2.1.11 Audio Amplzjier -Electronic input audio frequency signals. 2.1.12 Audio Mixer-Means more sources are mixed. A structure for mounting operatoramplifies the level of \

device which in which

the output signals of two or

2.1.13 Audio-Compressor -Electronic device often incorporated in a preamplifier for decreasing the dynamic range of a signal by raising the level of low volume parts of lowering the level of high volume parts or both. 2.1.14 Radio Tuner-Electronic device which detects and amplifies the signal of a broadcasting station. It may detect frequency modulation (FM) and/or amplitude (AM). 2.1S5 Radio Receiver - A device connected to an aerial or other source of radio signals in order to make available in some desired form the required information content of the signals. 2.1.16 Listening Centre - A distribution device into which headphones can be connected to enable more than one person to listen to an audio It may have more than one programme channel, be programme. monophonic or stereo, and may have volume controls. transducer which transforms 2.1.17 Earphone - An electro-acoustic electrical energy into sound energy and is intended to be closely coupled acoustihlly to the ear.

IS : 1885( Part 59 ) - 1986 2.1.18 Headphone 2.1.19 Headset on a headband. Assembly of one or two earphones on a headband. and one or two earphones that converts the that converts the

Assembly of a microphone

2.1.20 Loudspeaker - An electro-acoustic electrical energy into acoustical energy. 2.1.21 Microphone - An electro-acoustic acoustical energy into electrical energy. 2.2 Video Equipment

transducer transducer

2.2.1 Video Equipment - Devices used for generating, processing, storing, retrieving, distributing and/or displaying video signals. Also generally handles audio and control signals used with video. 2.2.2
Video Signal -

Electrical

signal generated

from an optical image.

Tape Recorder - An equipment for recording and 2.2.3 Video The tape may reproducing video and audio signals on magnetic tape. be handled by any one of a number of methods, for example, reel-toreel, cassette, or cartridge.

2.2.4 Video Tape Player - An equipment for reproducing video and The tape may be handled by audio signals recorded on magnetic tape. any one of a number of methods, for example, reel-to-reel, cassette, or cartridge. 2.2.5 Editing - The selecting, rearranging into a new complete programme. and assembling of sequences

2.2.6 Editing Video Tape Recorder - A video tape recorder with special features which allow the electronic editing of video tapes. 2.2.7 Viedo Tape Duplicator - A recording system capable one or more copies of a recorded video tape on blank tape. of making

2.2.8 Television Camera - Equipment embodying the necessary optical and electronic apparatus for taking a television picture for transmission recording. 2.2.9 Video Monitor-An electronic device for controlling displaying on a cathode ray tube (CRT) video signals provided video source. and by a

2.2.10 Television Receiver - A receiver which repoduces the visual and aural `components of a television programme. 5

IS : 1885 ( Part 59 ) - 1986 2.2.11 Television Desk/Television Console -Desk-type structure equipped with a number of control devices for such things as picture and sound selection, special effects, and technical adjustments to maintain picture quality. 2.2.12 Television Projector - An electronic device that projects television pictures on a large screen by means of an optical system. in which the manually controlled 2.2.13 Telewriter - Apparatus movements of a pen over a plane surface are converted into two currents of varying strength for transmission over two independent channels to control, at the receiving end, the movement of a similar pen. 2.2.14
Telecinc Equipment/ Telecine -

Equipment

for televising films.

system which distributes video and 2.2.15 Closed Circuit Television -A audio signals to specific receivers monitor by means of cable and/or microwave transmission. 2.2.16 Film Chain - A system of fixed television camera(s) and appropriate projector(s) used to transmit projected materials ( usually motion pictures, sides, filmstrips and opaque materials ) through a television system. 2.3 Photographic Equipment 2.3.1 Photographic Equipment - Devices used in the production still or motion picture images on a light-sensitive surface. of either

device designed for the photographic 2.3.2 Motion Picture Camera -A production of a series of images on motion picture film, usually at the rate of 18 or 24 images per second. device used for exposing 2.3.3 Still Camera -A intended to be shown as single photographs. photographic film

2.3.4 Microform Camera - A camera designed for producing micro-images which are generally negative and too small to be read without magnification. 2.3.5 Exposure Meter/Light MeterA device used for determining the length of exposure and the aperture of the diaphragm based upon a measurement of the light, either falling on or reflected from the subject to be photographed, and the sensitivity of the film. 2.3.6 Electronic Flash -A reusable but inte+nseflash of light to illuminate lighting device which emits a brief the object to be photographed.

IS : 1885 ( Part 59 ) - 1986 2.3.7 Copystand - A vertical or horizontal stand with an adjustable bracket to hold a camera for photographing flat objects at close range.

2.3.8 Slide Copier/Slide Duplicator - A device for making copies of a slide by photographic means.

one or more

2.3.9 Enlarger - A device designed to make an enlarged copy of a picture usually from a film negative, by projection of the film image onto a lightsensitive material. 2.3.10 Motion Picture Editor - A device which facilitates the selection and rearrangement of film sequences for the purposes of assembling them into a new complete programme. 2.4 Projected
Display Equipment

or motion picture on to a screen. 2.4.2 DiascopelSlide auditorium.

2.4.1 Projected Disfilay Equipment Projector -

Devices still

used for projection used in

of still cinema

A

projector

2.4.3 Filmstrip Projector - A designed to project a series of still images by transilluminating, in turn, each of a series of transparent images contained on a ( usually ) 35 mm wide length of film and transmitting the light to a screen by means of an optical system. 2.4.4 Slide Mount - An opaque frame transparency intended for projection. to support and protect a

2.4.5 Sound Slide Projector - A diascope designed to project slides and reproduce sound simultaneously. by 2.4.6 Overhead Projector - A device which projects an image large transparency resting on a typically transilluminating a 250 x 250 mm or larger horizontal stage, and transmitting the light to a screen located behind the operator/speaker, by means of a lens and An mirror optical system, parts of which are located above the stage. overhead projector operates from in front of the audience, and in normal or nearly normal room illumination. 2.4.7 Viewer - A device designed to permit an individual to examine, one at a time, small transparencies such as slides or filmstrip images, which are transilluminated and slightly magnified by the device. 2.4.8 Sound Synchronizer - A device linking a tape player or recorder and a slide projector or filmstrip projector and which causes the projector to change images in response to cue tones on the tape.

IS : 1885 ( Part 59 ) - 1986 2.4.9 Dissolve Control Unit -A device which provides a gradual transition from one screen image to another by fading in the light of one projector as it fades out the light of another. When the transition is accomplished very rapidly, it is termed a `cut'.

2.4.10 Episcope/Opaque Projector -Apparatus for projecting image of opaque objects such as postcards, on a screen by making use of illumination from the front.
2.4.11 Stereoscope - An optical system, enabling each eye to see a different image of essentially the same object, to give a three dimensional effect.

2.4.12

Epidiascope -

A combination

of the diascope and episcope.

2.4.13 Microprojector microscope slides. 2.4.14 Microform and/or microfiche.

A device designed to project enlarged images of A device designed for viewing microfilms reader allows capable viewing of of a

Reader -

2.4.15 Microform Reader/Printer - A microform providing enlarged copies on paper ( hard copies ). 2.4.16 Front Projection Screen - A screen projected image by reflected light. 2.4.17 Rear Projection Screen - A screen projected image by transmitted light. which which

allows viewing of a for

2.4.18 Motion Picture Projector - A composite apparatus required screening motion pictures and their accompanying sound tracks. 2.4.19 Screen -A images. prepared surface designed for viewing

projected

2.4.20 Image Modz$er - A camera-like device used for projecting an enlarged or reduced image of any original document through a transparent plate SO that a tracing may be made on translucent paper laid on the plate.
2.5 Recorded Materials

2.5.1 Recorded Materials -Materials, such as tape or film, on which information has been stored with the aim of subsequent reproduction.

IS : 1885 (Part 59 ) - 1986 2.5.2 Recording
2.5.2.1

Action by which signals are stored in a material

base.

2.5.2.2 Techniques whereby information is embodied in a material base with the aim of preserving them with a view to their subsequent reproduction. 2.5.2.3 Material base for signals after embodiment extension, the signals themselves after reproduction. and, through

2.5.3 Magnetic Tap - A recording medium in the form of a ribbon, made of a nonmagnetic base coated with a magnetizable material in a suitable binder. 2.5.4
Casset tc

2.5.4.1 A device composed of a superimposed hubs or reels on which the tape can move from hub ( reel ) reproduction, a fast forward movement

case containing two coplanar or a magnetic tape is wound, so that to hub ( reel) during recording, or rewinding.

2.5.4.2 The device can be easily and instantaneously inserted in a recording/reproducing equipment or in a reproducer designed for this purpose, without handling the magnetic tape. 2.5.5
Cartridge

2.5.5.1 A device composed of a case containing a magnetic tape in the form of a multiturn endless loop carried on a single hub. The tape is unwound from the inside turn of the loop and wound on the outside turn of the loop.

2.5.5.2 The device can be easily and instantaneously inserted in a recording/reproducing equipment or in a reproducer designed for this purpose without handling the magnetic tape. 2.5.6 Magnetic Disc/Magnetic Disk - A flat circular magnetic surface on which signals can be recorded. plate with a

2.5.7 Audiotape - A recording medium ( magnetic tape) especially designed for the storage and reproduction of audio frequency signals. 2.5.8 Audiodi.wlAudiodisklRecord/Phunodisc -A piece of plastic material in the form of a disc on which audio information is mechanically recorded.".

IS : 1885 ( Part 59 ) - 1986 2.5.9 Audio-Striped Card, Magnetic-Striped CardlAudiocard - A semi-rigid card that has one or more magnetic stripes for the audio recording and playback of both instructor and student information, and one or more areas for the presentation of visual information.

2.5.10 Audiopage/Audiosheet/Sound Page/Sound Sheet - A sheet having a printing/writing surface on one side and a magnetic coating suitable for the recording and reproduction of audio information on the other side. 2.5.11 Videotape - A recording medium ( magnetic tape ) especially designed for the storage and reproduction of video signals. Audio and control signals can also be recorded. 2.5.12 Videodisc/Videodisk - A disk on which monochrome or colour video signals are recorded along a single spiral groove or concentric circles and which can be reproduced on a standard home TV screen by means of a specially designed disk playing apparatus. A recording may be optical, mechanical or magnetic. Audio information can be recorded on the same groove. 2.5.13 Electronic Display Terminal/Equi~~men~ - A device designed for display of video information ( sometimes accompanied by sound ), generally using a cathode-ray tube. The device can be a television receiver. 2.5.14 Electronic Board - This is a display device to which graphics can be transmitted electronically. 2.6 Projected
and Magnified Materials Materials -Recorded

which are intended system.

2.6.1 Projected and Magnified

to be enlarged

or projected

visual materials by means of an optical

hole or. holes 2.6.2 Aperture Card - A card with a rectangular specifically prepared for the mounting therein of transparent microimages. 2.6.3 Microform -Any material, film or paper, printed or photographic, containing micro-images which are units of information, such as a page of text or a drawing. 2.6.4 Micro&he - A sheet of microfilm, usually containing multiple micro-images in a grid pattern. 26.5 vie$ng
Microscope Slide -

100 x 150

mm,

A thin glass plate holding a minute object for through a microscope or by a microprojector.

IS : 1885 ( Part 59 ) - 1986 2.6.6 Filmstrip -- A length of film, usually perforated, that presents a sequence of related still pictures for projection one at a time. 2.6.7 Slide projection. A transparent image, usually photographic, intended for

2.6.8 Slide/Tape-Tape/Slide - An ordered sequence of slides intended to be projected accompanied by a magnetic tape containing music and/or narration and/or sound effects; and, frequently, cue tines for picture advance and programme stop. 2.6.9 Overhead Slide/Overhead Transflarency - A intended for projection by an overhead projector. large transparency

2.6.10 Stereograph - A pair of opaque or transparent images ( usually photographic ) intended to produce a three dimensional effect when viewed with stereoscopic equipment. 2.6.11 Hologram-A material which dimensions, complete with perspective. photographic technique utilizing a laser.
presents

the illusion of A hologram is created

three by a

length of perforated photographic film 2.6.12 Motion Picture -A bearing a sequence of images which create the illusion of movement when The film may also contain a magnetic or projected in rapid succession. photographic sound track. 2.6.13 Micro-Image magnification.
-

An image which is too small to be read without

11

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units QUANTITY Length Mass
Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous Amount intensity of substance

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS )

UNIT

SYMBOL m kg S A K

metre kilogram

second ampere kelvin
candela mole

cd mol

Supplementary
QUANTITY Plane Angle Solid angle

Units
UNIT radian steradian
SYMBOL

rad sr

Derived

Units UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal
SYMBOL 1N J" w DEBINITION = 1 kg.m/ss

QUANTITY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress

1J
1w 1 Wb 1T 1 Ha 1s 1V 1 Pa

=
= = = = = =

1 N.m 1 Jls 1 V.s 1 Wb/m* 1 c/s (s-l) 1 A/V 1 W/A 1 N/m*

Wb T HZ S V Pa

