Wty HAF IS 16137 (Part 2) : 2014 


(Reaffirmed 2019) 


Ha Wel —USh del h 
Wie wt se al WIDTH Teta 
aT 2 Wen Tela 


Automotive Vehicles — Methods 
of Measurement of Braking 
Coefficient of Road Surfaces 
Part 2 Pendulum Method 


ICS 43.040.40; 93.080.01 


© BIS 2014 


Ra AM emu 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 creme AHL AP, as feeei-110002 
Vela” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2014 Price Group 3 


Automotive Braking and Steering Systems, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee, 
TED 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Automotive 
Braking and Steering Systems, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 


Friction is the force that opposes the relative motion or tendency of such motion of two surfaces in contact. The 
coefficient of friction (also known as the frictional coefficient or the friction coefficient) is a scalar value which 
describes the ratio of the force of friction between two bodies and the force pressing them together. 


This standard specifies two test methods for measurement of Braking Coefficient of road surfaces; namely; 
Standard Reference Test Tyre (SRTT) method and Pendulum method. While Part 1 covers the test method for 
measurement of Peak Braking Coefficient (PBC) using SRTT method; Part 2 covers Pendulum test method for 
quick and periodical checks of skid resistance on the road surfaces to evaluate its status of surface roughness. 


This standard does not support to address all of the safety concerns, if any, associated with its use. It is the 
responsibility of the user of this standard to establish appropriate safety and health practices and determine the 
applicability of regulatory limitations prior to use. 


While formulating this standard considerable assistance has been derived from ASTM E 303 : 1993 ‘Standard 
test method for measuring surface frictional properties using the British pendulum tester’. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16137 (Part 2) : 2014 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — METHODS OF 
MEASUREMENT OF BRAKING COEFFICIENT OF 
ROAD SURFACES 
PART 2 PENDULUM METHOD 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies test method for quick and 
periodical measurements of skid resistance of road 
surfaces using pendulum tester. 


2 SUMMARY OF TEST METHOD 


2.1 This test method consists of using a pendulum- 
type tester with a standard rubber slider to determine 
the frictional properties of a test surface. The British 
Pendulum Tester is a dynamic pendulum impact-type 
tester used to measure the energy loss when a rubber 
slider edge is propelled over a test surface. The tester 
is suited for road surfaces/test surfaces. 


2.2 The values measured, BPN = British Pendulum 
(Tester) Number for test tracks represent the frictional 
properties obtained with the apparatus and the 
procedures stated herein and do not necessarily agree 
or correlate with other measuring equipments. 


2.3 The test track surface is cleaned and thoroughly 
wetted prior to testing. 


2.4 The pendulum slider is positioned to barely come 
in contact with the test surface prior to conducting the 
test. This slider should be swing in the direction of the 
traffic. The pendulum is raised to a locked position, 
then released, thus allowing the slider to make contact 
with the test surface. Four readings are taken in the 
test track (usually the near side of wheel track) speed 
at approximately 5 to 10 m intervals are taken along 
the length under test. The mean of these reading gives 
a representative value of the skid resistance of the road. 


2.5 A drag pointer indicates the British Pendulum 
(Tester) Number. The greater the friction between the 
slider and the test track surface, the more the swing is 
retarded, and the larger the BPN reading. 


3 SIGNIFICANCE AND USE 


3.1 This test method provides a measure of a frictional 
property, micro texture, of road surfaces. 


3.2 The values measured in accordance with this 
method do not necessarily agree or directly correlate 
with those obtained utilizing other methods of 
determining friction properties or skid resistance. 


NOTE — BPN and polish values from similar types of surfaces 
will not be numerically equal, primarily because of the 
differences in slide length and surface shape. Theoretical 
correction of the polish values to obtain numerical equality, 
either by mathematical manipulation or by use of special 
measuring scales is not recommended. 


4 APPARATUS 


4.1 British Pendulum Tester (see Fig. 1) 


The pendulum with slider and slider mount shall weigh 
1 500 + 30 g. The distance of the center of gravity of 
the pendulum from the center of oscillation shall be 
411 +5 mm. The tester shall be capable of vertical 
adjustment to provide a slider contact path of 125 + 
1.6 mm for tests on flat surfaces, and 76 to 78 mm for 
tests on polishing-wheel specimens. The spring and 
lever arrangement shown in Fig. 2 shall give an average 
normal slider load between the 76 mm wide slider and 
test surface of 2 500 + 100 g as measured by the method 
described in Annex A. 


4.2 Slider 


The slider assembly shall consist of an aluminum 
backing plate to which is bonded a 6 mm x 25 mm x 
76 mm rubber strip for testing flat surfaces or a 6 mm 
x 25 mm x 32 mm rubber strip for testing curved 
polishing wheel specimens. The rubber compound shall 
be natural rubber meeting the requirements of the Road 
Research Laboratory or synthetic rubber as specified 
in ASTM E 501 'Specification for rib tire for pavement 
skid-resistant tests’. 


4.2.1 New sliders shall be conditioned prior to use by 
making ten swings on No. 60 grade silicon carbide 
cloth or equivalent under dry conditions. The swings 
shall be made with a tester adjusted as given in 6. 


4.2.2 Wear on the striking edge of the slider shall not 
exceed 3.2 mm in the plane of the slider of 1.6 mm 
vertical to it, as illustrated in Fig. 3. 


4.3 Accessories 


4.3.1 Contact path gage shall consist of a thin ruler 
suitably marked for measuring contact path length 
between 124 mm and 127 mm or between 75 mm and 
78 mm as required for the particular test. 


IS 16137 (Part 2) : 2014 


FRICTION RING—~ - | 
LOCKING RING — `] 


META SLE INE FERS TANE TELTE 


RELEA 
BUTTON —. B d HANDLE 


—-—— 
BALANCE WEIGHT——- f 
LIF TING — /. 


R9 Ti | 
F 1 POINTER ADJUSTMENT SCREW | 


DRAG POINTER 


VERTICAL HEIGHT 
CONTROL KNOBS 


SPIRIT 


LEVELING R 


E SCREW <a 


\ 


RUBBER SLIDER -.— 


LEVEL 
LEVELING SCREWS 


\ 


Fic. 1 BRITISH PENDULUM TESTER 


4.3.2 Miscellaneous equipment, such as water 
container, surface thermometer, and brush is 
recommended. 


5 TEST SPECIMENS 


5.1 Test surfaces shall be free of loose particles and 
flushed with clean water. The test surface does not have 
to be horizontal provided the instrument can be level 
led in working position using only the leveling screws 
and the pendulum head will clear the surface. 


5.2 Laboratory 


Laboratory test panels shall be clean and free of loose 
particles and shall be held rigidly so as not to be moved 
by the force of the pendulum. 


5.2.1 Flat laboratory test panels shall have a test surface 
of at least 89 mm x 152 mm. 


5.2.2 Accelerated laboratory polishing-wheel 
specimens shall have a test surface of at least 
44 mm x 89 mm and shall be curved in the arc of a 
circle 406 mm in diameter. 


6 PREPARATIONS OF APPARATUS 


6.1 Levelling 


Level the instrument accurately by turning levelling 
screws until the bubble is centered in the spirit level. 


6.2 Zero Adjustment 


Raise pendulum mechanism by loosening locking knob 
(directly behind pendulum pivot) and turn either of pair 
of head movement knobs at center of tester to allow 
slider to swing free of test surface. Tighten locking 
knob firmly. Place pendulum till release position and 
rotate the drag pointer counter clockwise until it comes 
to rest against adjustment screw on pendulum arm. 
Release pendulum and note pointer reading. If reading 
is not zero, loosen locking ring and rotate friction ring 
on bearing spindle slightly and lock again. Repeat test 
and adjust friction ring until the pendulum swing 
carries pointer to zero. 


6.3 Slide Length Adjustment 


6.3.1 With pendulum hanging free, place spacer under 


NUT FOR ADJUSTMENT 
OF SPRING TENSION 


LIFTING HANDLE 
FOR SLIDER 


RUBBER 


SUIS OF SLIDER 


STOP TO LIMIT OUTWARD 
MOVEMENT OF SLIDER 


ADJUSTABLE 
BALANCE WEIGHT 


CONTACT PATH 


IS 16137 (Part 2) : 2014 


CENTER OF SWING 


FREE PATH OF SLIDER 
508 mm (20 in.) RADIUS 


TEST SURFACE 


Fic. 2 SCHEMATIC DRAWING OF PENDULUM SHOWING SPRING AND LEVER ARRANGEMENT 


adjusting screw of lifting handle. Lower pendulum so 
edge of slider just touches surface. Lock pendulum 
head firmly, raise lifting handle, and remove spacer. 


6.3.2 Raise slider by lifting handle, move pendulum 
to right lower slider, and allow pendulum to move 
slowly to left until edge of slider touches surface. Place 
gauge beside slider and parallel to direction of swing 
to verify length of contact path. Raise slider, using 
lifting handle, and move pendulum to left, then slowly 
lower until slider edge again comes to rest on surface. 
If the length of the contact path is not between 124 mm 
and 127 mm on flat test specimens or between 75 mm 
and 78 mm on curved polishing-wheel specimens, 
measured from trailing edge to trailing edge of the 


rubber slide, adjust by raising of lowering instrument 
with the front levelling screws. Readjust level of 
instrument if necessary. Place pendulum in release 
position and rotate the drag pointer counter-clockwise 
until it comes to rest against adjustment screw on 
pendulum arm. 


7 SLIDER RUBBER STORAGE 


Rubber sliders are generally considered to have a shelf 
life of 12 months and should be stored in the dark with 
a constant environment, preferably below 15 °C. 


8 PROCEDURES 


8.1 Apply sufficient water to cover the test area 


IS 16137 (Part 2) : 2014 


thoroughly. Execute one swing, but do not record 
reading. 


NOTE — Always catch the pendulum during the early portion 
of its return swing. While returning the pendulum to its starting 
position, raise the slider with its lifting handle to prevent contact 
between the slider and the test surface. Prior to each swing, 
the pointer should be returned until it rests against the 
adjustment screw. 


8.2 Without delay, make four more swings, rewetting 
the test area each time and record the results. 


NOTE — Care should be taken that the slider remains parallel 
to the test surface during the swings, and does not rotate so 
that one end rather than the entire striking edge makes the 
initial contact. Available data indicate that tilting of the slider 
may cause erroneous BPN readings. Installation of a small flat 
spring will relieve the problem. The spring can be inserted 


Mc a | 


(1/8 in.) 


into a slot in the spring clip and the assembly secured by the 
cotter pin as shown in Fig. 4. The free ends of the spring can 
rest on the slider backing plate to restrain the slider from tilting. 


8.3 Recheck the slide contact length in accordance 
with 4.3. 


9 REPORTS 
Report the following information: 


a) Individual values in BPN or polish value units; 
b) Temperature of the test surface; 
c) Type, age, condition, texture and test surface; 


d) Type and source of aggregate for polish value 
tests; and 


e) Type and age of the rubber slider. 


1.6 mm 
(1/16 in.) 


Fic. 3 SLIDER ASSEMBLY ILLUSTRATING THE MAXIMUM WEAR ON STRIKING EDGE 


[^ A SPRING SPRING CLIP ET 


Lak 


Fic. 4 SPRING CLIP AND SPRING TO INHIBIT SLIDER ROTATION 


RABARAVArcecasecerease 


———— — e 


ANNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN 
E WASHER 


Al 


A-A 


4 


10 PRECISION AND BIAS 


NOTE — The following material pertains only to the precision 
and bias of BPN units. 


10.1 Repeated tests show standard deviations as follows: 


1.0 BPN unit 
1.2 BPN units 


British rubber sliders 


Rubber sliders (conforming to 
ASTM E 501) 


In both cases the upper quartile of variability is 
represented in prevailing test instruments. As there is 
no marked correlation between standard deviation and 
arithmetic mean of sets of test values, it appears that 
standard deviations are pertinent to this test regardless 
of the average skid resistance being tested. 


10.2 The relationship, if any exists, of observed BPN 
units to some ‘true’ value of skid resistance has not 
and probably cannot be studied. As a result, precision 
and bias of this test in relation to a true skid resistance 
measure cannot be evaluated, and only repeatability is 


IS 16137 (Part 2) : 2014 


given for the method. 


10.3 Determine the testing error as follows: 


E=t.on!? 
where 
E = testing error, 
t = normal curve of 1.96 or 2.0 rounded, 
O = standard deviation of individual test results 
(BPN units), and 
n = number of tests. 


10.4 In order to ensure that the testing error stays within 
1.0 BPN unit at a 95 percent confidence level 
(corresponding to a normal curve of 1.96 or 2.0 
rounded), the following sample sizes are needed: 


British natural rubber sliders 


Synthetic rubber sliders (conforming to 5 
ASTM E 501) 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.1) 


A-1 CALIBRATION 


A-1.1 Weight of Pendulum 


The pendulum arm with mounted rubber slider shall 
be disconnected from the instrument and weighed to 
the nearest 1 g. 


A-1.2 Center of Gravity 


The center of gravity of the pendulum with amounted 
rubber slider shall be determined by placing the 
pendulum assembly over a knife edge and 
experimentally locating the point of balance as shown 
in Fig. 5. The adapter nut shall be held at the far end of 
the arm by a light paper wedge. After the point of 
balance has been obtained, the position of the balance 
weight shall be adjusted until the slides of the pendulum 
foot are horizontal. 


A-1.3 Distance of Center of Gravity from Center 
of Oscillation 


With the pendulum reconnected to the tester and knurled 
bearing cap removed, distance shall be measured from 
the center of oscillation (center of bearing nut) to the 
point of balance (center of gravity). This distance shall 
be measured directly to the nearest 1 mm. 


A-1.4 Slider Load 


The pendulum shall be clamped to a holder attached 
to the scale plate of the tester and the tester placed and 
levelled on a tripod stand as shown in Fig. 6. Insert the 
spacer. Adjust the pan balance with a bearing assembly 
(see Note 1) on one pan and tare weights on the other 
pan so that the balance pointer is at center scale reading. 
The pendulum, with a slider, shall be lowered with the 
vertical height knobs of the tester until the slider is 
approximately 0.25 mm from the top surface of the 
bearing assembly. Lock vertical height knob and 
remove the spacer. This will cause an unbalance which 
shall be partially compensated by adding weights to 
the opposite pan to bring the indicator to within 
approximately 200 g of the center scale reading. To 
complete the balance procedure, the pointer is returned 
to the center scale reading, by adding water slowly into 
a graduated cylinder. Empty the cylinder and repeat 
pouring. Record the average weight required to raise 
slider so that the balance pointer is at the center of 
scale (see Note 2). If the average, normal slider load 
between the 76 mm wide slider and the pan balance is 
not within the requirements stated in 4.1 adjusts the 
spring tension nut illustrated in Fig. 2 and redetermine 
the slider load. 


IS 16137 (Part 2) : 2014 


NOTES 


1 The bearing assembly may be a ‘ladder’ bearing with a rigid, 
free moving top plate or a similar arrangement so that no 
horizontal loads are introduced while measuring the vertical 
slider load. 


2 It may be necessary to move the pans of the balance up and 


e 


z 


L 


| 
l 
f 
| 
1 
-J 


ADAPTOR NUT 


CENTER OF 
OSCILLATION 


down to ‘work’ the spring in order to get smooth and consistent 
readings. If the measurements of the slider load are still 
irregular after ‘working’ the spring. Remove the side and 
bottom panels of the pendulum foot and inspect for cleanliness 
of the bearing surfaces and knife edges illustrated in Fig. 2 
and re-determine the slider load. 


ADJUSTABLE SIDE PLATES TO 
BALANCE WEIGHT BE HORIZONTAL 
(COUNTERWEIGHT) 


Fic. 5 PENDULAM ASSEMBLY SHOWING LOCATION OF THE POINT OF BALANCE 


Fic. 6 ARRANGEMENT OF THE BRITISH PENDULUM TESTER, SHOWING PENDULUM ASSEMBLY 
AND PAN BALANCE USED To MEASURE SLIDER LOAD 


6 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 04 (0895). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


