**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 7975-1 (1976) : Driving parts for hand-operated square 
drive socket wrenches, Part 1: Technical supply conditions 
;PGD 5: Assembly Hand Tools] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



udc 621 883 16 fS .7975 ( Part L) - 1976 




Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

DRIVING PARTS FOR HAND-OPERATED SQUARE 

DRIVE SOCKET WRENCHES 

PART I TECHNICAL SUPPLY CONDITIONS 



1. Scope — Covers technical supply conditions for the following driving parts for hand-operated 
square drive socket wrenches: 

a) Tee handle, square drive; 

b) Speed brace; 

c) Ratchet handle; 

d) Ratchet handle, reversible; 

e) Handle, spin type, male square; 

f ) Nut spinner, flex head; and 

g) Offset handle, square drive. 

2. Material — Suitable steels meeting the requirements laid down in 4. 

Examples: 

40Cr1, 50CM, 50CMV23 of IS : 1570-1961 ' Schedules for wrought steels for general 
engineering purposes '. 

3. Workmanship and Finish 

3.1 Driving parts shall be free of burrs, scales and cracks. 

3.2 The driving parts shall be given any suitable anticorrosive coating. The type of anticorrosive 
coating shall depend upon the manufacturer unless specifically indicated by the user. 

3.2.1 The following plating thicknesses in case of nickel-chromium .and cadmium plating are 
considered suitable: 

Nickel-chromium plating — S Ni10b Cr r [see IS: 1068-1968 Specification for electroplated 

coatings of nickel and chromium on iron and steel ( first revision )] 

Cadmium plating — Cd8 [see IS: 1572-1968 Specification for electroplated coatings 

of cadmium on iron and steel ( first revision )] 

4. Torque Test 

4.1 Method of Test — The tool shall be placed in a female test square and the corresponding test torque 
as laid down in IS : 7975 ( Part II )-1976 ' Specification for driving parts for hand-operated square 
drive socket wrenches: Part II Dimensions ' shall be applied. The tool shall not be given any jerk or 
struck while testing. The load shall be applied gradually until the required test torque is reached. The 
torque shall be calculated as the product of the magnitude of the load and the distance measured 
between the point of application of the load and the axis of the female test square. 

4.1.1 The nominal width across flats dimension of the female test square shall be equal to 
the nominal dimension with a tolerance of H8. The female test square shall be hardened to a value 
of 595 HV Min ( ^55 HRC Min ). 

4.1.2 A device in which the female test square can be rotated at a certain torque, determined with 
an accuracy of ±25 percent may also be used for this test. 

4.1.3 On the completion of the test, the tool shall not show any permanent deformation or other 
damage which may influence its usability. 



Adopted 23 February 1976 



April 1976, IS! 



\ 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 7975 (Part I). 1976 

4.2 Application of Test Torque 

4.2.1 Tee handle, square drive — The handle shall be drawn out completely to one end ^nd the test 
torque shall be applied to the end farthest from the test square. 

4.2.2 Speed brace — The test torque shall be applied in the middle of the part on which the operator's 
hand normally rests. 

4.2.3 Ratchet handle and ratchet handle, reversible — The test torque shall be applied as near to the 
end of the handle as possible. 

4.2.4 Handle, spin type, male square — An appropriate appliance shall be used to allow the test torque 
to be applied to the handle without clamping ths handle on the rod, which may alter the test result. 

4.2.5 Nut spinner, flex head — The test torque shall be applied as near as possible to the end of the 
handle, which is placed at right angles to the axis of the square. 

4.2.6 Offset handle, square drive — The test torque applied shall be as near to the end of the handle as 
possible. 

5. Preservation and Packing — The driving parts which are not given any protective treatment 
against rust, such as plating, shall be covered with grease or mineral jelly for rust-proofing. Each 
driving part may be wrapped in nonabsorbent paper and packed in carton. 

5.1 The driving parts of different sizes may be packed to form a set. The sizes and number of driving 
parts to comprise such a set shall depend on the job for which it is required and shall be subject to 
agreement between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

6. Marking — The driving parts for hand-operated square drive socket wrenches shall be marked with 
nominal dimension, manufacturer's name, initials and/or recognized trade-mark. 

6.1 ISI Certification Marking — Details available with the Indian Standards institution. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard is in conformity with ISO 3315-1975 • Assembly tools for screws and nuts — 
Driving pfrjs for hand operated square drive socket wrenches — Torque testing' issued by the 
Internatiojfa Organization for Standardization (ISO). Assistance has also been derived from DIN 3122: 
19§8 ' Antrfebitelle fur handbetatigte steckschlusseleinsatze mit Innenvieskantantrieb (Driving parts for 
.hand op^l^square drive socket wrenches) ' issued by Deutsches Institut fiir Normung (DIN). 



Printed at Delhi Printers, Delhi. India 



