**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 2801 (1967) : Accuracy requirements for bulk meters used 
in petroleum trade [PGD 26: Weights and Measures] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



RE 



IaWriW* 



Indian Standard 



ACCURACY REQUIREMENTS FOR 

BULK METERS USED IN 

PETROLEUM TRADE 



UDC 681 121: 629-119-5 : 681-2089 



J5f 



© Copyright 1968 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 



Price 




February 1968 



IS : 2801 - 1967 

Indian Standard 

ACCURACY REQUIREMENTS FOR 

BULK METERS USED IN 

PETROLEUM TRADE 

Commercial Weights and Measures Sectional Committee, EDC 41 

Chairman Representing 

Dr A. R. Verma National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), New Delhi 

Members 

Shri Balmukand Bai.la Agra Iron Founders' Association, Agra 

Mat A. S. Dave Ministry of Defence (R & D) 

Mat N. P. Bhatnagar (Alternate) 
Shri B. R. Dhurandiiar Saple's Scales Manufacturing Co Private Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri A. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri If. C. Gulati Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

(Ministry of Supply, Technical Development 
& Materials Planning) 
Shri R. S. Gupta The Technical Corporation Private Ltd, Lucknow 

Shri P. N. Kaul (Alternate) 
Shri G. R. D. Harper The Avery Co of India Private Ltd, Calcutta; and 

The Bengal Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry, Calcutta 
Shri W. J. Shepherd The Bengal Chamber of Commerce and Industry 

(Alternate) Calcutta 

Shri C. K. Hazari Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 

Industry, New Delhi 
Joint Director, Mechanical Railway Board (Ministry of Railways) 
Engineering (Metric) 

Shri B. N. Mishra (Alternate) 
Shri V. J. Joshi India Government Mint (Ministry of Finance) 

Shri Syed Ahmed Khan States Controllers of Weights & Measures 

Shri H. C. Kinra Burmah-Shcll Oil Storage and Distributing Co of 

India Ltd, Bombay 
Shri C. S. R. Ullal (Alternate) 
Shri A. R. A. Krjshnan Ministry of Defence (DGI) 

Shri V. B. Mainkar Directorate of Weights & Measures (Ministry of 

Commerce) 
Shri A. P. Mass and Directorate General of Posts and Telegraphs 

(Department of Communications) 
Shri A. Jha (Alternate) 

(Continued on page 2) 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZA^AR MARO 

NEW DELHI i 



IS :2801 - 1967 



(Continued from page 1) 

Members 

Shri H. L. Mehandru 
Shri Jayendra A. Mehta 
Shri Vknilal Thakorlal 
Sheth {Alternate) 
Shri A. K. Mukhopadhyay 
Shri H. K. Mulchandani 
Shri V. M. Pednekar 



Representing 

States Controllers of Weights and Measures 
The Bombay Bullion Association Ltd, Bombay 



George Salter India Ltd, Calcutta 

Indian Institute of Petroleum (CSIR), New Delhi 

In personal capacity (6 Nowroji Vakil Street, 

Grant Road, Bombay 7) 
National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), New Delhi 
The Andhra Scientific Co Ltd, Masulipatam 
Directorate General of Technical Development 
(Ministry of Industry & Supply) * 

The Southern India Chamber of Commerce, Madras 
The Oriental Metal Pressing Works Private Ltd, 
Bombay 
Shri J. E. Yorke (Alternate) 
Shri P. K. Tikku India Government Mint (Ministry of Finance) 

Shri D. C. Mukherjee (Alternate) 
Shri M. V. Patankar, Director General, ISI (Ex-officio Member) 

Director (Mech Engg) (Secretary) 



Shri Prem Prakash 
Shri C. Narayana Rao 
Shri K. Srinivasa Rao 

Shri T. K. Singaram 
Shri G. D. Thakoor 



Commercial Measuring Instruments in the Petroleum Industry 
Subcommittee, EDC 41 : 6 



Convener 
Shri H. K. Mulchandani 
Members 



Indian Institute of Petroleum (CSIR), New Delhi 



Shri A 

Shri 

Shri G. R. 

Shri H. C. 

Shri C. 
Shri V. B. 

Shri H. L. 
Shri M. V. 

Shri C. M. 

Shri S. 

Shri M. P. 



, D. Tutej a (A Iternate to 
H. K. Mulchandani) 

D. Harper 

Kinra 



S. R. Ullal (Alternate) 



The Avery Co of India Private Ltd. Calcutta 
Burmah-Shell Oil Storage and Distributing Co of 
India Ltd, Bombay 



Mainkar 

Mehandru 
Pandit 

Pavri 



R. Khastgir (Alternate) 



Directorate of Weights & Measures (Ministry of 

of Commerce) 
Controller of Weights & Measures, Delhi 
Industries and Labour Department, Government of 

Maharashtra 
Caltex (India) Ltd, Bombay 



Wagh 



Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 



IS : 2801 - 1967 

Indian Standard 

ACCURACY REQUIREMENTS FOR 

BULK METERS USED IN 

PETROLEUM TRADE 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Insti- 
tution on 31 March 1967, after the draft finalized by the Commercial 
Weights and Measures Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 At the instance of the Standing Metric Committee (now the Directorate 
of Weights & Measures), Government of India, a number of Indian Stan- 
dards on testing of accuracy of commercial measuring instruments used 
in petroleum trade are being prepared by the Institution, This standard 
covers the accuracy requirements and test requirements of the bulk meters 
used in petroleum trade. Besides, the series of standards for accuracy 
of commercial measuring instruments at present comprises the following: 

IS: 3032-1965 General requirements for testing the accuracy of 
commercial measuring instruments used in petroleum trade 

IS: 3033-1965 Accuracy requirements for dispensing pumps used in 
petroleum trade 

IS: 3047-1965 Accuracy requirements for volumetric container 
filling machines used in petroleum trade 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS: 2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the accuracy requirements for bulk meters used 
in petroleum trade. 

1,1.1 Bulk meters shall not have a capacity below 100 litres. 



* Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). 

3 



IS: 2801 -1967 

2. DEFINITIONS 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Pressure Drop —The difference between the inlet and outlet 
pressures of the meter and is the pressure required to force liquid through 
the meter and overcome its resistance to movement. 

2.2 Hydraulic Slip or Slippage — That quantity of liquid which passes 
through the meter without causing any registration. 

2.3 Flow Range — That portion of the meter's total flow capacity in 
which it operates to meet the required degree of accuracy in measurement. 

3. TYPES AND CONSTRUCTION 

3.1 Bulk meters shall comply with IS: 3032-1965*. In addition, they 
shall conform with the requirements given in 3.3 to 3.5. 

3.2 Bulk meters used for measuring liquid petroleum products shall be 
positive displacement meters in which the liquid under a positive pressure 
head causes the measuring elements in the meter to rotate, reciprocate 
or otherwise move through a defined volumetric displacement before the 
liquid passes from the meter. This movement is interpreted through a 
train of gears on a register as a measure of liquid volume. 

3.3 Meters differ widely in construction, but in general they may be 
divided into the following two main classes: 

a) Capillary Seal Meter — Capillary seal meters which may either 
be of reciprocating, rotary or other types are sealed with a thin 
film of the liquid being measured and are usually characterized 
by a relatively low pressure-drop. 

b) ' Packed * or Mechanical Seal Meter — Tacked' or mechanical 
seal meters are always of the reciprocating piston type and are 
sealed by a suitably designed piston ring or washer to prevent 
' slip ' or leakage of liquid. They have a higher pressure-drop 
than capillary seal meters. 

3.3.1 Capillary seal meters arc generally preferable for installation 
where gravity discharge is essential; both 'packed' and capillary seal 
meters are suitable for pressure discharge. 

3.4 Meters are usually constructed of aluminium, aluminium alloys, 
bronze, brass or gun metal and stainless or special steels for certain sm^ll 



♦General requirements for testing the accuracy of commercial measuring instruments 
used in petroleum trade. 



IS: 2801 -1967 

components. Carbon bearings and carbon vanes are also used since they 
operate satisfactorily without lubrication. 

3.5 Meters are sometimes fitted with automatically or manually operated 
temperature compensating devices. These devices correct the expansion 
or contraction of the liquid being measured with change of temperature 
and directly indicate the volume which the liquid would occupy at a stan- 
dard temperature. The devices are satisfactory when the liquid tempe- 
rature remains substantially constant, but when marked fluctuations in 
temperature occur, they should be used for accurate measurement only 
when their response to temperature change is very rapid. 

4. METER INSTALLATION 

4.1 The installation of the meter has a direct bearing upon its operation 
and such characteristics as the rate of flow and accuracy may be seriously 
affected if it is not correctly installed. It is, therefore, essential that 
where possible the layout be based on the following: 

a) Meters should be protected by a strainer or filter and an air elimi- 
nator fitted as close to the inlet as possible so as to remove 
all particles which are injurious to the meter and which might 
impair its accuracy. They shall not be at a lower level. 

b) The pipe work should be so arranged that the strainer, air sepa- 
rator and meter cannot be accidentally drained. 

c) All pipe work and fittings shall be cleaned and flushed out to remove 
scale and foreign matter before installing the meter. 

d) The meter shall be mounted securely on a horizontal base using 
rubber mounting pads to reduce shock and vibration where these 
are likely to occur. 

e) Inlet and outlet pipe work should not exercise a strain on the meter 
body. Acute bends, tees and elbows shall be avoided as far as 
possible. 

f) The layout shall be so designed as to facilitate removal of the meter 
without unnecessarily disturbing the pipe work and sufficient space 
shall be provided to allow for meter calibration, cleaning and small 
servicing requirements. 

g) If pipe jointing compounds are used, these shall be applied to the 
male parts, not to female. It is vital not to allow any compound 
to enter the meter. 

h) The meter shall be located so that the resigter is clearly readable 

by the operator from the control point, 
j) Flow control valves, when fitted, shall be installed adjacent to 

the outlet of the meter. If a valve is installed on the inlet side, 



tS:280i-l%7 

it should be located at a sufficient distance on the upstream side 
to ensure a uniform steady flow through the meter when the valve 
is throttled. 

k) Pulsating flow, such as that caused by piston pumps, shall be 
avoided; if this is not possible to achieve, a surge tank or allevi- 
ator should be installed upstream of the meter (s). 

m) Meters shall not be installed on the suction side of pumps. 



5. TESTS 

5.1 All meters shall be tested for accuracy of discharge as described 
in 5.1.1 to 5.1.3. 

5.1.1 All meters shall be tested under conditions which duplicate normal 
operating conditions as closely as possible particularly in respect of rates 
of flow and the product involved. 

5.1.2 Before commencing checking of a meter, the meter should be run 
for several minutes to ensure that all units are functioning smoothly. 

5.1.3 For testing of meters, a proving tank shall be used. The capacity 
of the proving tank shall be sufficient in size to contain at least one minute's 
flow through the meter at its normal operating rate when used for bulk 
loading. 

5.2 The procedure for testing shall be as follows: 

a) After all connections have been made the proving tank of a veri- 
fied capacity shall be filled once with the full quantity in order 
to wet all surfaces, to fill the discharge hose and to prove that 
there are no leaks in the connection; 

b) The proving tank shall then be emptied and the outlet valve shall 
be closed after it is completely drained; 

c) Set the meter dial to zero reading; 

d) Fill the proving tank through the meter to a point where the meter 
dial records the capacity of the proving tank. If the meter is 
fitted with an automatic presetting device, this should be set to 
deliver the capacity of the proving tank ; 

e) Note the reading on the graduated gauge glass of the proving tank, 
which would show that the meter is : 

1) within the permissible error, or 

2) beyond the permissible error; 



IS :2801 - 1967 

f) If (e)(2) be the case, adjust the meter until the errors are brought 
within the permissible error prescribed under 5.3; 

g) Repeat steps (b), (c), (d) and (e) until the meter gives two conse- 
cutive deliveries within the permissible error; and 

h) If the meter has been found to give accurate measure in the initial 
test itself, make a further test to check the accuracy recorded. 

5.3 Permissible Error -The permissible errors shall not exceed ±0-1 
percent for any quantity discharged. 

5.4 The bulk meter shall be complete with all parts and attachments 
concerned with the operation of measurement and delivery. 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

The Indian Standards Institution (ISI), which started functioning 
In 1947, \s the national standards organization for India. Its principal 
object Is to prepare standards on national and International basis, 
and promote their general adoption. 

The overall control of ISI, which is run and financed Jointly as 
a non-profit making body by the Government and private 
enterprise, is exercised by the General Council, composed of represen- 
tatives of Central and State Governments; leading trade, scientific 
and technological organizations; and subscribing members. The 
Union Minister of Industry is the ex-officio President of ISI. 

The present technical activity of ISI is carried out through 
8 Division Councils for Agricultural and Food Products; Chemical; 
Civil Engineering; Consumer Products; Electrotechnical; Mechanical 
Engineering; Structural and Metals; and Textile. All technical work 
relating to the formulation and revision of standards is done by 
committees appointed by and under the direction of their respective 
Division Councils. These committees consist of experts drawn from 
manufacturing units, technical institutions, purchase organizations and 
other concerned bodies. 

To make available benefits of Indian Standards to the common 
man, ISI has introduced its Certification Marks Scheme under the 
Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act, 1 952, as amended 
by the Amendment Act, 1961. According to this Act, quality goods 
conforming to Indian Standards can carry the ISI Certification Mark. 
This Mark is a third-party guarantee of quality of marked goods. 
Licences to use the ISI Certification Mark are granted to manufacturers 
using reliable methods of quality control subject to overall Inspection 
by ISI. 

In the international field, ISI represents India on the International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International Electro- 
technical Commission (IEC). ISO and IEC respectively link 54 and 40 
countries, and function through 118 and 58 technical committees; 
ISI participates in 83 technical committees of ISO and all the technical 
committees of IEC. The committees and subcommittees of IEC and 
ISO for which ISI holds the secretariat deal with : Electric Fans, Lac, 
Mica, Pictorial Markings for Handling of Goods, Liquid Flow Measure- 
ments in Open Channels, Procedures for Inter-conversion of Values, 
Spices and Condiments, ahd Stimulant Foods. 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 SEPTEMBER 1997 

TO 

IS 2801 : 1967 ACCURACY REQUIREMENTS FOR 

BULK METERS USED IN PETROLEUM TRADE 

( Page 7 ) — Insert the following new clauses at the end of the text 

% MEASURING ASSEMBLY CHARACTERISTICS 

.1 The following characteristics of the measuring assembly shall be declared by 
he manufacturer. 

a) Maximum flow rate; 

b) Minimum flow rate; 

c) Maximum operating pressure; 

d) Minimum operating pressure, if necessary; 

e) The liquids or liquid to be measured and the limits of kinematic or 
dynamic viscosity (where an indication of the nature of the liquids alone 
is not sufficient to characterize their viscosity); 

f) Minimum delivery; and 

g) Temperature range, when the liquid volume can be measured at a 
temperature below minus 10°C 



;LM 06) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



PUBLICATIONS OF INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

INDIAN STANDARDS 

About 4 500 Indian Standards, broadly classified under the following 
main heads, have been issued so far: 

Agriculture & Food Electrotechnical 

Chemical Mechanical Engineering 

Civil Engineering Structural & Metals 

Consumer Products Textile 

Of these, the standards belonging to the Mechanical Engineering Group 
fall under the following categories: 

Basic Engineering Standards Machine Tools and Small Tools 

Abrasives Marine Engineering and Ship- 
Air-Co, .ditioning building 

Bearings Mechanical Handling, Lifting 

Bicycle Components Pumps 

Chemical Engineering Refrigeration 

Engineering Metrology Sewing Machines 

Gas Cylinders and Fittings Steam Tables 

Gaskets and Packings Threaded Fasteners and 
Gears Rivets 

Hand Tools Transmission Devices, Pulleys 
IC Engines and Automotive and Belts 

Vehicles Weights and Measures 

Instruments (Drawing, Optical Wire Ropes and Wire Products 

and Surveying) Unclassified 

OTHER PUBLICATIONS 

Rs 
ISI Bulletin (Published Every Month) 

Single Copy ... ... ... ... ... 2*00 

Annual Subscription ... ... ... ... 15-00 

Annual Reports (from 1948-49 Onwards) ... ... ... 2*00 to 3'00 each 

Handbook of ISI Publications, 1967 ... ... ... 5-00 

Available from 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Headquarters 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi I 

Telephones 27 36 11-20 Telegrams Manaksanstha 

Branch Offices 

Telegrams Manaksanstha 

534 Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Road Bombay 7 Telephone 35 70 27 

5 Chowringhee Approach Calcutta 13 ,, 23-1823 

Industrial Estate Administrative Hyderabad 18 ,, 3 92 29 

Building, Sanatnagar 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar Kanpur „ 3 76 95 

54 General Patters Road Madras 2 M 8 72 78 

Printed at th« Catholic Press. Ranchj, India 



