**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 972 (1988) : Method for determination of colour fastness 
of textile materials to potting [TXD 5: Chemical Methods of 
Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS : 972 - 1988 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 



METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF COLOUR 
FASTNESS OF TEXTILE MATERIALS 

TO POTTING 

(First Revision) 



UDC 667 01 6-473-4: 535-6-682-5 



© Copyright 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 10002 

Gr 1 December 1988 



IS : 972- 1988 



Indian Standard 



METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF COLOUR 
FASTNESS OF TEXTILE MATERIALS 

TO POTTING 

( First Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 



0,1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision) was 
adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
15 June 1988, after the draft finalized by the 
Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1956 
and has been revised to align it with ISO 105/E- 
1978 Textiles — Tests for colour fastness- E09 
Colour fastness to potting, issued by the Inter- 
national Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
and also to incorporate changes in line with other 
standards on colour fastness tests. 



0.3 Colour fastness of textile materials is of con- 
siderable importance to the consumer. The 
fastness depends not only upon the nature and 
depth of shade of the dyestuff used but also upon 
the nature of the fibre and the method of dyeing 
or printing employed; the same colouring matter, 
when used in dyeing or printing different fibres 
or when applied by different methods upon the 
same fibre, may give vastly different results. 
Formulation of standard methods of test for 
determining colour fastness of textile materials, 
to different agencies likely to effect change in 
colour is, therefore, necessary. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( First Revision ) prescribes 
a method for the determination of colour fastness 
of textile materials of all kinds and in all forms 
to the action of boiling water. 

1.2 The method is mainly applicable to wool 
and textile materials containing wool. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 A specimen of the textile in contact with 
specified adjacent fabrics is rolled around a glass 
rod and treated with boiling water. The speci- 
men and adjacent fabrics are dried separately. 
The change in colour of the specimen and staining 
of the adjacent fabrics are assessed with grey 
scales. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Sample to determine conformity of a lot of 
coloured textile material to a specification shall 
be selected so as to be representative of the lot. 

3.2 Sample drawn in compliance with the relevant 
material specification or as agreed to between 
the buyer and the seller to evaluate colour fastness 
of the material in the lot shall be representative 
of the lot. 

4. APPARATUS 



capable of holding a cylindrical specimen 4 cm 
long in boiling water. 

4.2 Glass Rod — 5 to 8 mm in diameter. 

4.3 Wool Adjacent Fabric — measuring 10 x 
4 cm. 

4.4 Cotton Adjacent Fabric — or in the case of 
blends, adjacent fabric made from the kind of 
fibre admixtured with the wool, measuring 
10 x 4 cm. 



4.5 Grey Scales 

and staining 

5. PREPARATION 
SPECIMEN 



for assessing change in colour 
OF COMPOSITE 



5.1 If the textile to be tested is fabric, place a 
specimen 10 x 4 cm between the two adjacent 
fabrics ( 4.3 and 4.4) and sew along one of the 
shorter sides to form a composite specimen. 

5.2 If the textile to be tested is yarn, knit or weave 
it into fabric and treat as in 5.1 or form a layer 
of parallel lengths of it between the two adjacent 
fabrics ( 4.3 and 4.4 ), the amount of yarn taken 
being approximately equal to half the combined 
mass of the adjacent fabrics. Sew along two 
opposite sides to hold the yarn in place and to 
form a composite specimen. 



4.1 Vessel — equipped with reflux condenser and 5.3 If the textile to be tested is loose fibre, comb 



IS : 972 - 1988 



and compress an amount approximately equal 
to half the combined mass of the adjacent fabrics 
(4.3 and 4.4) into a sheet 10 x 4 cm. Place 
the sheet between the two adjacent fabrics and 
sew along all four sides to hold the fibre in place 
and to form a composite specimen. 

6. PROCEDURE 

6.1 Roll the composite specimen compactly 
around the glass rod to form a cylinder 4 cm long, 
and the tie it loosely and uniformly with thread. 

6.2 Treat the specimen on the rod for 1 h in boiling 
distilled water at a liquor ratio of 1 : 30 under 

reflux. 

6.3 Open out the composite specimen by breaking 
the stitching on all sides except one of the shorter 
sides and dry it by hanging in air in shade at a 
temperature not exceeding 60°C with the three 
parts in contact only at the remaining line of 
stitching. 



6.4 Assess the change in colour of the specimen 
by the method prescribed in IS : 768 - 1982* 
and the staining of the adjacent fabrics by the 
method prescribed in IS : 769-1982f with grey 
scales. 

Note 1 — Treated test specimens and the pieces of 
adjacent fabrics should have cooled after drying and 
should have regained their normal moisture content 
before evaluation. 

Note 2 — In cases of doubt in colour fastness ratings 
as assessed by an observer, the assessment should be done 
by at least three observers and the overall average rating 
should be reported. 

7. REPORT 

7.1 Report the numerical rating for change in 
colour of test specimen and the numerical ratings 
for staining of the two adjacent fabrics used. 



♦Method for evaluating change in colour ( first revision). 
t Method for evaluating staining {first revision). 



The Central Electric Press, Delhi-7 



