( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard

PENSTOCKANDTURBINEINLETBUTTERFLY VALVESFORHYDRO-POWERSTATIONSAND SYSTEMS
PART 2 GUIDELINES FOR DESIGN ( AND SELECTION OF CONTROL EQUIPMENT

First Revision )

UDC

621 : 646.25 : 627.844

: 621.224-225*12

0

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

May 1992

Price Group 1

Hydraulic

Gates and Valves Sectional

Committee,

RVD 12

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. The butterfly valve is one of the types of shut-off devices most commonly employed in bydro-power station and systems. Its use is favoured because of their relatively low cost, compactness, light weight, reasonable water tightness and simplicity of operation. Basically, butterfly valve consists of a circular, lens shaped or open frame moving disc and body. The disc is pivoted in the body by two trunnions. When open the plane of symmetry of the disc lies parallel to the penstock axis. It serves the following purposes: a) Stops the water entry to the turbine when the latter is stopped to decrease the water leakages and to protect the guide vanes against slit cavitation and erosion. b) Stops the water entry in case of emergency, that is, non-closure of guide apparatus or in the event of low oil pressure in the system. c) Unit isolation in multi-unit plants where one penstock feeds more than one unit. d) To facilitate inspection of water path passages. This standard is being published in 3 parts. Part 1 deals with the structural and hydraulic aspects of design. This Part 2 deals with the guidelines for the design and selection of the control equipment used in butterfly valves. Part 3 deals with the operation and maintenance of butterfly valves. This standard Part 2 was first published in 1974. A revision of the standard has been taken up to incorporate certain changes found necessary in the standard in the light of comments received from the users. The major changes in this revision are inclusion of testing of servomotor cylinder and piston. Surface preparation and paniting have also been added in this revision. For the purpose value, observed dance with IS places retained standard. of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified with, the final off in accorof significant value in this

s7mi(P8aA):wz

lndim Standard PENSTOCK AND TURBINE INLET BUTTERFLY VALVES FOR HYDRO-POWER STATIONS AND SYSTEMS
PART 2 GUIDELINES FOR DESIGN AND SELECTION OF COUTROL EQUIPMENT ( 1 SCOPE This standard ( Part 2 > which applies to reinforced solid rubber resilient sealing rust resisting steel seated double flanged butterfly valves covers the guidelines for design and selection of control equipment for penstock and turbine inlet applications. 2 VALVE OPERATIONS 2.1 Depending upon the purpose of the valve and type of energy available, suitable mechanism for operation of disc may be selected. 2.2 Valve operator should be capable of seating and unseating the disc under most adverse conditions. A by-pass device should be used for balancing the pressures between the upstream and downstream of the valve to reduce the operator size. 2.2.1 The theoretical torque required to operate the disc is sum of the hydro-dynamic torque, friction torque and any other externally applied torque for closing purposes. 2.2.2 The hydro-dynamic torque is the function of flow velocity and diameter of the disc. The value should be obtained through appropriate model tests or previous experience. 2.2.3 The friction torque is the sum of the torque at the trunnion bearings and seal friction. For design purposes the value of friction coefficient should be chosen depending upon the frequency of operation and service- conditions of the valve. 2.3 Servomotor - These operators the hydraulic servomotor type. 2.3.1 The hydraulic servomotors oil operated or water operated. should be of may be either

First Revision )
2.3.4 The servomotors should be either fixed or swivelling mounted type and should be sized to transmit the required operating torque through levers to the valve trunnion. 2.3.5 The operating pressure for the oil operated servomotors may be obtained from a separate oil pressure unit for the valve or from the oil pressure unit of the turbine depending upon the service requirements. 2.3.6 When using water operated servomotors, the operating pressure may be obtained from the water in penstock upstream of valve through filters. 2.3.7 The hydraulic servomotor is normally used for both opening and closing of the valve, however may be used only for opening of the may be affected valve. While the closing through closing weight or combination of closing weight and ecentricity of the disc. For penstock valve operated by power pack, the system can also be designed for normal opening and closing by oil pressure and emergency closing by weight. 2.3.8 All bearings and pivots of the servomotors should have bushes and will be lubricated, if` necessary. 23.9 Suitable arrangement should be provided for controlling the speed of actuation. Total. time of actuation may be selected on the basis of the service conditions of the valve. Maximum time of closing the valve shot& be taken from 1 to 3 min and should depend on allowable time of running the generator at maximum permissible speed. Minimum time of valve closing should be taken on the basis of allowed pressure rise in the penstock. Opening time may be kept same as closing time. Suitable cushioning arrangement may be provided at the end of strokes. 2.3.10 Servomotor cylinder and piston should be designed for operating pressure and reaction pressure in cylinder arising due to closure of the value during penstock rupture condition or over velocity condition in emergency.

2.3.2 All materials used for manufacture of. these servomotors should be suitable for the operating media. 2.3.3 One or more servomotors may be used for operation of the butterfly valve.

JS 7326 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 2.3.11 Fastners at the two end flanges `should be corrosion resistant steel or steel with corrosion resistant coating. These fastners should be adequately and uniformly tightened to ensure no leakage past the flanges. 2.3.12 Suitable lifting arrangement should be provided in the assembly to facilitate handling.

indicator .for indicating differential nressure on upstream and down&earn of valve. Sufficient number of limit switches and auxiliary switches should be provided on the valve operating mechanism in order to energize the following signalling and trip circuits. a) For Penstock Valves: valve `Open' `Open' and

2.4 Testing of servomotor, cylinder and p.iston. 2.4.1 The servomotor cylinder and piston in case if made of cast iron should be tested separately for a pressure equal to 14 times the operating pressure and the soundness checked. The complete assembly should also be tested for the same test pressure for at least 30 min and it must be ensured that there are no leakages from joints in the cylinder, packings, gland packing seals and end covers etc. After final assembly, each servomotor should be operated 3 times from fully closed position to fully open -position and vice-versa to demonstrate that assembly is working satisfactorily. Subsequently, the top cover should be opened and the cylinder ,checked for any rubbing marks. 2.5 Surface Preparation and Painting ' All unmachined surfaces of ferrous material should be thoroughly cleaned to base metal by sand blasting or wire brushes to remove all loose scale, grit dust etc. Then it should be painted. The painting should consist of two coats of epoxy primer with a minimum DFT of '80 microns followed by 2 coats of coal tar epoxy paint having a minimum DFT of 100 microns on the inside water passage surface, `The external surface of the servomotor should .be cleaned by sand blasting or with wire brushes to base metal to remove all loose scale and then it should be painted. The surface should be applied with 2 coats of epoxy primer followed by at least 2 coats of epoxy primer followed by atleast 2 coats of approved paint. : *_ .< 3 LOCKING DEVICE 3.1 The mechanical lock' provided- in `closed position should, be designed to withstand maximum hydraulic pressure in the servomotor. 4 MECHANICAL INDICATOR be provided of the valve .4.1 Mechanical indicator may locally to indicate the position disc. 5 CONTROL
.5.1 Control

1) Indications of butterfly
and `Closed', Closed'.

2) Indications

of by-pass

3) Trip switches to stop the motor at the ends of open and closed position in case of motor operated by-pass valves. and alarm 4) Indication valve `out of control'. for butterfly

and alarm for butterfly 5) Indication valve `over ( water ) velocity trip'. 6) Trip switches to stop the motor of pump set when valve has reached the fully open or fully closed position. 7) Limit switches to start pumps of oil pumping unit in case valve door or disc retracts back and closed to certain angle/stroke due to leakage of oil and to bring back again to open position. 8) Limit switch to close the valve and given alarm in event of excessive leak-. age of oil in case it is close further and reopening is not possible. 9) A mechanical latch arrangement ated by gravity or by servomotor oil, penstock water or nitrogen. b) For Turbine Inlet Valve: operusing

1) Indications
Closed'.

of butterfly of by-pass

valve `Open'

`Open' and

and Closed'.

2) Indications

3) Trip switches to stop the motor at the ends of open and closed position in case of motor operated by-pass valves. and alarm 4) Indication valve `failed to close'. for butterfly

EQJrIPMENT

equipment should consist of slide valves with electro-magnets and flow control valves or diaphragms for controls of servomotors, by-pass arrangement, suitable pressure

5.2 The control equipment should be arranged for local control and remote control. if reauired. to open and close the valve in normal as &ell as emergency condition.

2

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standardr Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BlS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the latest amendments or edition. following reference: Doc:NoRVD 12(l)

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters
:

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 1102 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 600113

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices )

331 01 31 331 13 75 87 86 62 53 38 43 41 29 16 632 92 95

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS Western
: Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. KANPUR. JAIPUR.
Printed at New India Printing Prosm.Khuria. lndia

