INRI AAF IS 2094 (Part 2) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Rieda (AT) JR ura & fero er 
fafsrf$ 
amt 2 facia enn 
( TECH FRIT ) 


Heaters for Bitumen (Tar) and 
Emulsion — Specification 
Part 2 Bitumen Sprayer 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.220 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH HM, 4 fereft— 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2020 Price Group 4 


Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee, MED 18 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 

This standard has been prepared with a view to assisting the users in obtaining distributors capable of distributing 
binder uniformly to the specified standard and having a satisfactory mechanical efficiency. This standard includes 
a number of requirements which are at the option of the purchaser; for the sake of convenience to the purchaser 
and the supplier, requirements to be specified by the purchaser while making an enquiry or placing an order for 
distributors for hot tar and bitumen have been listed in ‘Annex A’. 


This standard was originally published in 1999. 
This Indian Standard is published in three parts. The other parts in this series are: 
Part 1 Bitumen heaters 
Part 3 Emulsion 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard 1s given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 2094 (Part 2) : 2020 


Indian Standard 


HEATERS FOR BITUMEN (TAR) AND EMULSION — 
SPECIFICATION 


PART 2 BITUMEN SPRAYER 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This standard (Part 2) covers distributors for hot tar 
and bitumen and emulsion for pavement construction 
work, such as surface dressing, soil stabilization and 
grouting. The standard lays down the requirements 
for road worthiness, capacity, construction, safety and 
performance. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard listed below contains provisions, which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard. 


IS No. Title 


2094 (Part 1): 1996 Specification for heater for 
bitumen (tar) and emulsion: 
Part 1 Bitumen heaters 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Binder — Tar, bitumen, tar/bitumen mixture or a 
cutback, or emulsion with or without special additives. 


3.2 Rate of Spread — The number of litres of binder 
required to cover one square meter of surface at the 
temperature of application. 


3.3 Transportable Distributor — A trailer mounted 
distributor fitted with manual or mechanized spraying 
equipment, intended for travelling short distances at 
low speeds, and is normally towed by another vehicle 
to any distant site. 


3.4 Mobile Distributor — A distributor fitted with 
mechanized spraying equipment, mounted on a self- 
propelled vehicle capable of travelling with full load of 
binder considerable distances at a speed up to statutory 
limit to any distant site 


4 TYPES 
The distributors shall be of the following types. They 
may be mobile or transportable: 


a) Binder tanks and spraying equipment for hand 
spraying, with manually or mechanically operated 
pressure systems. 


o` 
LA 


Mechanical tank-spraying units, provided with 
a series of nozzle fixed to a transverse header 
holding binder under pressure. 


Mechanical tank-units, provided either with 
gravity outflow pipes or a pump feed, combined 
with revolving or oscillating brushes to distribute 
the binder. 

Mechanical tank-units provided with a combination 
of gravity or pump-fed simple nozzles and a series 
of blades revolving on a horizontal shaft. 


[e] 
— 


a 
— 


5 CAPACITY 


5.1 The distributors shall have the following standard 
nominal capacities in litres: 


1 000, 1 500, 2 000, 3 000, 5 000, 7 500, 10 000. 


5.2 The actual capacity of the distributor shall be atleast 
10 percent greater than the nominal capacity. 


6 TANKS 


6.1 When distributors have pan type of U-shaped 
tanks, which can be filled from drums, their general 
construction shall comply with the requirements 
specified in IS 2094 (Part 1). A barrel hoist shall befitted 
when required by the purchaser. 


6.2 When a pressure tank is employed, this shall 
comply with the relevant safety regulations for pressure 
vessels. 


6.3 The tank shall have a dipstick clearly marked with 
the serial number of the tank to which it belongs. The 
dipstick shall fit into a guide or be positively located by 
other means, and shall be calibrated and clearly marked 
to show the contents of the tank at any level within an 
accuracy of | percent of the nominal capacity. 


IS 2094 (Part 2) : 2020 


7 LAGGING OF TANKS 


Lagging of tanks shall comply with the following 
requirements: 


a) The tank shall be covered with a suitable lagging 
material of adequate thickness, exposed feed 
and return pipes from the tank to the means 
of application shall be lagged. The lagging 
material in contact with the tank shall be non- 
combustible. 


b 


= 


The insulating material shall be protected and 
retained in position by suitable lagging plates, 
or their equivalent, to ensure that it does not 
deteriorate in use or become impregnated with 
binder. 


The temperature drop in a full load of binder, at an 
initial temperature of 150°C with the atmospheric 
temperature between 24?C and 30?C shall be not 
more than 20?C after 8 h when the tank and its 
contents are at rest. 


c 


— 


8 HEATERS 


When heaters are required to raise the temperature, the 
heating arrangements for distributors shall comply with 
the requirements specified in IS 2094 (Part 1). 


9 MEASUREMENT OF TEMPERATURE 


Distributors shall be fitted with a temperature 
indicator, or indicators, to show both the temperature 
at which the binder is being drawn off for application 
and the maximum temperature of the binder in the 
tank. The indicator or indicators shall be accurate to 
within + 3?C. 


10 COMPLIANCE WITH INDIAN STANDARDS 


All materials used in the construction of distributors 
shall comply with appropriate Indian Standards. 


11 ROAD WORTHINESS 


11.1 Transportable distributors shall be fitted with iron, 
rubber or pneumatic tyres, and the wheels may run 
on plain bearings. An efficient hand operated parking 
brake shall be provided. 


11.2 All distributors shall comply with the relevant 
road traffic regulations. 


12 MARKING 


12.1 Each distributor shall have firmly attached to it a 
plate giving the following particulars: 


a) Manufacturer’s name or trade-name; 

b) Type of distributor; 

c) Nominal capacity, tank serial number; and 
d) Year of manufacture. 


12.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau Indian Standard Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the product(s) may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


13 PUMPING SYSTEM 


13.1 The binder pump shall be either inside the tank 
or attached close to a heated part of the casing, so that 
special preheating is not required before pumping. The 
pumping system shall be so designed that there are no 
visible pulsations at the spray nozzle. 


13.2 To assist in clearing the system, provisions shall 
be made either for pumping air through the nozzle 
pipe or for admitting air to it at the pump end. An 
additional device for drawing the binder left over in 
the spray bar may also be provided, if required by the 
purchaser. 


14 STRAINER 


A strainer, in which the maximum dimension of any 
aperture is not more than half the minimum dimension 
of the smallest aperture in the pump valves or spray 
nozzle, shall be provided on the pump suction pipe. The 
strainer shall be easily removable for cleaning and shall 
be designed in such a way that all the binder will pass 
through it. 


15 FLEXIBLE PIPE AND SPRAY PIPE 


The flexible pipe and spray pipe shall have not less 
than 12 mm bore. The flexible pipe shall be not less 
than 3 m long and shall be made of a material that will 
resist deterioration from the hot binder. The pipe and 
its unions shall be capable of withstanding four times 
the maximum pressure that can be developed in the 
system. 


16 SPRAY LANCE 


The spray lance shall be fitted with thermally insulated 
adjustable handles and a shut-off valve shall be 
provided between the pump and the spray nozzles. 


17 SPRAY NOZZLE 


The spray nozzle shall be of a type which will deliver 
the binder in a fine spray of well-defined shape. 


18 PRESSURE GAUGE 


A suitable pressure gauge, capable of reading to at 
least double the normal working pressure and accurate 
to within +5 percent, shall be fitted to the delivery 


pipe. 


19 TEST FOR UNIFORM DISTRIBUTION 


19.1 For the distributors capable of being tested in 
accordance with the general requirements described in 
Annex B, the amount of binder collected on any strip of 
surface 5 cm wide within the effective width, the length 
of the strip being parallel to the direction of travel of 
the distributor, shall not differ from the average amount 
over the effective width by more thanl5 percent. 
Further, the mean of the amount of binder collected in 
any four adjacent trays within the effective width shall 
not differ from the average over the effective width by 
more than 10 percent. 


IS 2094 (Part 2) : 2020 


19.2 For the purpose of calculating the average amount 
collected, the effective width shall be the whole sprayed 
width less 15 cm at each side. 


19.3 The amount of binder received on the 15 cm 
margin at either side of the effective width of the 
spray shall be neither less than 50 percent nor more 
than 100 percent of the mean amount per 15 cm of the 
effective width sprayed. 


20 INSTRUCTIONS 


Instructions shall be supplied with each distributor to 
enable the operator to ensure that the specified rate of 
spread is obtained. 


IS 2094 (Part 2) : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


A-1 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED WITH 
AN ENQUIRY OR ORDER 


Information in regard to the following requirements 
which are at the option ofthe purchaser shall be supplied 
to the manufacturer while making an enquiry or placing 
an order for distributors for hot tar and bitumen: 


a) Type (see 3.1); 


b) Nominal capacity (see 4.1); 
c) Whether a barrel hoist is required (see 5.1); 
d) Whether heaters are required (see 7.1); and 


e) Whether a device for drawing in binder leftover in 
the spray bar is required (see 12.2). 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 19.1 ) 


TEST FOR UNIFORMITY OF TRANSVERSE DISTRIBUTION OF BINDER 
( DEPOT TRAY TESTS ) 


B-1 GENERAL 


This annex lays down the method for testing uniformity 
of distribution of binder across the surface being 
sprayed. Various methods for determining the transverse 
uniformity of distribution have been developed. The 
essential requirements of which are the following: 


a) The conditions prevailing during the test are 
comparable with those occuring during normal 
operations as regards: 


1) temperature of binder, 
2) viscosity of binder, 


3) height of distributing gear above the test 
surface, 


4) pressure in the distribution system, and 


5) speed of operation of mechanical distributing 
gear when applicable. 


b 


wm 


The test surface is divided into strips of equal 
width, usually 5 cm. The length of the stripes being 
parallel to the direction of travel of the distributor. 


c) The test is so arranged that the distributor can 
operate for a sufficient period to obtain the 
normal working conditions, and when this has 
been achieved, the test surface is exposed to the 
discharge for suitable period. 


d) The amount of binder delivered on each 5 cm 
strip is then measured and the results expressed as 
a percentage deviation from the mean for all the 
5 cm unit over the effective width. The effective 
width is defined as the sprayed width less than 
15 cm margin at each side. 


The results of the test are recorded in the form 
indicated in Fig. 1. A suitable record card is shown 
in Fig. 2. 


B-2 DEPOT TRAY TEST 


e 


wa 


B-2.1 The apparatus consists of a wheeled trolley 
carrying a set of removable containers. Each container 
is 5 cm wide, 1 m long and 15 cm deep, made of 
0.900 mm thick mild steel sheet, and of approximately 
7 litres capacity. The containers extend to a width 


EN 
a 
le] 
3 


s e LTT TTT TI HHHH 
z 44-4 [T] UPPER PERMISSIBLE LIMIT HH 
= +20 H NENNEN 
g +10 =] 
$ o HHH Tu 

» -10 LITT fel 

30 HH Ett 
" -30 

<í -40 

m -50 

© 60 EEE 

uo 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 | 22 


EFFECTIVE WIDTH 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL RESULTS OF TEST FOR UNIFORMITY OF TRANSVERSE DISTRIBUTION OF BINDER 


15 cm greater than the full spray width ofthe distributor, 
there being six containers in 30 cm of spray width. The 
rim of each container is lipped on one side in order that 
the containers will overlap and prevent binder from 
escaping. Before each test, the containers are examined 
for damage and replacement made 1f such damage 1s 
likely to affect the test. 


B-2.2 The trolley runs on steel rails fastened to the top 
of 1 500 litre catch tank, the rails being horizontal and 
parallel to the sides of the tank and sufficiently long 
to allow the trolley to lie clear of the spray before the 
test. The top rim of each container, when fitted on the 
trolley, is parallel to the rails, and the same distance 
below the nozzles or distributing gear as of the road 
surface under normal working conditions. 


B-2.3 The distributor is backed into position with the 
spray-bar over the catch tank, precautions being take to 


IS 2094 (Part 2) : 2020 


see that the spray bar is horizontal and at right angles 
to the rails. The trolley and containers rest on the rails 
clear of the spray hood. A short preliminary spray is 
made to ensure that all nozzles are functioning and 
that the distributor is otherwise in normal working 
condition. 


B-2.4 The trolley and containers are then pushed 
underneath the spray bar and spraying is commenced, 
and maintained for a period of time sufficient almost to 
fill the containers. The trolley is then withdrawn to the 
previous position. 


B-2.5 The depth of binder in each container is 
measured by dipping with a steel rule graduated 
in millimetres. Each container dipped in the same 
position, a convenient place being about 30 cm from 
one end. Dipping is to commence when the froth has 
settled. 


DEVIATION 
EROM MEAN| 


25 


50 


75 


100 


125 


150 


175 


200 


225 


250 


o o o S 
e ^r N 9 i 


o 
Q 


o 
© 


PERCENTAGE DEVIATION FROM MEAN 


Fic. 2 RECORD CARD FOR TEST FOR TRANSVERSE DISTRIBUTION OF BINDER 


IS 2094 (Part 2) : 2020 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee, MED 18 


Organization 


Ministry of Defence, CQAE, Pune 

AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 

Airport Authority of India, New Delhi 

Atlas Copco (India) Ltd, Pune 

Ammann Apollo India Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 
Caterpillar India Pvt Ltd, Chennai 

Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Directorate General Border Roads, New Delhi 
Escorts Construction Equipment Ltd, Faridabad 


In personal capacity, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 


Indian Construction Equipment Manufacturers' 
Association, Bangalore 


Ircon International Ltd, New Delhi 

Jaypee India Ltd, Kolkata 

John Deere India Pvt Ltd, Pune 

KYB Conmat Pvt Ltd, Vadodara 

L&T Ltd, Coimbatore 

M/s B. G. Shirke Construction Technology Pvt Ltd, 


Pune 


Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Defence, CQAE, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Bric P. K. SHRIVASTAVA (CHAIRMAN) 
Cor MANJUNATH B. T. (Alternate) 


Suni ROHITASH BARUA 
Suri K. K. V. Yasas (Alternate) 


Suni G. K. CHOUDHARY 
Suri R. L. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY SHARMA 
SHRI YOGESH TULJAPURKAR (Alternate) 


Suri D. MASHRU 
SHRI ANAND PATEL (Alternate) 


Suri K. Ren JOSE 
Suri Buu KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Dr Suvir SINGH 
Dr Rasıv Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI ATUL JAIN 
SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. Ray 


Suri Faiz AHMAD 
Suri LAXMI CHAND Tyaai (Alternate) 


SHRI HANSRAJ 

Suri S. N. MAHAJAN 
SHRI RAJENDRA JEE 
SHRI SATANDER KUMAR 


Suri K. V. KRISHNAMURTHY 


SHRI RANDHEER GUPTA 
Suri S. K. Ray (Alternate) 


SHRI KUMAR M. MEHTA 
Suri R. K. TEoTIA (Alternate) 


SHRI K. KALIAPPAN 
SHRI VIVEK JosHı (Alternate) 


SHRI NAGESH KUDVA 
SHRI KALPESH Son! (Alternate) 


Suri K. KESHAVA 

Suri M. SURESH KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI A. D. BHOSALE 

SHRI SUNIL KEDAR (Alternate) 
Suri K. C. SHARMA 

Suri ROHIT SINGH (Alternate) 


Cor SURESH KUMAR 
Lt Cor A. K. Maurya (Alternate) 


Organization 


National Council for Cement and Building 
Materials, Ballabgarh 


Shapoorji Pallonji & Co Ltd, Mumbai 


Universal Construction Machinery & Equipment 
Ltd, Pune 
Volvo Construction Equipment, Banglore 


Wirtgen India Pvt Ltd, Pune 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 2094 (Part 2) : 2020 


Representative(s) 
SHRI KAPIL KUKREJA 
SHRI S. BHATNAGAR (Alternate) 
SHRI NEERAJ KAPOOR 


SHRI RANJEET More 
Suri Ravi CuavaN (Alternate) 
Suri V. R. S. P. POLIPALLI 
SHRI RAGHURAMAN (Alternate) 
SHRI DEEPAK BHOIR 
SHRI PARUL ARORA (Alternate) 
SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (MED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Ms KHASHBOO KUMARI 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 18 (12327). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T, Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


