NAT HIAF IS 17000 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


Rara tart eat aed ATA — Mende 


Sustainable Development of 
Habitats — Indicators 


ICS 13.020.20 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH APT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2019 Price Group 13 


Smart Cities Sectional Committee, CED 59 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Smart Cities 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


This Indian Standard is designed to assist cities in steering and assessing the performance management of city 
services and all service provisions as well as quality of life. It considers sustainability as its general principle 
and resilience and inclusiveness as guiding concepts in the development of cities. All cities, towns and villages 
can make use of this document for assessment of their current status and development of framework for their 
sustainable growth. 


These indicators are designed keeping variety of habitats in view and are equally applicable for the villages, 
though the adaptation may require some attention. The term ‘city’ used at places should be deemed to include 
towns and villages as well. 


The core Indicators described in this Indian Standard are considered essential for steering and assessing the 
performance management of city services and quality of life. 


In order to promote best practices, cities should also report on the supporting indicators given in this standard. 


The core and supporting indicators are classified into themes according to the different sectors and services 
provided by a city. The classification structure is used solely to denote the services and area of application of each 
type of indicator when reported on by a city. This classification has no hierarchical significance and is organized 
alphabetically according to themes. 


Indicators under each theme, where possible, were selected and paired on the basis of input and outcome indicators 
for further contextual analysis. 


Summary table of city indicators is given at Annex A. 


When interpreting the results of a particular service area, it is important to review the results of multiple types of 
indicators across themes; as focus on a single indicator can lead to a distorted or incomplete conclusion. Elements 
of aspiration of the city must also be taken into consideration in the analysis. For instance, if the city chooses to 
remain a heritage city, a tourism city, a business city, or an industrial city, such aspiration should be retained and 
nurtured, while adopting this standard. 


Indicators can be used for the city as a whole or for a part of a city, subject to availability of the required data. 
Indicators can also be aggregated to larger administrative areas (for example region, metropolitan areas, etc). 
Indicators can be grouped together for analysis when taking into consideration holistic characteristics of a city. 
Finally, this set of indicators may be complemented by other indicator sets in order to have a more comprehensive 
and holistic approach to analysis on smartness. 


It is also important to acknowledge the potential antagonistic effects of the outcome of particular indicators, 
either positive or negative, when analyzing results. For example, an increase in air connectivity and the number 
of automobiles per capita could potentially result in increased levels of particulate matter and greenhouse gas 
emissions. 


For data interpretation purposes, cities shall take into consideration contextual analysis when interpreting results. 
The local institutional environment may affect the capacity to apply indicators. In some cases, services may be 
delivered by private sector or the community itself. 


The data sources indicated against various indicators in this document are, generally, those operated by national 
and state level bodies, such as the Registrar General-cum-Census Commissioner of India, Central Statistical 
Office, National Labour Bureau, National Crime Record Bureau, Central and State Pollution Control Boards, 
Ministries of Government of India including those of Health and Family Welfare, Housing and Urban Affairs 
and Human Resources Development and their state counterparts. This standard not only takes into consideration 
the ISO indicators but also the UN Sustainable Development Goals as also many other relevant national and 
international documents. 


However, while such organizations conduct detailed surveys for collection of data, which at times goes up to 
household levels, they normally project the analytical results at the national or state levels only, leaving a void 


(Continued on third cover) 


5 


6 


7 


SCOPE 
TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 
2.1 Habitat 
2.2 Sustainable Development 
2.3 Indicator 
GENERAL 
ECONOMY 
4.1 Gross Domestic Product (GDP) for the City (Core Indicator) 
4.2 GDP per Capita (Core Indicator) 
4.3 Gini Coefficient (Supporting Indicator) 
4.4 City’s Unemployment Rate (Core Indicator) 
4.5 Assessed Value of Commercial and Industrial Properties as a Percentage 
of Total Assessed Value of all Properties (Core Indicator) 
4.6 Number of Businesses per 100 000 Population (Supporting Indicator) 
EDUCATION 
5.1 Percentage of Female School-aged Population Enrolled in Schools 
(Core Indicator) 
5.2 Percentage of Students Completing Primary Education : Survival Rate 
(Core Indicator) 
5.3 Percentage of Students Completing Secondary Education: Survival Rate 
(Core Indicator) 
5.4 Primary Education Student-Teacher Ratio (Core Indicator) 
5.5 Percentage of School-aged Population Enrolled in Schools 
(Supporting Indicator) 
ENERGY 
6.1 Percentage of Total Energy Derived from Renewable Sources, as a Share 
of the City’s Total Energy Consumption (Core Indicator) 
6.2 Total Electrical Energy Use per Capita (kWh/Year) (Core Indicator) 
6.3 Total Residential Electrical Energy Use Per Capita (kWh/Year) 
(Supporting Indicator) 
6.4 Average Number of Electrical Interruptions per Customer per Year 
(Supporting Indicator) 
6.5 Average Length of Electrical Interruptions (in Hours) (Supporting Indicator) 
6.6 Percentage of Transmission and Distribution (T&D) Losses 
(Supporting Indicator) 
ENVIRONMENT 
7.1 Fine Particulate Matter (PM, .) Concentration (Core Indicator) 
7.2 Particulate Matter (PM,,) Concentration (Core Indicator) 
7.3 Nitrogen Dioxide (NO,) Concentration (Supporting Indicator) 


CONTENTS 


IS 17000 : 2019 


Page No. 


NN NY eR 


~J s 


O VV o © N 


IS 17000 : 2019 


7.4 Sulphur Dioxide (SO,) Concentration (Supporting Indicator) 
7.5 Ozone (O,) Concentration (Supporting Indicator) 
7.6 Green House Gas Emissions Measured in Tonnes per Capita (Core Indicator) 
7.7 Air Quality Index (Core Indicator) 
7.8 Noise Pollution (Core Indicator) 
7.9 Quality of Public Water Bodies (Core Indicator) 
8 FINANCE 
8.1 Debt Service Ratio (Debt Service Expenditure as a Percentage of 
Municipality’s Own-Source Revenue) (Core Indicator) 
8.2 Capital Spending as a Percentage of Total Expenditure (Supporting Indicator) 
8.3 Own-Source Revenue as a Percentage of Total Revenues (Supporting Indicator) 
8.4 Tax Collected as a Percentage of Tax Billed (Supporting Indicator) 


9 GOVERNANCE 


9.1 Voter Participation in Last Municipal Election (as a Percentage of 
Eligible Voters) (Core Indicator) 
9.2 Women asa Percentage of Total Elected to City Level Offices (Core Indicator) 
9.3 Percentage of Women Employed in the City Government Workforce 
(Supporting Indicator) 
9.4 Number of Convictions for Corruption by City Officials per 100 000 Population 
(Supporting Indicator) 
9.5 Citizens’ Representation: Number of Local Official Elected to office 
per 100 000 Population (Supporting Indicator) 
9.6 Number of Registered Voters as a Percentage of the Voting Age Population 
(Supporting Indicator) 
10 HEALTH 
10.1 Average Life Expectancy at Birth (Core Indicator) 
10.2 Under Age Five Mortality per 1 000 Live Births (Core Indicator) 
10.3 Number of In-Patient Hospital Beds per 100 000 Population (Core Indicator) 
10.4 Number of Physicians per 100 000 Population (Core Indicator) 
10.5 Number of Disabled Persons per 100 000 Population (Supporting Indicator) 
10.6 Number of Nursing and Midwifery Personnel per 100 000 Population 
(Supporting Indicator) 
10.7 Suicide Rate per 100 000 Population (Supporting Indicator) 
11 HOUSING 
11.1 Percentage of City Population Living in Slums (Core Indicator) 
11.2 Number of Homeless per 100 000 Population (Supporting Indicator) 
11.3 Percentage of Households that Exist Without Registered Legal Titles 
(Supporting Indicator) 
11.4 Percentage of Slum Dwellers Having the Right to Tenure (Supporting Indicator) 


12 RECREATION 


12.1 


12.2 


Square Metres of Public Indoor Recreation Space per Capita 
(Supporting Indicator) 

Square Metres of Public Outdoor Recreation Space per Capita 
(Supporting Indicator) 


IS 17000 : 2019 


Page No. 
12.3 Number of Art Galleries, Museums, Cultural Centres per 100 000 Population 
(Supporting Indicator) ae 20 
13 SAFETY . 20 
13.1 Number of Police Personnel per 100 000 Population (Core Indicator) . 20 
13.2 Number of Homicides per 100 000 Population (Core Indicator) ae 20 
13.3 Crimes Against Women Per 100 000 Population (Core Indicator) rT 21 
13.4 Response Time for Police Department from Initial Call (Supporting Indicator) .. 21 
13.5 Violent Crime Rate per 100 000 Population (Supporting Indicator) aw 21 
13.6 Number of Professional Firefighters per 100 000 Population (Core Indicator) wi. 22 
13.7 Number of Volunteer and Part-time Firefighters per 100 000 Population 
(Supporting Indicator) ves 22 
13.8 Number of Fire Related Deaths per 100 000 Population (Core Indicator) we (122 
13.9 Number of Natural Disaster Related Deaths per 100 000 Population 
(Core Indicator) os. 23 
13.10 Response Time for Emergency Response Services from Initial Call 
(Supporting Indicator) ‘ 23 
13.11 Response Time for Fire Department from Initial Call (Supporting Indicator) wm. 23 
13.12 Number of Buildings with Fire Safety Clearance per 10 000 Buildings 
(Supporting Indicator) ar 24 
14 SEWERAGE AND SANITATION . 24 
14.1 Percentage of City Population Having Access to Sanitary Toilet Facilities 
(Core Indicator) w= 24 
14.2 Percentage of City Population Served by Sewage (Wastewater) Collection 
(Core Indicator) w= 24 
14.3 Percentage of the City’s Wastewater that has Received no Treatment 
(Core Indicator) a 24 
14.4 Percentage of the City’s Wastewater Receiving Primary Treatment 
(Core Indicator) we 25 
14.5 Percentage of the City’s Wastewater Receiving Secondary Treatment 
(Supporting Indicator) wo 29 
14.6 Percentage of the City’s Wastewater that is being Recycled and Reused 
(Supporting Indicator) a 25 
15 SOLID WASTE se 26 
15.1 Percentage of City Population Covered with Regular Solid Waste Collection 
(Residential) (Core Indicator) Le 26 
15.2 Total Collected Municipal Solid Waste Per Capita per Year (Core Indicator) oe 26 
15.3 Percentage of the City’s Solid Waste that is Recycled (Core Indicator) us 27 
15.4 Percentage of the City’s Solid Waste that is Disposed of in a Sanitary Landfill 
(Supporting Indicator) we 27 
15.5 Percentage of the City’s Solid Waste that is Disposed of in an Incinerator 
(Supporting Indicator) ss 28 
15.6 Percentage of the City’s Solid Waste that is Burned Openly 
(Supporting Indicator) . 28 


15.7 Percentage of the City’s Solid Waste that is Disposed of in an Open Dump 
(Supporting Indicator) we 28 


15.8 Percentage of the City’s Solid Waste that is Disposed of by Other Means 
(Supporting Indicator) oe 28 


iii 


IS 17000 : 2019 


16 TELECOMMUNICATION AND INNOVATION 


16.1 
16.2 
16.3 
16.4 


16.5 


Number of Internet Connections per 100 000 Population (Core Indicator) 
Percentage of Households with Computer (Core Indicator) 
Percentage of Households with Internet Access (Supporting Indicator) 


Cyber Security Readiness for ICT Infrastructure and Online Citizen 
Service Delivery (Core Indicator) 


Number of New Patents per 100 000 Population per Year (Supporting Indicator) 


17 TRANSPORTATION 


17.1 


17.6 
17.7 


Kilometres of High Capacity Public Transport System per 100 000 Population 
(Core Indicator) 


Kilometres of Light Passenger Public Transport System per 100 000 Population 
(Core Indicator) 


Annual Number of Public Transport Trips per Capita (Core Indicator) 


Percentage Share of Electric Vehicles as Part of Total Vehicles in a City 
(Supporting Indicator) 


Percentage of Road Network with Usable Pedestrian Pathway/Footpath 
Network (Supporting Indicator) 


Percentage of Road Network with Cycling Lanes (Supporting Indicator) 
Transportation Fatalities per 100 000 Population (Supporting Indicator) 


18 URBAN PLANNING 


18.1 


18.2 
18.3 


18.4 
18.5 
18.6 


Percentage of Proposed Urban Development Area with in the Notified 
Master Plan for the City (Core Indicator) 


Green Area (hectares) per 100 000 Population (Core Indicator) 


Areal Size of Informal Settlements as a Percentage of City Area 
(Supporting Indicator) 


Jobs-Housing Ratio (Supporting Indicator) 
Urban Flooding (Core Indicator) 
Basic Services Proximity (Supporting Indicator) 


19 WATER SUPPLY 


19.1 


19.2 
19.3 
19.4 
19.5 


19.6 


19.7 


ANNEX A 


ANNEX B 


ANNEX C 


Percentage of City Population with Potable Water Supply Service 
(Core Indicator) 


Total Domestic Water Consumption per Capita (litres/day) (Core Indicator) 
Total Water Consumption per Capita (litres/day) (Supporting Indicator) 
Total Water Supply through Metered Water Connections (Supporting Indicator) 


Average Annual Hours of Water Service Interruption per Household 
(Supporting Indicator) 


Percentage of Water Loss (Unaccounted for Water) (Supporting Indicator) 
Compliance Rate of Drinking Water Quality (Core Indicator) 


SUMMARY TABLE OF CITY INDICATORS 
CITY PROFILE INDICATORS 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


42 


43 


IS 17000 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT OF 
HABITATS — INDICATORS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard defines and establishes methodologies 
for a set of indicators to steer the development and 
measure the performance of services and quality of life 
for sustainable habitats. 


1.2 This standard is applicable to a new city or any city, 
municipality or local body that undertakes to measure 
its performance in a comparable and verifiable manner, 
irrespective of size and location. These indicators 
can be adopted for the rural areas also, with suitable 
consideration. 


NOTE — The words ‘habitat’ and ‘city’ have been used 
interchangeably in this standard. 


2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given below shall apply. 


2.1 Habitat — A human habitation defined by a 
specific administrative boundary, commonly referred 
to as a city, town, village, region, etc, or a duly notified 
part of a city or a village, such as a ward. 
NOTE — Depending upon requirements, specific definitions of 
a town, city, village, etc, can be seen in the relevant legislation 
of the state or the metadata of Census of India. 


2.2 Sustainable Development — The development that 
meets the needs of the present without compromising 
the ability of future generations to meet their own 
needs. 


2.3 Indicator — A quantitative, 
descriptive measure. 


qualitative or 


2.3.1 Indicators in this standard are divided into 
following: 


a) Core indicators — Indicators that are required 
to steer the development and measure the 
performance in the delivery of services and of 
quality of life. 


b 


ma 


Supporting indicators — Indicators that are 
recommended to steer the development and 
measure the performance in the delivery of 
services and of quality of life. 


c) Profile indicators — Indicators that provide basic 
statistics and background information to help peer 
comparison of habitats. Profile indicators are used 
as an informative reference. 


3 GENERAL 


There is a continuous endeavour towards achieving 
better quality of life of the citizens keeping also in 
view the challenges from time to time. Services in a 
habitat provide effective means towards achieving the 
objective. These services in turn can be guided by a 
number of indicators directly or indirectly connected 
to sustainable development and better management of 
habitats. 


The indicators covered in this standard pertain to the 
following sectors, namely economy, education, energy, 
environment, finance, governance, health, housing, 
recreation, safety, sewerage and sanitation, solid waste, 
telecommunication and innovation, transportation, 
urban planning, and water supply. 


4 ECONOMY 


4.1 Gross Domestic Product (GDP) for the City 
(Core Indicator) 


4.1.1 General 


Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is an indicator of 
overall production activity and level of economic 
growth of a village, city, district, state or a country. 


4.1.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


GDP shall be calculated as the sum of gross value 
added of all resident producer units plus that part of 
taxes, less subsidies, on products, which is not included 
in the valuation of output. 


4.1.3 Data Source 


Central Statistical Office (CSO), in the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI), 
compiles the national and state level GDP, while the 
district level data is compiled by state Directorates of 
Economics and Statistics. 


As of now, in general, City level GDP is not directly 
reported, but can be calculated from the methodology 
outlined in the Urban and Regional Development 
Plans Formulation and Implementation (URDPFI) 
Guidelines, 2014 by making use of the state and district 
level data. 


Another data source is the Economic Census (EC), 
conducted by the CSO through household level surveys 
every 5 years. As of now, the CSO does not publish the 
EC data at town, ward, city and village levels. However, 


IS 17000 : 2019 


unit level data, that is establishment level data with 
complete identification details of the establishments in 
terms of their location (like state, district, town, ward, 
tehsil, village along with enumeration block number) 
may be available for dissemination by of MoSPI to the 
data users on request. Based on the EC data, cities can 
work out their GDP. 


NOTE — Computation of GDP is a complex exercise in 
which data from various sources, such as from various types 
of organization of the establishments (like corporate sector, 
government, unincorporated establishments) on output, 
intermediate consumption, factor incomes, etc, are required for 
calculation of gross value added by an organization/industry. 
Information on number of workers in industry as per EC for the 
domain of interest (like district, city, etc) would be a valuable 
input for calculation of gross value added (GVA) particularly 
for unincorporated segment. Number of workers multiplied by 
GVA per worker for the domain, to be estimated based on a 
sample survey, would give an estimate of the aggregate GVA 
for the domain of interest. 


4.1.4 Data Interpretation 


GDP is a measure of level of economic development 
of the geographical unit (city, district, state, or country) 
in comparison to other geographical units. It represents 
the economic significance of a city in relation to the 
district, state and the country; and also provides a 
measure for comparing regional disparities. 


4.2 GDP per Capita (Core Indicator) 
4.2.1 General 


GDP per capita, is the mean income of the people in an 
economic unit, such as a country, state, district, or city. 


4.2.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


Per capita income shall be calculated by taking a 
measure of all sources of income in the aggregate 
(such as, GDP or Gross National Income) and dividing 
it by the total population of country, state, district or 
city. 
NOTE — Per capita GDP of a city represents the standard of 
living of the residents and provides a measure for comparing 
regional disparities. The city can also analyze the per capita 
income of intra-city regions, such as wards, to determine intra- 
city economic disparities and take measures for equalization. 


4.2.3 Data Source 


Central Statistical Office (CSO) in the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) 
compiles the data on the national and state level 
GDP, while the district level data is compiled by state 
Directorates of Economics and Statistics. Population 
data is available through the decennial census. 


4.3 Gini Coefficient (Supporting Indicator) 
4.3.1 General 


A measure of inequality, Gini coefficient measures the 
deviation of an income (or consumption) distribution 
from a perfectly equal distribution among individuals 


within an economy. It is also known as Gini index or 
Gini ratio. 


4.3.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


Gini coefficient is obtained from the Lorenz curve, 
which is a curve that plots the actual relationship 
between the percentage of income recipients and 
the percentage of income they actually receive. The 
cumulative percentage of population is plotted along 
the horizontal axis while the cumulative percentage of 
income is plotted along the vertical axis. The 45° line of 
equality indicates perfect income equality, that is each 
unit in the economy receives the same income. It may 
be calculated for the income levels or the consumption 
expenditure (monthly per capita consumption 
expenditure). Gini coefficient is obtained by dividing 
the area between the Lorenz curve and the 45° equality 
line by the entire area below the 45° line. 

NOTE — A Gini coefficient of 0 indicates perfect income 

equality, while a Gini coefficient of 1 would imply perfect 


inequality where a single unit possesses all income of the 
economy. 


4.3.3 Data Source 

See 4.2.3. 

4.4 City’s Unemployment Rate (Core Indicator) 
4.4.1 General 


The unemployment rate is considered one of the single, 
most informative labour market indicators reflecting the 
general performance of the labour market and the health 
of the economy as a whole. It is used to measure a city’s 
unutilized labour supply and track business cycles. 
When economic growth is strong, unemployment rates 
tend to be low and when the economy is stagnating or 
in recession, unemployment rates tend to be higher. 


4.4.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


A city’s unemployment rate shall be calculated as the 
number of working-age city residents who during the 
survey reference period were not in paid employment 
or self-employment, but available for work, and 
seeking work (numerator) divided by the total labour 
force (denominator). The result shall be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage. 


Unemployment shall refer to individuals without work, 
actively seeking work and currently available for work 
under the Usual Principal Status (UPS) approach. 
Persons who did not look for work but have a stake 
in future labour market (arrangements for a future job 
start) are counted as unemployed. Discouraged workers 
or hidden unemployed shall refer to persons who are 
not actively seeking work because they believe the 
prospects of finding it are extremely poor or they have 
restricted labour mobility, face discrimination, and/or 
structural, social, and cultural barriers, are not counted 
as unemployed or as part of the labour force. Not 


actively seeking work, shall refer to people who have 
not taken active steps to seek work (that is job searches, 
interviews, informational meetings, etc) during a 
specified recent period (usually the past four weeks). 


NOTES 


1 Labour force shall refer to the sum of the total persons 
employed and unemployed who are legally eligible to work 
and are seeking/available to work. 

2 Reference period for employment/unemployment is past four 
weeks. However, in census, it is one year preceding the date of 
enumeration. 


3 The estimates need to be based on the Usual Principal Status 
(UPS) approach. The major time criterion based on the last 
365 days is used to determine the activity pursued by a person 
under the UPS approach. Accordingly, the major time spent 
by a person (183 days or more) is used to determine whether 
the person is in the labour force or out of the labour force. 
A person found unemployed under this approach reflects the 
chronic unemployment. The usual principal activity status 
estimates are derived based on a moving reference period of 
last twelve months. For example, if the household is surveyed 
in January 2019, then the reference period will be January 
2018 to December 2018. 


4.4.3 Data Source 


The data of employment-unemployment survey for 
numeral indicator is available at national as well as state 
level with Labour Bureau. In some cases; the district 
level estimates are also available with respective states; 
where matching sample is collected for reaching out 
district level estimates of aforesaid indicator. City level 
data can be obtained from census data, which gives the 
information on main workers, marginal workers and 
non-workers along with duration of working in a year, 
which can be a good approximation to the employment- 
unemployment status. 


4.4.4 Data Interpretation 


The unemployment rate reflects the portion of the 
labour force which was available for work during the 
given reference period but did not get work. 


4.5 Assessed Value of Commercial and Industrial 
Properties as a Percentage of Total Assessed Value 
of all Properties (Core Indicator) 


4.5.1 General 


Assessed value of commercial and industrial properties 
as a percentage of total assessed value of all properties 
provides an understanding of the mix of assessed values 
of properties as well as the ability of the assessed base. 
A downward trend in the proportion of commercial and 
industrial assessed values could indicate an eroding 
economic base. 


4.5.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The assessed value of commercial and industrial 
properties as a percentage of total assessed value of 
all properties shall be expressed as the assessed value 
of commercial and industrial properties (numerator) 


IS 17000 : 2019 


divided by the total assessed value of all properties 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage. 


Commercial and industrial properties shall refer to 
those, which have been designated by the city for 
commercial and industrial use. 
NOTE — Property assessment methods may vary from one 
jurisdiction of the country to another, including the market- 


oriented method, the profit/rent-oriented method and the cost- 
oriented method. 


4.5.3 Data Source 


The data on above indicator is available from the 
property assessment records of the municipality/local 
body of the city/area. 


4.6 Number of Businesses per 100 000 Population 
(Supporting Indicator) 


4.6.1 General 


The number of businesses per 100 000 population 
indicates a city’s level of economic activity and 
economic performance. It provides one indication of the 
overall business climate in a jurisdiction, and attitudes 
towards entrepreneurship. Strong entrepreneurial 
activity is closely associated with a dynamic and 
growing economy. The number of businesses is also 
used to inform competitiveness of a city and reflects 
both the number of new businesses created and the 
survival of existing businesses. 


4.6.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The number of businesses per 100 000 population 
shall be calculated as the total number of businesses 
in a city (numerator) divided by one 100 000th of the 
city’s total population (denominator). The result shall 
be expressed as the number of businesses per 100 000 
population. 


Businesses shall refer to companies or enterprises. 
The enterprise is the smallest combination of legal 
unit, that is, an organizational unit producing goods or 
services. Business can either be categorized as simple 
(one operating entity) or complex (multiple operating 
entities). 


4.6.3 Data Source 


a) Number of enterprises at state level can be 
obtained from the Economic Census conducted by 
Central Statistical Organization. 


b) State-level estimates are available through the 
NSS survey on Unincorporated Non-agricultural 
Establishments Excluding Construction. 


c) Number of industrial and commercial connections 
given by the electricity department can give city 
level data. 

d) Number of units registered with District Industries 
Centre can give city level data. 


IS 17000 : 2019 


e) House-listing data of Census (‘Use of Census 
Houses’) can also give an idea about the number 
of business units, though in a limited manner. 


f) In many cases, the City Municipality also 
maintains information on businesses operating 
in the city, for the purposes of licensing and 
taxation. 


g) Number of registered businesses under GST can 
also be the data source. 


5 EDUCATION 


5.1 Percentage of Female School-aged Population 
Enrolled in Schools (Core Indicator) 


5.1.1 General 


Education is one of the most important aspects of human 
development. This indicator addresses the issue of 
educational opportunity, by indicating how wide spread 
formal education is in the city among school-aged 
population. Reporting on the differential enrolment by 
gender is consistent with the Sustainable Development 
Goals (Goal 4 : Ensure inclusive and equitable quality 
education and promote lifelong learning opportunities 
for all). 


The Right to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 
provides a justiciable legal framework that entitles all 
children between the ages of 6 and 14 years to free and 
compulsory admission, attendance and completion of 
elementary education. It provides for children’s right 
to an education that is based on principles of quality, 
equity and non-discrimination. 


5.1.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of female school-aged population 
enrolled in schools shall be calculated as the number 
of female school-aged population enrolled at primary 
and secondary levels in public and private schools 
(numerator) divided by the total number of female 
school-aged population (denominator). The result 
shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as a 
percentage. 
NOTE — ‘Enrolment’ is the number of students who were 
enrolled in a grade as on 30 September of the school year. 
Information on the status is to be collected from school roster. 
Enrolment includes new entrants and repeaters for Grade I 
and new entrants, promotees and repeaters for Grade II 
onwards. 
The proportion of enrolment in public and private 
schools should be reported, and cities should ensure that 
private school data are included. In many cities, private 
schools are a significant component of education in the 
city. 
For details of definition, the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan 
Manual for Planning and Appraisal, issued by the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) 
may be referred. 


5.1.3 Data Source 


Data on school enrolment is compiled by every state, 
district and city, under the Unified District Information 
System of Education (U-DISE) Programme of MHRD. 
Under U-DISE, the school and village level data is 
updated annually with 30 September as the reference 
date. The school/village/city level data comprises 
variables related to the access to educational facilities 
of various types, identification of habitation without 
access to primary and upper primary schools based on 
distance norms, inventory of all types of educational 
institutions including recognized and unrecognized 
schools in the villages, selected data on the number, 
enrolment and teachers/instructors in non-formal 
education and alternative schools, pre-primary 
education including Anganwadi and Balwadi. Data 
on age specific population and out of school children 
generated through household surveys forms part of the 
village/city data. 


5.2 Percentage of Students Completing Primary 
Education : Survival Rate (Core Indicator) 


5.2.1 General 


Survival rate measures the holding power and internal 
efficiency of an education system. Survival rate to 
grade five of primary education is of particular interest 
since this is commonly considered as a pre-requisite 
for sustainable literacy. This indicator is often used 
as an assessment to Millennium Development Goals 
and continues to be relevant for the Sustainable 
Development Goals. 


5.2.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of students completing primary 
education or survival rate shall be calculated as the 
total number of students belonging to a school-cohort 
who complete the final grade of primary education 
(numerator) divided by the total number of students 
belonging to a school-cohort, that is those originally 
enrolled in the first grade of primary education 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage. The survival rate of 
primary education shall be expressed as the percentage 
of a cohort of students enrolled in the first grade of 
primary education who reached the final grade of 
primary education. 


Survival rates for the private education sector should 
be reported, if known. The user of this standard shall 
note if private school data are included. 


Promotees/Passouts : Out of the total enrolment in a 
grade (say, Grade III) as on 30 September during the 
base year (say 2018), it is those students who were 
promoted to the next higher grade (Grade IV) and are 
on roll as on 30th September of the following year 
(2019), are classified as promotees. 


NOTE — This indicator measures students belonging to a 
school-cohort who has reached each successive grade of 
primary education without failing or moving to another 
jurisdiction. 


5.2.3 Data Source 


Since the calculation of this indicator is based on 
student flow rates, the reliability of the survival rate 
depends on the consistency of data on enrolment and 
repeaters (those who repeat one or more grades) in 
terms of coverage over time and across grades. 


Data on school enrolment is available under the 
U-DISE Programme of MHRD and can be accessed 
through the State Education Department and District 
Education Office. 


5.3 Percentage of Students Completing Secondary 
Education: Survival Rate (Core Indicator) 


5.3.1 General 


Survival rate measures the holding power and internal 
efficiency of an education system. 


5.3.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of students completing secondary 
education or survival rate shall be calculated as the 
total number of students belonging to a school-cohort 
who complete the final grade of secondary education 
(numerator) divided by the total number of students 
belonging to a school-cohort, that is those originally 
enrolled in the first grade of secondary education 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied 
by 100 and expressed as a percentage. The survival 
rate of secondary education shall be expressed as the 
percentage of a cohort of students enrolled in the first 
grade of secondary education who reached the final 
grade of secondary education. 


Survival rates for the private education sector should be 
reported, if known. The user of this standard shall note 
if private school data are included. 


NOTES 


1 This indicator measures students belonging to a 
school-cohort who has reached each successive grade of 
secondary education without failing or moving to another 
jurisdiction. 

2 This methodology is adapted from UNESCO Education 
Indicator Technical Guidelines and is generally in line with 
the All India School Education Survey conducted in all the 
States/Districts by the Ministry of HRD/National Council for 
Educational Research and Training (NCERT). 

Example: If the city reporting year is 2019 and secondary 
education lasts seven years, report the percentage of students 
that entered secondary education in 2011 and reached the final 
grade of secondary education in 2018. 

3 Since the calculation of this indicator is based on student- 
flow rates, the reliability of the survival rate depends on the 
consistency of data on enrolment and repeaters (those who 
repeat one or more grades) in terms of coverage over time and 
across grades. 


IS 17000 : 2019 


5.4 Primary Education Student-Teacher Ratio 
(Core Indicator) 


5.4.1 General 


The student-teacher ratio is an indicator of the adequacy 
of teacher availability and can be related to the strength 
and quality of an education system. 


5.4.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The student-teacher ratio shall be expressed as the 
number of enrolled primary school students (numerator) 
divided by the number of full-time equivalent primary 
school classroom teachers (denominator). The result 
shall be expressed as the number of students per teacher. 


The number of classroom teachers and other 
instructional staff (for example teachers’ aides, 
guidance counsellors), shall not include administrators 
or other non-teaching staff. It shall also not include 
‘Kindergarten’ or pre-school teachers and staff. 
NOTE — Specific definition of various terms in respect of 
elementary education is available in the publication titled 
‘Elementary Education in India-Urban India, National 


University of Urban Planning and Administration, September 
2014’. 


5.4.3 Data Source 


The number of full-time equivalent primary school 
classroom teachers and the number of enrolled 
primary school students is available under the U-DISE 
Programme of MHRD and can be accessed through 
the State Education Department and District Education 
Office. 


5.4.4 Data Interpretation 


The student-teacher ratio reflects teacher workload and 
the availability of teachers’ services to their students. 
The lower the student-teacher ratio, the higher the 
availability of teacher services to students. The student- 
teacher ratio has implications not only for the cost of 
education, but also for the quality. Higher educational 
attainment is correlated with a lower student-teacher 
ratio. 


5.5 Percentage of School-aged Population Enrolled 
in Schools (Supporting Indicator) 


5.5.1 General 


Education is one of the most important aspects of 
human development. This indicator addresses the 
issue of educational opportunity by indicating how 
wide spread formal education is in the city among the 
school-aged population. 


5.5.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of school-aged population enrolled in 
schools shall be calculated as the number of school- 
aged population enrolled in primary and secondary 
levels in public and private schools (numerator) divided 


IS 17000 : 2019 


by the total number of the school-aged population 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage. 


Enrolment in public and private schools (recognized by 
the Central or State Government) should be reported, 
and cities shall note in the comment section if private 
school data are included. In some cities, private schools 
area significant component of education in the city. 
Enrolment in religious schools and home schools 
should be included, if they are recognized. 


Part-time enrolment of a half-day or more shall be 
counted as a full-time enrolment. 


5.5.3 Data Source 


Data on school enrolment is compiled by every state, 
district and city, under the Unified District Information 
System of Education (U-DISE) Programme of the 
Ministry of Human Resources Development (MHRD). 
Under U-DISE, the school and village level data is 
updated annually with 30 September as the reference 
date. The school/village/city level data comprises 
variables related to the access to educational facilities 
of various types, identification of habitation without 
access to primary and upper primary schools based on 
distance norms, inventory of all types of educational 
institutions including recognized and unrecognized 
schools in the village, selected data on the number, 
enrolment and teachers/instructors in non-formal 
education and alternative schools, pre-primary 
education including Anganwadis and Balwadis. Data 
on age specific population and out of school children 
generated through household surveys forms part of the 
village/city data. 


6 ENERGY 


6.1 Percentage of Total Energy Derived from 
Renewable Sources, as a Share of the City’s Total 
Energy Consumption (Core Indicator) 


6.1.1 General 


Promotion of renewable energy sources is a high 
priority for sustainable development, for reasons, such 
as the security and diversification of energy supply and 
for environmental protection. 


6.1.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The share of a city’s total energy consumption 
derived from renewable sources shall be calculated 
as the total consumption of electricity generated from 
renewable sources (numerator) divided by total energy 
consumption (denominator). The result shall then 
be multiplied by 100 and expressed as a percentage. 
Consumption of renewable sources, including the 
energy from fuel cell, should include geothermal, solar, 
wind, hydro, tide and wave energy, and combustibles, 
such as biomass. 


6.1.3 Data Source 


Data should be available from local utility provider, 
city energy or environment office. 


6.1.4 Data Interpretation 


Renewable energy shall include both combustible 
and non-combustible renewables. Non-combustible 
renewables include geothermal, solar, wind, hydro, tide 
and wave energy. For geothermal energy, the energy 
quantity is the enthalpy of the geothermal heat entering 
the process. For solar, wind, hydro, tide and wave 
energy, the quantities entering electricity generation 
are equal to the electrical energy generated. The 
combustible renewables and waste (CRW) consist of 
biomass (fuel wood, vegetal waste, ethanol) and animal 
products (animal materials/waste and sulphite lyes), 
municipal waste (waste produced by the residential, 
commercial and public service sectors that are collected 
by local authorities for disposal in a central location 
for the production of heat and/or power) and industrial 
waste. 

NOTE — The data on breakdown of energy consumption by 

source (that is, energy derived from fossil fuel; derived from 


nuclear; derived from renewable, etc, in percent), if available, 
should be noted. 


6.2 Total Electrical Energy Use per Capita (kWh/ 
Year) (Core Indicator) 


6.2.1 General 


An understanding of how much electricity is currently 
being consumed is needed in order to effectively 
manage generation, consumption, and conservation 
of electricity. Electricity is used to produce goods 
and services that are needed for economic growth and 
improved quality of life. Total electrical consumption 
reflects the overall consumption used by commercial, 
industrial, and residential sectors 


6.2.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


Total electrical energy use per capita shall be 
calculated as the total electrical usage of a city in 
kilowatt-hours including residential and non-residential 
use (numerator) divided by the total population of the 
city (denominator). The result shall be expressed as the 
total electrical energy use per capita in kilowatt hour/ 
year. 


6.2.3 Data Source 


Data shall be gathered from electricity providers. 
Electricity consumption statistics are typically 
collected in three categories: residential, commercial 
and industrial. 
NOTE — Electricity providers typically report electricity 
consumption statistics by customer and not by resident or they 
report consumption by sector (residential, commercial and 
industrial) in bulk and then report more detailed statistics as 
averages. 


6.2.4 Data Interpretation 


Compilation of the sources used to generate energy 
based on fossil and renewable energy sources, types of 
renewable energy already in use, identification of locally 
existing renewable energy sources, compilation of the 
energy required for heating and cooling processes, and 
completed and planned measures to save energy and to 
improve energy efficiency, and completed and planned 
activities for the environment friendly insulation and 
cooling of buildings, if available should be noted. 


6.3 Total Residential Electrical Energy Use Per 
Capita (kWh/Year) (Supporting Indicator) 


6.3.1 General 


An understanding of how much electricity is currently 
being consumed is needed in order to effectively 
manage generation, consumption, and conservation 
of electricity. Residential areas are one of the major 
consumers of electricity and its associated resource use. 


6.3.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


Total residential electrical energy use per capita shall 
be calculated as the total residential electrical usage of 
a city in kilowatt hour (numerator) divided by the total 
population of the city (denominator). The result shall 
be expressed as the total residential electrical energy 
use per capita in kilowatt hour/year. 


6.3.3 Data Source 


Data should be gathered from electricity providers. 
Electricity consumption statistics are typically 
collected in three categories, residential, commercial 
and industrial. 
NOTE — Electricity providers typically report electricity 
consumption statistics by customer and not by resident or they 
report consumption by sector (residential, commercial and 
industrial) in bulk and then report more detailed statistics as 
averages. 


6.4 Average Number of Electrical Interruptions per 
Customer per Year (Supporting Indicator) 


6.4.1 General 


Average number of electrical interruptions helps to 
track and benchmark reliability performance in electric 
utility services. 


6.4.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The average number of electrical interruptions per 
customer per year shall be calculated as the total 
number of customer interruptions (numerator) divided 
by the total number of customers served (denominator). 
The result shall be expressed as the average number of 
electrical interruptions per customer per year. 


Electrical interruptions shall include both residential 
and non-residential. 


IS 17000 : 2019 


It is normal to expect interruptions in service for a 
number of reasons including scheduled maintenance 
and equipment breakdown. To establish the opportunity 
to have a reasonable comparison between energy 
providers, major storms and weather events should be 
excluded due to their unpredictability and randomness 
since they are difficult to predict, prevent or mitigate 
against. 


6.4.3 Data Source 


Data shall be gathered from electricity providers. 


NOTE — This indicator is affected by the age, standard of 
maintenance and reliability of the infrastructure that constitutes 
the electricity grid and the electricity transmission capacity that 
services the grid. The ability of both the grid and its electricity 
transmission capacity to provide supply on demand and to 
cope with peak load is also an important consideration. 


6.5 Average Length of Electrical Interruptions (in 
Hours) (Supporting Indicator) 


6.5.1 General 


Average length of electrical interruptions helps to 
track and benchmark reliability performance in electric 
utility services. 


6.5.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The average length of electrical interruptions shall be 
calculated as the sum of the duration of all customer 
interruptions, in hours (numerator) divided by the 
total number of customer interruptions (denominator). 
The result shall be expressed as the average length of 
electrical interruptions in hours. 


Electrical Interruptions shall include both residential 
and non-residential. 


It is normal to expect interruptions in service for a 
number of reasons including scheduled maintenance 
and equipment break down. To establish the 
opportunity to have a reasonable comparison between 
energy providers, major storms and weather events 
shall be excluded due to their unpredictability as they 
are difficult to prevent or mitigate against. 


6.5.3 Data Source 


Data shall be gathered from electricity providers. 


NOTE — This indicator is affected by the age, standard of 
maintenance and reliability of the infrastructure that constitutes 
the electricity grid and the electricity transmission capacity that 
services the grid. The ability of both the grid and its electricity 
transmission capacity to provide supply on demand and to 
cope with peak loads is also an important consideration. 


6.6 Percentage of Transmission and Distribution 
(T&D) Losses (Supporting Indicator) 
6.6.1 General 


Energy losses occur in the process of supplying 
electricity to consumers due to technical and 


IS 17000 : 2019 


commercial reasons. The technical losses are due to 
energy dissipated in the conductors, transformers and 
other equipment used for transmission, transformation, 
sub-transmission and distribution of power. These 
technical losses are inherent in a system and can be 
reduced to a certain level. 


Pilferage by hooking, bypassing meters, defective 
meters, errors in meter reading and in estimating un- 
metered supply of energy are the main sources of 
the commercial losses. When commercial losses are 
added to the technical losses, it gives Transmission and 
Distribution (T&D) loss. 


There is another component of commercial losses, 
which is attributable to non-recovery of the billed 
amount, which is reflected in collection efficiency. 
T&D losses together with loss in collection give us 
the Aggregate Technical and Commercial (AT&C) 
losses. 


6.6.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The methodologies for computation of T&D losses and 
AT&C losses are as follows: 
a) Transmission and distribution losses (T&D 
losses): 
T&D Losses = 


Total energy billed 0 
Total energy input in the system 


b) Aggregate technical and commercial losses 
(AT&C losses): 


AT&C Losses = 
(1 — Billing efficiency x Collection efficiency) x 100 


where 
Total unit billed 


Total unit input 


Billing efficiency = 


Revenue collected 


Collection efficiency = 
Amount billed 


Ideally, reduction of technical losses should be 
the parameter for evaluation of performance of 
distribution companies (DISCOMs). However, the 
technical losses of the DISCOMs are not available and 
also it involves a cumbersome process to calculate the 
technical losses, which varies based on various factors 
like loading pattern, etc. Now, only the T&D losses 
and AT&C losses are available as the performance 
parameter for achieving energy efficiency by 
DISCOMs. Out of the two parameters, T&D loss 
parameter seems to be appropriate parameter, which 
reflects energy savings to a greater extent as compared 
to AT&C losses. 


6.6.3 Data Source 


Information on the T&D losses for the city is available 
with the respective DISCOMs, who also maintain the 
data for disaggregated levels within a city, such as 
wards, zones, etc. The periodicity of publication of the 
information is usually monthly. 


7 ENVIRONMENT 


7.1 Fine Particulate Matter (PM, .) Concentration 
(Core Indicator) 


7.1.1 General 


Fine particulate matter can cause major health problems 
in cities. The concentration of particulate matter (PM) 
is harmful to human health. PM is carcinogenic and 
harms the circulatory system as well as the respiratory 
system. Although all PMs are not carcinogenic, 
some sources are classified as human carcinogen and 
harmful to human being. One of the evidence of PM 
and its public health impact is consistent in showing 
adverse health effects at exposures that are currently 
experienced by urban populations in both developed 
and developing countries. The range of health effects 
is broad, but is predominantly to the respiratory and 
cardiovascular systems. 


7.1.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


Fine particulate matter (PM, .) concentration shall be 
calculated as the total mass of collected particles that 
are 2.5 microns or less in diameter (numerator) divided 
by the volume of air sampled (denominator). The result 
shall be expressed as the concentration of PM, ¿, in 
micrograms per cubic meter (ug/m°). 


The method for measurement shall involve the use of an 
air sampler, which draws ambient air at a constant flow 
rate into a specially shaped inlet where the suspended 
particulate matter is initially separated into one or more 
size fractions within the PM, , size range. The 24 hourly 
(daily) measurements of PM,, concentrations are 
computed and data is 24 hourly and annually compiled 
for each monitoring stations. 


7.1.3 Data Source 


The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) is 
executing a nation-wide programme of ambient air 
quality monitoring known as National Air Quality 
Monitoring Programme (NAMP). The network consists 
of 621 operating stations covering 262 cities/towns in 
29 States and 5 Union Territories as on date and the 
coverage is expanding. 


The objectives of the NAMP are to determine the 
status and trends of ambient air quality; to ascertain 
whether the prescribed ambient air quality standards 
are violated; to identify non-attainment cities; to 
obtain the knowledge and understanding necessary for 


developing preventive and corrective measures and to 
understand the natural cleansing process undergoing in 
the environment through pollution dilution, dispersion, 
wind based movement, dry deposition, precipitation 
and chemical transformation of pollutants generated. 


Under NAMP, three air pollutants, namely sulphur 
dioxide (SO,), nitrogen dioxide (NO,), and respirable 
suspended particulate matter (PM,,) have been 
identified for regular monitoring at all the locations. 
The monitoring of meteorological parameters, such as 
wind speed and wind direction, relative humidity (RH) 
and temperature are also targeted to be included in the 
monitoring of air quality. 


7.2 Particulate Matter (PM,,) Concentration (Core 
Indicator) 


7.2.1 General 


The evidence on airborne Particulate Matter (PM) 
and its public health impact is consistent in showing 
adverse health effects at exposures that are currently 
experienced by urban populations in both developed 
and developing countries. PM pose a health concern 
because they can be inhaled into and accumulate in the 
respiratory system. People with heart or lung disease, 
older adults, and children are considered at greater 
risk to particle pollution. Long-term exposures (annual 
mean) to particles, such as those experienced by people 
living for many years in areas with high particle levels, 
have been associated with problems, such as reduced 
lung function and the development of chronic bronchitis 
and even premature death. Short-term exposures (24 h) 
to particles can aggravate lung diseases, causing asthma 
attacks and acute bronchitis, and may also increase 
susceptibility to respiratory infections. 


7.2.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


Particulate Matter (PM,,) concentration shall be 
calculated as the total mass of collected particles in 
the PM „ size range (numerator) divided by the volume 
of air sampled (denominator). The result shall be 
expressed as the concentration of PM, in micrograms 
per cubic metre (ug/m°). 


The method for measurement shall involve the use of an 
air sampler which draws ambient air at a constant flow 
rate (1m?/min) into a specially shaped inlet where the 
suspended particulate matter is initially separated less 
than or equal of PM ,, size range. The 24 hourly (daily) 
measurements of PM,, concentrations are computed 
and data is 24 hourly and annually compiled for each 
monitoring stations. 
NOTE — Particulate matter is a mixture of microscopic solids 
and liquid droplets suspended in air. These particulates are 
made up of a number of components, including acids (such 
as nitrates and sulphates), organic chemicals, metals, soil or 
dust particles, and allergens (such as fragments of pollen or 
mould spores). Coarse particles are greater than 2.5 microns 
and less or equal to 10 microns in diameter and are defined 


IS 17000 : 2019 


as ‘respirable particulate matter’ or PM,,. Sources of coarse 
particles include crushing or grinding operations, and dust 
from paved or unpaved roads. 


7.2.3 Data Source 
See 7.1.3. 


7.3 Nitrogen Dioxide Concentration 


(Supporting Indicator) 


(NO,) 


7.3.1 General 


Nitrogen dioxide (NO,) is a major air pollutant, which 
can have significant impacts on human health and 
the environment. NO, contributes to the formation of 
photochemical smog and at raised levels can increase 
the likelihood of respiratory problems. Nitrogen 
dioxide inflames the lining of the lungs, and it can 
reduce immunity to lung infections. This can cause 
problems such as wheezing, coughing, colds, flu 
and bronchitis. Increased levels of nitrogen dioxide 
can have significant impacts on people with asthma 
because it can cause more frequent and more intense 
attacks. NO, chemically transforms into nitric acid and 
contributes to acid rain. Nitric acid can corrode metals, 
fade fabrics, and degrade rubber. When deposited, it 
can also contribute to lake acidification and can damage 
trees and crops, resulting in substantial losses. 


7.3.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


NO, concentration shall be calculated as the sum of daily 
concentrations for whole year (numerator) divided by 
365 days (denominator). The result shall be expressed 
as the annual average for daily NO, concentration, in 
ug/m?. The daily concentrations shall be determined 
by averaging the hourly/4 hourly concentrations 
throughout a 24 h period from all monitoring stations 
within the city. 


The method for measurement shall involve the use of 
an air sampler, which draws ambient air at a constant 
flow rate (1m?/min) into especially designed gaseous 
attachment or inlet where the nitrogen dioxide is 
absorbed initially and analyzed in the laboratory. The 
1 hourly/4 hourly measurements or 24 hourly (daily) 
measurements of NO, concentrations are computed 
and data is 24 hourly and annually compiled for each 
monitoring stations. 


7.3.3 Data Source 


See 7.1.3. 
7.4 Sulphur Dioxide (SO,) Concentration 
(Supporting Indicator) 


7.4.1 General 


Sulphur dioxide (SO,) is a major air pollutant, which 
can have significant impacts on human health and the 
environment. Health effects caused by exposure to high 
levels of SO, include breathing problems, respiratory 


IS 17000 : 2019 


illness, changes in the lung’s defenses, and worsening 
respiratory and cardiovascular disease. People with 
asthma or chronic lung or heart disease are the most 
sensitive to SO,. It also damages trees and crops. 
SO,, along with nitrogen oxides, are the main precursors 
of acid rain. This contributes to the acidification of 
lakes and streams, accelerated corrosion of buildings, 
reduced visibility and deforestation. SO, also causes 
formation of microscopic acid aerosols, which have 
serious health implications as well as contributing to 
climate change. 


7.4.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


Sulphur dioxide concentration shall be calculated as 
the sum of daily concentrations for the whole year 
(numerator) divided by 365 days. The result shall 
be expressed as the annual average for daily SO, 
concentration, in ug/m?. The daily concentration shall 
be determined by averaging the hourly/four hourly 
concentrations throughout a 24 h period from all 
monitoring stations within the city. 


The method for measurement shall involve the use of 
an air sampler, which draws ambient air at a constant 
flow rate (1m?/min) into especially designed gaseous 
attachment or inlet where the SO, is absorbed initially 
and analyzed in the laboratory. The 1 hourly/4 hourly 
measurements or 24 hourly (daily) measurements 
of SO, concentrations are computed and data is 
24 hourly and annually compiled for each monitoring 
stations. 


7.4.3 Data Source 

See 7.1.3. 

7.5 Ozone (O,) Concentration (Supporting 
Indicator) 


7.5.1 General 


High concentrations of ozone (O,) in the ambient 
air are harmful for humans as well as plants. High 
concentrations of ozone can irritate the respiratory 
system and are linked to asthma, bronchitis and heart 
attacks. The elderly are especially vulnerable. 
NOTE — There are links being made to ozone concentration 
and environmental justice, in particular with reference to 
underprivileged social groups with higher exposure and 
vulnerability. 


7.5.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


Ozone (O,) concentration shall be calculated as 
the sum of daily concentrations for the whole year 
(numerator) divided by 365 days (denominator). The 
result shall be expressed as the annual average for daily 
O, concentration in ug/m°. O, is normally monitored 
at 8 h intervals. To determine the 24 h average daily 
concentration, the three 8 hourly concentrations shall 
be determined and averaged over a 24 h period at all 
monitoring stations within the city’s boundaries. 


10 


7.5.3 Data Source 
See 7.1.3. 


7.6 Green House Gas Emissions Measured in Tonnes 
per Capita (Core Indicator) 


7.6.1 General 


The greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from all 
activities within the city are an indicator of the adverse 
contribution the city is making to climate change. Gases 
that trap heat in the atmosphere are called greenhouse 
gases. The most abundant GHG in Earth’s atmosphere 
are: (a) Water vapour (H,O), (b) Carbon dioxide (CO,), 
(c) Methane (CH,), (d) Nitrous oxide (N,O), (e) 
Ozone (O,), and (f) Chloro-fluorocarbons (CFCs). 
The major sources of Greenhouse Gases (GHG) are as 
follows: 


a) Carbon Dioxide (CO,) — Carbon dioxide enters 
the atmosphere through burning fossil fuels (coal, 
natural gas and oil), solid waste, wood, and also as 
a result of certain chemical reactions and industrial 
processes (for example, manufacture of cement). 
Carbon dioxide is removed from the atmosphere 
(or ‘sequestered’) when it is absorbed by plants as 
part of the biological carbon cycle. 


Methane (CH,) — Methane is emitted during the 
production and transport of coal, natural gas, and 
oil. Methane emissions also result from livestock 
and other agricultural practices and by the decay 
of organic waste in municipal solid waste landfills. 
Nitrous Oxide (N,O) — Nitrous oxide is emitted 
during agricultural and industrial activities, as 
well as during combustion of fossil fuels and solid 
waste. 


b 


we 


c 


ma 


d 


ww 


Fluorinated Gases Hydrofluorocarbons 
(HFC), perfluorocarbons, sulphur hexafluoride, 
and nitrogen tri-fluoride are synthetic, powerful 
greenhouse gases that are emitted from a variety 
of industrial processes. Fluorinated gases are 
sometimes used as substitutes for stratospheric 
ozone-depleting substances (for example, 
chlorofluorocarbons, HFCs, and halons). These 
gases are typically emitted in smaller quantities, 
but because they are potent greenhouse gases, 
they are sometimes referred to as High Global 
Warming Potential gases (High GWP gases). 


7.6.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The greenhouse gas emissions measured in tonnes 
per capita shall be measured as the total amount of 
greenhouse gases in tonnes (equivalent carbon dioxide 
units) generated over a calendar year by all activities 
within the city, including indirect emissions outside 
city boundaries (numerator) divided by the current 
city population (denominator). The result shall be 
expressed as the total greenhouse gas emissions per 
capita in tonnes. 


The total aggregate tonnage (expressed as equivalent 
carbon dioxide units of greenhouse gas) of greenhouse 
gas emissions shall be calculated for all activities 
within the city for the preceding 12 months. 


The Global Protocol for Community-Scale GHG 
Emissions (GPC), (2012 Accounting and Reporting 
Standard) refers to a multi-stakeholder consensus- 
based protocol for developing international recognized 
and accepted community-scale greenhouse gas 
accounting and reporting. This protocol defines the 
basic emissions sources and categories within sectors 
for a community-scale GHG inventory, in order to 
standardize GHG inventories between communities 
and within a community over time. The protocol 
provides accounting methodologies and step-by- 
step guidance on data collection, quantification, 
and reporting recommendations for each source of 
emissions. 


Both emissions sources and sector categorizations 
reflect the unique nature of cities and their primary 
emissions sources. These include emissions from: (a) 
Stationary units, (b) Mobile units, (c) Waste, and (d) 
Industrial process and product use sectors. For further 
specifications, refer to the full GPC methodology. 
Local bodies are expected to provide information (that 
is quantified emissions) for each of these emission 
sources. 


In order to address the issue of inter-city sources of 
emissions that transcend more than one jurisdictional 
body, the GPC integrates the GHG protocol scope 
definitions, as follows: 


a) Scope 2 emissions — Energy-related indirect 
emissions that result as a consequence of 
consumption of  grid-supplied electricity, 
heating and/or cooling, within the community’s 
geopolitical boundary. 

b) Scope 3 emissions — All other indirect emissions 

that occur as a result of activities within the 

community’s geopolitical boundary. 


For step-by-step guidance on data and accounting 

collection, see section 3 of the GPC. 
NOTE— Greenhouse gases (GHGs) are gases in the atmosphere 
that absorb infrared radiation that would otherwise escape to 
space; thereby contributing to rising surface temperatures. 
There are six major GHGs: carbon dioxide (CO,), methane 
(CH,), nitrous oxide (N,O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), 
perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulphur hexafluoride (SF,). The 
warming potential for these gases varies from several years to 
decades to centuries. 

Users may also consult the ISO 14064 series of 

standards on greenhouse gases for further guidance. 


7.6.3 Data Source 


See MOEF&CC website to get the data under National 
Programme on Climate Change & India’s Initial 
National Communication (NATCOM). 


11 


IS 17000 : 2019 


7.7 Air Quality Index (Core Indicator) 


7.7.1 General 


Air Quality Index (AQI) is a tool for effective 
communication of air quality status in terms, which are 
easy to understand. It transforms complex air quality 
data of various pollutants into a single number (index 
value), nomenclature and colour. 


7.7.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


AQI is based on sub-index and health breakpoints 
evolved for eight pollutants (PM,,, PM,., NO,, SO,, 
CO, O,, NH, and Pb). Based on the measured ambient 
concentrations of a pollutant, sub-index is calculated, 
which is a linear function of concentration (for example, 
the sub-index for PM, is 51 at concentration 31 g/m’, 
100 at concentration 60 g/m’, and 75 at concentration 
of 45 ug/m°). The worst sub-index determines the 
overall AQI. AQI is calculated only if data are available 
for minimum three pollutants out of which one should 
necessarily be either PM, , or PM, 


7.7.3 Data Sources 
See 7.1.3. 
7.8 Noise Pollution (Core Indicator) 


7.8.1 General 


Prolonged exposure to ambient noise from various 
sources, such as industrial activity, construction 
activity, fire crackers, sound producing instruments, 
generator sets, loud speakers, public address systems, 
music systems, vehicular horns and other mechanical 
devices have deleterious effects on human health and 
the psychological well being of the people. To regulate 
noise pollution, specific provisions have been made 
under the Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) 
Rules, 2000. 


NOTE — Another useful indicator of the noise levels in a city 
is the degree of annoyance as specified in ISO/TS 15666 : 
2003 ‘Acoustics — Assessment of noise annoyance by means 
of social and socio-acoustic surveys’. 


7.8.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


Noise pollution shall be calculated by mapping the 
noise level, L (day-evening-night) likely to cause 
annoyance as given in ISO 1996-2 : 2017 ‘Acoustics — 
Description and measurement of environmental 
noise — Part 2: Acquisition of data pertinent to land 
use’ identifying the areas of the city where L is greater 
than 55 dB(A) and estimating the population of those 
areas as a percentage of the total city population. 
The result shall be expressed as the percentage of the 
population affected by noise pollution. 


Users of this standard should note that noise pollution 
can also be recorded as L (night) and when exceeding 
50 dB(A) is likely to cause sleep deprivation. 


IS 17000 : 2019 


The Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules, 
2000 defines the upper limits for noise pollution in 
the ambient air. The State Government, local bodies 
and other authorities are notified for enforcing these 
standards. 


7.8.3 Data Source 


Average concentrations are measured by monitoring 
equipment and reported to air quality monitoring 
authority (that is city environment office, national/ state 
environment office, etc), notified by the states under the 
Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000. 


7.9 Quality of Public Water Bodies (Core Indicator) 
7.9.1 General 


This indicator aims at determining the quality of water 
of public sources, such as rivers, lakes, ponds and 
sub-soil water bodies in the city. Water pollution is an 
increasing concern as water is a scarce resource and 
hence measuring and keeping a check on water quality 
becomes important so that the water health is maintained 
for intended purposes including for propagation of wild 
life and fisheries. 


7.9.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The water quality monitoring network needs to be 
established with the help of central and state pollution 
control boards which covers ground waters and surface 
water encompassing rivers, lakes, tanks, ponds, creeks/ 
sea water, canals, drains, water treatment plants and 
wells. 


The Central Pollution Control Board has defined the 
standards for water quality for variety of purposes 
including for drinking, outdoor bathing, propagation of 
wild life and fisheries and controlled disposal. It has 
developed water quality index for the purpose. 


7.9.3 Data Source 


Central and state pollution control boards and 
committees have set up water quality monitoring 
stations at various locations. Cities can take the help of 
these organizations to undertake monitoring of water 
quality of the city water bodies. 


NOTE — At times, specialized agencies are created to look 
after the city water bodies. 


8 FINANCE 


8.1 Debt Service Ratio (Debt Service Expenditure 
as a Percentage of Municipality’s Own-Source 
Revenue) (Core Indicator) 


8.1.1 General 


This indicator is widely accepted as a measure of 
sound financial management and reflects the amount 
of financial resources that are available for day-to- 
day operations and how much money is spent paying 


12 


down debt. It can be a controllable cost and can assist 
in priority setting. 


8.1.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


Debt service ratio is the ratio of debt service expenditure 
as percent of a municipality’s own source revenue. 
Debt service ratio shall be calculated as the total long- 
term debt servicing costs including lease payments, 
temporary financing and other debt charges (numerator) 
divided by total own-source revenue (denominator). 
The result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed 
as a percentage of debt service expenditure as a percent 
of a municipality’s own-source revenue. 


Total own source revenue shall be calculated as the 
total revenue less transfers. 


8.1.3 Data Source 


The annual budget of the municipality would provide 
information on the outstanding debt liability and the 
provisions made/required for debt-servicing. The 
information can be cross-verified with the annual audit 
reports. 


8.1.4 Data Interpretation 


A lower number may indicate either an increased ability 
to borrow or a decision by a municipality to limit its 
debt to enable funding of other service areas. 


Care must be used in evaluating this indicator. A high 
debt-service ratio may indicate a municipality that has 
taken on too much debt but it may also indicate that 
the municipality has taken an aggressive approach to 
debt repayment and is paying down their debt quickly. 
Similarly, a low debt service ratio could indicate a 
municipality is strong financially and can finance most 
capital projects through alternative funding sources. 
It may also indicate that a municipality is financially 
weaker and has deferred capital projects and allowed 
important infrastructure to deteriorate. 


8.2 Capital Spending as a Percentage of Total 
Expenditure (Supporting Indicator) 


8.2.1 General 


The amount of capital expenditure by the city expressed 
as a percentage of the total city expenditure is an 
indicator of capital re-investment and the fiscal health 
of the city. 


8.2.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The capital spending as a percentage of total 
expenditures shall be calculated as the total expenditure 
on fixed assets in the preceding year (numerator) 
divided by the total expenditure (operating and capital) 
(denominator) by the city in the same period. The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
a percentage of capital spending as a percent of total 
expenditure. 


NOTE — Fixed assets are not expected to be consumed or 
converted into cash in the normal course of business. These 
are long-term, more permanent or ‘fixed’ items, such as 
land, building, equipment, fixtures, furniture, and leasehold 
improvements. 


8.2.3 Data Source 


The figures used in this calculation should be taken 
directly from the city’s annual budget and the audited 
financial statements. 


8.2.4 Data Interpretation 


This indicator needs to be considered in conjunction 
with the debt service ratio indicator to obtain an 
understanding of the city’s capacity to maintain its 
capital expenditure. The level of capital expenditure in 
relation to recurrent expenditure may reflect the city’s 
financial capacity to invest in capital items needed to 
support future growth and development. 


8.3 Own-Source Revenue as a Percentage of Total 
Revenues (Supporting Indicator) 


8.3.1 General 


On a very basic level, this indicator measures the level 
of dependence of the city on other levels of government 
for revenues to deliver its services to the public. 


8.3.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


Own-source revenue as a percentage of total revenues 
shall be calculated as the total amount of funds 
obtained through permit fees, user charges for city 
services, and taxes collected for city purposes only 
(numerator), divided by all operating or re-occurring 
revenues including those provided by other levels of 
government transferred to the city (denominator). The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
a percentage. 


Own-source revenue as a percentage of total revenues 
represent the percentage of local government revenues 
originating from fees, charges and taxes as permitted by 
law or legislation in relation to all revenues including 
those provided by other levels of government, which 
includes operating or re-occurring revenues determined 
through methods, such as formula driven payments 
or repatriation of income tax, grant donations from 
higher government levels including national or state 
governments and other types of financial transfers that 
may be tied to the delivery of specific services. 


8.3.3 Data Source 
See 8.2.3. 


8.4 Tax Collected as a Percentage of Tax Billed 
(Supporting Indicator) 


8.4.1 General 


Tax collection is a major source of income for all 
levels of government including cities. This indicator 


13 


IS 17000 : 2019 


is intended to measure the effectiveness of a city’s 
financial management capabilities and to some extent 
is a proxy of the willingness of citizens to pay taxes. 


8.4.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The tax collected as a percentage of tax billed 
measures the ratio of the actual tax collected to 
the mandated tax. It shall be calculated as the total 
revenues generated by tax collection (numerator) 
divided by the amount of taxes billed (denominator). 
The result shall then be multiplied by 100 and 
expressed as a percentage. 


8.4.3 Data Source 
See 8.2.3. 


9 GOVERNANCE 


9.1 Voter Participation in Last Municipal Election 
(as a Percentage of Eligible Voters) (Core Indicator) 


9.1.1 General 


The percentage of the eligible voting population that 
voted in the last municipal election is an indicator of 
the public’s level of participation and degree of interest 
in local government. 


9.1.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The voter participation in the last municipal election 
shall be calculated as the number of persons that voted 
in the last municipal election (numerator) divided by 
the city population eligible to vote (denominator). The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
a percentage. 


A result of zero shall be indicated if there have been no 
municipal elections in the last five years and this shall 
be noted in the comments. 


NOTES 


1 Election laws have provided for ‘None of the above (NOTA) 
option also, for a voter who does not wish to vote for any of 
the candidates listed on the ballot paper. Ratio of the voters 
who opted for the NOTA option, to the total number of voters 
who cast their votes (including the number of invalid votes) 
would give an indication of satisfaction of the citizens with the 
governance framework at the electoral levels. 


2 There is a distinction between eligible to vote and registered 
to vote. This should be noted. 


9.1.3 Data Source 


Information should be obtained from the local election 
authorities. 


9.1.4 Data Interpretation 


This indicator will only reveal the level of participation, 
not the level of satisfaction of the population. In some 
cases, high rates of participation will mean that the 
population is not satisfied with its local government’s 
leadership and actions. 


IS 17000 : 2019 


9.2 Women as a Percentage of Total Elected to City 
Level Offices (Core Indicator) 


9.2.1 General 


The percentage of women elected to city level office is 
a direct reflection of inclusiveness in governance. 


9.2.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The number of women elected to city level office 
shall be calculated as the total number of elected city 
level positions held by women (numerator) divided 
by the total number of elected city level positions 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage. 


The number of elected city level positions shall refer 
to the number of places on the city council or in city 
government that are directly or indirectly elected. 
This shall include elected managerial roles, such as 
Council/Standing Committee chairperson, where 
relevant. 
NOTE — While there is a constitutional mandate to ensure a 
minimum of one-third of the seats to be reserved for women in 
the offices of chairperson of municipalities, some states have 
made provisions to provide higher percentage for women. In 


some cities, the percentage of women elected representatives 
is even higher than the statutory requirements. 


9.2.3 Data Source 
See 9.1.3. 


9.3 Percentage of Women Employed in the City 
Government Workforce (Supporting Indicator) 


9.3.1 General 


The percentage of the city government workforce that 
is women is a direct reflection of the equity of the hiring 
system within the city government. 


9.3.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The number of women employed in the city government 
workforce shall be calculated as the total number of 
employees in the city government workforce that are 
women (numerator) divided by the total number of the 
city government workforce (denominator). The result 
shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as a 
percentage. 


The city government workforce shall be calculated as 
the total number of employees working within the city 
government. 


9.3.3 Data Source 


Information should be obtained from the city 
government offices. 


9.4 Number of Convictions for Corruption by 
City Officials per 100 000 Population (Supporting 
Indicator) 


14 


9.4.1 General 


The principles of governance include selflessness, 
objectivity, accountability, openness, honesty and 
leadership. The number of convictions for corruption/ 
bribery can reflect the extent to which governance 
adheres to these core principles. 


9.4.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The number of convictions for corruption by city 
officials shall be calculated as the total number of 
convictions for corruption by city officials (numerator) 
divided by one 100 000th of the city’s total population 
(denominator). 


City officials are the elected representatives or 
employed officials of the municipality. 
9.4.3 Data Source 


Information should be obtained from 
government office. 


the city 


9.5 Citizens’ Representation: Number of Local 
Official Elected to Office per 100 000 Population 
(Supporting Indicator) 


9.5.1 General 


The number of public officials elected by citizens of the 
city and the right of citizens as guaranteed by law, to 
examine and then make submissions/objections to urban 
planning, development and infrastructure policies/ 
plans/projects prior to their approval/construction is an 
indicator of citizens’ rights to participate in the affairs 
of their city. 


9.5.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The number of local officials elected to office per 
100 000 shall be calculated as the total number of 
public officials elected to local office by citizens of 
the city (numerator) divided by one 100 000th of the 
city’s total population (denominator). The result shall 
be expressed as the number of local officials elected to 
office per 100 000 population. 


The term ‘public officials elected to local office by 
citizens of the city’ shall include all positions in the 
public service relating to the city that require election 
by the citizens of the city to hold office. It includes all 
councils, boards, commissions, etc. where members are 
elected by the citizens of the city but does not include 
national or state government politicians. 


NOTE — This indicator only reveals the number of local 
officials elected to office and does not determine whether or 
not citizens have the right, guaranteed by law, to examine 
and then make submissions/ objections to urban planning, 
development and infrastructure policies/plans/projects prior 
to their approval/construction. It is codified and enforceable 
law of the city that guarantees citizens the right to examine 
and then make submissions/objections to urban planning, 
development and infrastructure policies/plans/projects prior 


to their approval/construction in order for cities to report that 
this element of the citizens’ participation exists in their city. 
Whether these rights exist should be noted. 


9.5.3 Data Source 
See 9.1.3. 


9.5.4 Comments and Limitations 


An increase in the number of elected city officials and/ 
or city workers may in some circumstances indicate an 
expensive city administration. 


9.6 Number of Registered Voters as a Percentage of 
the Voting Age Population (Supporting Indicator) 


9.6.1 General 


Determining the percentage of the number of registered 
voters from the voting age population can reveal the 
legitimacy and quality of the electoral process in a 
city. For citizens to exercise their democratic right 
to vote there must be a comprehensive and inclusive 
electoral register, also called a voters list; and this must 
be carefully maintained to ensure that each eligible 
citizen is registered to vote once and only once. A 
voters’ list makes it possible to separate two of the most 
important functions of the election authority: verifying 
voter eligibility and controlling the legitimacy of the 
balloting process. 


9.6.2 Supporting Indicator Requirement 


The number of registered voters as a percentage of 
the voting age population shall be calculated as the 
total number of registered voters, as determined by 
the official voter register (numerator) divided by 
the voting age population (denominator). The result 
shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as a 
percentage. 


Number of registered voters shall refer to the number 
of names on the voters’ register at the time that the 
registration process closes (cut-off date), as reported by 
the election authority. The election authority should use 
one of three options for voter registration: a periodic 
list, a continuous register/list, or a civil registry. Any 
one of these options can determine the number of 
registered voters. 


Voting age population shall include all citizens of legal 
voting age. 


NOTE — Voting age population is not necessarily an exact 
measure of the number of citizens entitled to vote as it does 
not take into account legal or systemic barriers to the exercise 
of the franchise or account for non-eligible members of 
the population, such as resident non-citizens or in some 
jurisdictions persons serving a sentence of imprisonment in a 
penal or correctional institution [the voting eligible population 
(VEP) would capture these discrepancies but it is very hard to 
achieve the data required to measure VEP]. 


15 


IS 17000 : 2019 


9.6.3 Data Source 
See 9.1.3. 


10 HEALTH 


10.1 Average Life Expectancy at Birth (Core 
Indicator) 


10.1.1 General 


Life expectancy at birth measures the average number 
of years a person is expected to live under prevailing 
mortality conditions. Life expectancy at birth is 
closely connected with health conditions, which are 
an integral part of development. Mortality is also 
one of the variables that determine the size of human 
populations and their potential for future growth. 
Life expectancy at birth is also a measure of overall 
quality of life in a country and summarizes mortality 
at all ages. It can also be thought of as indicating the 
potential return on investment in human capital and 
is necessary for the calculation of various actuarial 
measures. 


10.1.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The average life expectancy at birth shall be calculated 
as the average number of years to be lived by a group 
of people born in the same year, if health and living 
conditions at the time of their birth remained the same 
throughout their lives. 


10.1.3 Data Source 


In India, life expectancy at various broad age groups has 
been estimated through Sample Registration System 
(SRS) conducted by the Census Commissioner of India. 
However, SRS data is available only for the states but 
not for the cities, owing to sampling methodology 
adopted. Cities will need to make assessment of life 
expectancy through expert agencies. 

NOTE — The life tables generated under SRS are based on 

the mortality package for life table estimation (MORTPAK 


4), which is a United Nation’s software package for mortality 
measurements. 


10.2 Under Age Five Mortality per 1 000 Live Births 
(Core Indicator) 


10.2.1 General 


The under age five mortality rate is a leading indicator 
of the level of child health and overall development 
in cities. Child mortality is an indicator of the status 
of the city as a healthy or unhealthy place to live. In 
addition, mortality rates are among the most frequently 
used indicators to compare levels of socio-economic 
development across countries. Improving child 
mortality rates is a vital component of the Sustainable 
Development Goals. 


IS 17000 : 2019 


10.2.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The under age five mortality per 1 000 live births shall 
refer to the probability of a child born in a specified 
year dying before reaching the age of five, and shall be 
expressed as a rate per 1 000 live births. 
NOTE — The under age five mortality rate, is strictly speaking, 
not a rate (that is the number of deaths divided by the number 
of population at risk during a certain period of time) but a 
probability of death derived from a life table and expressed as 
rate per | 000 live births. 
Age-specific mortality rates among children and infants 
shall be calculated from birth and death data derived 
from vital registration, census, and/or household 
surveys. Estimates based on household surveys data 
shall be obtained, 


a) directly, using birth history, as in demographic and 
health surveys, or 


b) indirectly, using the Brass method, as specified in 
the Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. 


The data shall then be summed for children under age 
five and shall be expressed as a rate per | 000. 


The under age five mortality per 1 000 live births should 
be computed for boys, girls and the total population of 
children of this age group, to facilitate understanding 
of gender bias. 


10.2.3 Data Source 


The registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 
requires the state governments to appoint Registrars for 
compulsory registration of all births and deaths in their 
respective local areas. Usually, an officer of the local 
body (municipality, panchayat, cantonment board, etc) 
is appointed as the Registrar. Data on births and deaths 
may be secured from the Registrar. 

NOTE — It would be desirable to ascertain the list of all the 

authorized Registrars in the city and secure data from all of 

them. 


10.3 Number of In-Patient Hospital Beds per 
100 000 Population (Core Indicator) 


10.3.1 General 


The number of in-patient public hospital beds is one of 
the few available indicators, which monitor the level 
of a health service delivery. Service delivery is an 
important part of health systems, and in-patient public 
hospital bed density is one of the few indicators that 
can be collected. 


10.3.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The number of in-patient hospital beds per 100 000 
shall be calculated as the total number of in-patient 
public and private hospital beds (numerator), divided by 
100 000th of the city’s total population (denominator). 
The result shall be expressed as the number of in- 
patient public and private hospital beds per 100 000 of 
the city population. 


16 


Hospital beds shall include in-patient and maternity 
beds. This shall include beds in wards, which are 
closed for reasons, such as lack of health staff, 
and building works. It shall also include beds for 
patients admitted who require continual assistance, 
incubators and specialized care. It may not include 
day care beds, pre-anesthesia beds, wake-up beds, 
beds for members of a patient’s family, and beds for 
hospital staff. 


10.3.3 Data Source 


This indicator should rely on administrative records, 
based on reported data by public inpatient facilities. 
Data may also come from censuses of health care 
facilities. 


10.4 Number of Physicians per 100 000 Population 
(Core Indicator) 


10.4.1 General 


The availability of physicians is an important indicator 
of the strength of a city’s health system. There is 
evidence that the number of physicians is positively 
associated with immunization coverage, outreach of 
primary care, and infant, child and maternal survival. 
In this standard, physicians may also be referred to as 
doctors. 


10.4.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The number of physicians per 100 000 population shall 
be calculated as the number of general or specialized 
practitioners whose workplace is in the city (numerator) 
divided by one 100 000th of the city’s total population 
(denominator). The result shall be expressed as the 
number of physicians per 100 000 population. 


For this indicator, a physician shall be defined as 
someone who graduates from any facility or school of 
medicine whose workplace is in the city. 


Full-time equivalence (FTE) shall be applied, in order 
to capture doctors working part-time in hospitals and 
in practices. 


10.4.3 Data Source 


Cities should report the number of physicians based on 
administrative records, such as physicians registered 
with the Medical Council of India in the City. 
Information may also be obtained from the census, 
labour force statistics or other surveys, which inquire 
about occupation. 


The accuracy and completeness of the human resource 
data can be a problem because databases are not updated 
frequently, private sector data are often not included 
and definitions of workers vary. It is for this reason 
that yearly updated data sources, such as administrative 
records, should be used. The definition presented above 
shall be the definition used when gathering data to 
report on this indicator. 


10.5 Number of Disabled Persons per 100 000 
Population (Supporting Indicator) 


10.5.1 General 


Every city should aim to be an inclusive society in 
which equal opportunities and access are provided 
for the growth and development of the persons with 
disabilities (PwDs) to lead productive, safe and 
dignified lives. 


Accordingly, the city should have the details about 
the number of PwDs and their social and economic 
status, which should enable the city administration 
to provide for social and physical infrastructure for 
them commensurate with requirements of barrier free 
environment. 


10.5.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The number of disabled persons per 100 000 population 
shall be calculated as the number of disabled persons 
residing in the city (numerator) divided by 100 000th 
of the city’s total population (denominator). The result 
shall be expressed as the number of disabled persons 
per 100 000 population. 


Disability has been defined under the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 and covers 
impairments relating to blindness and low vision; deaf 
and hard of hearing; locomotor disability including 
cerebral palsy, leprosy cured, dwarfism, acid attack 
victims and muscular dystrophy; autism, intellectual 
disability, specific learning disability and mental 
illness; etc. 


10.5.3 Data Source 


Data on the PwDs is available in the decennial census. 
Cities can update the same through specific surveys. 


10.6 Number of Nursing and Midwifery Personnel 
per 100 000 Population (Supporting Indicator) 


10.6.1 General 


The number of nursing and midwifery personnel is 
a good indication of the city’s health system and the 
strength of its outreach for maternal health. 


10.6.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The number of nursing and midwifery personnel 
shall be calculated as the total number of nurses and 
midwives (numerator), divided by one 100 000th of the 
city’s total population (denominator). The result shall 
be expressed as the number of nursing and midwifery 
personnel per 100 000 population. 


The number of nurses shall include actively practicing 
nurses and midwives employed in public and private 
hospitals, clinics and other health facilities, including 
self-employed nurses and midwives. Both fully- 
qualified nurses with post-secondary education in 
nursing and _ vocational/associate/auxiliary/practical 


17 


IS 17000 : 2019 


nurses with a lower level of nursing skills but also 
usually registered, shall be reported. 


NOTE — Some figures may be underestimated or 
overestimated when it is not possible to distinguish whether 
the data includes health workers in the private sector, double 
counts of health workers holding two or more jobs at different 
locations, health service providers working outside the health 
care sector (for example, nurses working in a school or large 
private company), workers who are unpaid or unregulated 
but performing health care tasks (for example, volunteer 
community health workers) or people with health vocational 
training who are not currently engaged in the national health 
labour market (for example, unemployed, migrated, retired or 
withdrawn from the labour force for personal reasons). 


10.7 Suicide Rate 100 000 Population 
(Supporting Indicator) 


per 


10.7.1 General 


Suicide rate is a serious issue in many cities and reflects 
on mental health in a city, which is central to human 
development. 


10.7.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The number of deaths by suicide per 100 000 population 
shall be calculated as the total number of reported 
deaths by suicide (numerator) divided by 100 000th 
of the city’s total population (denominator). The result 
shall be expressed as the number of deaths by suicide 
per 100 000 population. 


Death by suicide shall refer to acts deliberately initiated 
and performed by a person who fully acknowledges the 
fatal outcome of such acts. 


10.7.3 Data Source 


The National Crime Records Bureau compiles state- 
wise information on accidental deaths and suicides in 
India (ADSI) and publishes the same annually on its 
website. This data is generated by the police station 
houses and compiled at district and state levels. The 
ADSI also contains city-wise information in respect of 
53 cities having population of over 10 lakh. For other 
cities, police station-wise data can be consolidated to 
generate city level information. 


11 HOUSING 


11.1 Percentage of City Population Living in Slums 
(Core Indicator) 


11.1.1 General 


The percentage of the population living in slums is 
an indicator of the number of city residents living in 
sub-standard or insecure housing. Evidence shows that 
slums are growing and becoming permanent features of 
urban landscapes. One out of every five city dwellers 
lives in a slum today. Since slums host significantly 
large proportions of the urban population it is important 
to measure them. 


IS 17000 : 2019 


11.1.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of city population living in slums shall 
be calculated as the number of people living in slums 
(numerator) divided by the city’s total population 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage. 


The number of people living in slums in each city is 
available in the Census 2011. 


Different cultures and countries define the physical 
and social attributes of slums differently. United 
Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) 
acknowledges this diversity and the fact that slums take 
many different forms and names. 


The legal definition of a ‘Slum’ is available in the 
Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956. 
Broadly speaking, a slum household refers to a group of 
individuals living under the same roof in an urban area 
who lack one or more of the following five conditions: 


a) Durable housing — A house is considered 
‘durable’ if it is built on a non-hazardous location 
and has a structure permanent and adequate 
enough to protect its inhabitants from the extremes 
of climatic conditions, such as rain, heat, cold and 
humidity. 

b 


wm 


Sufficient living area — A house is considered to 
provide a sufficient living area for the household 
members if not more than three people share the 
same room. 


c) Access to improved water — A household is 
considered to have access to improved water 
supply if it has a sufficient amount of water for 
family use, at an affordable price, available to 
household members without being subject to 
extreme effort, especially on the part of women 
and children. 


d) Access to sanitation — A household is considered 
to have adequate access to sanitation if an excreta 
disposal system, either in the form of a private 
toilet or a public toilet shared with a reasonable 
number of people, is available to household 
members. 


e 


Saa 


Secure tenure — Secure tenure is the right of all 
individuals and groups to effective protection 
against forced evictions. People have secure tenure 
when there is evidence of documentation that can 
be used as proof of secure tenure status or when 
there is either de facto or perceived protection 
against forced evictions. 


Care should be taken to avoid double counting so as 
to not exaggerate or over-count the percentage of 
population in slums. 


11.1.3 Data Source 


Data for the above conditions should be gathered from 
census and survey data and information from agencies 


18 


working with slums. In Census 2011, for the first time 
data in percentage to total households up to village in 
rural and wards in urban area are available in public 
domain. While the absolute figures are only available 
in public domain up to sub-district/town level only, 
similar data for ward and enumeration block levels can 
be obtained from the district census office. 


11.2 Number of Homeless per 100 000 Population 
(Supporting Indicator) 


11.2.1 General 


Having a home to live in can be considered a basic need. 
There may be several reasons for a homeless situation, 
such as the housing price to income ratio. 


11.2.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The number of homeless per 100 000 population shall 
be calculated as the total number of homeless people 
(numerator), divided by one 100 000th of the city’s total 
population (denominator). The result shall be expressed 
as the number of homeless per 100 000 population. 


The United Nations defines homelessness as ‘Absolute 
homelessness refers to those without any physical 
shelter, for example, those living outside, in parks, in 
doorways, in parked vehicles, or parking garages, as 
well as those in emergency shelters or in transition 
houses for women fleeing abuse’. 


In India, Census 2011 defines houseless households as 
‘Households which do not live in buildings or census 
houses but live in the open or road side pavements, in 
hume pipes, under fly-overs and staircases, or in the 
open in places of worship, mandaps, railway platforms, 
etc’. 


11.2.3 Data Source 


Data for the above conditions should be gathered from 
census and survey data and information from agencies 
working with slums. 


11.3 Percentage of Households that Exist Without 
Registered Legal Titles (Supporting Indicator) 


11.3.1 General 


Understanding the percentage of households that 
exist without registered legal titles informs municipal 
leaders on housing security for city residents as well 
as housing conditions, infrastructure requirements 
and builds a better database for less formal parts of 
the city. 


11.3.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of households that exist without 
registered legal titles shall be calculated as the number 
of households that exist without registered legal titles 
(numerator) divided by the total number of households 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage. 


Unregistered legal title includes the following 
tenure types: unregistered lease or leaseholds, rental, 
occupancy right, use right (including sub-lease, sub- 
rental and co-tenancy, and co-occupancy right). 


11.3.3 Data Source 


Information on this indicator is expected to be available 
with the local municipality. 


11.4 Percentage of Slum Dwellers Having the Right 
to Tenure (Supporting Indicator) 


11.4.1 General 


Right to tenure would encourage the slum dwellers 
participate more actively in improvement of their 
shelter and the surroundings. 


11.4.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of slum dwellers having the right to 
tenure shall be calculated as the total number of slum 
dwellers having the right to tenure (numerator) divided 
by the total number of slum dwellers (denominator) 
within the city. 


11.4.3 Data Source 


Data on number of slum dwellers having the right 
to tenure would be available in the decennial census 
documents. This may be updated from the local bodies. 
In some cases, surveys can also be conducted. 


12 RECREATION 


12.1 Square Metres of Public Indoor Recreation 
Space per Capita (Supporting Indicator) 


12.1.1 General 


Recreation is an important aspect of city life, 
contributing to the health of citizens and the vitality 
of the city. Recreation is a service that many cities 
provide through local bodies or related office. It is 
recommended that this space is made accessible to the 
elderly, people with disabilities and wheelchair users 
in accordance with National Building Code of India 
2016. 


12.1.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


Square metres of public indoor recreation space per 
capita shall be calculated as the square metres of 
indoor public recreation space (numerator) divided by 
the population of the city (denominator), and shall be 
expressed as the number of square meters of indoor 
recreation space per capita. 
NOTE — The need for indoor public recreational spaces varies 
depending on local climatic and cultural conditions. 
Public recreation space shall refer to land and buildings 
open to the public for relaxation, amusement or leisure 
pursuits. Recreation space shall include only space that 
primarily serves a recreation purpose. 


19 


IS 17000 : 2019 


Indoor public recreation space should include, 
a) city-owned or maintained buildings; and 


b) other recreation buildings within the city not 
owned or operated by the city, provided they are 
open to the public. This category may include 
state or provincially owned buildings, schools and 
colleges, as well as non-profit organizations. If 
cities report only city-owned recreation space, this 
shall be noted. 


For multi-story buildings the floor area of all floors in 
the building should be counted, if known. 


For multi-use facilities only the portion of the building 
devoted to recreation shall be counted (the play areas at 
a school or college, for example, not the entire school 
site). 


The area of the entire recreation site shall be included 
(including, for example, building maintenance and 
utility areas) but shall exclude parking areas. 
NOTE — Many cities report city-owned recreation space and 
this does not include the contribution to recreation from non- 
city-owned facilities. While the methodology in this standard 
appears complex, the result will ultimately be more meaningful. 
It is recommended that a recreation space inventory be created. 


12.1.3 Data Source 


This information should be obtained from the city 
planning department together with departments 
knowledgeable about the city. 


Recreation spaces may also be delineated using aerial 
photography and/or land use maps. Once the areas have 
been identified on a map, the area in square metres may 
be calculated using low cost Geographic Information 
Systems (GIS) or, if not available, through use of hand- 
held measuring devices. Area may be calculated in 
hectares or acres and converted to square meters. 


12.2 Square Metres of Public Outdoor Recreation 
Space per Capita (Supporting Indicator) 


12.2.1 General 


Recreation is an important aspect of city life, 
contributing to the health of citizens and the vitality of 
the city. Recreation is a service that many cities provide 
through local bodies related office. This will include 
outdoor recreation space. It is recommended that this 
space is made accessible to the elderly, people with 
disabilities and wheelchair users in accordance with 
National Building Code of India 2016. 


12.2.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


Square metres of public outdoor recreation space per 
capita shall be calculated as square metres of outdoor 
public recreation space (numerator) divided by the 
population of the city (denominator), and shall be 
expressed as the number of square meters of outdoor 
recreation space per capita. 


IS 17000 : 2019 


Public recreation space shall refer to land and open 
space available to the public for relaxation, amusement 
or leisure pursuits. Recreation space shall include only 
space that primarily serves a recreation purpose. 


Outdoor recreation space should include, 
a) city-owned or maintained land; and 


b) other-recreation lands within the city not owned 
or operated by the city, provided they are open 
to the public. This category may include state 
or provincially owned lands, school and college 
grounds, as well as non-profit organizations. If 
cities report only city-owned recreation space, this 
shall be noted. 


For multi-use facilities, only the portion of the land 
devoted to recreation shall be counted (the play areas at 
a school or college, for example, not the entire school 
site). Double counting shall be avoided. For example, 
do not include indoor facilities on parkland. 


The area of the entire outdoor recreation site shall 
be included (including, for example wooded areas of 
parks, building maintenance and utility areas) but shall 
exclude parking areas. 
NOTE — Many cities report city-owned recreation space 
and this does not include the contribution to recreation 
from non-city owned facilities. While the methodology in 
this Standard is more complex, the result will ultimately be 
more meaningful. It is recommended that a recreation space 
inventory be created. 


12.2.3 Data Source 


This information should be obtained from a city 
planning department together with departments 
knowledgeable about the city. 


Outdoor recreation spaces may also be delineated using 
aerial photography and/or land use maps. Once the 
areas have been identified on a map, the area in square 
metres may be calculated using low cost Geographic 
Information Systems (GIS) or, if not available, through 
use of hand-held measuring devices. Area may be 
calculated, in hectares or acres, and converted to square 
metres. 


12.3 Number of Art Galleries, Museums, Cultural 
Centres per 100 000 Population (Supporting 
Indicator) 


12.3.1 General 


Cities require to maintain and showcase their cultural 
and social heritage by way of art galleries, museums, 
cultural centres and similar institutions. 


12.3.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The number of art galleries, museums, cultural 
centres and similar institutions per lakh of population 
shall be calculated as the number of such institutions 
in government and other sectors, but available to 


20 


public at large (numerator) divided by one 100 000th 
of the city’s total population (denominator). The 
result shall be expressed as the number of art 
galleries, museums and cultural centres per 100 000 
population. 


12.3.3 Data Source 


This information should be obtained from a city 
planning department together with the licensing 
department. Relevant departments and organizations 
of the state government can also provide additional 
information. 


13 SAFETY 


13.1 Number of Police Personnel per 100 000 
Population (Core Indicator) 


13.1.1 General 


The number of sworn police personnel per 100 000 
population is an indicator of the overall crime 
prevention in place in a city. 


13.1.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The number of police personnel per 100 000 population 
shall be calculated as the number of permanent full- 
time (or full-time equivalent) sworn police personnel 
(numerator) divided by one 100 000th of the city’s 
total population (denominator). The result shall 
be expressed as the number of police personnel per 
100 000 population. 


Sworn law enforcement police personnel should meet 
the following criteria: work in an official capacity; have 
full arrest powers; carry identification; and be paid from 
governmental funds set aside specifically for payment 
of sworn law enforcement representatives. 


Each year, law enforcement agencies shall report the 
total number of sworn law enforcement officers as of 
a locally determined date. Personnel counts shall be 
based on permanent, full-time employees. 


13.1.3 Data Source 


Data for this indicator is available on the web portal of 
National Bureau of Police Research and Development 
(BPRD), for the states. City-wise data in respect of 
51 cities having Police Commissioners as on | January 
2015 is also available on the same portal. For the other 
cities, the State Police Department has this information 
available almost readily. 


13.2 Number of Homicides per 100 000 Population 
(Core Indicator) 


13.2.1 General 


The number of homicides is an indicator of the amount 
of crime and an indicator of feelings of personal safety 
and can affect incentives to invest. 


13.2.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The number of homicide per 100 000 population shall 
be calculated as the number of reported homicides 
(numerator) divided by 100 000th of the city’s total 
population (denominator). The result shall be expressed 
as the number of homicides per 100 000 population. 


Homicide shall include intentional and non-intentional 
homicide. Intentional homicide shall refer to death 
deliberately inflicted on a person by another person, 
including infanticide. Non-intentional homicide shall 
refer to death non-deliberately inflicted on a person by 
another person. This shall include manslaughter, but 
shall exclude traffic accidents that result in the death of 
a person, and suicides. 


13.2.3 Data Source 


Data on crime is compiled by State Crime Record 
Bureaus and consolidated in the form ofa Compendium 
at national level by the National Crime Record Bureau 
(NCRB), annually. The latest compendium on ‘Crime 
in India’, which also includes city-level data for 
53 metro-cities, that is cities with population of over 
10 lakh. In respect of every city, police station level 
data can be obtained from the respective State Crime 
Record Bureau, which can be aggregated to obtain 
data for the whole or part of a city. These databases 
include details in respect different social segments, 
such as crime against women, scheduled castes/tribes, 
children, etc. 

NOTE — Homicides are not always reported as such. In 

particular, domestic homicides are sometimes reported as 

suicides or accidents. 


13.3 Crimes Against Women Per 100 000 Population 
(Core Indicator) 


13.3.1 General 


The number of crimes against women in a city is 
considered a benchmark for the overall level of safety 
in the city. 


13.3.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The number of crimes against women shall be 
calculated as the total number of all such crimes 
reported (numerator) divided by one 100 000th of the 
city’s total population (denominator). The result shall 
be expressed as the number of crimes against women 
per 100 000 population. 


Crimes against women include crime head, namely 
rape; assault on women with intent to outrage her 
modesty; insult to the modesty of women; importation 
of girls from foreign country; cruelty by husband or 
his relatives; kidnapping and abduction of women; 
abetment of suicides of women; dowry deaths under 
the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961; and crime under the 
Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 
1986, the Commission of Sati Prevention Act, 1987, 


21 


IS 17000 : 2019 


the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 
2005 and the Immoral Traffic (P) Act, 1956. 


13.3.3 Data Source 


Data on crime is compiled by State Crime Record 
Bureaus and consolidated in the form of a Compendium 
at national level by the National Crime Record Bureau 
(NCRB), annually. The latest compendium on ‘Crime in 
India’, which also includes city-level data for 53 metro- 
cities, that is cities with population of over 10 lakh. 
In respect of every city, police station level data can be 
obtained from the respective State Crime Record Bureau, 
which can be aggregated to obtain data for the whole or 
part of a city. These databases include details in respect 
different social segments, such as crime against women, 
scheduled castes/tribes, children, etc. 


13.4 Response Time for Police Department from 
Initial Call (Supporting Indicator) 


13.4.1 General 


The average response time (in minutes and seconds) it 
takes a police department to respond to an initial distress 
call is an indicator of how protected a city’s residents 
are from security and safety threats. Because it has 
the appearance of objectivity, police response time is 
a valuable and key operational measure used to assess 
system performance from the citizen’s perspective. 


13.4.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The response time for police department from initial 
call shall be calculated as the sum of number of all 
initial distress calls to the on-site arrival of the police 
department personnel for the year in minutes and 
seconds (numerator) divided by the number of police 
department responses in the same year (denominator). 
The result shall be expressed as the response time 
for police department from initial call in minutes and 
seconds. 


The total number of minutes and seconds taken to 
respond to all emergency calls shall include the time 
elapsed from receiving the initial call for assistance 
to arrival on-site of police department personnel is 
calculated for the preceding 12 months. 


13.4.3 Data Source 


The city police office maintains the information on 
calls received and responded. 


13.5 Violent Crime Rate per 100 000 Population 
(Supporting Indicator) 


13.5.1 General 


The number of violent crimes is an indicator of the 
amount of serious criminal offences in a city and a lead 
indicator of feelings of personal safety. The number 
of violent crimes in a city is considered a benchmark 
measure of the overall level of safety in the city. 


IS 17000 : 2019 


13.5.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The violent crime rate per 100 000 population shall 
be calculated as the total number of all violent crimes 
reported (numerator) divided by one 100 000th of 
the city’s total population (denominator). The result 
shall be expressed as the number of violent crimes 
per 100 000 population. 


Violent crimes shall include offences that involve force 
or the threat of force to a person. Total violent crimes 
reported shall be calculated as the total sum of the 
number of murders and non-negligent manslaughters, 
the number of rapes, the number of robberies and the 
number of aggravated assaults. 


Furthermore, a violent crime should be classified as one 
of the following four offences (in order of severity): 
murder and non-negligent manslaughter; rape; robbery; 
and, aggravated assault. 


For a multiple offence, only the most serious/severe 
offence shall be counted. 


13.5.3 Data Source 
See 13.3.3. 


13.6 Number’ of Professional Firefighters 
per 100 000 Population (Core Indicator) 


13.6.1 General 


Fire response is a fundamental service for protecting 
life and property of citizens. Cities with populations 
of 100 000 or more usually have professional fire 
brigades with full-time employees. These are often 
supported by volunteer firefighters. In smaller cities 
and rural municipalities, fire brigades often consist 
mainly of volunteer workers. However, in respect of 
this indicator, only full-time, professional firefighters 
are to be counted. 


13.6.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The number of full time firefighters per 100 000 
population shall be calculated as the total number of 
such persons (numerator) divided by one 100 000th of 
the city population (denominator). The result shall be 
expressed as the number of professional firefighters per 
100 000 population. 


13.6.3 Data Source 


The district and city fire department offices invariably 
maintain the statistics on the number of full time 
firefighters available in the city. 


13.7 Number of Volunteer and Part-time Firefighters 
per 100 000 Population (Supporting Indicator) 


13.7.1 General 


Fire response is a fundamental service for protecting 
life and property of citizens. Cities with populations of 
100 000 or more usually have professional fire brigades 


22 


with full-time employees. These are often supported 
by volunteer firefighters. In smaller cities and rural 
municipalities, fire brigades often consist mainly of 
volunteer workers. 


13.7.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The number of volunteer and part time firefighters 
per 100 000 population shall be calculated as the 
total number of volunteer and part time firefighters 
(numerator) divided by one 100 000th of city’s total 
population (denominator). The result shall be expressed 
as the number of volunteer and part time firefighters per 
100 000 population. 


Volunteer firefighters shall refer to individuals who 
respond to incidents without pay. 


Part-time firefighters shall refer to individuals who 
are not considered full time career firefighters and are 
paid only for incidents that they respond to. The Home 
Guards and Civil Defence personnel, who are engaged 
as such on part-time basis, shall be considered as part 
of this indicator. 


NOTE — The term ‘volunteer’ may be used in reference to a 
group of part-time or on call firefighters who may have other 
occupations when not engaged in occasional firefighting. 
Therefore, volunteer and part-time firefighters are considered 
to be the same classification. 


13.7.3 Data Source 


In general, the fire department of state/city should 
be maintaining the data on volunteer and part time 
firefighters. In most states, the civil defence and home 
guards department has got a district-level office, which 
maintains the information on the trained personnel 
available on their payrolls/registers. 
NOTE — It would also be desirable for the municipalities 
to promote voluntary participation of citizens in firefighting 
and protection activities and maintain a record of such 
volunteers. 


13.8 Number of Fire Related Deaths per 100 000 
Population (Core Indicator) 


13.8.1 General 


One of the many measures used to demonstrate the 
effectiveness of a city’s fire services is the number of 
fire related deaths that occur on an annual basis. 


13.8.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The number of fire related deaths per 100 000 
population shall be expressed as the number of deaths 
directly attributed to a fire incident with death occurring 
within 30 days. This indicator shall be calculated as the 
total number of citizen fire related deaths recorded in a 
12 month period (numerator), divided by one 100 000th 
of the city’s total population (denominator). The result 
shall be expressed as the number of fire related deaths 
per 100 000 population. 


13.8.3 Data Source 


The National Crime Records Bureau compiles state- 
wise information on accidental deaths and suicides in 
India (ADSI), including in respect of accidental fire 
and forest fires, and publishes the same annually on 
its website. This data is generated by the police station 
houses and compiled at district and state levels. The 
ADSI also contains city-wise information in respect of 
53 cities having population of over 10 lakh. For other 
cities, police station wise data can be consolidated to 
generate city level information. 


In addition, the local fire department office and the city 
Disaster Management Authority may also be a possible 
source for such information. 


13.9 Number of Natural Disaster Related Deaths 
per 100 000 Population (Core Indicator) 


13.9.1 General 


The attractiveness of cities for citizens and investors 
alike, is affected by the frequency and magnitude of 
natural disasters occurring within a city and a city’s 
ability to respond. The natural disaster related losses of 
lives in the past can be indicative of a city’s potential 
future exposure. 


13.9.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The number of natural disaster related deaths per 
100 000 population shall be expressed as the number of 
deaths directly attributed to natural disaster incidents. 
This indicator shall be calculated as the total number of 
natural disaster related deaths recorded in a 12 month 
period (numerator), divided by one 100 000th of the city 
population (denominator). The result shall be expressed 
as the number of natural disaster related deaths per 
100 000 population.13.9.3 Data Source 


13.9.3 Data Source 
See 13.8.3. 


13.10 Response Time for Emergency Response 
Services from Initial Call (Supporting Indicator) 


13.10.1 General 


The average response time (in minutes and seconds) it 
takes an emergency and rescue department to respond 
to an initial distress call is an indicator of how protected 
a city’s residents are from security and safety threats. 


13.10.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The response time for the emergency and rescue 
department from the initial call shall be calculated 
as the sum of time elapsed from receiving all initial 
distress calls to the on-site arrival of the emergency 
personnel and equipment in minutes and seconds for the 
year (numerator) divided by the number of emergency 
responses in the same year (denominator). The result 


23 


IS 17000 : 2019 


shall be expressed as the response time for emergency 
response services from initial call, in minutes and 
seconds. 


The total number of minutes and seconds taken to 
respond to all emergency rescue calls shall include 
the time elapsed from receiving the initial call for 
assistance to arrival on-site of emergency personnel and 
equipment is calculated for the preceding 12 months. 


This indicator includes all forms of emergency 
response, for example rescue services and ambulatory 
rescue personnel, and police personnel responding to 
criminal acts such as robberies and assault. 
NOTE — As an accurately recorded response time is objective, 
this indicator is a valuable key operational measure to assess 
system performance from the citizen’s perspective. 


13.10.3 Data Source 


The emergency and rescue department, which 
normally maintains toll-free call numbers such as 100, 
101,102 and 112 shall be the source for providing this 
information. 


NOTE — Some states have moved to have a common ‘108’ 
number for all such services including for medical emergencies. 


13.11 Response Time for Fire Department from 
Initial Call (Supporting Indicator) 


13.11.1 General 


The average response time (in minutes and seconds) it 
takes a fire department to respond to an initial distress 
call is an indicator of how protected a city’s residents 
are from fires and emergencies. 


13.11.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The response time for a fire department from the initial 
call shall be calculated as the sum of time elapsed from 
receiving all initial distress calls to the on-site arrival 
of the fire department personnel and equipment in 
minutes and seconds for the year (numerator) divided 
by the number of fire department responses in the same 
year (denominator). The result shall be expressed as the 
response time for fire department from initial call in 
minutes and seconds. 


The total number of minutes and seconds taken to 
respond to all emergency calls shall include the time 
elapsed from receiving the initial call for assistance 
to the on-site arrival of fire department personnel 
and equipment and is calculated for the preceding 
12 months. 


13.11.3 Data Source 


In most cities, the fire department would be maintaining 
the details of distress calls received and the response 
time. In addition, the emergency and rescue department, 
which normally maintains toll-free call numbers, 
such as 100, 101, 102 and 112 shall be the source for 
providing this information. 


IS 17000 : 2019 


13.12 Number 
Clearance per 
Indicator) 


of Buildings with Fire Safety 
10 000 Buildings (Supporting 


13.12.1 General 


As the habitats are getting denser, the issue of fire safety 
in high rise buildings gets increasingly significant. 


13.12.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The number of buildings of 15 m or more height or 
500 m°? or more of built space having fire safety 
clearance as a ratio of all buildings would fall in this 
category. 


Fire safety norms would be as defined in the National 
Building Code of India 2016, duly reflected in the fire 
regulations/building bye laws and development control 
regulations of the local body concerned. 


13.12.3 Data Source 


States/local bodies that have adopted the online 
building plan approval system, will have such data 
available online and real time basis. In other cases, this 
information will be available with the city fire service 
department. 


14 SEWERAGE AND SANITATION 


14.1 Percentage of City Population Having Access to 
Sanitary Toilet Facilities (Core Indicator) 


14.1.1 General 


The percentage of the city population having access to 
sanitary toilet facilities is an indicator of city health, 
cleanliness and quality of life. 


14.1.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of city population having access to sanitary 
toilet facility shall be calculated as the number of 
people within the city that are provided with water 
flush sanitary toilets with on site disposal (twin pit pour 
flush sanitary toilet), septic tank with sanitary disposal 
of its effluents and individual as well as community 
toilets connected with wastewater collection network 
(numerator) divided by city population (denominator). 
The result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed 
as a percentage. 


The number of households having access to sanitary 
toilet facility be first collected and the number is then 
multiplied by the current average number of people in 
household size of the city to determine the number of 
persons having access to sanitary toilet facility. 


In case of people provided with community toilet 
facility the number of people will be worked out on 
the basis of 10 persons per latrine seats provided at 
the community facility. Community toilet facilities 
provided at commercial places, bus stands, etc, shall 
not be counted. 


24 


14.1.3 Data Source 


Information on the number of households having access 
to sanitary toilet facility in the city should be obtained 
from the local body and authorized local operator(s) of 
wastewater systems. 


14.2 Percentage of City Population Served by 
Sewage (Wastewater) Collection (Core Indicator) 


14.2.1 General 


The percentage of the city population served by a 
wastewater collection is an indicator of city health, 
cleanliness and quality of life. Wastewater collection 
and treatment is a significant component of the 
Sustainable Development Goals, Goal 6: Ensure 
Availability and Sustainable Management of Water and 
Sanitation for All. 


14.2.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of city population served by wastewater 
collection shall be calculated as the number of 
people within the city that are served by wastewater 
collection (numerator) divided by the city population 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage. 


The number of households in the city serviced with 
regular wastewater collection shall first be determined 
by counting the number of households that are 
connected as part of a public or community owned 
system of discharge of wastewater through a pipe or 
similar duct that is connected to a network that takes 
it to a facility where it is treated. The number of 
households being serviced by wastewater connection 
shall then be multiplied by the then current average 
household size for that city to determine the number of 
persons serviced with wastewater collection. 
NOTE — Results will only indicate whether or not a house has 
access to wastewater systems, not the quality of the system, 
the capacity and quality of the service, the levels of loss 
(contamination), or the capacity of the treatment plants to meet 
the growth in wastewater volumes. Some of these limitations 
will be addressed in other supporting indicators. 


14.2.3 Data Source 


Information on the number of households in the city 
serviced with regular wastewater collection should 
be obtained from the local body and the authorized 
operator(s) of wastewater systems. 


14.3 Percentage of the City’s Wastewater that has 
Received no Treatment (Core Indicator) 


14.3.1 General 


It has been proven that improvement of water treatment 
reduces the incidence of a variety of water-borne 
diseases. A reliable wastewater treatment system is a 
major indicator of the level of local development and 
of community health. Water pollution from human 


waste is less of a problem in cities that can afford to 
treat sewage and wastewater, and water pollution can 
be minimized with adequate investment in treatment 
systems. The percentage of wastewater treated is a key 
indicator of water quality management. 


14.3.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of the city’s wastewater that has received 
no treatment shall be calculated as the total amount of 
the city’s wastewater that has undergone no treatment 
(numerator) divided by the total amount of wastewater 
collected in the city (denominator). This result shall then 
be multiplied by 100 and expressed as a percentage. 


No treatment shall refer to collected wastewater that is 
disposed without any treatment, including periods when 
wastewater volume exceeds treatment plant capacity. 


14.3.3 Data Source 


This information may be obtained by municipal 
authorities and the wastewater collection and treatment 
companies, such as the sewage boards or corporations. 


14.4 Percentage of the City’s Wastewater Receiving 
Primary Treatment (Core Indicator) 


14.4.1 General 


The percentage of wastewater treated is a key indicator 
of water quality management. It has been proven that 
improvement of water treatment reduces the incidence 
of a variety of water-borne diseases. A reliable 
wastewater treatment system is a major indicator of the 
level of local development and of community health. 
Water pollution from human waste is less of a problem 
in cities that can afford to treat sewage and wastewater, 
and water pollution can be minimized with adequate 
investment in treatment systems. 


14.4.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city’s wastewater receiving 
primary treatment shall be calculated as the total amount 
of the city’s wastewater that has undergone primary 
treatment (numerator) divided by the total amount of 
wastewater collected in the city (denominator). This 
result is then multiplied by 100 and expressed as a 
percentage of the city’s wastewater receiving primary 
treatment. 


Primary wastewater treatment shall refer to the physical 
separation of suspended solids from the wastewater 
flow using primary clarifiers. This separation reduces 
total suspended solids as well as the biological oxygen 
demand (BOD) levels and prepares the waste stream 
for the next step in the wastewater treatment process. 
NOTE — Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) is the amount 
of dissolved oxygen required to oxidize or neutralize 
biodegradable matter in water. High BOD levels represent 
high amounts of contaminant matter, and the reduction of BOD 


is a common measure for determining the efficacy of water 
treatment. 


25 


IS 17000 : 2019 


Some cities have no system for treating wastewater. 
This shall be reported. 


14.4.3 Data Source 


This information may be obtained from municipal 
authorities and authorized water supply and treatment 
companies. 


14.5 Percentage of the City’s Wastewater Receiving 
Secondary Treatment (Supporting Indicator) 


14.5.1 General 


It has been proven that improvement of water treatment 
reduces the incidence of a variety of water-borne 
diseases. A reliable wastewater treatment system is a 
major indicator of the level of local development and 
of community health. Water pollution from human 
waste is less of a problem in cities that can afford to 
treat sewage and wastewater, and water pollution can 
be minimized with adequate investment in treatment 
systems. The percentage of wastewater treated is a key 
indicator of water quality management. 


14.5.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of the city’s wastewater receiving secondary 
treatment shall be calculated as the total amount of 
the city’s wastewater that has undergone secondary 
treatment (numerator) divided by the total amount of 
wastewater collected in the city (denominator). The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
a percentage. 


Secondary treatment shall refer to the process of 
removing or reducing contaminants or growths that 
are left in the wastewater from the primary treatment 
process. Secondary treatment reduces Biological 
Oxygen Demand (BOD) by microbial oxidation. 


Some cities have no system for treating wastewater. 
This shall be reported. 


14.5.3 Data Source 


This information may be obtained from municipal 
authorities and the main water supply and treatment 
companies. 


14.6 Percentage of the City’s Wastewater that is 
being Recycled and Reused (Supporting Indicator) 


14.6.1 General 


Of the total fresh water supplied to a city, almost 80 
percent get converted in to wastewater after use and can 
be reclaimed after suitable recycling. In the process of 
recycling, sludge also gets generated. 


Reclaimed water can significantly augment freshwater 
sources and mitigate water stress for cities. Reclaimed 
water can be an ideal choice for industrial use, 
construction activities and horticulture including for 
avenue plantations. 


IS 17000 : 2019 


Sludge can be used in agriculture and for generation 
of energy. However, sludge from certain sources could 
contain toxins, which need to be isolated. Decentralized 
wastewater treatment could help in identification and 
isolation of such sources. 


14.6.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of the city’s wastewater being recycled and 
reused shall be calculated as the total amount of the 
city’s recycled wastewater that is being pushed into 
supply lines or being supplied to bulk users through 
tankers (numerator), divided by the total amount of 
wastewater that is received by the treatment plants 
of the city (denominator). The result shall then be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as a percentage. 


14.6.3 Data Source 


This information may be obtained from municipal 
authorities and authorized wastewater supply and 
treatment companies/agencies. 


15 SOLID WASTE 


15.1 Percentage of City Population Covered with 
Regular Solid Waste Collection (Residential) (Core 
Indicator) 


15.1.1 General 


The percentage of the city population served by regular 
solid waste collection is an indicator of city health, 
cleanliness and quality of life. Solid waste systems 
contribute in many ways to public health, the local 
economy, the environment, and the social understanding 
and education about the environment. 


15.1.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of city population with regular solid 
waste collection shall be calculated as the number 
of people within the city that are served by solid 
waste collection (numerator) divided by the total city 
population (denominator). The result shall then be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as a percentage. 


The number of households in the city serviced with 
regular solid waste collection shall first be determined. 
The number of households being serviced by the regular 
solid waste collection service shall then be multiplied 
by the current average household size for that city to 
determine the number of persons serviced with regular 
solid waste collection. Regular solid waste collection 
shall be defined as having the solid waste picked up 
from the household, transported and dumped at a proper 
treatment facility (recycling or landfill sites) on at least 
a weekly basis or every two weeks. If the solid waste is 
collected in any moving vehicle by persons who have 
not constituted a legally established entity, the house 
shall not be considered as a household serviced with a 
solid waste collection service. 


26 


NOTE — Use of persons rather than city area as the metric 
for this indicator avoids the distortion arising from local 
government areas that include both urban and non-urban areas. 


15.1.3 Data Source 


Information should be obtained from the local 
operator(s) of solid waste collection systems, census 
data, and municipal waste facilities as submitted in 
the annual form-II of Solid Waste Management Rules, 
2016. The Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 may be 
read along with similar rules, such as the Bio-Medical 
Waste Management Rules, 2016, Construction and 
Demolition Waste Management Rules, 2016, E-Waste 
Management Rules, 2016, Hazardous and Other Waste 
(Management and Trans-Boundary Movement) Rules, 
2016, Batteries (Management and Handling) Rules, 
2001 and Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016. 


15.2 Total Collected Municipal Solid Waste per 
Capita per Year (Core Indicator) 


15.2.1 General 


This indicator provides a measure of how much waste 
a city is producing and the level of service a city is 
providing for its collection. Higher levels of municipal 
waste contribute to greater environmental problems 
and therefore levels of collection, and also methods 
of disposal, of municipal solid waste are an important 
component of municipal environmental management. 
Collection of municipal solid waste is also an indicator 
of city management with regard to cleanliness, health 
and quality of life. Solid waste systems contribute 
in many ways to public health, the local economy, 
the environment, and the social understanding and 
education about the environment. 


15.2.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


This indicator shall be calculated as the total amount of 
solid waste (household and commercial) generated in 
tonnes (numerator) divided by the total city population 
(denominator). The total collected municipal solid 
waste per capita shall be expressed as the total 
municipal solid waste produced in the municipality per 
person per year. 


Municipal waste shall refer to waste collected by or on 
behalf of municipalities. 


The data shall only refer to the waste flows managed 
under the responsibility of the local administration 
including waste collected on behalf of the local 
authority by private companies or regional associations 
founded for that purpose. 


Municipal waste should include waste originating from, 
a) households; and 


b) commerce and trade, small businesses, office 
buildings and institutions (for example, schools, 
hospitals and government buildings). 


The definition should also include, 


1) bulky waste (for example, white goods, old 
furniture and mattresses); 

2) garden waste, leaves, grass clippings, street 
sweepings, the content of litter containers, and 
market cleansing waste, if managed as waste; 
and 

3) waste from selected municipal services, that 
is waste from park and garden maintenance, 
waste from street cleaning services (for 
example, street sweepings, the content of 
litter containers, market cleansing waste), if 
managed as waste. 


The definition shall exclude: 


i) waste from municipal sewage network 
and treatment; and 


ii) municipal construction and demolition 
waste. 


15.2.3 Data Source 


Information should be obtained from the local 
operator(s) of solid waste collection systems, census 
data, and municipal waste facilities as submitted in the 
annual form-II of the Solid Waste Management Rules, 
2016. 


15.2.4 Data Interpretation 


The proper discharge, transportation and treatment of 
solid waste is one of the most important components 
of life in a city and one of the first areas in which 
governments and institutions should focus. Solid 
waste systems contribute in many ways to public 
health, the local economy, the environment, and 
the social understanding and education about the 
environment. A proper solid waste system can foster 
recycling practices that maximize the life cycle of 
landfills and create recycling micro-economies, and it 
provides alternative sources of energy that help reduce 
the consumption of electricity and/or petroleum based 
fuels. 


15.3 Percentage of the City’s Solid Waste that is 
Recycled (Core Indicator) 


15.3.1 General 


Recycling the waste, after suitable segregation, 
not only helps in controlling the waste generation 
quantity but also manages the effective utilization 
of waste. In addition, it puts the waste to productive 
economic use. 


Recycled materials shall include household waste, 
garden waste, construction and demolition waste, 
e-waste, hospital waste, industrial waste, etc. It 
shall also include those materials diverted from the 
waste stream, recovered, and processed into new 
products. 


27 


IS 17000 : 2019 


15.3.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city’s solid waste that is recycled 
shall be calculated as the total amount of the city’s solid 
waste that is recycled in tonnes (numerator) divided 
by the total amount of solid waste produced in the 
city in tonnes (denominator). The result shall then be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as a percentage. 


Recycled materials shall denote those materials diverted 
from the waste stream, recovered, and processed into 
new products. 


Hazardous waste that is produced in the city and is 
recycled shall be reported separately. 


15.3.3 Data Source 


Information should be obtained from the local 
operator(s) of solid waste collection systems, census 
data, and municipal waste facilities as submitted in the 
annual form-II of the Solid Waste Management Rules, 
2016. 


15.4 Percentage of the City’s Solid Waste that is 
Disposed of in a Sanitary Landfill (Supporting 
Indicator) 


15.4.1 General 


Many cities generate more solid waste than they 
can dispose of. Even when municipal budgets are 
adequate for collection, the safe disposal of collected 
waste often remains a problem. Open dumping and 
unsanitary landfills are sometimes the main disposal 
methods, particularly in lower income cities. Sanitary 
landfills are the norm in only a limited number of cities 
worldwide. 


Open dumping and landfills are sometimes the main 
disposal methods chosen resulting in so many nuisances. 
Biodegradable waste and other useful wastes taken to 
landfill not only unnecessarily occupy the precious 
land in city but can also contribute to ground water 
contamination, methane production, odour nuisance, 
etc, if left unchecked. Hence, it is desirable that only 
limited and non-decomposable waste goes to landfills. 
However, all efforts should be made to make economic 
use of all waste by recycling, leading to a ‘zero land- 
fill’ situation. 


15.4.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city’s solid waste, that is disposed 
of in a sanitary landfill shall be calculated as the amount 
of the city’s solid waste that is disposed of in a sanitary 
landfill in tonnes (numerator) divided by the total 
amount of solid waste produced in the city in tonnes 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage. 


Sanitary landfill shall refer to a carefully designed 
structure, which uses a clay liner or a synthetic liner 
in order to isolate solid waste from the surrounding 


IS 17000 : 2019 


environment. This isolation is accomplished with a 
bottom liner and daily covering of soil. 


15.4.3 Data Source 
See 15.1.3. 


15.5 Percentage of the City’s Solid Waste that is 
Disposed of in an Incinerator (Supporting Indicator) 


15.5.1 General 


Many cities generate more solid waste than they can 
dispose of. Even when municipal budgets are adequate 
for collection, the safe disposal of collected waste often 
remains a problem. As sanitary landfill sites are limited, 
cities examine other alternatives for disposal, such as 
incineration. 


Incinerators provide the quick way of processing 
the waste giving energy as a byproduct. The volume 
reduction is assumed to be the 90 percent of the 
original volume and the energy output can be refined 
by improving the quality of the processing waste in the 
initial phases. 


15.5.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city’s solid waste that is disposed 
of in an incinerator shall be calculated as the total 
amount of the city’s solid waste that is disposed of in an 
incinerator in tonnes (numerator) divided by the total 
amount of solid waste produced in the city in tonnes 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage. 


15.5.3 Data Source 


This information should be obtained from municipal 
bodies, public services and major private contractors 
dealing with solid waste processing and disposal. Data 
may be obtained from specific studies carried out on 
solid waste for specific projects and the state pollution 
control bodies/committee. 


15.6 Percentage of the City’s Solid Waste that is 
Burned Openly (Supporting Indicator) 


15.6.1 General 


Many cities generate more solid waste than they can 
dispose of. Even when municipal budgets are adequate 
for collection, the safe disposal of collected waste often 
remains a problem. Open burning as a disposal method 
remains an alternative for some cities facing budgetary 
limitations, particularly in lower income cities. 


15.6.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city’s solid waste that is burned 
openly shall be calculated as the amount of the city’s 
solid waste that is burned in tonnes (numerator) divided 
by the total amount of solid waste produced in the 
city in tonnes (denominator). The result shall then be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as a percentage. 


28 


Burned openly shall refer to the combustion of solid 
waste in an open dump or open space. 


15.6.3 Data Source 


This information should be obtained from municipal 
bodies, public services and major private contractors 
dealing with solid waste collection and disposal. Data 
may be obtained from specific studies carried out on 
solid waste for specific projects. 


Information on selected disposal methods should 
be gathered from municipal facilities and operators, 
parastatal and private companies dealing with solid 
waste treatment. Solid waste experts, as well as NGOs 
working in this area, may be consulted. 


When data are not available, an estimate of the 
proportion of waste to sanitary landfill and the 
proportion disposed to open dump should be provided. 


15.7 Percentage of the City’s Solid Waste that 
is Disposed of in an Open Dump (Supporting 
Indicator) 


15.7.1 General 


Many cities generate more solid waste than they can 
dispose of. Even when municipal budgets are adequate 
for collection, the safe disposal of collected waste often 
remains a problem. Open dump as a disposal method 
remains an alternative for some cities facing budgetary 
limitations, particularly in lower income cities. 


15.7.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city’s solid waste that is disposed 
of in an open dump shall be calculated as the amount 
of the city’s solid waste that is disposed of in an open 
dump in tonnes (numerator) divided by the total 
amount of solid waste produced in the city in tonnes 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage. 


Open dump shall refer to an uncovered space or hole 
where solid waste is disposed of without further 
treatment. 


15.7.3 Data Source 
See 15.6.3. 


15.8 Percentage of the City’s Solid Waste that is 
Disposed of by Other Means (Supporting Indicator) 


15.8.1 General 


Many cities generate more solid waste than they can 
dispose of. Even when municipal budgets are adequate 
for collection, the safe disposal of collected waste often 
remains a problem. 

Other means shall refer to methods of disposal by 
means other than the ones indicated in 15.3 (recycling), 
15.4 (sanitary landfill), 15.5 (incinerator), 15.6 (burned 
openly), and 15.7 (open dump). 


15.8.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city’s solid waste that is disposed 
of by other means shall be calculated as the total 
amount of the city’s solid waste that is disposed of by 
other means in tonnes (numerator) divided by the total 
amount of solid waste produced in the city in tonnes 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage. 


15.8.3 Data Source 
See 15.6.3. 


16 TELECOMMUNICATION 
INNOVATION 


AND 


16.1 Number of Internet Connections per 100 000 
Population (Core Indicator) 


16.1.1 General 


The number of internet connections is an indicator of 
information access and communication technology 
connectivity. Internet connections are available through 
wireless media as well as through fixed/wired media. 


16.1.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The number of internet connections per 100 000 
population shall be calculated as the number of internet 
connections in the city (numerator) divided by one 
100 000th of the city’s total population (denominator). 
The result shall be expressed as the number of internet 
connections per 100 000 population. 


Internet connections shall refer to the number of 
internet subscriptions and not the number of people 
with internet access. 


16.1.3 Data Source 


Internet service and telecommunications providers in 
the form of subscriber locations and accounts keep 
Internet access records. 


Census 2011 too gives information on households 
having computers with internet access. 


Department of Telecommunications (DOT) compiles 
data on the availability of personal computers, number 
of internet users, telephone lines, mobile phones and 
televisions sets in the country and publishes it on their 
website for the country as a whole. DOT also publishes 
data on total number of telephone connections, in the 
categories of wireline, wireless, public, private, urban 
and rural and updates the same on a monthly basis on 
its web portal. DOT can possibly make arrangements to 
publish city level data as well. 


16.2 Percentage of Households with Computer 
(Core Indicator) 


16.2.1 General 


Computer refers to a desktop computer, laptop 
(portable) computer, tablet or similar handheld 


29 


IS 17000 : 2019 


computer. It does not include equipment with some 
embedded computing abilities, such as smart TV sets, 
or devices with telephony as a main function, such as 
mobile phones or smartphones. 


Household with a computer means that the computer 
is available for use by all members of the household at 
any time. The computer may or may not be owned by 
the household, but should be considered a household 
asset. 


Computers today are essential tools for empowering 
the citizens with knowledge and education. Computers 
contribute in enhancing the literacy level of any city. 
Further, for empowering the citizens with the various 
citizen services enabled by the internet, computer is a 
powerful enabler for ubiquitous internet experience. 


Availability of computers will ensure all services 
associated with city like information sharing, 
e-healthcare, banking transactions, and public 
governance facilities are available to inhabitants as per 
their necessity and without any inconvenience. 


16.2.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of households with computer shall be 
calculated as number of households using computers 
divided by total number of households in the city. 
The result shall be expressed as the percentage by 
multiplying by 100. 


16.2.3 Data Source 


Data on this indicator is available in the decennial 
census of population and amenities (for example, Table 
HH-12 of House-listing operations in Census 2011). 


16.3 Percentage of Households with Internet Access 
(Supporting Indicator) 


16.3.1 General 


The Internet is a worldwide public computer network. 
It provides access to a number of communication 
services, including the world wide web, and carries 
e-mail, news, entertainment and data files, irrespective 
of the device used (not assumed to be only a computer. 
It may also be a mobile telephone, tablet, PDA, games 
machine, digital TV, and so on). Access can be via a 
fixed or mobile network. Household with internet 
access means that the internet is available for use by all 
members of the household at any time. 


Availability of Internet across multiple platforms 
will ensure all services associated with city like 
information sharing, e-healthcare, banking transactions, 
and public governance facilities are available to 
inhabitants as per their necessity and without any 
inconvenience. 


16.3.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


Data for the same may be calculated as number of 
households using Internet (numerator) divided by 
total number of households in the city (denominator). 


IS 17000 : 2019 


The result shall be expressed as the percentage by 
multiplying by 100. 


16.3.3 Data Source 


Data on this indicator is available in Census 2011 
(Table HH-12 of House-listing operations). 


16.4 Cyber Security Readiness for ICT 
Infrastructure and Online Citizen Service Delivery 
(Core Indicator) 


16.4.1 General 


Cyber security focuses on protecting computers, 
networks, programmes and data from unintended or 
unauthorized access, change or destruction. 


Creation of large centralized databases that contains 
confidential information pertaining to users, accessible 
over the Internet in real time poses a threat to operational 
and security concerns like interception and tampering 
of data sent over the networks. To overcome this 
information technology (IT) infrastructure will have 
to be highly secure and resilient with proper backup 
systems to ensure round the clock availability. 


Security and privacy issues will have to be countered 
at various stages of information lifecycle that is data 
collection, storage and transmission, by ensuring that 
standard operating procedures are followed during 
data collection, adequate IT infrastructure is available 
to handle large amount of data and proper security 
measures are adopted to protect the data. 


Also, the authority, responsibility and accountability of 
the city administration will have to be well defined in 
case of any event of unauthorized access or leakage. 
To ensure the continued security of the information 
and communication technology (ICT) infrastructure, 
security audits shall need to be conducted at regular 
intervals and security definitions and patches updated. 


16.4.2 Core Indicator Requirement 


Cyber security readiness of the ICT infrastructure in 
a city shall be calculated as number of ICT enabled 
services that are secure and resilient (numerator) 
divided by total number of ICT enabled services in the 
city (denominator). The result shall be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage. 


16.4.3 Data Source 


Data on cyber crime is compiled by State Crime Record 
Bureaus and consolidated in the form of a compendium 
at national level by the National Crime Record Bureau 
(NCRB), annually. The latest compendium on ‘Crime 
in India’, which also includes city-level data for 
53 metro-cities, that is cities with population of over 
10 lakh. Police station level data can be obtained from 
the respective State Crime Record Bureau, which can 
be aggregated to obtain data for the whole or part of 


a city. 


30 


Data regarding the same may also possibly be captured 
from various citizen centric service providers, Internet 
Service Providers (ISPs), National Informatics Centre 
(NIC) and, more significantly, by the National Critical 
Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIP), 
which is the watchdog agency for ensuring the security 
of the ICT Infrastructure in the country. 


16.5 Number of New Patents per 100 000 Population 
per Year (Supporting Indicator) 


16.5.1 General 


The number of patents issued to resident persons or 
corporations of a city is an indicator of commercial and 
technological innovation. 


16.5.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The number of new patents per 100 000 population 
per year shall be calculated as the total number of new 
patents issued to resident persons and corporations of 
the city (numerator) divided by one 100 000th of the 
city’s total population (denominator). The result shall 
be expressed as the number of patents registered per 
100 000 population. 


16.5.3 Data Source 


As patents are generally issued by the national 
government, cities will be reliant on another level of 
government to provide this information on an annual 
city-by-city basis. For instance: 


a) Controller General of Patents, Designs and 
Trademarks, Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
for national level data. 


b) Geographical Indication registry portal of the 
Controller General of Patents Designs and 
Trademarks, Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
for state level data. 


c) The District Industries Office for city level data on 
patents. 


17 TRANSPORTATION 


17.1 Kilometres of High Capacity Public Transport 
System per 100 000 Population (Core Indicator) 


17.1.1 General 


The extent ofa city’s transportation network can provide 
insight into traffic congestion, transportation system 
flexibility and urban form. Cities with larger amounts 
of public transport may tend to be more geographically 
compact and supportive of non-motorized modes of 
transportation. 


17.1.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The kilometres of high capacity public transport system 
per 100 000 population shall be calculated by adding 
the kilometres of high capacity public transport systems 


operating within the city (numerator) divided by one 
100 000th of the city’s total population (denominator). 
The result shall be expressed as the kilometres of 
high capacity public transport system per 100 000 
population. 


High capacity public transport may include heavy rail 
metro, sub-way systems and commuter rail systems. 


17.1.3 Data Source 


Information on kilometres of high capacity public 
transport should be gathered from city/ district/ regional 
transport offices and the transit authorities/companies 
like the metro rail corporations and can also be counted 
using computerized mapping, aerial photography, or 
existing paper maps, all of which shall be field-verified. 
This information may be gathered from transport 
system plans or other master plans. 


17.2 Kilometres of Light Passenger Public 
Transport System per 100 000 Population (Core 
Indicator) 


17.2.1 General 


The extent ofa city’s transportation network can provide 
insight into traffic congestion, transportation system 
flexibility, and urban form. Cities with larger amounts 
of public transport may tend to be more geographically 
compact and supportive of non-motorized modes 
of transportation. Light passenger public transport 
systems, such as the Bus Rapid Transit System (BRTS), 
tramways, pod systems, ferries, etc, are often more 
cost-effective than the heavy ones, particularly in the 
cities below 2 million population. 


17.2.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The kilometres of light passenger public transport 
system per 100 000 population shall be calculated 
by adding the kilometres of light passenger transport 
systems provided within the city (numerator), divided 
by one 100 000th of the city’s total population 
(denominator). The result shall be expressed as 
the kilometres of light passenger transport system 
per 100 000 population. 


Light passenger transport may include light rail 
streetcars and tramways, bus systems including the Bus 
Rapid Transit System (BRTS), trolleybus, and other 
light passenger transport services. 


17.2.3 Data Source 


Information on kilometres of light passenger transport 
should be gathered from city/district/regional transport 
offices and the transit authorities/companies like 
the BRTS operator, tramways company, etc, and can 
also be counted using computerized mapping, aerial 
photography, or existing paper maps, all of which shall 
be field-verified. This information may be gathered 
from transport system plans or other master plans. 


31 


IS 17000 : 2019 


17.3 Annual Number of Public Transport Trips per 
Capita (Core Indicator) 


17.3.1 General 


Transport usage is a key indicator of how easy it is to 
travel in the city by modes other than single occupancy 
vehicles. The indicator might also provide insight into 
transportation policy, traffic congestion, and urban 
form. Cities with higher transport ridership rates 
tend to invest more in their transport systems and are 
more geographically compact. Transport usage also 
addresses overall travel patterns in the city, and not just 
the journey to work. 


17.3.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


Annual number of public transport trips per capita shall 
be calculated as the total annual number of transport 
trips originating in the city (ridership of public transport) 
(numerator), divided by the total city population 
(denominator). The result shall be expressed as the 
annual number of public transport trips per capita. 


Transport trips shall include trips via heavy rail metro 
or sub-way, commuter rail, light rail streetcars and 
tramways, organized bus, trolleybus, and other public 
transport services. 


Cities shall only calculate the number of transport trips 
with origins in the city itself. 


NOTE — Transport systems often serve entire metropolitan 
areas, and not just central cities. The use of number of transport 
trips with origins in the city itself will still capture many trips 
whose destination are outside the city, but will generally 
capture the impact that the city has on the regional transport 
network. 


17.3.3 Data source 


Transport data should be gathered from a number 
of sources, including: the local/regional transport 
authorities, transport systems operators, and the 
revenue collection systems (for example number of 
fares purchased). 


NOTES 


1 Fare box records (for example, transport fares paid) are 
usually the primary source of data for this indicator. However, 
the relationship between fares purchased and trips taken is 
not always exact. For example, many transport systems do 
not actively check for proof of fare purchase often, riders are 
expected to have valid tickets, and are severely fined if a ticket 
is not presented, but enforcement of such rules is not uniform 
for every rider on every trip. Other transport systems offer 
monthly or weekly passes, which do not necessarily allow for 
accurate counts of each trip. 

2 In many cities, a large number of trips are made via ‘informal 
transport’ services (for example, mini-buses not operated by 
the government or municipal transport corporation). These 
informal trips are not part of the official transport network and 
shall not be counted. 

3 While higher transport ridership rates are generally 
considered desirable, extremely high ridership rates can also 
indicate cities with overcrowding problems. 


IS 17000 : 2019 


17.4 Percentage Share of Electric Vehicles as Part of 
Total Vehicles in a City (Supporting Indicator) 


17.4.1 General 


In India, the automobile industry is one of the key 
sectors driving economic growth. More than 25 million 
vehicles including passenger vehicles, commercial 
vehicles, three wheelers and two wheelers were 
produced in 2016-17, reporting a jump of 5.41 percent 
from the previous fiscal year. However, it is also one of 
the biggest contributors of pollution. Therefore, shifting 
to electric mobility is one of the important aspects of 
de-carbonizing transport sector in the country. 


17.4.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The percentage share of electric vehicles will be 
calculated as total electric vehicle registered in a year 
(numerator) per total vehicles registered in that year 
(denominator) for a city. The result shall be expressed 
as the percentage by multiplying by 100 


17.4.3 Data Source 


The data can be obtained from transport department of 
the city and Regional Transport Office (RTO). 


17.5 Percentage of Road Network with Usable 
Pedestrian Pathway/Footpath Network (Supporting 
Indicator) 


17.5.1 General 


Sustainable cities should have equitable streets with 
priority to pedestrian infrastructure. The city should 
have street network to ensure safe and efficient access 
for all users including pedestrians. A transportation 
system that is conducive to pedestrian movement can 
reap many benefits in terms of reduced road fatalities 
and improved quality of life. Economic rewards both to 
the individual and to society are also realized through 
reduced health care costs and reduced dependency on 
auto ownership (and resulting in insurance, maintenance 
and fuel costs). Pedestrian pathway/footpaths also 
require relatively small infrastructure investments as 
compared to other types of transportation infrastructure 
and therefore, less environmental impact. The 
pedestrian pathway/footpath network system needs to 
be connected and continuous, just like roadways and 
railways. 


17.5.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of road networks with safe usable 
pedestrian pathway/ footpath shall be calculated as 
length of usable footpath (numerator) per total road 
length (denominator). The result shall be expressed as 
the percentage by multiplying by 100. 


17.5.3 Data Source 


The data can be obtained from agencies engaged with 
planning for and maintenance of roads in the city. 


32 


17.6 Percentage of Road Network with Cycling 
Lanes (Supporting Indicator) 


17.6.1 General 


A transportation system that is conducive to bicycling 
can reap many benefits in terms of reduced traffic 
congestion and improved quality of life. Economic 
rewards both to the individual and to society are also 
realized through reduced health care costs and reduced 
dependency on auto ownership (and the resulting in 
insurance, maintenance and fuel costs). Bicycle lanes 
or pathways or tracks also require relatively small 
infrastructure investments as compared to other types 
of transportation infrastructure and comparatively less 
environmental impact. 


17.6.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of road networks with cycling lanes or 
pathways or tracks shall be calculated as length of cycle 
tracks or pathways or lanes (numerator) per total road 
length (denominator). The result shall be expressed as 
the percentage by multiplying by 100. 


Cycling lanes shall refer to part of a carriageway 
designated for cycles and distinguished from the rest 
of the road/carriageway by longitudinal road markings. 
Cycling pathways shall refer to independent road or part 
of a road designated for cycles and sign-posted as such. 
A cycling/cycle track is separated from other roads or 
other parts of the same road by structural means. 


Bicycle lanes or paths that exist on both sides of the 
same road shall be counted separately. 

17.6.3 Data Source 

The data can be obtained from agencies engaged with 


planning for and maintenance of roads in the city. 


17.7 Transportation Fatalities 100 000 


Population (Supporting Indicator) 


per 


17.7.1 General 


Traffic accident rates and, specifically, fatality rates, 
can serve as indicators for the overall safety of the 
transportation system, the complexity and congestion 
of the roadway and transport network, the amount and 
effectiveness of traffic law enforcement, the quality 
of the transportation fleet (public and private), and 
the condition of the roads themselves. Traffic deaths 
represent the most severe type of traffic safety failure, 
allowing cities to focus on their most urgent traffic 
safety needs. 


17.7.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


Transportation fatalities per 100 000 population shall 
be calculated as the number of fatalities related to 
transportation of any kind within the city borders 
(numerator), divided by one 100 000th of the city’s 
total population (denominator). The result shall be 


expressed as the number of transportation fatalities per 
100 000 population. 


The city shall include in this indicator deaths due to 
any transportation-related proximate causes in any 
mode of travel (automobile, public transport, walking, 
bicycling, etc). The city shall count any death directly 
related to a transportation incident within city limits, 
even if death does not occur at the site of the incident, 
but is directly attributable to the accident. 
NOTE — Transportation fatalities are used here as a proxy 
for all transportation injuries. Whereas, many minor injuries 
are never reported, and thus cannot be measured. Deaths are 
almost always reported. It is also worth noting that differences 
in the quality of the roadway, the quality of motorized vehicles, 
and the nature of law enforcement can change the relationship 
between injury and fatality. 


17.7.3 Data Source 


The National Crime Records Bureau compiles state- 
wise information on accidental deaths and suicides in 
India (ADSI), including in respect of accidental traffic 
and road incidents, and publishes the same annually on 
its website. This data is generated by the police station 
houses and compiled at district and s tate levels. The 
ADSI also contains city-wise information in respect of 
53 cities having population of over 10 lakh. For other 
cities, police station-wise data can be consolidated to 
generate city level information. 


In addition, the local transport department office may 
also be a possible source for such information. 


18 URBAN PLANNING 


18.1 Percentage of Proposed Urban Development 
Area with in the Notified Master Plan for the City 
(Core Indicator) 


18.1.1 General 


Master plan notified under appropriate statute is a 
primary requirement for sustainable development of 
any city. Master plan for a city needs to be integrated 
with different hierarchy of plans that is zonal plans and 
local area plans. 


Master plan should be based on the relevant statutes and 
the Urban and Regional Development Plan Formulation 
and Implementation (URDPFI) Guidelines and through 
a transparent and participatory process. The master 
plan shall have thematic sub-layers including drainage, 
sanitation, transit oriented development, disaster and 
climate resilience, housing, social infrastructure, urban 
renewal, etc. 


NOTES 

1 The master plan and all its sub-layers would have to be 
detailed on the cadastral map of the city and notified under the 
relevant statutes. 

2 Master plan may have various nomenclatures as per different 
statutes for example, development plan. 


33 


IS 17000 : 2019 


18.1.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of Proposed Urban Development Area 
with in the notified master plan for the city shall be 
calculated as area of approved area proposed for 
urban development (in square kilometres) (numerator) 
divided by the total notified master plan area of the city 
(in square kilometres) (denominator). The result shall 
be expressed as percentage by multiplying by 100. In 
the absence of a notified master plan or development, 
this indicator shall be considered as zero. 


18.1.3 Data Source 


Data may be obtained from local bodies, Development 
Authority, Planning Authority and other similar 
authorities. 


18.2 Green Area (hectares) per 100 000 Population 
(Core Indicator) 


18.2.1 General 


The amount of green area, natural and semi-natural, 
parks including biodiversity parks and other open space 
is an indicator of how much green space a city has. 
Green areas perform important environmental functions 
in an urban setting. They improve the urban climate, 
capture atmospheric pollutants, reduce storm runoff 
and improve quality of life by providing recreation for 
urban inhabitants. 


18.2.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


Green area (hectares) per 100 000 population shall be 
calculated as the total area (in hectares) of green in the 
city (numerator) divided by one 100 000th of the city’s 
total population (denominator). 


This indicator reflects green area that is publicly 
accessible as opposed to whether or not the green area 
is protected. 


NOTE — Green area is broader than recreation space (see 12). 


18.2.3 Data Source 


Information on green area should be obtained from 
recreation and parks departments, planning departments 
of the city municipal corporation, development 
authorities, and horticulture and forestry departments. 


18.3 Areal Size of Informal Settlements as a 
Percentage of City Area (Supporting Indicator) 


18.3.1 General 


The size of informal settlements is an indicator of the 
extent of the challenges for the city in meeting shelter 
needs and demand. The UN statistics division has 
developed the following definitions which are used in 
this standard: 


a) Areas where groups of housing units have been 
constructed on land that the occupants have no 
formal legal claim to. 


IS 17000 : 2019 


b) Unplanned settlements and areas where housing 
is not in compliance with planning and building 
regulations (unauthorized housing). 


NOTES 


1 While many informal settlements also meet the definition 
of slum, the terms are not synonymous. Slums might exist in 
areas that do not meet the definition of informal settlements. 
Some informal settlements might have improved such that they 
do not meet the definition of slum. 


2 Settlements characterized by irregular tenure, unplanned 
development and unauthorized shelter that is not in compliance 
with local building regulations are generally marginal and 
precarious, and affect social well-being, human health and 
economic development. 


18.3.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The areal size of informal settlements as a percentage 
of city area shall be calculated as the area of informal 
settlements within the city boundary (in square 
kilometres) (numerator) divided by the city area in 
square kilometres (denominator). The result shall be 
expressed as the percentage by multiplying by 100. 


Areas of informal settlements should be delineated 
using aerial photography and/or land-use maps and 
the area in square kilometres shall be calculated. 
Some low-cost and more sophisticated measurement 
methodologies have been developed. Once the areas 
have been identified on a map, the area in square 
kilometres should be calculated using a low-cost GIS 
(if available) or measuring devices. 


18.3.3 Data Sources 


Data should be gathered from the city planning 
department, together with departments knowledgeable 
about the city neighbourhoods. Local bodies and 
academic institutions may also be of assistance. 


18.4 Jobs-Housing Ratio (Supporting Indicator) 


18.4.1 General 


Jobs shall refer to all types of full and part-time 
employment opportunities including those provided 
in the retail, industrial, government and office sectors 
located within the city boundaries. Housing shall refer 
to all dwelling units available for habitation. 


This indicator does not take into account the informal 
sector, labour or employment, as unofficial employment 
is unaccounted for. 


18.4.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The jobs-housing ratio shall be calculated as the total 
number of jobs (numerator) divided by the total number 
of dwelling units (denominator). The result shall be 
expressed as a whole number reflecting jobs to housing 
ratio within a city. 


18.4.3 Data Source 


Data on jobs in the organized sector available in the 
city could be collected from the register of profession 


34 


tax maintained at city and other levels, District Labour 
Office, Local Bodies (Municipality, Panchayat, etc) and 
compiled suitably. In some instances, focussed surveys 
could also be called for. 


Data on housing is available in the town/village Census 
Directory, which is published decennially and updated 
with the property data register of the local body 
concerned. 


18.5 Urban Flooding (Core Indicator) 
18.5.1 General 


Rains are necessary for the wellbeing of human beings. 
Yet, they also make the habitats, in general, prone to 
flooding, particularly during the rainy season. As most 
of the rain-spells are short-lived, the flooding too is 
usually of shorter duration, yet it throws the life and 
economy of the citizens off the normal track. If and 
when the rains are of higher intensity, longer duration 
or more widespread, the impact on the habitats and the 
citizens is more devastating. 


Cities must, therefore, identify their respective 
vulnerability to floods and, accordingly, undertake 
measures for both, adaptation and mitigation. 


18.5.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The location of the flood prone areas and the highest 
flood levels, as also the rainfall data, as available 
in the historical records, particularly of the past 
25 years need to identified and noted in the master plans. 
The master plan, in turn, should restrict the 
development activities in the flood prone areas. 
The development control regulations should also be 
aligned suitably. 


The three identified aspects for streamlining 
sustainability in mitigating urban floods are: 


a) Drainage management (Ding Mgmt); 
b) Rain water harvesting (RWH); and 


c) Rejuvenation and upkeep of urban water bodies 
(UWB). 
It is advisable that the three listed components be 
quantified by their performance indices in the respective 
cities with their weighted values of importance. 


Drng Mgmt Index (X) = 


Length of urban drains cleaned and 
de-silted before the monsoon 


Total length of surface drains in the city 


RWH Index (Y) = 


No. of working RWH structures by annual audit 


Total number of samples audited 
in the reference year 


UWB Index (Z) = 


Total area of water bodies conserved 
and rejuvenated in ref year 


Total area of all listed water bodies 
within the city limits 


where 
X+Y+Z=1. 


The fourth (additional) component, to define the 
availability of flood relief/shelter areas, could be the 
Disaster Management Index (DM Index), as follows: 


DM Index = 


Flood relief and shelter area identified 
in the DM Plan (over HFL) 


Area of the city 


Since, the matter of ‘RWH? is subjective for city geo- 
morphology and hence can be selectively judged to 
be adopted for sustainability. It is proposed that the 
coefficient of the index so conceived may be kept 
variable between 0 and 1 while formulating the overall 
‘Urban Flooding’ index. 


Alongside, cities should prepare suitable action plans 
for drainage management, rainwater harvesting and 
proper upkeep of water bodies to offset the impact of 
flooding. Detailed advisories for the purpose have been 
issued under various documents such as the NDMA 
and URDPFI Guidelines, instructions contained in 
the advisories and policy documents of the state 
governments concerned, etc. 


18.5.3 Data Source 


The data relating to parameters for calculation of 
indices and about the flood prone areas, rainfall data 
and the highest flood levels, are available in the records 
of the city government, land revenue department, 
irrigation and flood control department and district 
statistical office. Geo-spatial maps available under 
BHUVAN and other sources can augment the database 
substantially. 


18.6 Basic 
Indicator) 


Services Proximity (Supporting 


18.6.1 General 


The ease with which residents are able to access 
basic services is an important indicator of overall 
liveability and quality of life. This indicator measures 
the percentage of the population that lives within 
established proximity to basic services. 


Basic services include food and everyday products, 
education centres, health centres, social centres, sports 


35 


IS 17000 : 2019 


centres, cultural centres, entertainment centres, waste 
collection points, parks and playgrounds, etc. 


18.6.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


Basic service proximity shall be calculated as the 
number of inhabitants who live near at least one basic 
service (numerator) divided by the total population of 
the city (denominator). 


For each type of basic service, the corresponding point 
layer is created by geo referencing the centres using a 
relational database join process that relates each centre 
with its address in the georeferenced municipal street 
guide. 


Once all the layers are included in the GIS, proximity 
buffers are created for each of them with the help of the 
GIS buffer geoprocess. 


Finally, the population that lives close to the basic 
service centres are those that are contained in each buffer 
layer, which can be obtained by a spatial selection. 


NOTE — Proximity shall be considered as per the URDPFI 
guidelines. 


18.6.3 Data Source 


This information may be obtained from municipal 
authorities and authorized companies dealing with 
respective services. 


19 WATER SUPPLY 


19.1 Percentage of City Population with Potable 
Water Supply Service (Core Indicator) 


19.1.1 General 


The percentage of the city population served by a 
potable water supply is an indicator of city health 
and quality of life and a significant component of 
Sustainable Development Goals, Goal 6: Ensure 
Availability and Sustainable Management of Water and 
Sanitation for All. 


19.1.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of city population with potable water 
supply service shall be calculated as the total number of 
people with potable water supply service (numerator) 
divided by total city population (denominator). The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
a percentage of city population serviced by a potable 
water supply service. 


The total number of people with potable water supply 
service shall be calculated as the total number of 
households in the city connected to a potable water 
supply service multiplied by the current average 
household size for the city. 
NOTE — Results will only indicate whether or not a house 
has access to potable water, not the quality of the delivery, the 
levels of loss, consumption or misuse, or the capacity of the 
sources to meet the demand. 


IS 17000 : 2019 


Potable water shall refer to water that is treated or 
confirmed safe for human consumption. A potable 
water supply service shall refer to a service that delivers 
potable water through a pipe or similar duct that is 
connected to a network. If a house or group of houses 
has a ‘mother’ pipe connected either provisionally or 
permanently; it shall be considered to have access to 
potable water. 


A house shall not be considered to have access to 
potable water when an individual house or group is 
served by a conduit system built with for example 
wood, bamboo, or rubber hose, connected directly to a 
river, well, or to another house. 


19.1.3 Data Source 


This information may be obtained from municipal 
authorities and the authorized water supply companies/ 
agencies. 


19.2 Total Domestic Water Consumption per Capita 
(litres/day) (Core Indicator) 


19.2.1 General 


Water consumption must be in harmony with water 
resources to be sustainable. This harmony may be 
achieved through improvements in water supply 
systems and changes in water consumption patterns. 
This indicator will need to be measured in terms 
of changes from year to year within a city within a 
range of rates due to the variability among cities. 
Consumption of water per person depends on the 
availability and price of water, the climate, and the uses 
to which water is customarily put by individuals (for 
example drinking, bathing, washing and gardening). 
In many cities, potable water supply is not constant 
and households rely on a few hours to tap the available 
water during the day. Water consumption is usually 
much higher in cities of higher income. A 24x7 water 
supply is to be aimed at, as this reduces per capita 
water consumption, besides providing social and 
economic benefits. 


19.2.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


The total domestic water consumption per capita 
shall be calculated as the total amount of the city’s 
water consumption in litres per day for domestic 
use (numerator) divided by the total city population 
(denominator). The result shall be expressed as the 
total domestic water consumption per capita in litres 
per day. 


Only water consumed for domestic purpose shall be 
taken into account. Water consumed for industrial and 
commercial purposes shall be excluded. 

NOTE — A part of the water supplied is lost through leakage 


or illegal tapping. In cities with old and deteriorating water 
reticulation systems, a substantial proportion of piped water 


36 


may be lost through cracks and flaws in pipes. It is therefore 
important to take this into account in the final consumption 
measure and if possible, with hundred percent metered 
connections and the quantity assessed on the basis of meter 
readings should be considered as quantity consumed. 


19.2.3 Data Source 


This information should be obtained from the 
municipalities and the authorized local operator(s) of 
water supply systems, which maintain records on water 
supplied, delivered, consumed and ultimately paid by 
the end-users for domestic purposes. 


19.2.4 Data Interpretation 


In interpreting this indicator, water consumption per 
capita should fall within a range that is sustainable 
for the climate of the city. A minimum benchmark 
should be established to meet public health and safety 
needs. Higher rates of per capita water consumption 
should show reductions approaching the minimum or 
sustainable consumption rates. 


19.3 Total Water Consumption per 
(litres/day) (Supporting Indicator) 


Capita 


19.3.1 General 


Water consumption must be in harmony with water 
resources to be sustainable. This harmony may be 
achieved through improvements in water supply 
systems and changes in water consumption patterns. 
This indicator will need to be measured in terms of 
changes from year to year within a city within a range of 
rates due to the variability among cities. Consumption 
of water per person depends on the availability and 
price of water, the climate, and the uses to which water 
is customarily put by individuals (for example drinking, 
bathing, washing and gardening) and industrial, 
commercial and agricultural entities. In many cities, 
potable water supply is not constant and households 
rely on a few hours to tap the available water during 
the day. Water consumption is much higher in cities of 
higher income countries, as with most other forms of 
consumption. 


19.3.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


Total water consumption per capita (litres/day) shall 
be calculated as the total amount of the city’s water 
consumption in litres per day (numerator) divided by 
the total city population (denominator). The result shall 
be expressed as the total water consumption per capita 
in litres/day. 


19.3.3 Data Source 


This information should be obtained from the main 
water supply companies, which maintain record on 
water supplied, delivered, consumed and ultimately 
paid by the end-users. 


19.4 Total Water Supply through Metered Water 
Connections (Supporting Indicator) 


19.4.1 General 


Water for consumption as domestic, commercial, 
industrial or any other use, should be provided through 
water meter connection. Total quantity of water as 
summation of all meter readings should tally with the 
quantity of water produced and supplied. Water utility 
service will keep these records updated. 


19.4.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of metered water connection shall be 
calculated as: 


Number of metered water connections x 100 


Total number of water connections 


19.4.3 Data Source 


This information should be obtained from the local 
bodies and authorized water supply companies, which 
maintain record on water supplied, delivered, consumed 
and ultimately paid by the end-users. 


19.5 Average Annual Hours of Water Service 
Interruption per Household (Supporting 
Indicator) 


19.5.1 General 


The reliability of water service to the user is the 
ultimate consideration in evaluating water supply, even 
though this reliability is based on both quantity and 
quality considerations and on interconnected systems 
of source water availability, water treatment and 
water distribution. This indicator determines whether 
a water supply system is reliable, or whether the 
water supply system needs fundamental or marginal 
improvements. 


19.5.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The average annual hours of water service interruption 
per household shall be calculated by taking the total 
sum of hours of interruption multiplied by the number 
of households impacted (numerator), divided by 
the number of households (denominator). The result 
shall be expressed as the average annual hours of 
water service interruption per household. Incidents 
of complete shutoff, low flow restriction, boil water 
advisory, water main flushing and planned and 
unplanned interruptions shall be counted for this 
purpose. 

This indicator shall exclude incidents where there is 
some reduction to the level of service but where normal 
activities (shower, washing machine, toilet flushing, 
etc) are still possible. 


37 


IS 17000 : 2019 


An ‘unplanned interruption’ is an interruption caused by 
a fault in the utility’s system. A ‘planned interruption’ 
is an interruption for which the utility has provided 
at least 24 h advanced notification (or as otherwise 
prescribed by regulatory requirements). 


19.5.3 Data Source 


This information should be obtained from the local 
bodies and authorized water supply companies, which 
maintain record on water supplied, delivered, consumed 
and ultimately paid by the end-users. 


19.5.4 Data Interpretation 


Cities with older infrastructure, in areas with electric 
power interruptions, in areas of war or civil unrest, or 
in areas that are more susceptible to natural hazards 
such as earthquakes and extensive flooding will tend to 
report more incidents of service interruptions. 


To facilitate comparison among cities, the number of 
interruptions can also be related to the hectares of water 
service area within the city. 


19.6 Percentage of Water Loss (Unaccounted for 
Water) (Supporting Indicator) 


19.6.1 General 


Before reaching the users, a part of the water supplied 
might be lost through leakage or illegal tapping or 
water supplied for which no revenue is obtained. In 
cities with old and deteriorating water reticulation 
systems, a substantial proportion of piped water may 
be lost through cracks and flaws in pipes, for example, 
up to 30 percent of water is lost in this way in some 
cities. 


19.6.2 Supporting Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of water loss (unaccounted for water) 
shall be calculated as the volume of water supplied 
minus the volume of utilized water (numerator) divided 
by the total volume of water supplied (denominator). 
The result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed 
as a percentage. 


The water loss includes actual water losses, for example 
leaking pipes, and billing losses, for example delivered 
through informal or illegal connection. 


19.6.3 Data Source 


This information should be obtained from local bodies 
and authorized water supply companies, which maintain 
record on water supplied, delivered, consumed. 


19.7 Compliance Rate of Drinking Water Quality 
(Core Indicator) 


19.7.1 General 


Clean drinking water is a key determinant of human 
health. The compliance rate of drinking water quality 


IS 17000 : 2019 


is an indicator which can be used to determine the rate 
at which drinking water is kept to local regulations and 
standards to ensure no public health problems. 


19.7.2 Core Indicator Requirements 


Compliance rate of drinking water quality shall 
be calculated as the sum of the number of compliant 
tests multiplied by 100 (numerator) divided by the 
number of treated water quality tests carried out 
(denominator). 


Compliant tests to be considered are aesthetic, 
microbiological, physical, chemical and radioactivity 
tests. 


38 


The compliance rate of drinking water quality indicates 
the percentage of the total number of treated water tests 
performed that comply with the applicable drinking 
water local regulations and standards on a quarterly 
basis to account for seasonal variations. The tests to be 
taken into account are the analyses performed on the 
distributed water for each parameter in relation with the 
local regulation and Indian Standard on drinking water 
quality. 


19.7.3 Data Source 


The local body and the specialized agencies, such as 
the Jal Boards/Corporations, handling water supply for 
the city. 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


IS 17000 : 2019 


SUMMARY TABLE OF CITY INDICATORS 


A-1 The various indicators, described in this document, are presented in a summary form in the Table 1. 


Table 1 Summary of City Indicators 


( Clause A-1 ) 


SI No. Sector Core Indicator Supporting Indicator 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Economy (see 4) a) Gross domestic product (GDP) for the a) Gini coefficient 
city b) Number of businesses per 100000 
b) GDP Per capita population 
c) City’s unemployment rate 
d) Assessed value of commercial and 
industrial properties as a percentage of 
total assessed value of all properties 
ii) Education (see 5) a) Percentage of female school-aged Percentage of school-aged population 
population enrolled in schools enrolled in schools 
b) Percentage of students completing 
primary Education: Survival rate 
c) Percentage of students completing 
secondary Education: Survival rate 
d) Primary education student-teacher ratio 
ili) Energy (see 6) a) Percentage of total energy derived from a) Total residential electrical energy use 
renewable Sources, as a Share of the per capita (kWh/year) 
City’s Total Energy Consumption b) Average number of electrical 
b) Total electrical energy use per capita interruptions per customer per year 
(kWh/year) c) Average length ofelectrical interruptions 
(in hours) 
d) Percentage of transmission and 
distribution (T& D) losses 
iv) Environment (see 7) a) Fine Particulate matter (PM, .) a) NO, (Nitrogen dioxide) concentration 
concentration b) SO, (Sulphur dioxide) concentration 
b) Particulate matter (PM,,) concentration c) O, (Ozone) concentration 
c) Green house gas emissions measured in 
tonnes per capita 
d) Air quality index 
e) Noise pollution 
f) Quality of public water bodies 
v) Finance (see 8) a) Debt service ratio (debt service a) Capital spending as a percentage of total 
expenditure as a percentage of expenditures 
municipality's own-source revenue) b) Own-source revenue as a percentage of 
total revenues 
c) Tax collected as a percentage of tax 
billed 
vi) Governance (see 9) a) Voter participation in last municipal a) Percentage of women employed in the 
election (as a percentage of eligible city government workforce 
voters) (core Indicator) b) Number of convictions for corruption 
b) Women as a percentage of total elected by city officials per 100 000 population 
to city-level offices c) Citizens’ representation: number of 
local official elected to office per 
100 000 population 
d) Number of registered voters as a 


39 


percentage of the voting age population 


IS 17000 : 2019 


Table 1 (Continued) 


SI No. Sector Core Indicator Supporting Indicator 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
vii) Health (see 10) a) Average life expectancy at birth a) Number of disabled persons per 100 000 
b) Under age five mortality per 1 000 live population 
births b) Number of nursing and midwifery 
c) Number of in-patient hospital beds per personnel per 100 000 population 
100 000 population c) Suicide rate per 100 000 population 
d) Number of physicians per 100 000 
population 
viii) Housing (see 11) Percentage of city population living in a) Number of homeless per 100 000 
slums population 
b) Percentage of households that exist 
without registered legal titles 
c) Percentage of slum dwellers having the 
right to tenure 
ix) Recreation (see 12) a) Square metres of public indoor 
recreation space per capita 
b) Square metres of public outdoor 
recreation space per capita 
c) Number of art galleries, museums, 
cultural centres per 100 000 population 
x) Safety (see 13) a) Number of police personnel per 100 000 a) Response time for police department 
population from initial call 
b) Number of homicides per 100 000 b) Violent crime rate per 100 000 
population population 
c) Crimes against women per 100 000 c) Number of volunteer and part-time 
population firefighters per 100 000 population 
d) Number of professional firefighters per d) Response time for emergency response 
100 000 population Services from initial call 
e) Number of fire related deaths per e) Response time for Fire Department 
100 000 population from initial call 
f) Number of natural disaster related f) Number of buildings with fire safety 
deaths per 100 000 population clearance per 10 000 buildings 
xi) Sewerage and Sanitation a) Percentage of city population having a) Percentage of the city’s wastewater 
(see 14) access to sanitary toilet facilities receiving secondary treatment 
b) Percentage of city population served by b) Percentage of the city’s wastewater that 
sewage (wastewater) collection is being recycled and reused 
c) Percentage of the city’s wastewater that 
has received no treatment 
d) Percentage of the city’s wastewater 
receiving primary treatment 
xii) Solid Waste (see 15) a) Percentage of city population covered a) Percentage of the city’s solid waste that 
with regular solid waste collection is disposed of in a sanitary landfill 
b) Total collected municipal solid waste b) Percentage of the city’s solid waste that 
per capita per year is disposed of in an incinerator 
c) Percentage of the city’s solid waste that c) Percentage of the city’s solid waste that 
is recycled is burned openly 
d) Percentage of the city’s solid waste that 
is disposed off in an open dump 
e) Percentage of the city’s solid waste that 
is disposed of by other means 
xiii) Tele communication and a) Number of internet connections per a) Percentage of households with internet 
Innovation (see 16) 100 000 population access 
b) Percentage of households with computer b) Number of new patents per 100 000 
c) Cyber security readiness for ICT population per year 


infrastructure and online citizen service 
delivery 


40 


SI No. 
0) (2) 


Sector 


Table 1 (Concluded) 


Core Indicator 


(3) 


IS 17000 : 2019 


Supporting Indicator 
(4) 


xiv) Transportation (see 17) 


xv) Urban Planning (see 18) 


xvi) Water Supply (see 19) 


a) 


b) 


Kilometres of high capacity public 
transport system per 100 000 population 


Kilometres of light passenger public 
transport system per 100 000 population 


Annual number of public transport trips 
per capita 


Notified master plan for integrated land 
use 


Green area (hectares) per 100 000 
population 

Urban flooding 

Percentage of city population with 


potable water supply service 


Total domestic water consumption per 
capita (litres/day) 


a) 


b) 


o) 


d) 


a) 


b) 
c) 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


Percentage Share of electric vehicles as 
part of total vehicles in a city 


Percentage of road network with usable 
pedestrian pathway/footpath network 


Percentage of road network with cycling 
lanes 


Transportation fatalities per 100 000 
population 

Areal size of informal settlements as a 
percentage of city area 

Jobs-housing ratio 


Basic services proximity 


Total water consumption per capita 
(litres/day) 


Total water supply through metered 
water connections 

Average annual hours of water service 
interruption per household 


Percentage of water loss (unaccounted 
for water) 


TOTAL 16 


48 


41 


52 


IS 17000 : 2019 


B-1 A list of profile indicators, which provide basic 
statistics and background information about the city, 
is given in the Table 2. This list contains the core 
minimum information that should be projected. It can 
be augmented with additional information that a city 


would like to showcase. 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


CITY PROFILE INDICATORS 


Table 2 City Profile Indicators 
( Clause B-1 ) 


SI No. 
0) (2) 


Theme 


Indicator 


(3) 


i) People a) 


dD 
k) 


m) 


n) 


ii) Housing a) 


c) 


d) 


e 


SH 


Total city population 


Population density (per square 
kilometre) 


Percentage of 
population 


country’s 


Percentage of population that 
are children (0-14 year) 
Percentage of population that 
are youth (15-24 year ) 
Percentage of population that 
are adult (25-64 year) 
Percentage of population that 
are senior citizens (65+ year) 
Male to female ratio (number of 
males per 100 females) 

Annual population change 
Population dependency ratio 
(that is the number of children 
(0-14 years old) and older 
persons (65 years or over) to the 
working-age population (15-64 
years old) 

Percentage of population that 
are foreign born 

Percentage of population that 
are new immigrants 

Percentage of residents who are 
not registered voters in the city 


Total number of households 


Total number 
dwelling units 


of occupied 


Persons per unit 
Dwelling density (per square 
kilometre) 


Total number of vacant houses 
(vacant for last one year or 
more) 


42 


SI No. 


0) 


Theme 


(2) 


Indicator 


(3) 


iii) 


iv) 


v) 


Economy 


Government 


Geography 
and Climate 


g) 


h) 


D 


k) 


a) 


e) 


Average household income 
(= per annum) 

Annual inflation rate based on 
average of last 5 years 

Total number of bank branches 
Number of factories registered 
under the Factories Act 


Availability of 
passenger services 


airport for 


Availability of railway station 
for passenger and goods 
services 


Availability of number of 
national highways connecting 
the City with rest of the region/ 
nation 


Availability of number of 
national water ways for goods 
transportation 


City product as a percentage of 
country’s GDP 


Employment percentage 
change based on the last 
5 years 


Type of government (for 
example, municipality, 
cantonment board, industrial 
area authority, regional 
authority, etc) 


Gross operating budget (= in 
crore) 


Gross operating budget per 
capita (2) 

Region 

Climate type 

Land area (square kilometres) 


Area under natural resources, 
such as forests, water bodies, 
hills/hillocks, natural drainage 
systems and changes in past 
5 years 


Percentage of non-residential 
area (square kilometres) 


Number of native species 
Annual 
(C°) 


Average annual rain (mm) 


average temperature 


Average annual snowfall (cm) 
Is the ground water receding? 


Area and population 
experiencing natural hazard 
risks during past 5 years 


IS 17000 : 2019 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Smart Cities Sectional Committee, CED 59 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity, (G-1602, Pioneer Park, 
Sector-61, Gurugram 122 001) 


AECOM Ltd, Noida 


ALL India Institute of Local Self Government, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, 
New Delhi 


Builders Association of India, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Confederation of Real Estate Developers’ Association 
of India, New Delhi 


Corporation of Chennai, Chennai 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor Development 
Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Department of Telecommunications, Ministry of 
Communications, New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & 
Industry, New Delhi 


Gujarat International Finance, Tec-City Company Ltd, 
Ghandinagar 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Green Building Congress, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, Kharagpur 


Institute of Town Planners, India, New Delhi 


Karki Associates, New Delhi 
Ministry of Commerce & Industry, New Delhi 


Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution, New Delhi 


Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dr Supuir KrisHNa (Chairman) 


SHRI PAWAN KUMAR JAIPURIAR 
SHRI ARVIND AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMNATH JHA 
SHRI ADVAIT AUNDHKAR (Alternate) 


Suri J. K. PRASAD 


SHRI DHARMESH AWASTHI 
SHRI ARUN SAHAI (Alternate) 


SHRI VIRENDER SINGH 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri B. V. BABU 
SHRI S. SUDHAKAR (Alternate) 


Suri S. P. PATHAK 
SHRI RAJESH KUMAR JAIN (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN 


Suri S. P. MOHAPATRA 
SHRI ANAND AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYANT KOHALE 
Ms Mousumı Roy (Alternate) 


SHRI LOVELEEN GARG 


SHRI K. P. ABRAHAM 


Dr PrReM C. JAIN 
Ms SHEETAL RAKHEJA (Alternate) 


Pror UTTAM K. BANERJEE 


Suri B. C. DATTA 
PROF KULSHRESHTHA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNISH KARKI 
SHRI RAJESH KHER 


Director (BIS) 
UNDER Secretary (BIS) (Alternate) 


Suri D. RAJSHEKHAR 
SHRI G. BALASUBRAMANIYAM (Alternate) 


43 


IS 17000 : 2019 


Organization 


Ministry of Earth Sciences, New Delhi 


Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, New Delhi 
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, New Delhi 


Ministry of Panchayati Raj, New Delhi 
Ministry of Power, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Tourism, New Delhi 
Ministry of Transport, New Delhi 


Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation, New Delhi 


National Association of Software & Services Companies, 
Noida 


National Real Estate Development Council, New Delhi 


National Remote Sensing Centre, Hyderabad 


Saviram Engineering Consultants Pvt Ltd, Noida 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 


Shapoorji Pallonji Ltd, Mumbai 


Sulabh International Social Service Organization, 
New Delhi 


Survey of India, Dehradun 


Svayam National Centre for Inclusive Environment, 
New Delhi 


Town and Country Planning Organization, New Delhi 


C 


Jnified Traffic & Transportation Infrastructure 
(P. & Engg.) Centre, New Delhi 


= 


niversity of Delhi, New Delhi 


(a 


Jrban Development Department, Town & Country 
Planning Branch, Kolkata 


(an 


Jrban Governance, Administrative Staff College of 
India, Hyderabad 


WRI India, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dr M. MOHAPATRA 
Dr O. P. Misura (Alternate) 


Ms Kavita BHATIA 
SHRI Mayank (Alternate) 


SHRI KUNAL KUMAR 


Dr A. K. TRIPATHI 
Dr G. Prasan (Alternate) 


JOINT SECRETARY 
SECRETARY 


Ms R. SAVITHRI 
Dr P. C. Misura (Alternate) 


Dr Ravi KANT BHATNAGAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri R. K. JAIN 
Suri G. C. Pati (Alternate) 


Suri MANnosit BOSE 
Ms Rama VEDASHREE (Alternate) 


SHRI NAVIN RAHEJA 
Bric R. R. SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr K. VENUGOPAL 
DR MURALIKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH MISHRA 


ProF Vinay MAITRI 
PROF SANJUKKTA S. BHADURI (Alternate) 


SHRI VENKATESH GOPALKRISHNAN 


Pror K. J. NATH 
Suri A. K. SENGUPTA (Alternate) 


Ma GEN R. C. PADHI 


Ms ABHA NEGI 
SHRI SUBHASH CHANDRA VASHISHTH (Alternate) 


SHRI R. SRINIVAS 
Suri Nitin Kumar Azan (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI PAROMITA Roy 


Pror C. R. BABU 


SHRI SATANU PRASAD KAR 
Ms SANDHYATRA SAHA (Alternate) 


PROF SRINIVAS CHARY VEDALA 


SHRI AMIT BHATT 
Ms Prerna V. Menta (Alternate) 


44 


Organization 


In personal capacity (B-399, 2™ Floor, Meera Bagh, 
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi 110063) 


In personal capacity (Apartment No. 3203, Verona 
Cliff Avenue, Hiranandani Gardens, Powai 
Mumbai 400076) 


In personal capacity (1/5 Shabd Pratap Asharam, 
Lashkar, Gwalior 474012) 


In personal capacity (374, Sector 28, Noida 201301) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 17000 : 2019 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR 


SHRI V. SURESH 


SHRI S. P. BANSAL 


SHRI SANDEEP GARG 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)| 


Member Secretaries 


SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
SciENTIST ‘C’? (Crvit Enca), BIS 


Surimat! Divya S. 
SciENTIST ‘C? (Crvit ENGG), BIS 


AND 


SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
SciENTIstT ‘C? (Crvit Enca), BIS 


Working Group under Smart Cities Sectional Committee, CED 59/WG 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity, (G-1602, Pioneer Park, 
Sector 61, Gurugram 122 001) 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Gujarat International Finance, Tec-City Company Ltd 
(GIFT), Ghandinagar 


School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi 


Town and Country Planning Organization, New Delhi 


WRI India, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dr Supuir KrisHna (Convener) 


SHRI VIRENDER SINGH 


SHRI LOVELEEN GARG 


PROF SANJUKKTA S. BHADURI 


SHRI R. SRINIVAS 
SHRI SUDEEP Roy (Alternate) 


Ms PRERNA MEHTA 


45 


(Continued from second cover) 


for city level database. It should, however, be possible for the city bodies to secure the city level data from these 
bodies. It would also be desirable for the data collecting bodies to tabulate the survey data at local levels, such as 
the ward, village and city and publish the same on their portals in a format that would allow the users collate and 
generate results for higher levels, such as metropolitan region or district. 


Cities should give attention to development of city-level database on real-time basis by digitizing their services. 
For instance, registration of the birth of a child should automatically lead to updating the statistics of city’s 
population; issue of occupancy certificate (OC) for a building should lead to automatic updating the database on 
the number of buildings in the city and if the OC was given for a commercial building then the city data on city 
data on number of commercial buildings should get updated automatically. 


Cities would need to maintain their statistical information online, for which the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation has developed a framework titled “Basic Statistics for Local Level Development 
(BSLLD)’. The database should be dynamically linked with the city’s business processes so as to update it on a 
real-time basis. Such database would facilitate immensely in adoption of these standards in developing Master 
Plans for integrated land-use and sector-specific plans, such as city mobility plan, city sanitation plan, city housing 
plan, etc, as also for development of projects for specific sectors. 


While the data from the periodic surveys by national and state bodies, such as the decennial census of population 
and amenities or the five-yearly economic census, etc, would provide the benchmark statistics, the online BSLLD 
based profile information system suggested above would provide a framework for measuring the progress achieved 
by the city in different aspects. 


A list of profile indicators, which provide basic statistics and background information about the city is given in 
Annex B. Profile indicators are used as an informative reference about the city and can help cities determine which 
other cities could be of interest for peer comparisons. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


While formulating this Indian Standard, necessary guidance has been derived from ISO 37120 : 2018 ‘Sustainable 
development of communities: Indicators for city services and quality of life’, duly modulated by the documents 
notified by various statutory and other authorized agencies in India. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is compiled with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 59 (10000). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


