( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS t8143-19X

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR PLUGS AND KEYS FOR RESISTAtiCE BOXES
Electrical Instruments Sectional
Chairman

Committee,

ETDC

48

PROF ( DR ) J. K. CROUDHURY
Jadavpur Members University, Calcutta Representing National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi National Test House, Calcutta

DR A. S. BHADURI SHRI B. P. GROSH ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SEEI J. L. CHHABRA ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi SHRI J. S. Pass1 ( Alternate ) Designs & Standards Organization, GRIEF ELECTRICAL ENGINEER Research, Lucknow ( CENTRAL RAILWAY ) ADDITIONAL CHIEF ELECTRICAL ENCINEER ( CENTRAL RAILWAY ) ( Alternate ) Controllerate of Inspection Electronics ( Ministry of COL R. C. DHINGRA Defence ) , Bangalore Institute for Design of Electrical Measuring InstruSHRI R. N. GANDHI ments, Bombay .. SHRI G. CHANDRASEKARAN ( Alternate ) Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries SHRI A. N. GHOSH $II&rz of Industrial Development )*

SHRI V. K. BATRA

SERI D. A. GOPALAKRISHNA

SHRI P. P. MALHOTRA ( Alternate ) Instrumentation Ltd, Kota SHRI S. C. ARZARE ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Posts & Teleeranhs ( DenartSHRI K. B. KAMAT ment of Communications ), Ne; Delhi ' * SHRI S. C. MURHERJEE ( Alternate ) All India Instrument Manufacturers' & Dealers" SHRI S. D. KULKARNI Association, Bombay SHRI B. K. GARODIA ( Alternate ) SHRI J. R. MAHAJAN Indian Electrical Bombay SHRI S. P. RANADE ( Alternate ) Manufacturers' Association,.

( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1976 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian CoPyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

1st8143 -1976
( Continued from page 1 ) Members
SHRI S.S. MAVI

Representing Department of Industries, Chandigarh Government of Punjab,

SKRI K. L. KORLI ( Alternate ) Ltd, Pvt SHRI K. P. R. NAMBIAR British Physical Laboratories India Bangalore SHRI N. L. RAO ( Alternate ) and Commerce, SHRI E. N. NARAYANASWAMY Industries Department of Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras SHRI V. H. NAVKAL The Bombay Electric Supply and Transport Undertaking, Bombay SHRI S. P. BROO~A ( Alternate ) CAPS P. R. PARSAD Directorate of Standardization, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi SHIU C. V. K. RAO ( Alternate ) Central Scientific Instruments Organization ( CSIR ), SHRI P. V. N. RAMANATHAN Chandigarh DR R. N. MATHUR ( Alternate ) SHRI K. N. RAMASWAMY DirectNorrt;elfieneral of Technical Development, e SHRI R. S. SOUNDRIRARAJAN ( Alternate ) SHRI LAKSHMI SAGAR Oriental Science Apparatus Workshop, Ambala Cantt SHRI K. S. GUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI DINESH N. SARBAHI The Motwane Manufacturing Co _Pvt Ltd, Gyan Baug, Maharashtra DR G. R. TOSHNIWAL Toshniwal Industries PvtLtd. , Aimer I SHRI S. C. MAHESHWARI ( Alternate ) SHRI M. S. WANDALKAR Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal SHRI S. K. KASLIWAL ( Alternate ) SHRI S. P. SACHDEV, Director General, IS1 (Ex-of$cio Member ) Director ( Elec tech ) Secretary
SRRI HARCEARAN SIN~H Deputy Director ( Elec tech), IS1

IS I 8143- 1976

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR PLUGS AND KEYS FOR RESISTANCE BOXES
0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 28 July 1976, after the draft finalized by the Electrical Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 Plugs and keys are used with electrical apparatus, such as, resistance boxes and post office boxes for inserting and short circuiting the resisIn view of a large variety of design and dimensions of tance as desired. plugs and keys manufactured by the different manufacturers, it is considered rather difficult to achieve dimensional standardization for the However, it has been felt that a,caitable necessary interchangeability. standard for plugs and keys prescribing minimum requirements would be useful for an individual manufacturer in ensuring proper quality of these components. 0.3 The requirements of the associated electrical apparatus, such resistance boxes and post office boxes are covered in IS : 1565-1966*. as,,

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of atest, shall be rounded off in accordance with. IS : 2-1960t. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies the requirements and tests for plugs used in electrical apparatus, such as, plug type resistance boxes office boxes.
2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shalk apply. *Specification for electrical apparatus comprising resistors ( revised).
tRules for rounding off numerical values ( mu&d ).

and and

keys post

3

IS : 8143 - 1976
2.1 Base Plate The insulated plate on which keys are mounted. part to which of the plug resistors moulded are fitted in the on the

2.2 Keys base. 12.3 Lug material.

Bloc-ks of metallic The metallic portion

insulating for the

12.4 Plug - A device for inserting making continuity. 2.5 Stud resistors. 3. Metallic terminations

into a gap between attached

two key blocks connecting

to keys for

MATERIALS insulating material, such defects. material brass rods as,

.3.1 Base Plate - It shall be of a suitable .bakelite or ebonite. 13.2 Keys The keys shall be of brass

free from mechanical

top of the plug shall be of a suitable 3.3 Plugs -The with lug rigidly moulded in it. lug shall be made 3.4 Lug -The free from mechanical defects. .3.5 StudIt shall be of brass. out of specially

insulating treated

4. CONSTRUCTION 4.1 Base Plate - The base plate shall be solid insulating sheet of thickness not less than 9 mm and shall meet the requirements of IS : 20361974* depending upon the maximum range of the resistors to be mounted %on the base plate. .4.2 Keys - The keys ( metallic blocks ) shall have a minimum contact .area of 12.5 mm2 and a suitable length to allow easy handling of plug tops. The studs shall Abe appropriately connected to the key blocks where it is not an integral part of the key block in order to minimize the contact Blocks shall be fixed by suitable means so as to avoid resistance. misalignment. The blocks shall be given a protective coating against corrosion except the contact area. The consecutive blocks shall be separated with a minimum gap of 1 mm and shall have a tapered hole to match the taper ofthe plug to be inserted. 4.3 Plugs -The easy handling. insulated top of the plug shall be suitably shaped for

*Specification for phenolic laminated sheets (Jirst revi&~~ ). 4

IS : 8143 - 1976 4.4 Lugs -

The lugs shall be of diameter not less than 8 mm to with.stand wear and tear. These shall be turned to a fixed taper for interchangeability.

-4.5 Stud - The diameter of the stud ( screws, if of screw type ) shall be not less than 4. mm. 5. PACKING
AND MARKING

5.1 Packing - Plugs and keys are usually supplied with the associated .apparatus. When not accompanying the associated apparatus, they shall be packed in suitable containers and labelled. 5.2 Marking-The label which is to be securely container shall have the following information: a) Manufacturer's b) Manufacturer's 5.2.1 name or trade-mark; serial number; and Mark. attached to the

c) Country of manufacture. The label may also be marked with the IS1 Certification
NOTE - The use. of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act and the Rules and ReguThe IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard lations made thereunder. conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 6.

TESTS

6.1

Type Tests - The following shall constitute the type tests and shall be carried out in the sequence given below:

a) Insulation

resistance

test ( 6.4 ),

b) High voltage test ( 6.5 ), and c) Contact resistance d) Mechanical
6.2 Acceptance

test ( 6.6 ), and test ( 6.7 ).

endurance

Tests -The following shall constitute the acceptance tests and shall be carried out in the sequence given below:

a) Insulation

resistance

test ( 6.4 ),

b) High voltage test ( 6.5 ), c) Contact resistance test (6.6 ), and d) Mechanical endurance test (6.7 .) 5

IS:6143-1976
6.2.X Sampling Plan and Criteria for Accepance - A recommendatory sampling plan and criteria for acceptance of lot are given in Appendix A. 6.3 Routine Tests - The following shall constitute the routine tests and. shall be carried out in the sequence given below: a) Insulation c) Contact resistance test (6.4), b) High voltage test ( 6.5 ), and resistance test ( 6.6 ). 6.4 Insulation Resistance Test -The insulation resistance between the plug and its top when measured at 500 f 50 V dc after one minute of electrification shall be not less than 100 MQ. 6.5 High Voltage Test-No breakdown, arcing or sparking shall occur when an ac voltage of 1000 V ( rms ) is applied gradually across the plug and its top and maintained for a period of one minute. 6.6 Contact
Resistance Test

6.6.1 General Measuring Requirements- Measurement may be carried out with direct current or alternating current. In the case of dispute, the dc measurement shall govern.

6.6.1.1 The contact resistance shall normally be calculated from the potential difference measured between the points intended for connection of the wiring. The contact shall be made before the measuring voltage is applied. 6.6.1.2 In order to prevent the breakdown of insulating films on the contacts, the emf of the measuring dircuit shall not exceed `20 mV ( dc or ac peak ). 6.S.1.3 In order to prevent undue heating ofthe contacts, the current flowing shall not exceed 1 A. For ac measurements the frequency shall be 1 kHz f 200 Hz. 6.6.1.4 The measuring accuracy of f 10 percent. apparatus shall be such as to ensure an

6.6.1.5 The measurement shall consist of determination of the mean value of the contact resistance of the contacts of mated sets of plugs and keys ( R ).

6.6.2

Measuring Cycle Measurement with dc One measuring cycle consists ofi

6.6.2.1

a) making the contact, b) connection of voltage source, 6

IS : 3143 - 1976

cl 4

measurement measurement

with current flowing in one direction, with current flowing in opposite direction, of voltage source, and contact.
with ac -

disconnection e> f>breaking the 6.6.2.2 a) b) c) d) e)

Measurement

One measuring cycle consists of:

making the contact, connection of voltage source, measurement, disconnection of voltage source, and breaking the contact. Measuring cycles
Mated

6.6.2.3 succession.

shall

be

carried number

out

in

immediate to be

6.6.3 Measurement on measured shall be 10.

Sets -The

of contacts

6.6.3.1 There shall be five measuring cycles. The average of the values per contact thus obtained is the resistance of the contact under test ( R). The value of any individual measurement shall not exceed twice this value. 6.6.4 Requirement exceed 3 milliohms. The value of the contact resistance
(R)

shall not

-6.7 Mechanical Endurance Test - The keys and plugs shall be tested After 10000 operations, there shall be by actual operation 10000 times. no mechanical deterioration in the working of the plugs and keys. 6.7.1 After this test, the contact resistance test shall be carried out. Subsequently, the plugs and keys shall be tested with the associated apparatus for resistance accuracy in accordance with 7.4 of IS : 15651966* and shall comply with the requirements specified in 7.4.2 (a) of IS: 1565-1966*.

APPENDIX ( Clause 6.2.1 )
RECOMMENDED SAMPLING PLAN FOR ACCEPTANCE

A
AND CRITERIA

A-l. LOT A-l.1 In any consignment, all plugs and keys of the same type, and manufactured under similar conditions of production shall be grouped together to constitute a lot.
*Specification for electrical apparatus comprising resistors ( revised ).

7

IS : 8143 - 1976 A-1.2 Plugs
conformity and keys shall to the acceptance be tested tests. from each lot for ascertaining the

A-2. SCALE

OF SAMPLING

A-2.1 The number of plugs or keys to be selected from each lot shall be. in accordance with Table 1. These keys and plugs shall be selected at random ( see IS : 4905- 1968* ).
TABLE
LOT SIZE

1

SCALE

OF SAMPLING SECOND STAGE Jv, (3) 2 3 5 8 13

AND CRITERIA NI + &

FOR ACCEPTANCE G c* G

FIRST STAQE fl1 (2) 25 2 3 5 8 13

(1)
Up to 26 ,, 100 101 ,) 300 301 ,) 500 501 and above

(4) 4 6 10 16 26

(5) 0 0 0 0 0

(6) 2 2 2 2 3

(7) 2 2 2 2 4

A-3. NUMBER A-3.1 Each

OF TESTS

AND

CRITERIA

FOR

ACCEPTANCE

of the plug nor key selected in the first stage in accordance with co1 1 and 2 of Table 1 shall be tested for acceptance tests (see 0.2). A plug or key shall be called a defective if it fails in any of the acceptance tests. If the number of defectives is equal to CL, the lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements of the acceptance tests. `If the number of defectives is greater than or equal to Cz, the lot shall be declared to have failed in acceptance tests. If the number of defectives are between Cl and Cz, a further sample of same size as taken in the first stage shall be taken and tested. If the number of defectives in the two samples combined is less than C3, the lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements of acceptance tests, otherwise not.

*Methods for random sampling. 8

