INATA Ah IS 6430 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


PAT Tas oe Meg ATT 
tuts — fates 


(GAT FIAT ) 


Mobile Air Compressor for 
Construction Purposes — 
Specification 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 23.140 


© BIS 2023 


dit gtt Oat 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WMS WH, 9 get TE TH AM, 28 Keelt. 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


O A Y 


June 2023 Price Group 6 


Compressor, Blowers and Exhausters Sectional Committee, MED 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Compressor, Blowers and Exhausters Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 


This Indian Standard was first published in 1972 and subsequently revised in 1985. This standard is being revised 
again to keep pace with the latest technological developments and international practices. In this revision, the 
standard has been brought into the latest style and format of Indian Standards, and references of Indian Standards, 
wherever applicable have been updated. The following major modifications have been incorporated with revision 
of the standard: 


a) Amendment no. | and 2 have been incorporated; 
b) Clause 6.4 on oil temperature has been modified to include the requirement for high-pressure operation; 
c) Clause 16.1 on instrumentation has been modified; and 


d) Clause 21 regarding BIS certification marking has been added. 
The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules 
for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 6430 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


MOBILE AIR COMPRESSOR FOR CONSTRUCTION 
PURPOSES — SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers general requirements and 
performance of internal combustion-engine or 
electric-motor-driven mobile air compressor plants 
with positive displacement which include 
reciprocating, rotary and screw-type compressors 
for construction purposes with pressure up to 20 bar. 
The requirements of the standard shall also apply to 
wheel and skid-mounted plants. 


1.2 This standard does not cover the truck-mounted 
or self-propelled compressors driven by the prime 
mover of the vehicle itself. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards listed in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in ISO 3857 (Part 2) shall apply. 


3.2 Mobile Compressor — A compressor mounted 
on a trailer which can be towed by a vehicle at 
speeds and conditions specified in this standard or a 
skid-mounted compressor which can be lifted along 
with the skid and bolted onto a trailer which can be 
towed by a vehicle at speeds and conditions 
specified in this standard. 

NOTE — The definition in 3.2 does not include trolley- 


mounted small inflating units, which are not covered by this 
standard. 


4 MATERIAL 


All materials and components used in the 
manufacture and construction of the mobile air 
compressors shall be in accordance with the good 
engineering practice and as far as possible shall 
conform to the requirements of relevant Indian 
Standards. 


5 DESIGNATION OF SIZES 


The size of the compressor shall be specified by its 
capacity in terms of free air delivered at the specified 
working pressure. 


6 OPERATING AND STORAGE CONDITIONS 


The machine shall be capable of operation and 
storage in the environment conditions as given in 6.1 
to 6.3. 


6.1 Temperature 


The compressor shall normally be capable of 
working and being stored without any defect at 
temperatures 5 °C to 45 °C when the prime mover is 
an electric motor or an internal combustion engine. 


6.1.1 If so required by the purchaser, the compressor 
shall be capable of working at a temperature other 
than specified above. 


6.2 Humidity 


The compressor shall be suitable for operation at 
95 percent relative humidity at all temperatures 
below 27 °C ambient. At and above this temperature 
the machine shall be suitable for relative humidity, 
not in excess of that corresponding to 30 mm of 
mercury. 


6.3 Altitude 


The machine shall be capable of giving its rated 
output up to 300 m altitude. If the machine is to run 
at higher altitudes, the derating factor shall be given 
by the supplier. If especially required by the 
purchaser, the engine shall be capable of running at 
the rated speed and load at higher altitudes up to and 
including 4 200 m. 


7 PERFORMANCE 
7.1 Output 


The compressor shall be capable of delivering 
specified free air flow at rated discharge pressure 
measured in accordance with IS 5456. 


7.2 Air Temperature 


The manufacturer shall indicate the rise in 
temperature (above the intake temperature of the 
discharged air) measured at the outlet of the 
compressed air receiver; when the compressor is 
working at full load under normal working 
conditions. 


7.3 Coolant Temperature 


In the case of engine-driven compressor under 
continuous full load conditions, the temperature of 
the coolant in the radiator header tank shall be lower 


IS 6430 : 2023 


than the boiling point of the coolant by at least 7 °C. 


NOTE — The boiling point of water will be higher when a 
pressurized cap is used. 


7.4 Oil Temperature 


The temperature of the oil in the compressor and 
engine shall not exceed 120 °C when the plant is 
running continuously at full load. The high-pressure 
operation may call for a high oil temperature 
operation to avoid condensation. It can be 
permissible, provided that the manufacturer ensures 
the oil suitability, equipment reliability, and design 
of downstream equipment to operate at high 
temperatures. 


7.5 Mobility 


The samples of the mobile compressor as defined in 
3.2 selected in accordance with 7.5.2 shall pass the 
type test as described in 7.5.1. 


7.5.1 The mobile compressor shall traverse 80 km 
on a rough cross-country road at a speed of not less 
than 15 km/h without damage to its any component 
and without in any way affecting its performance. 


NOTE — 80 km run on a rough cross-country road need 
not be a continuous run. 


7.5.2 Unless otherwise agreed to between the 
purchaser and the supplier, the number of samples 
for the mobility test may be one in twenty with a 
minimum of one for consignments of less than 
twenty and more than five. For consignments of less 
than five the manufacturer shall give a certificate 
that the mobile compressor fulfils the requirements 
of the type test in 7.5.1. 


7.6 Operating Angle 


The plant shall be capable of operating satisfactorily 
even when tilted at an angle of one in seven in any 
direction. 


8 AIR COMPRESSOR 


The air compressors shall meet the requirements as 
given in 8.1 or 8.2. 


8.1 Oil Flooded Rotary Vane and Screw Types 


The compressor shall be of one or two stages and 
shall conform to the requirements as given in 8.1.1 
to 8.1.4. 


8.1.1 Oil System 


The compressor oil system shall be self-priming and 
shall incorporate an element-type filter, easily 
accessible and with a minimum life of 100 h. The 
system shall be so arranged that oil shall 
automatically bypass the filter in the event of a 
restriction. An oil contents gauge or dip-stick shall 
be supplied and there shall be a means of adequately 
draining the system. 


8.1.2 Air Output Control 


This shall be done by engine speed control and 
suction unloading; for electric motor run 
compressors, it shall be with suction unloading only. 
The engine speed shall be within the limits 
recommended by the engine manufacturers. The air 
output control shall give a maximum pressure 
differential of 1 kg/cm? between full output and no 
flow, this pressure being measured at the inlet to the 
receiver connection. The control shall be adjustable 
to give the rated capacity at any discharge pressure 
up to 1.5 kg/cm? below the rated pressure of the 
compressor. All moisture filters in the air system 
shall be rustproof and easily accessible. 


8.1.3 Discharge Pressure Control 


For the proper functioning of the compressor, the 
necessary device shall be fitted to maintain adequate 
air pressure in any receiver even if air cocks are fully 
open. 


8.1.4 Automatic Shut-down Devices 


Automatic shut-down devices shall be fitted, if 
required by the purchaser. 


8.2 Reciprocating Type 


The reciprocating type compressor shall conform to 
the requirements given in 8.2.1 to 8.2.3. 


8.2.1 Lubricating System 


The compressor shall have a suitable lubrication 
system to give adequate lubrication under all starting 
and climatic conditions. The lubricating system shall 
incorporate an oil filter easily accessible. If so 
required by the purchaser, the system shall be so 
arranged that oil shall automatically bypass the filter 
and the oil cooler (if fitted), in the event of a 
restriction in either of these components. Means 
shall be provided for isolating the oil cooler (if 
fitted), alternatively, an automatic shut-down 
device shall be provided. Easily accessible drain 
points shall be provided for draining all lubricants. 
An oil contents gauge or dipstick shall be provided 
for measuring the level of the oil in the crankcase. 


8.2.2 The compressor shall be fitted with an 
automatic device to maintain the pressure in the air 
receiver between the limits of rated pressure. If 
required by the purchaser, an automatic pressure- 
operated control shall be incorporated to reduce the 
engine speed and unload the compressor. 


8.2.3 Water Cooling System 


In the case of water-cooled machines, the cooling 
system may be combined with that of the engine. If 
a separate cooling system is used it shall conform 
to the requirements as given in 8.2.3.1 to 8.2.3.4. 


8.2.3.1 The system shall be so arranged that when 
the plant is shut down, water circulation shall be 
maintained by thermosyphone. 


8.2.3.2 In the case of internal combustion engine- 
driven compressors, it is recommended that a 
thermostat bypass valve is incorporated into the 
system. 


8.2.3.3 The radiator may, at the request of the user, 
be fitted with adjustable doors or shutters, whereby 
the operating temperature of the engine may be 
maintained at a satisfactory figure when the plant is 
running at temperatures down to - 13 °C. 


8.2.3.4 Easily accessible drain points (either drain 
cocks or drain plugs) shall be provided in order to 
drain the system completely without tilting or 
dismantling the plant. Drain-cocks shall be closed 
when the handles are in the down position. 


9 AIR RECEIVER 


The requirements of the air receiver shall be as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the 
manufacturer. 


10 PRIME MOVER 


10.1 The prime mover shall be either an electric 
motor conforming to relevant Indian Standards or an 
internal combustion engine conforming to IS 10001 
or IS 10002 or a variable speed compression ignition 
(diesel) engine as agreed to between the 
manufacturer and the purchaser. The prime mover 
shall meet the power demand of the compressor 
under conditions as specified in 6. Provision shall be 
made to measure the speed by the tachometer. 


10.2 The compressor unit shall be provided with 
the following: 


a) Running hour recorder, when so required by 
the purchaser; 

b) Revolution meter, when so required by the 
user; 

c) Exhaust to be so arranged as to avoid 
contamination of air inspired by the 
compressor and the engine; and 


d 


wm 


A cold starting device shall be supplied with 
the prime mover when the compressor is to 
operate at a temperature sub-zero and/or as 
per the engine OEM’s recommendation. 


10.2.1 The engine exhaust silencer, is so designed 
and fitted that the noise level should be limited to 75 
dB at 7 m distance as per ISO 2151 and ISO 3744. 


10.2.2 ISO 2151 shall be followed for the 
measurement of the noise level of the compressor 
unit. 


10.3 Starting System 


The internal combustion engine shall be provided 


IS 6430 : 2023 


with an electric or hydraulic or spring starting gear. 
The electric starter when provided shall be on a 
12 V/24 V electric system. Hand starting 
arrangement may be provided as an alternative to 
electric or hydraulic or spring starting gear for 
engines up to 22.5 kW. 


10.4 In the case of an electric motor being the 
prime mover, the following shall be provided: 


a) Starter with overload relay trip and no volt 
coil; 

b) Voltmeter (optional); 

c) Ammeter (optional); 

d) Running hour recorder, when so required by 
the purchaser; 


e) Tachometer (optional); and 


f) Suppression of radio interference (optional). 
11 MOUNTING 


11.1 The compressor, prime mover, and air receiver 
shall be mounted either on a trailer of sound design 
or a skid capable of being fitted on a trailer (see 3.2). 
The compressor and prime-mover shall also be 
mounted on a tubular frame forming an air receiver 
of sound design and capable of taking the entire 
load. 


11.2 Trailer Mounting 


The trailer shall have pneumatic or solid rubber 
wheels with 1 or 2 axles as agreed to between the 
user and the manufacturer. When the compressor is 
mounted on a trailer, the following shall be ensured. 


11.2.1 Centre of Gravity 


The fully laden plant shall not overturn on its near 
or off side when mounted on a tilting platform, tilted 
laterally to an angle of 15°. 


If so agreed to between the purchaser and the 
supplier, as a special requirement the fully-laden 
plant shall not overturn onto its near or off side when 
mounted on a tilting platform, tilted laterally to an 
angle of 30°. 


NOTES 


1 The requirements in 11.2.1 shall not necessarily mean 
that the plant shall be capable of operating under the 
conditions mentioned in 11.2.1. The plant shall be capable 
of operating satisfactorily at an angle as indicated in 7.6. 

2 The requirements in 11.2.1 shall not be considered as a 
‘routine test’. Normally the manufacturer’s certificate 
guaranteeing the performance in accordance with 11.2.1 
shall suffice, but where specifically required by the 
purchaser a type test may be done in accordance with 7.5.2. 


11.2.2 Lashings and Lifting Eyes 


The chassis shall be fitted with the lashing eyes. 
When so required by the purchaser, adequate 
facilities shall be provided for lifting the complete 
equipment. 


IS 6430 : 2023 


11.2.3 Mudguards 


Mudguards shall be fitted to all road wheels and 
shall have a minimum clearance of 25 mm on the 
tyres when the suspension is fully defected and each 
axle is fully articulated about the longitudinal axis 
of the chassis, alternatively, any other equally 
suitable arrangement may be provided. 


11.2.4 Tyre Inflation 


Arrangements for inflating the trailer tyres from the 
compressor reservoir be provided, if so required by 
the purchaser. 


11.2.5 Resting Bars 


In the case of a two-wheel trailer, two adjustable 
resting bars or fixed resting supports shall be 
provided on the rear end of the trailer. A landing leg 
or wheel shall be provided below the drawbar of the 
trailer to hold the trailer chassis when uncoupled 
from the towing vehicle. 


11.2.6 Brakes, Lights Reflector, and other Safety 
Requirements 


The trailer shall have brakes, lights reflector, and 
other road safety devices as per the relevant 
statutory regulations. A parking brake shall be 
provided to keep the compressor in position when 
stationary at a slope of 1 in 7. 


11.3 Skid-Mounting 


In the case of skid-mounting compressors, the 
mounting of the whole unit shall be such that it shall 
be lifted conveniently by a crane and readily fixed in 
a position on a trailer designed for the same. Holes 
shall be provided in the skid base to allow bolting 
down in a foundation. The machine mounted on the 
skid shall be capable of operating normally if the 
skid is placed on a trailer and bolted down. The 
following shall be ensured. 


11.3.1 In the case of two-wheeled trailers the skid- 
mounted prime mover compressor unit shall be so 
located on the trailer that the preponderance of 
weight on the drawing bar eye when the trailer frame 
is in level, shall be between 25 kg and 35 kg. 


11.3.2 The skids shall fit between the wheel arches, 
where exist, and shall not exceed the length of the 
appropriate trailer platform. 


11.3.3 The prime mover and compressor unit shall 
be capable of operating both when mounted on the 
trailer and when dismounted from the trailer without 
any necessity for bolting down to a foundation. In 
the latter case, the compressor shall operate 
satisfactorily with no site preparation other than 
rough levelling of the ground by hand. 


11.3.4 The complete skid-mounted compressor unit 
shall be fitted with a bale or lifting ring or rings to 
enable the equipment to be lifted by a crane. The 
lifting ring or rings shall be strong enough to enable 
the whole assembly including the appropriate trailer, 
fuel, oil and maintenance tools to be lifted from the 
ground with safety. The lifting gear, including the 
rings, shall be capable of withstanding any handling 
conditions which may be encountered, such as the 
rapid lowering and sudden stoppage of the load. 


11.3.5 The design of the skid base and the mounting 
of the engine and compressor upon it shall be such 
that distortion of the trailer frame as in cross-country 
running shall not be transmitted to the engine and 
compressor assembly. 


12 AIR CLEANERS (FILTERS) 


The air cleaners (filters) fitted to the engine and air 
compressor shall be subject to an agreement 
between the purchaser and the supplier. 


13 FUEL SYSTEM 


13.1 The fuel tank shall be of sufficient capacity to 
provide a minimum of six-hour running on full load. 
The filling orifice shall incorporate a removable 
filter and shall be of adequate size. A captive filler 
cap shall be provided for the filling orifice and the 
method used for venting the tank to the atmosphere 
shall be such that no fuel spillage occurs when the 
machine is travelling with the tank completely full. 
The draw-off from the fuel tank to the engine shall 
leave sufficient dead volume below it at any 
operating angle up to 10 degrees. A plug shall be 
provided for completely draining the tank. A 
dipstick shall be provided for measuring the fuel. A 
fuel gauge, indicating refill level and the maximum 
level, shall be fitted in the tank on the base panel as 
agreed to between the manufacturer and the 
purchaser. 


13.1.1 If specified, a hand-operated semi-rotary 
pump shall be fitted to the plant in a position suitable 
for pumping fuel from containers on the ground to 
the fuel tank. The pump shall be complete with hose 
and suction and strainer which shall be of such 
diameter as to admit entry to the 50 mm opening in 
180 litres drum. The suction hose and strainer shall 
be secured in such a position as to keep it dry and 
free from road dirt. Fuel filters of adequate capacity 
for the conditions specified in 6 shall be 
incorporated into the system. 


14 TAKE-OFF COCKS 


14.1 Unless otherwise required by the purchaser, 
take-off cocks of 20 mm size as per IS 3004 shall be 
provided. They shall be positioned on a discharge 


manifold within the overall dimensions of the 
chassis mounting: 


SI No. Inlet Volume No. of Cocks 
(m/min) 

(1) (2) (3) 
i) 1.85 2 

11) 3.40 2/3 
111) 4.25 2/3 
1v) 5.95 3/4 
v) 8.92 3/4 


In addition, means shall be provided for taking the 
full output of the compressor through the one take- 
off point. 


14.2 The cocks shall be “straight through”, inverted, 
spring-loaded, taper plug type or wheel valve type. 
They shall be suitable for connection to the standard 
female hose union. Each cock shall be provided with 
a non-ferrous captive protecting cap which screws 
on the full length of the thread, and which is firmly 
secured by a suitable length of non-ferrous or 
galvanized chain sufficiently strong to withstand 
rough handling. 


14.2.1 If agreed to between the purchaser and the 
supplier, wheel valves may be provided as an 
alternative to the cocks in 14.2. 


15 CANOPY AND GUARDS 


To give protection against weather, the plant shall be 
provided with a metal or fibreglass canopy having 
detachable or folding side screens. Locking devices 
shall be fitted on the canopy and all equipment and 
tools shall be either accommodated within the 
enclosed space of arrangement at a suitable position 
outside the canopy (see 18). Suitable guards for the 
moving parts shall be fitted as necessary to give 
mechanical protection to the plant and physical 
protection to the operating personnel. 


16 INSTRUMENTATION 


16.1 The following instruments shall be 
incorporated: 


a) Pressure gauges for air receiver, the first 
stage of air compressor (if two stages) and 
engine oil pressure switch/transmitter (for 
engine-driven machines only); 

b) Capillary dial-type thermometers of dial 
size not less than 50 mm for recording the 
temperature in the radiator header or 
temperature switch/transmitter; 

c) Capillary dial-type thermometers of dial 
size not less than 50 mm for recording the 
temperatures of the compressed air or oil 


IS 6430 : 2023 


delivery (rotary machines only) or 
temperature switch/transmitter; 


d) Tachometer (optional); 

e) Voltmeter with a rotary switch (for motor- 
driven machines only) (optional); and 

f) Thermometers shall be marked with the 
normal operating temperature range 
(optional). 


16.2 All instruments shall be conveniently grouped 
on an instrument panel. If required by the purchaser 
a switch and panel type lamp operating from the 
starting batteries shall be fitted to illuminate the 
instrument panel, alternatively, inspection lamp 
shall be provided. 


16.3 The engine starting controls shall be either 
mounted on the instrument panel or located 
sufficiently close to it to permit the operator to read 
the instruments when starting the engine. 


16.4 All instruments shall be suitably identified to 
indicate their function. 


16.5 All pressure gauges shall be of automotive 
type. 
17 TOOLBOX 


A toolbox, with means for locking the lid, shall be 
provided and firmly secured in a suitable position 
inside or outside the canopy (see 15). 


18 TOOLS 


To enable the purchaser to decide what tools 
(spanners) shall be supplied with the plant, full 
particulars of the tools normally supplied for 
operation and maintenance shall be given at the time 
of tendering. 


19 DISMANTABILITY 


19.1 During design, consideration may be kept for a 
purchaser’s requirement who wants the plant to be 
made dismantlable into convenient independent 
small loads, as mutually agreed upon by the 
purchaser and the manufacturer, for transportation in 
inaccessible areas. 


19.1.1 The plant shall be capable of being 
dismantled easily in a short time by ordinary hand 
tools and shall not require any special tools or 
equipment for that purpose. 


19.2 TEST ON COMPRESSORS 


For acceptance, the compressors shall be tested in 
accordance with IS/ISO 1217 or IS 5456 and 
methods of tests agreed to between the purchaser 
and the manufacturer, as applicable. 


20 DOCUMENTS 


20.1 A copy of the operating and maintenance 
manual illustrated parts list shall be provided along 
with each unit. 


IS 6430 : 2023 


20.1.1 If required by the purchaser, the workshop 
manual shall specify the working limits for the 
dimensions of all-important moving or wearing 
parts of the compressor, beyond which the parts 
shall be replaced. 


21 MARKING 


21.1.1 An approved information plate or plates, 
permanently and clearly marked with the following 
information, shall be fitted to each plant: 


a) Maker’s name, type and serial number; 


b) Rated output; and 


c) Rated pressure. 
21.1.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
products may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


ISSO No. 
IS/1SO 1217 : 2009 


ISO 2151 : 2004 


IS 3004 : 1979 


ISO 3744 : 2010 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 


Displacement compressors 
— Acceptance test 


Acoustics — Noise test 
code for compressors and 
vacuum pumps — 
Engineering method 
(Grade 2) 


Specification for plug cocks 
for water supply purposes 
(first revision) 


Acoustics — 
Determination of sound 
power levels and sound 
energy levels of noise 
sources using sound 
pressure — Engineering 
methods for an essentially 
free field over a reflecting 
plane 


IS/ISO No. 


IS/ISO 3857 (Part 2) 
:1977 


IS 5456 : 2006 


IS 10001 : 1981 


IS 10002 : 1981 


IS 6430 : 2023 


Title 


Compressors, pneumatic 
tools, and machines — 
Vocabulary: Compressors 


Testing of positive 
displacement type air 
compressors and exhausters 
— Code of practice (second 
revision) 


Performance requirements 
for constant speed 
compression ignition 
(diesel) engines for general 
purposes (up to 20 kW) 


Specification for 
performance requirements 
for constant speed 
compression ignition 


(diesel) engines for general 
purposes (above 20 kW) 


IS 6430 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Compressor, Blowers and Exhausters Sectional Committee, MED 22 


Organization 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 
Atlas Copco India Limited, Pune 


Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Boldrocchi Indian Private Limited, Gurugram 


Burckhardt Compression India Private Limited, 
Noida 
CSIR - National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


CSIR - National 
Bengaluru 


Aerospace Laboratories, 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 


of Defense, New Delhi 


Dresser-Rand India Private Limited, Pune 


ELGI Equipments Limited, Coimbatore 


Engineers India Limited, Gurugram 


GAIL (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Register of Shipping, Mumbai 


Ingersoll Rand India Limited, Ahmedabad 


Kirloskar Pneumatic Company Limited, Pune 


Representative(s) 
SHRI K. RAVI (Chairperson) 
SHRI VIJAY SHARMA 


SHRI PRASAD YADAV 
SHRI ATUL GAIKWAD (Alternate) 


SHRI S. DURAIRAJ 
SHRI Y. V. RAMA LAKSHMI (Alternate) 


SHRI KANNAN V. V. 


SHRI NOKESH AGGARWAL 
SHRI PIYUSH GOEL (Alternate) 


SHRIR. S. GUNAJI 
SHRI A. BHASKAR PRABHUNE (Alternate) 


DR RAJESH KUMAR 
PROF DR M. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI THENNAVARAJAN S. 
LT COL DEEPAK SHARMA 
SHRI U. R. RAJA (Alternate) 


SHRI M. H. VYAS 
SHRI J. B. RAVAL (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYARAJ B. 
SHRI S. SENTHIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI J. S. DUGGAL 
SHRI MAHESH EASWARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH GEDA 


SHRI V. V. RAJSEKHAR 
SHRI MUNESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI GAUTAM MISRA 


SHRI SUNEET DIGIKAR 
SHRI KARTHIK S. (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMESH K. V. 
SHRI DILEEP PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAMOD KUMAR YADAV 
SHRI AMIT SAXENA (Alternate) 


Organization 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


National Fertilizers Limited, Noida 


Neuman and Esser Compressor Application Centre 
Private Limited, Pune 
Oil 


and Natural Gas 


New Delhi 


Corporation Limited, 


Project and Development India Limited, Noida 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Research Designs and Standards Organization 


(RDSO), Lucknow 


TLT Engineering India Private Limited, Gujarat 


Tata Chemicals Limited, Mumbai 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Navi Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 6430 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SUJOY BANERJEE 
SHRI A. K. MODI (Alternate) 


SHRI ANUJ KUMAR SHAHI 
SHRI DOONDESHWAR V (Alternate) 


SHRI M. N. GOYAL 
SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR AGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ATUL AGARWAL 
SHRI MAHESH DIXIT (Alternate) 


SHRI BRAJ KISHOR RAI 
SHRI RITUJIT HAZARIKA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MANDILWAR 
SHRI AJAY K.S. RUHEL (Alternate) 


SHRIS. K. GARYALI 
SHRI RANJIT S. MUNDRA (Alternate) 


SHRI SATNAM SINGH 
SHRI VIJAY KUMAR GOEL(Alternate) 


SHRI MUKESH K. JAIN 
SHRI SANJAY MAKWANA (Alternate) 


SHRI M. S. PRASAD 
SHRI AJOY KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIREESH S. SWAMI 
SHRI ASLAM BASHA B. (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA SCIENTIST 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI LOKRAJ MEENA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (MECHANICAL ENGINEERING) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 22 (20150). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern ` :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


