UDC

621'38'038-871

: 621'317'332'3

IS : 12448

( Part 2ISec 2 ) - 1988

Indian

Standard

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

BASIC TESTING PROCEDURES AND MEASURING METHODS FOR ELECTROMECHANICAL COMPONENTS FOR ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT
PART 2 GENERAL EXAMINATION, INSULATION ELECTRICAL TESTS AND CONTINUITY VOLTAGE AND STRESS Tests continuity and CONTACT TESTS RESISTANCE Section TESTS, 2

Electrical

Continuity

and Contact

Resistance

1. Scope - This standard :ontact resistance. 2. Test 2a: Contact

( Part 2/Set -

2 ) covers methods Level Method

to measure electrical

Resistance

Millivolt

2.1 Object - The object of this test is to detail a standard method to measure the resistance across a pair of mated contacts or a contact with a measuring gauge.

electrical

2.2 General Measuring Requirements - Measurements may be carried out with direct current or In the case of alternating current. For ac measurements, the frequency shall not exceed 2 kHz. dispute, the dc measurements shall govern. The accuracy 10 percent. of the measuring apparatus shall be such that the total error does not exceed

2.3 Method of Measurement 2.3.1 Measurement details - The contact drop measured between the zones intended points specified in the detail specification. resistance shall be derived normally from the voltage for connection of the wiring to the contacts at the voltage is applied. Care must be pressure on the contacts under test

The contact shall not be operated while the measuring taken during the measurement to avoid exerting abnormal and to avoid movement of the test cables.

While the connection points specified in the detail specification are not directly accessible, the resistance of the cable or wire used shall be subtracted from the measured value. The corrected value shall be recorded. The contacts to be measured shall be chosen in accordance with the detail specification.

2.3.2 Test current and voltage - In order to prevent the breakdown of insulating films on the contacts, the emf of the measuring circuit shall not exceed 20 mV dc or ac peak, open circuit. The test current shall not exceed 100 mA ac or dc. Ad !?&z~~*??~:~ i-' **I f* 2;
;Li,* .Jl.,' LLS C;_,qrjc7E_ 5

2.4 Measuring Cycles 2.4.1 Measurement with direct current a) making the contact, b) application of the voltage, c) measurement with current One measuring

1 ril;it., '-,,,~[~,;.%' :.~`;nt..g

cycle consists

of:

t

1

flowing

in one direction, direction,

d) measurement with current flowing in the opposite e) disconnection of the voltage source, and f) breaking the contact. 2.4.2 Measurement with alternating current a) making the contact, b) application of the voltage,

One measuring

cycle consists

of:

Adopted 6 September

1988

I BUREAU
MANAK

0 May 1989, BIS
I

Gr 3

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

IS : 12448

( Part 2/&c

2 ) - 1988

c) making the measurement, d) disconnection of the voltage source, and cycles are required
of

e) breaking the contact. 2.4.3 More than one measuring cycle - When two or more measuring the detail specrfication, they shall be carried out in immediate succession. Note - Unless
preceding

by
the

otherwise specified, the made contact( s ) should not be disturbed between the end test and the application of the voltage in this test, nor between successive measuring cycles.

2.5 Requirements 2.5.1 The value of the contact specified in the detail specification. resistance shall not exceed, for any measurement, with dc shall
should

the

value

2.5.2 The contact resistance measurement obtained with forward and reverse current. Note - Any deviation
from the standard

be the average
indicated

of the two

readings

test procedure

be clearly

in the test report.

2.6 Details to be Specified details shall be specified:

When this test

is required

by the detail specification,

the following

a] The connecting

point of the measuring

wires, their type and size, if applicable;

b) For mated sets, the contacts to be measured and the number of measuring cycles; c) For individual mated contacts, the number of contacts to be measured and the number of measuring cycles; d) Whether contacts measuring cycles; are to be operated before the measurements and/or between the

e) The permissible limits of contact resistance; and f) Any deviation from the standard test method and/or conditions. 3. Test 2b: Contact Resistance Specified Test Current Method to measure gauge, the electrical

3.1 Object - The object of this test is to detail a standard method resistance across a pair of mated contacts or a contact with a measuring

3.2 General Measuring Requirements - Measurements may be carried out with direct current or In the case of For ac measurements, the frequency shall not exceed 2 kHz. alternating current. dispute, the dc measurements shall govern. The accuracy of the measuring 10 percent. 3.3 Method of Measurement 3.3.1 Msasurem~nt details - The contact drop measured between the zones intended points specified in the detail specification. The contact shall not be operated while resistance shall be derived normally from the voltage for connection of the wiring to the contacts at the the measuring voltage is applied. abnormal pressure on the apparatus shall be such that the total error does not exceed

Care must be taken during the measurement to avoid exerting contacts under test and to avoid movement of the test cables,

Where the connection points specified in the detail specification ire not directly accessible, the resistance of the cable or wire used shall be subtracted from the measured value. The corrected value shall be recorded. The contacts to be measured shall be chosen in accordance with the detail specification.

3.3.2 Test current and voltage - The contact resistance shall be measured with the rated The emf of the source alternating current or direct current as specified in the detail specification. shall not exceed 60 V dc or ac peak, but shall be at least 1 V, as specified in the detail specification. Measurements the test current. shall be made on individual contacts within minutes following application of

2

IS,: 12448 3.4 Measuring Cycles 3.4.1 Measurement with direct current One measuring

( Pat

2/Set -2 ) - 1998

cycle consists of:

4 making the contact, b) application of the voltage, cl measurement with current flowing in d) measurement with current flowing in d disconnection of the voltage source, f> breaking the contact.
Note - Unless otherwise specified, test and the application of the voltage

one direction, the opposite and direction,

the Fade contacts should not be, disturbed between the end of a preceding in this test, nor between successive measuring cycles.

3.4.2

Measurement with alternating current -

One measuring

cycle consists of:

a) making the contact, b) application
C)

of the

VOkQe,

making the measurement, of the voltage
COntaCt.

d) disconnection e) breaking the

source,

and

Note - Unless otherwise specified, test and the application of the voltage

the made contacts should not be disturbed between the end of a precedinfj in this test. nor between successive measuring cycles.

3.4.3
the detail

or more measuring More than one measuring cycle - When hV0 specification, they shall be carried out in immediate succession.

cycles are required for any measurmenT,

by

the

3.5 Requirements value of hhich

is specified

The value

of the contact resistance shall not in the detail specification. with dc shall
should

exceed average
indicated

The obtained

contact resistance IIIeaSUreIIIent with forward and reverse current.
from the standard

be the
be clearly

of the two readings

Note - Any deviation

test procedure

in the test report,

3.6 Details to be Specified details shall be specified:

When this test is required

by the detail

specification,

the following

a) The connecting point of the measuring wires, their type and size, if applicable; b) For mated sets, the contacts to be measured and the number of measuring cycles; c) For individual mated contacts, the number of contacts to be measured and the number of measuring cycles; and/or between the d) Whether contacts are to be operated before the measurements measuring cycles; e) The measuring current; f) The permissible limits of contact resistance; and
g)

Any deviation

from the standard test method and/or conditions. Resistance Variation

4. Teat 2c: Contact

the variation of 4.1 Object - The object of this test is to detail a standard method to determine contact resistance of electromechanical Components under specified dynamic conditions. This iest,shall be carried out only on components, the contact resistance of which is measured by Test 2a. 4.2 Mounting of the Test Specimen - The test specimen shall the requirements of the detail specification. 4..3 General Requirements 4.3.1 The variation of contact resistance shall be determined under dynamic conditions. shall be made during 50 mA the period of the be mounted in accordance with

4.3.2 The measurement of variation of contact resistance specified in the relevant test and/or detail specification. 4.3.3 The measurement shall be made with a dc not measuring circuit shall not exceed 20 mV. 3

exceeding

and the emf

IS : 12448

( Part 2/&c

2 ) - 1988 of contact resistance shall not exceed the value specified in the detail

4.3.4 The variation specification. 4.4 Measuring

Apparatus

4.4.1 The variation of contact resistance may be determined by means of a cathode-ray oscilloscope ( with a long-persistance screen ) displaying the voltage drop measured between points specified in the detail specification. 4.4.2 The measuring apparatus shall have a frequency f 3 dB between 400 Hz and 1 MHz; and if an oscilloscope as follows: a) 50 pV/cm or better, up to 1 MHz, when measuring b) 500 pV/cm or better, up to 1 MHz, when measuring c) 1.0 m V/cm or better, up to 1 MHz, when measuring 4.5 Detail to be Specified details shall be specitted: characteristic which is flat within is used, it shall have a sensitivity up to 6 ma; up to 30 ma; above 30 ma. specification, the following bundle to and

resistances resistances

resistances

When this test is required by the detail

a) method of mounting and wiring the test specimen be used, limit of variation of the contact resistance, b) c) severity of the associated dynamic test(s), d) contacts to be measured, e) sensitivity of the measuring f) any deviation 6. Test 2e: Contact Disturbance apparatus, and

and details of the cable/wire

from the standard test method and/or conditions.

5.1 Object - The object of this test is to detail a standard method for detecting disturbance of electromechanical components under specified dynamic conditions. 5.2 Mounting of the Test Specimen - The test specimen the requtrements of the detail specification. 5.3 Method of Measurement shall be mounted

contact with

in accordance

5.3.1 The contact disturbance shall be determined under dynamic conditions. The duration of the opening Of closed contacts and/or the closing of open contacts shall be determined when the component is subjected to bump, shock, vibration or acceleration tests. 5.3.2 The monitoring of contact disturbance shall be made during the period specified in the relevant test and/or detail specification. The contacts may be monitored individually or in one or more groups as specified in the detail specification. When monitored in groups, closed, contacts may be connected in series and open contacts may be connected in parallel. Note If failure
is indicated when testing contacts in groups, it is permitted to test individual contacts subsequently.

5.4 Requirements 5.4.1 The measurement shall not exceed IO V. shall be made with dc not exceeding 150 mA. The emf of the source

5.4.2 The duration of the contact relevant test and/or detail specification.

disturbance shall not exceed the value specified in the Preferred values are 1 @IS, 10 PLS,100 ps, 1 ms and 10 ms.

5.4.3 A closed contact is considered disturbed when the voltage across it exceeds 50 percent of the source emf. An open contact is considered disturbed when the voltage across it drops below 50 percent of the source emf. 5.5 Details to be Specified details shall be specified: a) When this test is required by the detail specification, the following bundle

Method of mounting and wiring the test specimen and details of the cable/wire to be used; period, if different from that specified in the relevant test method; b) Monitoring Contacts to be monitored and their operated condition; c) 4

IS : 12448 d) Limit of duration of contact disturbance; and e) Any deviation from the standard test method and/or conditions. 6. Test 2f: Housing ( Shell ) Electrical Continuity

( Part S/Set

2 ) - 1988

6.1 Object - The object of this test is to detail a standard method for measuring the resistance between component housing (shells) which are intended to provide electrical continuity, when mated. This test is not intended 6.2 General Requirements 6.2.1 Components having metallic housings when mated shall be tested as follows: (shells) intended to provide and of cable electrical continuity, to ensure shielding against magnetic or rf interference,

a) Measurements shall be made on mated sets of components, b) Free components shall be fitted with short lengths of wire detail specification. 6.2.2 The resistance shall be measured through

as specified

in the

all joints connected

in series such as: of the components

a) From cable braid and/or housing (shell) to mounting is a fixed type. b) Between cable braids for free components, and c) Between 6.2.3 mounting panels where both connectors The resistance measurements

panel where one

are fixed. to Test 2b. not exceed the value specified in

shall be made according shall

6.3 Testing Requirements the detail specification. 6.4 Details to be Specified a) method of mounting
b) points

The value of the resistance When this test is required

by the detail specified: cable(s) wire bundle(s),
'

the specimen

and the associated

at which

measurements

are to be made,

c) test current and test method (Test 2b or Test 2c) to be used, d) maximum permissible resistance, and e) any deviation 7. Test from the standard test method and/or conditions. (Earthing) from Actuator to Mounting Bushing (Surface) the resistance

2h: Resistance

7.1 Object - The object of this test is to detail a standard method to determine between a metal switch actuator and the mounting bushing in which it operates. Method of Measurement - Connections actuator and the mounting bushing. it during measurement of resistance.
switch

7.2

shall be between suitable exterior points on the The actuator shall have no external force applied to Actuations during test shall into its next reading position.

One complete cycle of the actuator may be made prior to test. be limited to the minimum movement necessary to put the actuator Resistance measurements possible for rotary switches; in the detail specification.

shall be made in each of two actuator positions, as far apart as at each normal actuator position for level switches; or as specified actuator exceed test for any position. Resistance the shall value

One resistance measurement shall be made in each be measured in accordance with Test 2a. 7.3 Requirements - The value of resistance shall of which is specified in the detail specification. 7.4 Details to be Specified details shall be given: not

measurement, the

When this test is required

by the detail specification, in 7.2,

following

a)
b)

measurement positions of actuator, if other than that specified maximum allowable resistance, and any deviation from the standard test method. 6

c)

IS : 12448 ( Part 2/Set 2 ) 1988 EXPLANATORY NOTE

This standard (Part 2ISec 2) is based, without any technical change, on IEC Pub 612-2 (1985) JElectromechanical components for electronic equipment; Basic testing procedures and measuring methods: Part 2 General examination, electrical continuity and contact resistance tests, insulation tests and voltage stress test', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC).

Printed at Printograph, New Delhi, India

