( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS:2810-1979

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
RELATING TO SOIL DYNAMICS

( First Revision )
Soil Engineering
Chairman
PROF

and Rock Mechanics

Sectional

Committee,
Institute

BDC 23
( CSIR ),

Representing Central Building Roorkee Research

DINESHMOHAN Members

ADDITIONAL DIRECTORRESEARCH (FE), RDSO DEPUTY DIRECTORRESEARCH ( FE-I ), RDSO ( Alternate ) PKOF ALAM SINGH LT-COL AVTAR SINGH MAJ V. K. KANITKAR ( Alternate DR A. BANERJEE SARI S. GUPTA ( Alternate ) DR R. K. BHANDARI CHIEF ENGINEER (D & R ) DIRECTOR( IPRI ) ( Alternate ) SHRI K. N. DADINA SHRI A. G. DASTIDAR

Railway Board (Ministry

of Railways )

University ofJodhpur, Jodhpur Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters ) Cementation Co Ltd, Calcutta Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), Roorkee Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh In personal capacity (P-820 Jvew A&ore, Calcutta 700053) In personal capacity ( 5 Hungerford Street, 12/l Hungerford Court, Calcutta 700017) Irrigation Ruearch Institute, Khagaul, Patna Indian Geotechnical Society, New Delhi Central Water Commission, New Delhi

SHRI R. L. DEWAN DR G. S. DHILLON DIRECTOR( CSMRS ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( CSMRS ) ( Altern& ) Asia Foundations & Construction (P) Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. H. DIVANJI SHRI A. N. JANGLE ( Alternate ) University of Roorke-e, Roorkee; and Institution of DR GOPAL RANJAN Engineers ( India) ( Delhi Centre) Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi DR SHASHIK. GULHATI DR G. V. RAO ( Alternate )

( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright INDIAN STANDARDS 1979 INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyrighf Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 2810- 1979
( Confinuedfrom pagr 1 ) Members SHRI 0. P. MALHOTRA Representing Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh Centr$byd Research Institute ( CSIR), New

SHRIT. K. NATARAJAN

Building & Roads Research Laboratory, Chandigarh RESEARCHOFFICER Engineering Research Laboratories, Hyderabad SHRI K. R. SAXEHA Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi SECRETARY DEPUTY SECRETARY( Alternate ) Public Works Department, Government of Uttar SHRI M. M. D. SETH Pradesh, Lucknow DR B. L. DHAWAN (Alternate ) Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee SHRI M. K. SIN~HAL Roads Wings (Ministry of Shipping & Transport) SHRI N. SIVAGURU SHRI D. V. SIKKA (Alternuts ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI K. S. SRINIVASAN SHRI SUNILBERRY ( Alternate ) Public Works Department, Government of Tamil SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER Nadu, Madras EXECUTIVE ENGINEER ( Alternate) Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI B. T. UNWALLA SHRI T. M. MENON ( Alternate ) All India Instruments Manufacturers & Dealers SHRI H. C. VERMA Association, Bombay SHRI V. S. VASUDEVAN( Alternate ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-o&o Member ) SHRI D. AJITHA SIMHA, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SHRI K. M. MATHUR Deputy Director (Civ Engg), IS1

Glossary of Terms Subcommittee,
Convene7

BDC 23 : 4

DRSHAMSHER PRAKASH
Members SHRI D. N. BHARGAVA SHRI N. M. PATEL

University of Roorkee, Roorkee Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee Cen~o~rk~eilding Research Institute

( CSIR ),

SHRI AMAR SINGH ( Alternate )

2

IS : 2810 - 1979

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO SOIL DYNAMICS

( First Revision)
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 23 March 1979, after the draft finalized by the Soil Engineering and Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 A number of Indian Standards covering soil testing, site investigation for foundations, etc, has been either published or is under preparation; these include a large number of technical terms relating to soil engineering. The extensive use of these terms has necessitated the preparation of this glossary. This standard was originally published in 1964. This revision has been prepared so as to include a number of new terms besides making the existing terms up to date. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practice in the field in this country. 0.4 In the preparation of this standard, by the Civil Engineering Department Roorkee. considerable assistance was given of the University of Roorkee,

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers definitions of jerms relating The symbols of some of the terms are also given. 2. DEFINITIONS 2.1 Accelerograph - An instrument for recording ground acceleration picked up by the acceleration pick-up. 2.2 Accelerogram - A graphical obtained from the accelerograph. 3 record of acceleration as to soil dynamics.

versus time

IS : 2810 - 1979 2.3 Acceleration Pick-Up accelerations of vibrations. displacement from mean position or position 2.4 Amplitude - Maximum of static equilibrium. 2.4.1 wave. An instrument for measuring the absolute

Double Amplitude -Amplitude

measured on

from peak to peak of the which material or change is forged in wave-

base block for a hammer 2.5 Anvil -A into shape by repeated striking of the tup.

2.6 Attenuation - Decay or reduction of amplitude form due to energy dissipation with distance and time.

2.7 Coefficient of Elastic Non-uniform Compression ( G#I) - It is the ratio of external non-uniform pressure to the elastic part of the settlement. 2.8 Coefficient of Elastic Uniform Compression ( C,, ) -It is the ratio of external uniform pressure to the elastic part of the settlement. 2.9

Coefficient of Elastic Non-uniform

Shear ( CT ) -

It is the ratio product and the

of the external of polarmoment angle of rotation

moment applied to the vertical axis to the of inertia of contact area of base of foundation of the foundation.

2.10 Coefficient of Elastic Uniform Shear ( CT ) - It is the ratio of average shear stress at the foundation contact area to the elastic part of the displacement in sliding. 2.11 Coefficient pressure intensity of Subgrade Reaction ( C, ) to the corresponding settlement. It is the ratio of the

2.12 Critical Hydraulic Gradient ( i) - It is the hydraulic at which the seepage force balances the weight of the soil. 2.13 Cycle period. The full sequence of a periodic quantity occurring

gradient during a

2.14 Damping Characteristics the motion is retarded by energy

- Characteristics dissipation.

of the system by which damping aperiodic forces to coefficient

2.14.1 Critical Damping Coe&cient (C, ) - It is the value of coefficient which determines the case between periodic and motion. 2.14.2 Damping the velocity. 2.14.3 Damping ( C) to the critical

Coe&cient ( C) Factor ( D) damping

It is the ratio of the damping

It is the ratio of the damping coefficient ( C, ).

fS a 2810'9 1979'
velocity of the system.

2.14.4 Viscous barn&g

-

Where

damping force is proportional

to the of

2.15 Damage Potential -A a ground motion. 2.16 Degree of Freedom to define a vibratory system.

measure of the damage causing capacity

Number of independent co-ordinates required where the or

2.17 Drop Hammer -A forge hammer used for die stamping side frame is mounted on the anvil. 2.18 Dynamic Compaction impact or blasting. Compaction produced

by vibration

2.18.1 Blasting - Detonating small charges ofexplosive at predetermined points to increase the density of the soil. 2.18.2 Imfinct - Increasing the density of the soil by the application pressure, by impact or falling of weights at predetermined points. 2.19 Dynamic Loading of

A phenomenon giving rise to dynamic loading,

2.19.1 Earthquake - Soil samples are subjected to simplified load patterns taking into account the stress prior to and during the occurrence of earthquake. 2.19.2 Transient - Loading of short duration, generally sample to simulate the condition of blast loading. 2.19.3 Vibratory - A load which repeats with time comparable in relation to period of the system. 2.20 Dynamic Load response of the system. Factor-Ratio of dynamic applied on soil and has to period static

response

2.21 Dynamic Shear Apparatus-An apparatus with provision for applying shear stresses ( stress-controlled) or shear strains ( straincontrolled ) similar to one expected during a dynamic phenomenon. 2.21.1 Oscillatory Shear Box -A dynamic shear apparatus where soil samples are subjected to simple shear deformation under known shear stresses at known frequencies. 2.21.2 Direct Shear-A dynamic shear apparatus, where the normal and shear stresses can be cycled either independently or simultaneously. 2.21.3 Dynamic Triaxial - A dynamic shear apparatus where the deviator stress and the confining pressure can be cycled at known frequency, either independently or simultaneously. 5

IS : 2810 - 1979 2.21.4 Resonanct Column A@aratus - An apparatus in which a cylindrical ( solid and hollow ) sample of soil can be excited at different frequencies for determination of dynamic soil properties ( dynamic shear modulus ). 2.22 Excursion - Variation of dependent or variation of wave from centre line. of variables from mean value flow of loose soil mass

2.23 Flow Slides Due to Vibration -The because of earthquake loading.

2.24 Forced Vibration - Motion of a system, when an external periodic force is impressed on the system. Vibrations of a system when displaced from its 2.25 Free Vibrationequilibrium position and left free to vibrate. 2.26 Frequency - The rate at which a motion is repeated in a vibrating system, expressed in radians/second, cycles/second or rev/min. 2.26.1 Damfitd flatural damping in the system.
Frtquency -

The

natural

frequency

considering

frequency at which 2.26.2 .Naturul Frtqutncy -The under the effect of forces inherent in the system. 2.26.3 Optrating Frequtncy -The operating. frequency

a system vibrates the machine the is

at which

frequency at which 2.26.4 Rtsonant Frequtncy -The response occurs in a system subjected to forced vibrations. 2.26.5 Undamped JVahral considering damping. 2.27 Frequency Ratio frequency ofa system. 2.28 Inertia Force acceleration.
Frtqutncy -

maximum without

Natural

frequency

The ratio of the forcing frequency to the natural product of the mass of a system and the cohesion-

The

2.29 Liquefaction - The phenomenon by which a submerged less soil loses its strength.

2.30 Logarithmic Decrement -The natural logarithm of the ratio of any two successive amplitudes of same sign in decay curve obtained in free vibration, 2.31 Loading Stt 2.19, It is the ratio of the dynamic amplitude to 6

2.32 Magnification Factor the static displacement.

IS t 2810 - 1979 2.33 Mass Ratio ( b ) - It is the ratio of the mass of machine foundation to the product of mass density and cube of the equivalent radius of the base. 2.34 Mode of Vibration - A characteristic pattern assumed by a system in which the motion of every particle is simple harmonic with same frequency. It is the secant modulus 2.35 Modulus of Deformationbetween the pressure range of zero and half yield stress. of a soil

2.36 Modulus of Subgrade Reaction - It is the ratio of the pressure intensity to the corresponding total settlement. 2.37 Motion 2.37.1 Aperiodic - When there is non-regularity crossing its equilibrium position during motion. of the system in

2.37.2 Periodic-When the system in motion crosses the equilibrium position at definite intervals of time. 2.37.3 Steady State- When a system is under a sinusoida vibration and the response of the system is also sinusoidal. 2.37.4 Transient 2.38 Natural Frequency 2.39 Node -Point, amplitude is zero. 2.40 Oscillator 2.40.1 Electromagnetic- Electromagnetic Dynamic load is constant and independent unit to produce of frequency. oscillation. See2.26.2. forced

When a system is subjected to a sudden displacement. line or surface of standing wave system at which

unit to produce sinusoidal, unidirec2.40.2 Mechanical - Mechanical tional force with action line through centre of oscillator by means of two unbalanced rotating masses. Dynamic load of a mechanical oscillator is frequency dependent. 2.41 Period Time interval at which the cycle repeats. Difference between phase block 2.42 Periodic Motion See2.37.2.

2.43 Phase Angle (Phase Difference ) angles of two waves of same frequency. vibration 2.44 Pitching - Rotational about the shorter horizontal axis. motion

of the foundation

A transducer to transform pressure into another 2.45 Pressure Cellphysical quantity ( usually electrical ) whose magnitude can be more easily or conveniently measured. 7

IS t 2810 - 1979 2.46 Pseudostatic Analysis - Analysis in which replaced by an inertia force assumed to remain static. 2.47 2.48 Pulsating Stress dynamic action is

Stress which varies with time.

Resonance Characteristics - Quantitative expression of input versus output. Variables, such as force, displacement, velocity, acceleration, or power input are functions of frequency. condition of maximum See2.26. Compaction by impact with blows at critical increase in amplitude of a

2.49 Resonance -A vibrating system.

2.50 Resonant Frequency 2.51 Resonant Tamping frequency.

2.52 Response Spectrum - The dynamic response of an idealized The response can be expressed in structure to an earthquake motion. terms of the maximum relative velocity S,. 2.53 Rigid Body Response body. 2.54 Rocking - Rotational longer horizontal axis. Response of a system treating it as a rigid of the foundation block about the

motion

2.55 Screening of Vibrations - Protecting energy of elastic waves propagative in soils.

structure from influence of due to

rates of the design acceleration 2.56 Seismic Coefficient -The earthquake and the acceleration due to gravity. 2.57 Seismic Wave Waves produced by any seismic activity.

harmonic motion defined as the motion 2.58 Simple Harmonic -,Simple of a point in a straight line, such that acceleration of the point is proportional to the distance of the point from the mean position, and is always directed towards it. 2.59 Simulitude - The technique ofrepresenting one system with another system with respect to force, time and length such that the result of one can be accurately predicted by the observations from the other. 2.60 Sinusoidal Quantity varying according to sine law with line. SCG 2.52. 2.61 Spectral Response -

2.61.1 Spectral Acceleration - Spectral response expressed in terms of the maximum relative acceleration. 2.61.2 Spectral Displacement - Spectral response expressed in terms of the maximum relative displacement. 8

IS : 2810 - 1979 2.61.3 Spectral Velocity -

maximum relative velocity.

Spectral

response expressed in terms of the

2.62 Strain Amplitude - The maximum strain from its position of rest, to extreme position of the vibrating particle. 2.53 Strain Gauge vibration. 2.64
Synchronous -

Gauge for measuring strains in an elastic element of Two rotating machines having identical frequency. of stress to

2.65 Time of Loading - It is the time from the application the time of reaching the maximum stress. 2.66 Time
Period See 2.41. -

2.67 Torsional

Vibrations -

Vibrations in torsional mode. unit to transform mechanical input into

2.68 Transducer electrical output. 2.69 Transient 2.70

Pick-up

Strength -

Strength of soil under transient loading.

Transmissibility Force Motion -

2.70.1

Force transmitted by a vibrating system to its support. Motion transmitted by a vibrating system to its support. Ratio of exciter frequency to natural frequency.

2.70.2

2.71 Tuning Factor 2.72 Tup -

Falling part of the hammer. introduced to

2.73 Vibrations Absorber - Pad of an elastic material reduce transmissibility of vibrations. -Instrument 2.74 Vibrometer acceleration of vibrations.

which measures the phase, velocity and

2.75 Wave - Disturbance propagated in medium in such a manner that at any point in medium the amplitude is a function of time, while at any instant the displacement at point is function of position of point. surface which is the locus of all points having 2.76 Wave Front -The motion in identical phase propagating in a wave, the direction of propagation being perpendicular to the wave front. 2.77 Wavelength - Normal distances between two wave fronts with periodic characteristics in which amplitudes have phase difference of one complete cycle. 9

IS : 2810 - 1979 2.78 Wave Types 2.78.1 Longitudinal Wave or Primary Wave - Wave in which direction of displacement at each point of medium is normal to wave front with propagation velocity, calculated as follows : v1 or up = where

21

E( p(l+v)

l-v) (l-2v) wave,

A+2p = 2/ P

~1, up = velocity of longitudinal p = mass density,
E = Young's modulus,

h>c1=

Lame's constants, and

v = Poisson's ratio. 2.78.2 Rayleigh Wave - Dispersive surface wave in which element has retrograding elliptic orbit with one major vertical and one minor horizontal component both in plane of propagation velocity. VR = velocity of Rayleigh wave = a vt with 0.910 < a < 0.995 for 0.25 < v < 0.50 where a = angle of obliquity, and at = propagation velocity of transverse waves. 2.78.3 Rejected ( or Refracted) Wave - Components of wave incident upon second medium and reflected into first medium (or refracted into second medium ). 2.78.4 Shear Wave (Rotational Equivoluminal ) - Wave in which medium changes shape without change of volume (shear plane wave in isotropic medium is transverse wave ). 2.78.5 Transverse Wave - Wave in which the direction of displacement of element of medium is parallel to wave front. The propagation velocity vt is calculated as follows:

where G = shear modulus, p = mass density, v = Pois.9on's ratio, E = Young's modulus, and p = Lame's constant. 10

IS : 2810 - 1979 2.79 Yawing -

Rotational
-

motion

of the foundation

block

about

its

vertical axis. 2.80 Yield Acceleration of material occurs. The acceleration at which yielding of a slope

2.81 Zoning - The various zones into which a country may be divided for design of structures, etc, based upon the seismic coefficient.

11

INTfiRNATIONAL

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( Si .UNITS

)

Base

Units

Quantify Length Mass Time Electric current

unit
metre kilogram second ampere kelvin

Symbol m kg s A K

Thermodynamic temperature Luminous Amount intensity of substance Units

candela mole

cd mol

Supplementary Quantity Plane angle Solid angle Units

Unit radian steradian

Symbol rad sr

Derived

Quantity Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance force

Unit newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal 12 *T HZ S V Pa N J W Wb

Definition 1 1 1 N 1 kg. m/s*

J = 1 N.m W ==I J/s

1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 1 1 1 1 T = 1 Wb/m* Hz==lc/s(s-1) S = 1 A/V V-l Pa==1 W/A N:m*

Electromotive Pressure,

stress

