( Reaffirmed 1998 )

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS FOR PROPERTIES OF GYROMAGNETIC MATERIALS FOR USE AT MICROWAVE FREQUENCIES
PART II RESONANCE LINEWIDTH

Magnetic Components and Ferrite Materials Sectional Committee, LTDC 13
Chairman DR G. C. JAM Members DR B. K. DAS ( Alternate to Dr G. C. Jain ) DR K. S. IRANI Semiconductors Ltd, Pune SHRIV. N. SOMAN ( Alternate ) KUMARI K. R. JAYA Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI NAUEYHBHATT( Alternate ) SHRI E. KRUBAKARAN Radio and Electricals Manufacturing Co Ltd, Bangalore SHRIR. K. MAHAPATU Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI S. CHANDRASEKILLRAN (Alternate) SHRI M. N. MATHUR Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHRI R. N. MITAL Electronic Component Industries, Association, Bombay DR D. E. MORRIS Morris Electronics (P) Ltd, Pune DR H. C. BHASIN ( Alternate) SHRI N. R. NAIR Central Electronics Ltd, New Delhi SHRI M. I. ALAX ( Alternate ) SHRI S. Y. PATIL Permanent Magnets Ltd, Bombay Ministry of Railways SERI L. R. PARTEASARATHI SERI V. JAYARAMAN ( Alternate ) SERI P. K. RAO Ministry of Defence (DGI ) SHRI I~EWAR DWT ( Alternate ) SHRI K. N. RAMASWAMY DireF;;epl of Technical Development, e SHRI R. G. DEODUR ( Alterate ) ( Continuea on page 2 Nat$Fh: Representing Physical Laboratory ( CSIR), New

@I Copyright
INDIAN STANDARDS

1978 INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Cofyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except ~with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 8426 ( Part II ) - 1977

Representing SHRI RI. G. RAO SHJU PIIAN KISHAN ( Atemale ) RESEARCH ENGINEER
DR N. S. SATYA MURTHY SHRI C. K. SREENIVAS

Solidstatc Physics Laboratory Defence ), Delhi

( Ministry

of

SHRI R. SOMASEKHARA (Alternate ) National Research Development Corporation of SHKI C. G. SUBI~AMANYAN India, New Delhi The Radio Electronic and Television ManufacDR J. VAID turers' Association ( RETMA ), Bombay; aad Philips India Ltd, Bombay San1 V. M. BaPar ( Alternate ) Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), National Dn VED PILAIGASH Tamsheduur Elppo Intern'ational Ltd, Pune SH~I S. S. WANDRKKU SHHI A. S. `TlL9K ( .~~hxatr ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&`icio Member ) SHRI N. SKINIVASAX, Director ( Electronics )

All India Radio, New Delhi Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore

Secretary SICRI S. C. GUPTA Assistant Director ( Electronics ), IS1

IS : 8426 ( Part II ) - 1977

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS FOR PROPERTIES OF -GYROMAGNETIC MATERIALS FOR USE AT MICROWAVE FREQUENCIES
PART II RESONANCE LINEWIDTH

0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 22 December 1977, after the draft finalized by the Magnetic Components and Ferrite Materials Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 With the increasing use of ferrites in electronics and telecommunication equipment, and their availability from indigenous manufacturers, it has become necessary to formulate a series of Indian Standards to establish measuring methods for their properties. 0.3 The object of this series of standards isto establish measuring methods for properties of gyromagnetic materials for use at microwave frequencies. The methods described herein do not exclude the use of other methods giving substantially the same or better results and accuracy. 0.4 This standard ( Part II ) is one of the relating to methods of measurements for materials for use at microwave frequencies. series is given in Appendix A. series of Indian Standards properties of gyromagnetic A list of standards of this derived from IEC measuring methods for application at Electrotechnical

0.5 In preparing this standard, assistance has been Document 51 ( C.O. ) 164 and 51 ( Sectt) 140 `Draft materials intended for proper ties of gyromagnetic issued by International microwave frequencies ' Commission.

0.6 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960".
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

3

IS : 8426 ( Part II ) - 1977 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part II ) describes method of measurement of gyromagnetic resonance linewidth, AH, and effective Lande' factor, g,ff; spinlinewidth, wave resonance linewidth AH,, and effective resonance AH,B, of ferrite materials, for application at microwave frequencies. NOTE 1 -For the purpose of this standard, the words r ferrite ' and ` microwave ' are used in a broad sense: -by ` ferrites ' are meant only magnetodielectric chemical components
having a spine1 crystal structure, hexagonal structures; and but also materials with garnet the cmicrowave ' region is taken to include wavelength to 1 mm, roughly, the main interest being concentrated 0.3 m to 10 mm.

and

between 1m on the region

NOTE 2 - Examples of components employing microwave ferrites are nonreciprocal devices, such as circulators, isolators and non-reciprocal phase shifters. but the materials may be used in These constitute the major field of application, reciprocal devices as well, for example, modulators and ( reciprocal ) phase-shifters. Other applications include gyromagnetic filters, limitors and more sophisticated devices, such as parametric amplifiers.

2. DEFINITIONS 2.1 For the definitions of general terms used in this standard, should be made to IS : 1885 ( Part XXX1 )-1971". SECTION 1 METHOD FOR MEASUREMENTS LINEWIDTH, FACTOR, geff reference

OF AH, AND

GYROMAGNETIC

RESONANCE LANDE'

EFFECTIVE

3. SCOPE 3.1 This section describes the method for measurements of gyromagnetic resonance linewidth, AH, and effective Lande' factor, g,ff, of ferrite materials, for application at microwave frequencies. 4. METHOD OF MEASUREMENT 4.1 Introduction --The gyromagnetic resonance linewidth and the effective Lande' factor are properties which are necessary for the computation of tensor permeability components. Determination of these quantities involves the measurement of a resonance phenomenon in which both frequency and applied magnetostatic field strength are critical parameters. Stability, both dimensional ( of the cavity ) and electrical, thus become of primary importance, particularly when it comes to investigating materials laving very narrow resonance linewidth, such as monocrystalline ferrite of the garnet type.
*Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part XXX1 Magnetism.

4

IS : 8426

( Part II ) - 1973

4.2 Object - To describe a method that can be used for measuring the gyromagnetic resonance linewidth and the effective g-factor of isotropic microwave ferrites over the approximate frequency range 0.3 - 30 GHz. It may be used for materials having wide, as well as, narrow linewidths. 4.3 Theory -The method applies exclusively to the so-called Kittel's mode or the uniform precession resonance; such resonances in which magnetostatic modes are involved or which suffer from ambiguity due to insufficient magnetic saturation are disregarded. The value of the field for maximum absorption or resonance, Ho, may be theoretically computed in terms of the magnetization of the sample, M,,; the demagnetizing factors, N,, NY, N,; the effective g-factor, geff, and the measuring frequency, fo. If the specimen has the shape of a small sphere the relationship reduces to the simple formula:

fo=

Y PJS -7jy;

Jv;, =

fl;

=JY,

=

l/3

.*. .S

If, on the other hand, the specimen is shaped as a disk with a diameter sufficiently larger than the thickness and the external field is perpendicular to the surface; the formula becomes:

fo=
Recognizing

y~o(Ho-Mo! ;
27r

Jv,=j+o

>j$=

1

. . . . . . . . . (2) knowing

Ho and MO, to calculate

that y = 88 geff 10QT-lS-~; it is thus possible, the effective Lander factor g,rf.

fo,

The gyromagnetic resonance linewidth, AH, is ( by definition ) obtained as the difference between the two magnetic field strength values at which the power absorbed by the ferrite material is one half the maximum absorption. The method recommended for the measurement of geff and AH is The absorption at resonance is based on the cavity perturbation theory. approximately proportional to the ( saturation ) magnetization divided by If the absorption becomes too large to maintain the resonance linewidth. the required accuracy, as may sometimes be the case with narrow linewidth materials, the specimen should be reduced in size. To obtain less absorption the diameter ( of spherical samples ) should be reduced as required ( see 4.4 ). The absorption in the specimen is measured by determining the change of power incident on the cavity required to keep the output power from the cavity at a fixed reference level. The variation in input power may be expressed as the variation the attenuation inserted between the monitored source and the cavity of in

5

IS : 8426 ( Part II ) - 1977 order to maintain the reference output level. If a0 is the attenuator reading in decibels with no sample present, and a, is the reading for maximum specimen absorption, then the reading, CQ,~, corresponding to a specimen absorption of half the resonance value is given by one of the following equations: u1/2 = a, + or "l/2 = M0-+- 20 log 2 The choice of the measuring procedure 20 log (\ 10 ( uo a, )/20 -I- 1 ) . . . . . . . . . (4) by this 10 log 2 10 log 10 (a, a,) I10 3-l 1 . . . ..* . . . (3)

(

expression for calculating chosen ( see 4.6).

CC~/~,is determined specimens for

4.4 Test Specimens and Cavities -The test measurement may be either spherical or disk shaped.

Figure 1 illustrates a cavity of the transmission type, resonant at 10 GHz with a loaded quality factor ( C& ) greater than 2 000. Specimens with a diameter not greater than 1 mm will give sufficient accuracy, provided that AH is greater than approximately 800 A/m. When H is less than 800 A/m and particularly when magnetization is high; a smaller sphere will be required. The specimen is positioned at a point of minimum electric and maximum magnetic microwave field, In Fig. 1 the proper specimen position is also indicated. The specimen is mounted on a -fused silica ( or other dielectric ) rod. The hole for inserting the specimen into the cavity is located in the narrow cavity -wall and should be not larger than 2.00 mm in diameter ( for an X-band cavity ). An additional perturbing rod to permit tuning is mounted in a suitable position so as to obtain tuning by interaction with the electric field in the cavity. The input and output lines to the cavity are made to appear as matched loads by means of pads or isolators, This type of cavity design applies for spherical samples over the frequency range of 1 to 30 GHz. For measurements below 3 GHz, however, a disk-shaped specimen is preferable. The type of cavity recommended in this case is a tunable strip-line resonator with both ends open-circuited as illustrated in Fig. 2. As is evident from the figure the cavity has odd-order resonances at wavelengths of about 2L, 2/3L,.... where L is the length of the strip-line inner conductor. The specimen is glued to the inner surface of the outer To keep conductor in the vicinity of the centre of the inner conductor. the microwave field as uniform as possible over the specimen, the sample diameter should be less than one-third of the width of the inner conductor. The tuning rod serves to tune the cavity by additional perturbation so that measurement may be made at a predetermined frequency. 6

.

IS : 8426 ( Part II ) - 1977

SAMf'L E HOLDER (Fused Silica Rod

yCOUPLlNG

HOLE

$I

Q!

.$,F

MICROMETER

HEAD

Dimension ( mm )

f-------3 27% 72.14 34.04 2 6 15

FrequenGy ( GHz )
10 118.4 22.86 10.16 1 3 5

___~------__-_7
30 36.9 S.636 4.318 0.5 1.5 2.5

FICZ.1

CAVITY FOR MEASUREMENT OF GYROIVAGNETIC RFAONANCB LINEWIDTI~AND EFFECTIVE LANDE' FACTOR

7

IS :I3426 ( Part II ) - 1977

\

SPACER

Dimension ( mm

)

Frequency ( MHz ) (_-_______h._____~
300 1000 150 60 20 7 500 60 20

L WI WZ

h

7

FIG. 2

STRIP-LINE RESONATOR FOR MEASUREMENTOF GYROMAGNETIC RESONANCE LINEWIDTH AND EFFECTIVE LANDE' FACTOR AT Low FREQUENCY

4.5 Measuring Apparatus - Figure 3 is a schematic diagram of the equipment required to make the measurements. Power from a suitable microwave source A, operated either unmodulated or with amplitude modulation, but free of frequency modulation, is fed through a precision variable attenuator F, to the cavity G, and the output power is detected and indicated on a suitable meter H. The power incident on the precision attenuator is monitored at E, by means of a directional coupler and crystal~detector, and this incident power is kept constant throughout the measurement by means of a variable attenuator C. The microwave 8

fS :8426 (Part ff )-- 193'1
frequency, which is monitored at B, may be kept unchanged because the perturbing rod may be used to tune the cavity to the generator frequency. An adiustable magnetic field of sufficient stability perpendicular to the microwave magnetic field is applied to the specimen. The nonhomogeneity of the applied field over the specimen shall be negligible compared to the linewidth being measured.

(El

(F)

0
CAVITY

(G)

FIG. 3 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF EQIXPMENTREQUIRED FOR MEASUREMENT OF GYROMAGNETIC RESONANCE LINEWIDTH AND EFFECTIVELANDE' FACTOR frequency as closely as 4.6 Measuring Procedure - Set the generator possible to the measuring frequency. Tune the cavity for maximum transmission with the aid of the dielectric rod. Establish an input level

9

fS : 8426 ( Part If ) - 1977 measured at E, a setting, uO on the precision attenuator, and an output level measured at H. Take this output level as a reference value. Insert This operation should have neghgible effect the specimen into the cavity. on the output level. Apply the magnetic field and adjust it for maximum absorption ( minimum transmission ). Determine the new setting ar on the precision attenuator which restores the output level to the reference value. Determine the microwave frequency fo, and the applied magnetostatic field strength HO. The gyromagnetic resonance linewidth may now be obtained by two slightly different methods. 4.6.1 Method A - Calculate the attenuator setting to obtain the reference output level at the half-power points with the aid of equation (3). Set the precision attenuator at this value and vary the magnetic field, noting the two magnetic field strengths at which the reference output level is obtained HI and Hs. 4.6.2 Method B -- Calculate the attenuator setting to obtain the reference output level at the half-power points with the aid of equation (4). Set the precision attenuator at this value and vary the magnetic field to obtain the reference output level. Retune the cavity for maximum output with the aid of the dielectric rod. Read just the field strength and the tuning as required and note the final field strength value HI. Repeat the procedure at the other half-power point to obtain Hz. In order to check sphericity and isotropy of spherical specimens, the specimen may be rotated in the cavity. The values obtained for HO and LIH should not depend upon the specimen orientation for correctly shaped isotropic materials. Allowable limits of variation are 1 percent in For thin disk specimens the effect of the H and 5 percent in AH. electromagnetic mirror image upon the measured data should be eliminated prior to final measurement. This is effectively accomplished by making successive measurements on a specimen whose thickness is varied stepwise by means of careful grinding. The values obtained for HO and Allowable limits of variation AH should not depend upon the thickness. are in this case 3 percent in HO and 5 percent in AH.
4.7 Calculation - The effective Lande' factor is calculated from observed values of frequency and resonance field strength according to equation (1) ( sphere ) or equation (2) ( disk ).

The gyromagnetic AH=

resonance linewidth is calculated as: 1 HI-Hz 1 .. . . .. ... . . . (5) B is used for the measuring

regardless of whether Method A or Method procedure. 10

IS : 8426 ( Part II ) - 1977 4.8 Accuracy - If frequency is measured with an accuracy of -&l percent and magnetic field strength with an accuracy of 32 percent, the relative errors in the determination of AH and g,R become equal to f5 percent and &2 percent, respectively. 4.9 Data Presentation - Data should be presented so as to conform with the requirements of IS : 8454-1977*. It should be pointed out that the values refer to a particular measuring frequency. This may be done by using a subscript which represents the measuring frequency in GHz, that is, AH,,, glo (if measured at 10 GHz), in the following manner:

a) b)

Resonance linewidth at 10 GHz, 0%; X2'< kAm-1 &5 percent, and Effective XY< f2 Lande' factor percent. at 10 GHz,

AHlO,at

a temperature

of

glo, at a temperature

of 6�C;

SECTION

2

METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT RESONANCE LINEWIDTH, A&

OF SPIN-WAVE

5. SCOPE 5.1 This section describes the method for measurement of resonance linewidth, AH,, of ferrite materials, for application wave frequencies. -6. METHOD OF MEASUREMENT spin-wave at micro-

6.1 Introduction - Ferrite materials exhibit an anomalous absorption at high rf power levels that results from a power dependent coupling between the uniform mode of precession and spin waves. Through this transfer of energy certain spin wave amplitudes build up. The spin wave frequencies are equal to one half the applied frequency or the applied frequency. The absorption is observed when the spin waves are parametrically excited beyond some threshold level where unstable growth of spin wave amplitude occurs. This threshold level, and hence the relative high paver performance of the ferrite material, may be shown to be proportional to the spin-wave linewidth of the material. Spin-wave linewidth is an intrinsic property of the material, and its determination is necessary to characterise the material completely. Not only do the high power characteristics of the materials depend on AH,, but this intrinsic linewidth is also indicative of loss in applications where the materials is biased far from resonance as in most phase shifters and
*Guide for drafting of performance at microwave frequencies. specifications for gyromagnetic materials for use

11

IS : 8426 ( Part II ) - 1977 circulator designs where no low to medium with the operating frequency.

k spin waves are degenerated

6.2 Object -To describe the procedure for the determination of the The microwave spin-wave linewidth of nonmetallic magnetic materials. test is made at X-band frequencies, on spherical samples at room temperature. Both monocrystalline and polycrystalline samples may be measured by this procedure. The measurement described here is based on the so-called parallel pump technique wherein the sample is biased below resonance by a magnetostatic field applied parallel to the rf field. In this arrangement the The threshold rf sample shows low magnetic loss at low rf power levels. field is determined by observing the onset of nonlinear lossas evidenced by a change in shape of the rf pulse. of spin waves beyor.d the threshold level is 6.3 Theory - The excitation observed either as an increase in loss at magnetcstatic field values below that required for resonance or as a saturation and broadening of the main resonance line. These effects are indicated inFig. 4. Because the subsidiary resonance exhibits a more sharply defined threshold, more accurate measurements of threshold level are possible in that region.

5

SUBSIDIARY RESONANCE

'

NORMAL RESONANCE

fj

APPLIED

MAGNETOSTATIC

FIELD,H,

FIG. 4 SUBSIDIARYABSORPTKJX AND SATURATION OFTHE NORMAL RESONANCE
With increasing rf field, high power absorption is first observed at the trailing edge of the rf pulse. As the rf field is increased beyond threshold this absorption occurs over increasingly larger fractions of the pulse as indicated in Fig. 5. 12

IS : 8426 ( Part II ) - 1977

TIME FIG. 5 PULSE DETERIORATION AT ONSET OF SUBSIDIARY RESONANCE

This behaviour is a result of the time required for the spin-wave amplitude to build up and can lead to some ambiguity in critical field determination. It is experimentally found that measured critical field values are a function of T,, where T,, is the pulse duration. Optimally, the measurements should be made with a pulse length long compared to the time required for spin-wave build-up at threshold. (For polycrystalline materials with AHk > 800 Am-1 a pulse length of 1 ps is adequate ). Equipment limitations may make this impossible, and as an alternative, measurements may be made at different pulse lengths and extrapolated as indicated in Fig. 6 to obtain the true value. The threshold field value, h, is equal to the rf magnetic field strength When the sample is located at at the sample at the critical power level. the centre of a lElon ( where 12 is even ) cavity the rf field strength is given by: h = 4' where Yl = input VSWR of cavity at resonance; Pi, = peak power incident upon the cavity; 13

IS : 8426

( Part II ) - 1977

QL = loaded Q of the cavity; a, b, d = cavity width, height and length, _fi=
resonant frequency of the cavity;

respectively;

pi3 = the magnetic constant; and Ezznumber of half wavelengths n h

along

the cavity.

rr----/
LFIG. 6

lI l-P
linewidth .. . 01, = ._.

MEASURED CRITICAL FIELD VALUE AS A FUIWTION OF PULSE DURATION

From this threshold field value the spin-wave general case may be calculated from the formula: A Hk = h, *-%* w The AHk lowest = h; where W"1= sin2 0 IC . . . ... ... when

AI'&, in the
... (7) case: (8)

value

of 11, is obtained

n/2, in which

f-!!!_
w

. .. y/Lo iK
operating

.. .

. ..

...

...

.. .

w

=

angular

frequency.

The minimum threshold for parallel pumping occurs when spin waves with Ok = x/2 are degenerate with one half the operating frequency, and in the case of a sphere this occurs at a magnetic field strength. Ho given by:

Ho =
where

++
A& =

;-J-M:+(-$-)"
saturation magnetization. 14

...

...

...

(9)

IrS-:8426 ( Part il ) - 1937
6.4 Test Specimen and Cavity The sample to be measured should be A transmission spherical in shape with a diameter between 1 and 2 mm. cavity of the type sketched in Fig. 7 may be conveniently used as a TElo* cavity resonant between 9 and 10 GHz with a loaded Q greater than 2 000. The sample is positioned in the centre of the cavity cross-section at a point of minimum microwave electric field and maximum microwave magnetic field. The sample is mounted on a fused silica or other dielectric rod. The hole for inserting the sample into the cavity is centered in the broad wall of the cavity. INPUT COUPLING IRIS 4 6.35 PLATE THICKNESS 0.7+ 0.05

AND

BOTTOM

OUTPUT

COUPLING

IRIS # 3-8

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 7 TY-PICAL TEIo4 CAVI'TY FORTHE MEASUREMENT OF SPIN-WAVE LINEWIDTHAT 9 300 MHz

6.5 Measuring Apparatus - Figure 8 is a block diagram of the equipment required to make these measurements. The pulse modulator A operates the magnetron B at a duty cycle of about O*OOl and provides a synchronizing pulse to the oscilloscope L. The isolator C provides a matched impedance to the magnetron, and the power divider D allows the The power to the test cavity F to be varied over at least a 20 dB range. unused power is dissipated in the high power termination E. The frequency and power level incident on the test cavity are monitored by the frequency motor H and the power meter I. This monitoring is 15

IS : 8426 ( Part If) - 1977 accomplished with a 30 dB directional coupler whose ~directivity exceeds 40 dB. The power reflected from the cavity at resonance is monitored through an identical coupler by the power meter G. By comparing the reading of meter G and I the power reflection coefficient, r, may be obtained and the input VSWR, ~1 computed. The transmitted signal IS terminated in a high power termination J and sampled through a 30 dB directional coupler by a crystal detector ET. The output of the crystal detector X is displayed on the oscilloscope L.

PULSE MODULATOR

CR0

HIGH POWER ' TERMINATION

J

FIG. 8

BLOCK DIAGRAM OF SPIN-WAVE LINEWIDTH TEST EQUIPMENT

This 6.6 Calibration - The loaded Qof the cavity shall be determined. may be easily accomplished with the equipment and procedures used to determine the complex dielectric constant of ferrite materials. 6.7 Measuring Procedure -- The sample to be measured is mounted in the cavity, and the field supply by the electromagnet M is adjusted to provide a magnetostatic field strength approximately equal to that calculated from equation (9). This field should be oriented in a plane parallel to the broad wall of the waveguide and normal to the longitudinal axis of the guide, that is, parallel to the rf magnetic field in the guide at the sample location. 16

IS : 8426 ( Part II ) - 1977 The frequency of the magnetron is made to coincide with the resonant frequency of the cavity by adjusting the frequency for maximum output of the crystal detector K'. The pulse duration should be made as long as possible, and the repetition rate adjusted to yield a duty cycle of the order of 0.001. With the magnetron operating at the resonant frequency of the cavity, the power reflection coefficient may be determined from reading at meters G and I. The power divider is adjusted so that the rf magnetic field in the cavity according to equation (6) is well below the critical value and then The magneincreased until some deterioration of pulse shape is observed. tostatic field is then carefully adjusted about the determined value EL,, to minimize the critical field strength. The incident power level that first causes a perceptible degradation in shape of the trailing edge of the pulse may then be used to calculate the critical rf power level for that pulse length. The measurement should be repeated for shorter pulse lengths to establish a basis for extrapolation to h, as indicated by Fig. 6. For materials with A Hk > 800 Am-l, a pulse length of l/ps is sufficiently long to make extrapolation unnecessary. 6.8 Calculation - From the extrapolated linewidth, A&, is calculated from equation value (8). of h, the spin-wave

6.9 Accuracy -- Cavity Q determinat ion should be made to an accuracy of f3 percent. Incident power level determination should be made to Cavity dimensions and resonant frequency an accuracy of *lO percent. measurements are easily made to be within ho.5 percent. This restricts the expected error in A& to f 15 percent. 6.10 Data Presentation - Value of A& determined from extrapolated value of h, should be reported. The frequency of measurement, temperature at which measurements were made, and unique identity of sample should also be reported.

SECTION

3

METHOD FOR MEASU~REMENT OF EFFECTIVE RESONANCE LINEWIDTH, A&

7. SCOPE 7.1 This section describes the method for measurement resonance linewidth, AH,**, of ferrite materials for application frequencies. 17 of effective at microwave

IS : 8426 ( Part II ) - 1977 8. M-ETHOD OF MEASUREMENT

8.1 Introduction

- At magnetostatic field strengths widely different from that required for resonance at the working frequency, calculation of the imaginary parts of the permeability tensor components using the gyromagnetrc resonance linewidth, H, yields results which can be grossly in error. Consequently, insertion loss values cannot be predicated with sufficient accuracy. In order to eliminate this difficulty an effective resonance linewidth, AH,ff is defined, which takes into account any deviations from the classical Lorentzian behaviour.

8.2 Object --This method covers the measurement of the magnetic permeability tensor components, wherefrom the effective resonance linewidth is deduced. The method is valid for polycrystalline isotropic ferrites operating at microwave frequencies, outside the gyromagnetic resonance region and at low power level. The test specimen is a rod, coaxially arranged in a resonant cylindrical cavity, and is submitted to an axial magnetostatic field. The effective resonance linewidth is a useful parameter as regards insertion losses of microwave devices. In this context, effective resonance linewidth means the relaxation parameter, Mr. Formal calculation of & also requires knowledge of the frequency shift, S. 8.3

Theory 8.3.1 Definitions-In an isotropic magnetic field, H,,, the microwave magnetic magnetic field strength by: ... ... medium submitted to a flux density is related to .. . .I,. . .. (10)

static magnetic the microwave where

b=/LO(~)h=/&(l+X)h

= permeability of free space, PO ( p ) = relative tenser permeability ( X) = relative tenser susceptibility of Ho. ( p) and ( X) are functions

of the medium, of the medium,

and

In perpendicular pumping, to a two-dimensional expression: ( X) = i 3"x_ ]

the susceptibility ... I.. ...

tenser ...

may be reduced ... ... (11)

where X+ and X_ are the susceptibilities for the counter-clockwise circularly polarized waves, respectively. are complex quantities: x, = X',

clockwise and They normally

-- j X",

... 18

...

...

...

. ..

...

(12)

IS : 8426 ( Part II ) - 197'7
The imaginary part X', initiating the magnetic through the effective resonance linewidth AH,tf: losses in the medium,

H,,, = 2 AI, . Im
where

i > i\lISis the saturation

c

-&

. ..

...

. ..

.

.

(13)

magnetization. of the through

But these susceptibilities X* are intrinsic susceptibilities medium. Due to demagnetizing effects the quantities obtained measurement in a cavity are effective susceptibilities:

XfT=X'fe-j.c"fC ... Hrcf may t!ren be rewritten: Herr = 2 MS - Itn

.. .

_._

_..

...

...

(14)

.

,_ (15)

8.3.2 Measurement --A cylindrical TMllo resonator and a rod-shaped specimen are used for the measurement. Quantities that shall be measured are, at the applied magnetic field Ho and for the clockwise sense of circular polarization, the resonance frequency of the cavity with and without the sample, the loaded Q of the cavity with and without the specimen and the cavity and specimen dimensions. The loaded Qoof the empty cavity is checked by inserting a low loss magnetic sample saturated above 1 MAm-1. The method is not suitable for materials with dissipation factors: X"+ > 0.1 -i-JZY+If fU is the resonance frequency of the empty cavity and f = f. + of the cavity containing the specimen, X'+e and XN+e may be expressed as functions of Sf+/fo by an approximation.

Sf+e that

With components 1

the cavity dimensions are given by:

given

in

Fig.

9B,

the

susceptibility $ . ..(16)

1 + 5.485 3.671 e' C1 1 + 2

----7 = 1 + x .&

8J;f-t log 3.415 fo c41 %

3.671 C,C, + 19 1.957 c,c,

+ C, +

> c,

. . . (17) __. (18)

IS : 8426 ( Part 31) - 1977

FIG. 9A

SECTIONAL VIEW OF THE CAVITY WITH SPECIMEN 70

FIG. 9B where E' 6 a

DIMENSIONS OF CAVITY DESIGNEDFOR RESONANCEAT A FREQUENCY OF 0.1 GH~

= real part of the relative permittivity of the medium; = radius of the specimen (see Fig. 9A ); = radius of the cavity, determined from the resonance frequency of the empty cavity ( see Fig. 9A ); EH = imaginary part of the relative permittrvity of the medium;

20

IS : 8426 ( Part II ) - 1977
Q+ = Q1 = loaded loaded having one; Q of the cavity with real sample;

Q of the cavity with an ideal lossless sample, the real parts of the susceptibility as the measured Qof the empty cavity;

Q,, = loaded

; and

1 -

4.605

log 3.415

$

10.4 Test Specimen ax&Cavity - The specimen shall be cylindrical of diameter 1.60 If 0.01 mm and of length 22 f O-5 mm. It shall be in a satisfactory clean and dry state. The test specimen is inserted in the cylindrical T_Ml10 cavity. The ends of the specimen shall pass through holes in the cavity wall, the hole diameter being 1.62 f 0.01 mm. A uniform axial magnetic field is imposed on the specimen.

>I2

The cylindrical cTkfnO cavity has its dimensions given by Fig. 9B. It presents four irises at right angles, two of them for excitation of the circularly polarized wave, the two other ones for detection of that same wave. The coupling hole diameter is 4 mm. The coupling coefficient is identical for each iris and smaller than O-01. The loaded Q of the cavity shall be greater than 5 000. 10.5 Measuring Apparatus -Figure 10 is a schematic diagram of the equipment required for the measurement. Power from a suitable CW generator G with a frequency stability better than 10-T is run through a variable attenuator A, the frequency being measured in F, then through a variable precision attenuator V, power being measured at P. A magic tee divides the power in two partswhich through adjustments of the variable attenuator Al and the variable phase shifter D1 recombine to give a circularly polarized wave inside the cavity C. The two output irises feed through adjustments of the variable attenuator A2 and the variable phase shifter D, a magic tee delivering output powers leading to X+, or X_, ; al, a2 are fixed complementary attenuators, dl and d2 fixed complementary phase shifters, I isolators. The axial static magnetic field H,, is measured with a field strength meter M. 21

IS : 8426 ( Part II ) - 1977

FIG. 10

SCHEMATIC DIAGRAMOF EQUIPMENT precision attenua-

10.6 Calibration - The frequency meter, the variable tor and the field strength meter shall be calibrated. 10.7 Measuring Procedure

10.7.1 Equifiment Adjustment - Insert a low loss magnetic sample and apply a magnetostatic field of about 40 kAm-1 in order to remove the cavity degeneracy. With any setting of A, and D1 shift the frequency to obtain on GH a maximum output, for the upper resonance frequency corresponding to the clockwise circular mode. Adjust A2 and D, to obtain on GE a minimum output corresponding to a minimum detection of the counter clockwise circular mode. Shift the frequency down to the lower resonance frequency corresponding to the counter clockwise circular mode. Adjust A, and D, to obtain a minimum detection on GE. The counter clockwise mode is then no longer exciting the cavity. With the cavity so adjusted remove the sample. mode. Measurements are performed only on GH for the clockwise circular

10.7.2 Measurement Procedure-Without the specimen in the cavity introduce an attenuation of 3 dB with the variable precision attenuator V. Adjust the microwave frequency to cavity resonance as indicated by Note the maximum power output with respect-to-frequency variation. indication of the output power level at Gn and measure the resonance frequency fO, with the frequency meter F. Remove the 3 dB of attenuation on V and locate the two frequencies at which the output power is the same 22

IS :

8426(Part

II ) - 195'1

as at cavity resonance with the 3 dB attenuation in. The frequency separation of the half power points is measured on the frequency meter F asfi.T The loaded Q of the empty cavity is given by:

-- f "-- Af+
Check by inserting the low-loss~sample saturated above 1 MAm-1. Insert the specimen into the cavity and measure in the same way

f + and Q + at the selected magnetostatic field strength.

10.8 Calculation - E' and s" being deduced from a dielectric measurefrom ment in a TM 010 cavity X'+c, X"+e and AH,ff are calculated the equations (15), (16), (17) and (18).
10.9 Accuracy - The overall accuracy in X'.+ is 2 percent. accuracy in X"+c is given by the followmg curve.

The overall

80

60

40 20 0
0.005 0.01 0.015 0.02

FIG. 11
10.10 Data Presentation -

ACCURACYIN X"+

The report shall include the following:

a) Unique identity of the specimen; b) Value of the magnetic field strength

Ho;

c) Values of X'+e, X"+_ and AH,**; and
d) Temperature of the sample during the measurement.
23

APPENDIX ( Claz4.w 0.4 )

A

IS : 8426 Methods of measurements for properties materials for use at microwave frequencies: Part I Magnetization Section 1 Saturation magnetization, MS Section 2 Magnetization Part II Resonance linewidth Section

of

gyromagnetic

( at specified field strength ), MH

1 Gyromagnetic resonance linewidth, AH and effective Lande' factor, geff ( general )

Section 2 Spin-wave resonance linewidth, AHk Section 3 Effective resonance linewidth, AH,, Part III Permittivity, apparent density and Curie temperature Section 1 Complex permittivity, Ed Section 2 Apparent density, papp Section 3 Curie temperature, 0,

24

