IS 13360 ( Part 5/Set IS0 527-l : 1993

1 ) : 1996

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard PLASTICS Section 1 Determination

ETHODS OF TESTING
PROPERTIES General Principles of Tensile Properties

PART 5 MECHANICAL

ICS

83.086

0 BIS 1996

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 Price Group 5

August

1996

Methods of Test for Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 23

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 527-l : 1993 `Plastics - Determination of tensile properties - General principles', issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Methods of Test for Plastics Sectional Committee and approval of the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. The text of IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly , drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'. b) Comma (J has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. In this adopted standard reference-appears to certain lnternationai Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated :
International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence

IS0 291 : 1977 Plastics - Standard conditioning atmospheres for and testing IS0 2602 : 1980 Statistical interpre: tation of test results - Estimation of the mean - Confidence interval

IS 196 : 1966 Atmospheric conditions for testing ( revised) IS 14277 : 1995 Statistical interpretation of test results - Estimation of standard deviation and mean, regression coefficient - Confidence interval Nil

Technically equivalent do

IS0 test and rate

5893 :1985 Rubber and plastics equipmgnt - Tensile, flexural compression types ( constant of traverse ) - Description

-

In the case of IS0 5893 the technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed its contents and has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjuction with this standard. For tropical countries like India, the standard temperature and the relative humidity shall be taken as 27 + 2 "C and 65 f 5 percent respectively In reporting the results of a test or analysis in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 13360( ISO

Parta/Sec

I):1996

527-1:1993

Indian Standard PLASTICS Section
1 Determination

METHODS 0,F TESTING
of Tensile Properties General Principles

PART 5 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

1

Scope

The methods are not ncrmally suitable for use with rigid cellular materials or sandwich structures containing cellular material. 1.4 The methods are applied using specimens which may be either moulded to the chosen dimensions or machined, cut or punched from finished and semifinished products such as mouldings, laminates, films and extruded or cast sheet. In some cases a multipurpose test specimen (see IS0 3167:1993,

1.1 This part of IS0 527 specifies the general principles for determining the tensile properties of plastics and plastic composites under defined condkzns. Several'different types of test specimen to suit different types of material which in subsequent parts of IS0 527. are defined are detailed

P/astics - Preparation and use of multipurpose test specimens), may be used.
1.2 The methods are used to investigate the tensile behaviour of the test specimens and for determining the tensile strength, tensile modulus and other aspects of the tensile stress/strain relationship under the conditions defined. 1.5 The methods specify preferred dimensions for the test specimens. Tests which are carried out on specimens of different dimensions, or on specimens which are prepared under different conditions, may produce results which are not comparable. Other factors, such as the speed of testing and the conditioning of the specimens, can also influence the results. Consequently, when comparative data are required, these factors must be carefully controlled and recorded.

1.3 The methods are selectively suitable with the following range of materials: -

for use

rigid and semirigid thermoplastics moulding and extrusion materials, including filled and reinforced compounds in addition to unfilled types; rigid and semirigid thermoplastics sheets and films; rigid and semirigid thermosetting moulding materials, including filled and reinforced compounds; rigid and semirigid thermosetting sheets, including laminates; fibre-reinforced thermoset and thermoplastics composites incorporating unidirectional or nonunidirectional reinforcements such as mat, woven

2

Normative

references

-

-

fabrics, woven rovings, chopped strands, combination and hybrid reinforcements, rovings and milled fibres; sheets made from prc:-impregnated matpfials (prepregs); thermotropic liquid crystal polymers.
1

The following standards ccntain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this part of IS0 527. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this part of IS0 527 are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below. Members of IEC and IS0 maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. IS0 291 :1977, Plastics conditioning and testing.

Standard atmospheres for of test rs

IS0 2602:l?BO, Statistical interpretation

IS 13360 ( Part 5/!&x 1 ) : 1996 IS0 527-l : 1993

suits in ten/al.

Estimation

of

the

mean

-

Confidence

4.3.4 tensile stress at x % strain (see 4.41, a,: Stress at which the strain reaches the specified value x expressed in percentage. It is expressed in megapascals (MPa).

IS0 5893:1985, Rubber and plastics - Tensile, flexural and compression rate of traverse) - Description.

test equipment types (constant

3

Principle

The test specimen is extended along its major longitudinal axis at constant speed until the specimen fractures or until the stress (load) or the strain (elongation) reaches some predetermined value. During this procedure the load sustained by the specimen and the elongation are measured.

It may be measured for example if the stress/strain curve does not exhibit a yield point (see figure 1, curve d). In this case, x shall be taken from the relevant product standard or agreed upon by the interested parties. However, x must be lower than the strain corresponding to the tensile strength, in any case. 4.4 tensile strain, E: Increase original length of the gauge. in length per unit

It is expressed as a dimensionless ratio, or in percentage (%) [see 10.2, equations (4) and (511. It is used for strains up to yield point (see 4.3.1); for strains beyond yield point see 4.5. 4.4.1 tensile strain at yield, z,,: Tensile strain at the yield stress (see 4.3.1 and figure 1, curves b and c). It is expressed centage (%I. as a dimensionless ratio, or in per-

4

Definitions

For the purposes of this part of IS0 527, the following definitions apply. 4.1 gauge length, L,: Initial distance between the gauge marks on the central part of the test specimen; see figures of the test specimens in the relevant part of IS0 527. It is expressed in millimetres (mm). of the

4.4.2 tensile strain at break, &g: Tensile Strain at the tensile stress at break (see 4.3.21, if it breaks without yielding (see figure 1, curves a and d). It is expressed centage (%I. as a dimensionless ratio, or in per-

4.2 speed of testing, v: Rate of separation grips of the testing machine during the test. It is expressed in millimetres per minute

(mm/min).

For breaking after yielding,

see 4.5.1.

4.3 tensile stress, 0 (engineering): Tensile force per unit ar6a of the original cross-section within the gauge length, cerried by the test specimen at any given moment. It is expressed equation (311. in megapascals (MPa) [see 10.1,

4.4.3 tensile strain at tensile strength, &M:Tensile strain at the point corresponding to tensile strength (see 4.3.3), if this occurs without or at yielding (see figure 1, curves a and d). It is expressed centage 1%). For strength 4.5.2. as a dimensionless ratio or in per-

4.3.1 tensile stress at yield; yield stress, u+ First stress at which an increase in strain occurs without an increase in stress. It is expressed in megapascals (MPa). attainable stress

values higher than the yield stress, see

It may be less than the maximum (see figure 1, curves b and c).

4.5 nominal tensile strain, F+:Increase in length per unit original length of the distance between grips (grip separation). It is expressed as a dimensionless ratio, or in percentage (o/o) [see 10.2, equations (6) and (711. It is used for strains beyond yield point (see 4.3.1). For strains up to yield point, see 4.4. It represents the total relative elongation which takes place along the free length of the test specimen. 4.5.1 nominal tensile strain at break, q+ Nominal tensile strain at the tensile stress at break (see 4.3.21, if the specimen breaks after yielding (see figure 1, curves b and c).

4.3.2 tensile stress at break, cB: The tensile stress at which the test specimen ruptures (see figure 1). It is expressed in megapascals (MPa).

i-3.3 tensile strength, cM: Maximum tensile stress sustained by the test specimen during a tensile test (see figure 1). It is expressed in megapascals (MPa).

IS 13360 ( Part 5/Set 1 ) : 1996 IS0 527-l : 1993

It is expressed centage (%I.

as a dimensionless

ratio, or in perTable 1 Speed
mm/min

Recomm

ided testing

speeds

For breaking without

yielding,

see 4.4.2.

Tolerance 96 f 20 1)

4.5.2 nominal tensile strain at tensile strength, &1M: Nominal tensile strain at tensile strength (see 4.3.31, if this occurs after yielding (see figure 1, curve b). It is expressed centage (%). For strength as a dimensionless ratio, or in per-

2 5
10 20 50 100 200

f 20 1) f 20 f 20 f 10 f 10 f 10 f 10 f 10

values without

or at yielding,

see 4.4.3.

4.6 modulus of elasticity in tension; Young's modulus, Et: Ratio of the stress difference o2 minus 0, to the corresponding strain difference values Em = 0,002 5 minus E, = 0,000 5 (see figure 1, curve d and 10.3, equation (811. It is expressed This definition NOTE 1 in megapascals, (MPa). I

500

1) These tolerances are smaller than those indicated in

IS0 5893.

does not apply to films and rubber. 5.1.3 Grips

With computer-aided equipment, the dete:mination of the modulus E1 using two distinct stress/strain points can be replaced by a linear regression procedure ap plied on the part of the curve between these mentioned points.

4.7 Poisson's ratio, ~1:Negative ratio of the tensile strain E,, in one of the two axes normal to the direction of pull, to the corresponding strain E in the direction of pull, within t.he initial linear portion of the longitudinal versus normal strain curve. It is expressed as a dimensionless ratio.

Grips for holding the test specimen shalt be attached to the machine so that the major axis Qf the test specimen coincides with the direction of puU through the centreline of the grip assembly. This can be achieved, for example, by using centring pins in the grips. The test specimen shall be held such that slip relative to the grips is prevented as far as possible and this shall preferably be effected with the type of grip that maintains or increases pressure on the test specimen as the force applied to the test specimen increases. The clamping system shall not cause premature fracture at the grips.

Poisson's ratio is indicated as & (width direction) or & (thickness direction) according to the relevant axis. Poisson's ratio is prleferentially used for long-fibrereinforced materials.

5.1.4

Load indicator

5

Apparatus

The load indicator shall incorporate a mechanism capable of showing the total tensile load carried by the test specimen when held by the grips. The mechanism shall be essentially free from inertia lag at the specified rate of testing, and shall indicate the load with an accuracy of at least 1 % of the actual value. Attention is drawn to IS0 5893.

5.1

Testing

machine 5.1.5 Extensometer

5~1.1

General

The machine shall comply with IS0 5893, and meet the specifications given in 5.1.2 to 5.1.5, as follows.

5.1.2

Speeds of tes#ting

The tensile-testing machine shall be capable of maintaining the speeds of testing (see 4.2) as specified in table 1. 3

The extensometer shalt comply with IS0 5893. It shall be capable of determining the relative change in the gauge length on the test specimen at any time,during the test. It is desirable, but not essential, that this instrument should automatically record this change. The instrument shall be essentially free from inertia lag at the specified speed of testing, and shall be capable of measuring the change of gauge length with an accuracy of 1 % of the relevant value or better. This corresponds to f 1 lrn for the measurement of the modulus, based on a gauge length of 50 mm.

IS 13360 ( Part 5/Set 1 ) : 1996 IS0 527-i : 1993

When an extensometer is attached to the test specimen, care shall be taken to ensure that any distortion of or damage to the test specimen is minimal. It is essential that there is no slippage between the extensometer and the test specimen. The specimens may also be instrumented with longitudinal strain gauges, the accuracy of which shall be 1 % of the relevant value or better. This corresponds to a strain accuracy of 20 x'~O-~ (20 microstrain) for the measurement of the modulus. The gauges, surface preparation and bonding agents should be chosen to exhibit adequate performance on the subject material. 5.2 Devices for measuring of the test specimens 5.2.1 Rigid materials width and thickness

on the material being tested and that, in the case of parallel lines, they are as narrow as possible. 6.4

Checking the test specimens

The specimens shall be free of twist and shall have mutually perpendicular pairs of parallel surfaces. The surfaces and edges must be free from scratches, pits, sink marks and flash. The specimens shall be checked for conformity with these requirements by visual observation against straightedges, squares and flat plates, and with micrometer calipers. Specimens showing observed or measured departure from one or more of these requirements shall. be rejected or machined to proper size and shape before testing. 6.5

Anisotropy
to the material being

A micrometer or its equivalent, capable of reading to 0,02 mm or less and provided with means for measuring the thickness and width of the test specimens, shall be used. The dimensions and shape of the anvils shall be suitable for the specimens being measured and shall not exert a force on the specimen such as to detectably alter the dimension being measured. 5.2.2 Flexible materials

See that part IS0 527 relevant tested.

7

Number

of test specimens

A dial-gauge, capable of reading to 0,02 mm or less and provided with a flat circular foot which applies a pressure of 20 kPa f 3 kPa, shall be used for measuring the thickness.

7.1 A minimum of five test specimens shall be tested for each of the required directions of testing and for the properties considered (modulus of elasticity, tensile strength etc.). The number of measurements may be more than five if greater precision of the mean value is required. It is possible to evaluate' this by means of the confidence interval 195 % prob-. ability, see IS0 2602). 7.2 Dumb-bell specimens that break within the shoulders or the yielding of which spreads to the width of the shoulders shall be discarded and further specimens shall be tested. 7.3 Data from parallel-sided specimens where jaw failure occurs within slippage occurs, or where 10 mm of either jaw, or where an obvious fault has resulted in premature failure, shall not be included in the analysis. Repeat tests shall be carried out on new test specimens. Data, however variable, shall not be excluded from the analysis for any other reason, as the variability in such data is a function of the variable nature of the' material being tested.
NOTE 2 When the majority of failures falls outside the criteria for an acceptable failure, the data may be analysed statisticallv, but it should be recognized that the final result is likely to be conservative. In such instances, it is preferable `for the tests to be repeated with the dumb-bell specimens to reduce the possibility of unacceptable results.

6
6.1

Test specimens
Shape and dimensions

See that part of IS0 527 relevant to the material being tested. 6.2

Preparation

of specimens

See that part of IS0 527 relevant to the material being tested. 6.3

Gauge marks

If optical extensometers are used, especially for thin sheet and film, gauge marks on the specimen are necessary to define the gauge length. These shall be approximately equidistant from the midpoint, and the distance between the marks shall be measured to an accuracy of 1 % or better. *Gauge marks shall not be scratched, punched or impressed upon the test specimen in any way that may damage the material being tested. It must be ensured that the marking medium has no detrimental effect
4

8

Conditioning

The test specimen shall be conditioned as specified in the appropriate standard for the material concerned. In the absence of this information, the most appro-

IS 13360 ( Part ~/SIX 1 ) : 1996
IS0 527-I:1993

priate condition from IS0 291 shall be selected, unless otherwise agreed upon by the interested parties.

The residual stress u. at the start of a test shall not exceed the following value, for modulus measurement:

9
9.1

Procedure
Test atmosphere

idol < 5 x lo-"E,

. . . (1)

which corresponds to a prestrain of co G 0,05 %, and for measuring relevant stresses 0, e.g. 0 = o,, bM or QB' cro ( lo-*a . . . (2)

Conduct the test in the same atmosphere used for conditioning the tc.st specimen, unless otherwise agreed upon by the interested parties, e.g. for testing at elevated or low temperatures.

9.5

Setting

of extensometerk

9.2

Dimensions

of test specimen

Measure the width b to the nearest 0,l mm and the thickness h to the nearest 0,02 mm at the centre of each specimen and within 5 mm of each end of the gauge length. Record the minimum and maximum values for width and thickness of each specimen and make sure that they are within the tolerances indicated in the standard applicable for the given material. Calculate the arithmetic means for the width and thickness of each specimen, which shall be used for calculation purposes. NOTES 3 In the case of injection-moulded specimens, it is not necessary to measure the dimensions of each specimen. It is sufficient to measure one specimen from each lot to make sure that the dimensions correspond to the specimen type selected (see the relevant part of tS0 527). With multiple-cavity moulds, ensure that the dimensions of the specimens are the same for each cavity. 4 For test specimens stamped from sheet or film material, it is permissible to assume that the mean width of the central parallel portion of the die is equivalent to the corresponding width of the specimen. The adoption of such a procedure should be based on comparative measureflents taken at periodic intervals.

After balancing the prestresses, set and adjust a calibrated extensometer to the gauge length of the test specimen, or provide longitudinal strain gauges, in accordance with 5.1.5. Measure the initial distance (gauge length) if necessary. For the measurement of Poisson's ratio, two elongation- or strain-measuring devices shall be provided to act in the longitudinal and normal axes simultaneously. For optical measurements of elongation, place gauge marks on the specimen in accordance with 6.3. The elongation of the free length of the test specimen, measured from the movement of the grips, is used for the values of the nominal tensile strain &r(see 4.5).

9.6

Testing speed

Set the speed of testing in accordance with the appropriate standard for the material concerned. In the absence of this information, the speed of testing should be agreed between the interested parties in accordance with table 1. It may be necessary or desirable to adopt different speeds for the determination of the elastic modulus, of the stress/strain properties up to the yield point, and for the measurement of tensile strength and maximum elongation. For each testing speed, seperate specimens shall be used. For the `measurement of the modulus of elasticity, the selected speed of testing shall provide a strain rate as near as possible to 1 % of the gauge length per minute. The resulting testing speed for different types of specimens is given in that part of IS0 527 relevant to the .laterial being tested.

9.3

Clamping

Place the test specimen in the grips, taking care to align the longitudinal axis of the test specimen with the axis of the testing machine. To obtain correct alignment when centring pins are used in the grips, it is necessary to tension the specimen only slightly before tightening the grips (see 9.4). Tighten the grips evenly and firmly to avoid slippage of the test specimen.

9.7

Recording of data

9.4

Prestresses

The specimen shall not be stressed substantially prior to test. Such stresses can be generated during centring of a fitm specimen, or can be caused by the clamping pressure, especially with less rigid materials. 5

Record the force and the corresponding values of the increase of the gauge length and of the distance between grips during the test. It is preferable to use an automatic recording system which yields complete for this operation [see stress/strain curves clause 10, equations (31, (4) and (5Yj.

IS 13360 ( Part 5/Set 1 ) : 1996 IS0 527-l : 1993

Determine all relevant stresses and strains defined in clause 4 from the stress/strain curve (see figure 11, or using other suitable means. Fot'failures outside the criteria for an acceptable ure, see 7.2 and 7.3. fail-

Et L

nominal tensile strain, expressed as a dimensionless ratio or percentage, %; initial distance in millimetres; between grips, expressed

AL

increase of the distance expressed in millimetres.

between

grips,

10 10.1

Calculation

and expression of results

10.3

Modulus calculation

Stress calculations

Calculate ali stress values defined in 4.3 on the basis of the initial cross-sectional area of the test specimen: g=- F A where
CJ

Calculate the modulus of elasticity (Young's modulus), defined in 4.6 on the basis of two specified strain values:

&SZ&where

. . . (8)

...

4
is the tensile stress value in question, pressed in megapascals; is the measured newtons; force concerned, exQl

is Young's modulus of pressed in megapascals;

elasticity,

ex-

F A

in

is the stress, in megapascals, measured at the strain value E, = 0,000 5; is the stress, in megapascals, measured at the strain value ~2 = 0,002 5;

is the initial cross-sectional expressed in specimen, metres.

area of the square milli-

For computer-aided 10.4

equipment,

see 4.6, note 1.

Poisson's ratio
ratio defined in 4.7 on strain values perpen-

10.2

Strain calculations
in 4.4 on the basis If required, calculate Poisson's the basis of two corresponding dicular to each other: p,=_+ where ...(5) is Poisson's ratio, expressed as a dimensionless ratio with n = b (width) or h (thickness) indicating the normal direction chosen; E 8, is the strain in the longitudinal direction; with

Calculate all strain values defined of the gauge length:

a_dLd
b &(%)=100Xwhere
E

. . .(4)
% b

...

is the strain value in question, expressed as a dimensionless ratio, or in percentage; is the gauge length of the test specimen, expressed in millimetres; is the increase in the specimen length between the gauge marks, expressed in millimetres.

b
4

is the strain in the normal direction, n = b (width) or h (thickness).

10.5

Statistical parameters

The values of the nominal tensile strain, defined in 4.5, shall be calculated on the basis of the initial distance between the grips:

Calculate the arithmetic means of the test results and, if required, the standard deviations and the 95 % confidence intervals of the mean values according to the procedure given in IS0 2602.

&++Et(%)= 100x*
where

. . . (6)
. . . (7)

10.5

Significant figures

Calculate the stresses and the modulus to three significant figures. Calculate the strains and Poisson's ratio to two significant figures. 6

IS 13360 IS0 527-I

( Part 5/Set

1 ) : 1996

: 1993

11

Precision

the product or semifinished is cut; g) number of test specimens

product from which

it

See that part of IS0 527 relevant to the material being tested.

tested;

12

Test report
information:

h) standard atmosphere for conditioning and testing, plus any special conditioning treatment, if required by the relevant standard for the material or product concerned; i) accuracy grading IS0 5893); type of elongation of the test machine (see

The test report shall include the following a) a reference

to the relevant part of IS0 527; j)

b) all the data necessary for identification of the material tested, including type, source, manufacturer's code number and history, where these are known; c) description of the nature and form of the material in terms of whether it is a product, semifinished product, test panel or specimen. It should include the principal dimensions, shape, method of manufacture, succession of layers and any pretreatment; d) type of test specimen, the width and thickness of the parallel section, including mean, minimum and maximum values; e) method of preparing the test specimens, and any details of the manufacturing method used; f) if the material is in product or semifinished product form, the orientation of the specimen in relation to

or strain indicator; device and clamping pressure, if

k) type of clamping known; I) testing speeds;

m) individual

test results; measured property(ies), value(s) for the material

n) mean value(s) of the quoted as the indicative tested;

o) standard deviation, and/or coefficient of variation, and/or confidence limits of the mean, if required; p) statement as to whether any test specimens have been rejected and replaced, and, if so, the reasons: q) date of measurement.

7

IS 13360 ( Part B/Set 1 ) : 1996 IS0 527-l : 1993

Et -

EtM

c'n

El E2 E0 EM EY En EEY X% Es EM

Curve a Curves b and c Curve d

Brittle materials Tough materials with yield point Tough materials without yield point to 10.3 are indicated by loI, EJ and (~2, $1, shown

The points for the calculation of Young's modulus E, according only for cuNe d (e, = 0,000 5; &2= 0,002 5).

Figure

1 -

Typical stress/strain

curves

8

IS IS0

13360 527-l

( Part S/Set

1 ) : 1996

: 1993

Annex A

(informative)
Young's modulus and rela%d values
Due to their viscoelastic behaviour many properties of polymer materials depend not only on temperature but also on time. With regard to the tensile test, this causes nonlinear stress/strain curves (bending towards the strain axis) even within the range of linear viscoelasticity. This effect is pronounced in the case of tough polymers. Consequently, the values of the tangent modulus of tough materials taken from the initial part of the stress/strain curves often depend strongly on the scales used. Thus the conventional method (tangent at the initial point of the stress/strain curve) does not give reliable moduli for these materials. The method for the measurement of Young's modulus prescribed in this part of IS0 527 is based, therefore, on two specified strain values, i.e. 0,25 % and 0,05 %. (The lower strain value has been set at not zero in order to avoid errors in the measured modulus caused by possible onset effects the stress/strain curve.) at the beginning of.

In the case of brittle polymers, both the new and the conventional methods give the same values for the modulus. The new method however, allows accurate and reproducible measurement of the moduli of tough plastics. The definition of the initial tangent modulus, therefore, has been deleted in the present part of IS0 527. The aspects mentioned above for the modulus similarly relate to the "offset yield point", which in ISO/R 527 was defined by the deviation of the stress/strain curve from its initial linearity. The offset yield point, therefore, is replaced by a point of specified strain (stress at x % strain, or, see 4.3.4). Since the definition of such a "substitute" yield point is significant for tough materials only, the specified strain shall be chosen near the yield strain commonly found.

9

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau oflndian StandardsAct, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basi.s of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This lndian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. PCD 23 ( 1390 ). Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 323 76 17 323 3841 337 84 99, 337 85 61 337 86 26, 337 86 62 60 38 43 I 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 I 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 I 832 78 91,832 78 92

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 83 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. BANGALORE. Branches : AHMADABAD. HYDERABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. FARIDABAD. COIMBATORE. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. LUCKNOW. JAIPUR. ' KANPUR.

Pnnted at New India Printing Press, Khurja. India

