IS 15183 ( Part 1 ) :2002

Indian Standard GUIDELINES FOR MAINTENANCE MANAGEMENT OF BUILDINGS
PART 1 GENERAL

Ics

91.040.01

0 BIS 2002

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 August 2002 Price Group 7

Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, CED 13

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Diwsion Council. Maintenance management in building industry is the art of preserving over a long period what has been constructe~. It is as important as construction management or even more. Whereas construction stage lasts for a short period of 2 to 5 years, maintenance continues for at least 20-30 times the construction phase. Bad practice of maintenance adversely affects the environment in which people work, thus affecting the overall output. [t is clearly impractical and even undesirable to replace all older buildings at once. Everyone concerned with buildings whether as owners, engineers, designers, constructors or users should take a serious interest in this problem of building maintenance. In the post-construction stage, the day-to-day maintenance or upkeep of the building shall certainly delay the decay of the building structure. Though the buildings may be designed to be very durable, it needs maintenance to keep it in good condition. It ha; been planned to publish Guidelines for Maintenance Management of buildings in the following three parts: a) b) c) Part 1 General, Part 2 Finance, and Part 3 Labour.

This part covers the general aspects related to maintenance management of buildings. This standard keeps in view the practices in the field of building maintenance management in the country. Assistance has been derived from BS 8210:1986 `Guide for Building Maintenance Management', issued by the British Standards Institution. The composition of the technical Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given at Annex D. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 15183 (Part l) :2002

Indian Standard GUIDELINES FOR MAINTENANCE MANAGEMENT OF BUILDINGS
PART 1 GENERAL 1 SCOPE This standard provides general guidelines for maintenance management of building fabric including services ( electrical and mechanical ). 2 REFERENCE The following Indian Standard contains provisions which through reference in this text, constitutes provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: IS No,
Is 15183 Title

in a building. This includes free holders, lease holders or those holding a sub-lease which both bestows a legal right to occupation and gives rise to liabilities in respect of safety or building condition. In case of lease or sub-lease holders, as far as ownership with respect to the structure is concerned, the structure of a flat or structure on a plot belongs to the allotee/ lessee till the allotment/lease subsists. 3.7 Confined Space -- Space which may be inadequately ventilated for any reason and may result in a deficiency of oxygen, or a build-up of toxic gases, for example, closed tanks, sewers, ducts, closed and unventilated rooms, and open topped tanks particularly where heavier than air gases or vapours may be present. 4 BUILDING MAINTENANCE 4.1 General Any structure, building or service when built has certain objectives and during the total economic life of that structure or service, it has to be maintained. Maintenance is a continuous process requiring a close watch and taking immediate remedial action. It is inter-woven with good quality of house keeping. It is largely governed by the quality of original construction. The owners, engineers, constructors, occupants and the maintenance agency are all deeply involved in this process and share a responsibility. Situation in which all these agencies merge into one is ideal and most satisfactory. There are two processes envisaged, that is, the work carried out in anticipation of failure and the work carried out after failure. The former is usually referred to as preventive maintenance and the latter as corrective maintenance. The prime objective of maintenance is to maintain the performance of the building fabric and its services to provide an efficient and acceptable operating environment to its users. 4.1.1 Maintenance, in general term, can be identified in the following broad categories. 4.1.1.1 Cleaning
and servicing

Guidelines fQr maintenance ( Part 2 ) :2002 management of buildings: Part 2 Finance

3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 3.1 Maintenance -- The combination of all technical and associated administrative actions intended to retain an item in or restore it to a state in which it can perform its required function. 3.2 Maintenance Management -- The organisation of maintenance within an agreed policy. Maintenance can be seen as a form of `steady state' activity. 3.3 Building Fabric -- Elements and components of a building other than furniture and services. 3.4 Building Maintenance -- Work undertaken to maintain or restore the performance of the building fabric and its services to provide an efficient and acceptable operating environment to its users. 3.5 House Keeping -- House keeping maintenance can be defined as a routine recurring work which is required to keep a structure in good condition so that it can be utilized at its original capacity and efficiency along with proper protection of capital investment, throughout its economic life. 3.6 Owner -- Person or body having a legal interest 1

This is largely of preventive type, such as checking the efficacy of rain water gutters and servicing the mechanical and electrical installations. This covers the house keeping also.

IS 15183 (Part l) :2002 4.1.1.2 Rectl~ication
andrepairs

b)

This is also called periodical maintenance work undertaken by, say, annual contracts and including external replastering, internal finishing, etc. 4.1.2 Replacements This covers major repair or restoration such as reroofing or re-building defective building parts. 4.2 Factors Affecting Maintenance 4.2.1 Maintenance of the buildings is influenced by the following factors: a)
Technical factors -- These include age of building, nature of design, material specifications, past standard of maintenance and cost of postponing maintenance. Policy -- A maintenance policy ensures that

Detail and choose materials during construct ion so that the job of maintenance is less onerous.

4.2.2.1 In addition to designing a building for structural adequacy, consideration should also be given to environmental factors, such as, moisture, natural weathering, corrosion and chemical action, user wear and tear, pollution, flooding, subsidence, earthquake, cyclones, etc. 4.2.2.2 A list of common causes for maintenance problems is given in Annex A for guidance. However, no such list is likely to be entirely comprehensive. 4.3 Maintenance Policy The policy should cover such items as: The owner's anticipated future requirement for the building taking account of the building's physical performance and its functional suitability. This may lead to decisions regarding: a) the present use of the building anticipating any likely upgradings and their effect on the life cycles of existing components or engineering services; and a change of use for the building and the effect of any conversion work on the life cycles of existing components or engineering services.

b)

value for money expended is obtained in addition to protecting both the asset value and the resource value of the buildings concerned and owners. c) d)
Financial and economic factors [ see

IS15183(Part2)].
Environmental -- All buildings are subject

to the effects of a variety of external factors, such as, air, wind precipitation, temperature, etcj which influence the frequency and scope of maintenance. The fabric of building can be adversely affected as much by the internal environment as by the external elements. Similarly, factors of humidity, temperature and pollution should be considered. Industrial buildings can be subject to many different factors, subject to processes carried out within. Swimming pool structures are vulnerable to the effects of chlorine used in water. e)
User -- The maintenance requirements of buildings and their various parts are directly related to the type and intensity of use they receive. of Design

b)

4.4 Maintenance Work Programmed The programming of maintenance work can affect an owner or his activities in the following ways: a) Maintenance work should be carried out at such times as are likelyto minimize any adverse effect on output or function. Programme should be planned to obviate as far as possible any abortive work. This may arise if upgrading or conversion work is carried out after maintenance work has been completed or ifwork such as rewiring is carried out after re-decorations. Any delay in rectifying a defect should be kept to a minimum only if such delay is likely to affect output or function. The cost of maintenance increases with shortening response times. Maintenance work, completed or being carried out should comply with all statutory and other legal requirements.

b)

4.2.2 Influence

c)

The physical characteristics, the life span and the aesthetic qualities of any building depend on the considerations given at the design stage. All buildings, however well designed and conscientiously built, will require repair and renewal as they get older. However, for better performance of the building envelop, the following are the ways to minimize troubles at the later stage. a) Minimize defects during construction and design. 2

d)

4.5 Maintenance Guides An owner responsible for a large number of buildings may have established procedures for

IS 15183( Part 1 ) :2002 maintenance. When an owner is responsible for the maintenance of only one building or a small number of buildings, the preparation of a guide tailored to suit each particular building, can offer significant advantages. Such a guide should take into account the following: a) b) type of construction and residual life of the building, and environment and intensity of use ( see 4.2). 4.8.2 Maintenance work sub-divided into major repair, restoration, periodical and routine or day-today operations will be undertaken by one of the following: a) b) c) Directly employed Iabour, Contractors, and Specialist contractors under service agreement or otherwise. 4.8 Means of Effecting Maintenance 4.8.1 Responsibility Some maintenance work will be carried out by the occupier of a building or by the occupier's representative. In the case of leasehold or similar occupation, not all maintenance may be the responsibility of occupier. Responsibility of common areas may be clearly defined.

The guide may form part of a wider manual covering operational matters. 4.6 Planning of Maintenance Work Work should take account of the likely maintenance cycle of each building element and be planned logically, with inspections being made at regular intervals. Annual plans should take into account subsequent years' programmed to incorporate items and to prevent additional costs. It should be stressed that the design of some buildings can lead to high indirect costs in maintenance contracts and therefore, carefid planning can bring financial benefits. Decisions to repair or replace should be taken after due consideration. 4.7 Feedback 4.7.1 Feedback is normally regarded as an important procedure of providing information about the behaviour of materials and detailing for the benefit of the architect/ engineer designing new buildings, which will result in lessening maintenance costs. It is an equally valuable source of information for the persons responsible for maintenance. Every maintenance organisation should develop a simple way of communicating its know-how, firstly for benefit of others in the organization and secondly for the benefit of the building industry as a whole. There should be tlank and recorded dialogue on an on-going basis between those who occupy and care for buildings and those who design and construct them. 4.7.2 Feedback should aim at the following: a) b) c) User satisfaction, Continuous improvement, and Participation by all.

4.8.3 The merits of each category for typical maintenance *work must be considered because optimum use of resources appropriate to tasks in a given situation is an important element of policy.

4.8.4 The success of contracting out depends on the nature of the services, conditions in which contracting is undertaken ( the tendering process), how the contract is formulated and subsequent monitoring of service quality. The important consideration in the decision to contract out is whether a contractor can ensure a socially desirable quantity and quality of service provision at a reasonable cost to the consumers. 5 ACCESS 5.1 General All maintenance activities including any preliminary survey and inspection work require safe access and in some situations this will have to be specially designed. Maintenance policy and maintenance costs will be much influenced by ready or difficult access to the fabric and to building services. Special precautions and access provisions may also need to be taken for roof work or for entry into con fir ~d spaces, such as, ducts or voids. 5.2 Access Facilities 5.2.1 Permanent accessibility measures should be provided at the design stage only for all the areas for safe and proper maintenance. It is a matter on which those experienced in the case of the building can make an important contribution at design stage in the interest of acceptable maintenance costs. 5.2.2 A wide variety of temporary access equipment may appropriately be provided for maintenance work, ranging from ladders to scaffoldings or powered lift platforms. 3

4.7.3 Source of Information The information on feedback can be obtained from the following: a) b) c) d) Occupants, Inspections, Records, and Discussions.

1S 15183 (Part l) :2002 5.2.3 Wherever possible, it is better to provide permanent access facilities such as fixed barriers, ladders and stairways. When such permanent access facilities are provided, necessary arrangement may be included in maintenance plans for their regular inspection, maintenance and testing. 5.2.4 All personnel employed for carrying out maintenance should be provided with the necessary protective clothing and equipment, and instructed in its use. 5.2.5 When physical access is not possible in situations, such as, wall cavities, drains, etc, inspections may be made with the aid of closed circuit television or optical devices, such as, endoscopes. 5.3 Access to Confined Spaces 5.3.1
Ventilation

the form of the records and the conditions needed to keep them from damage of any kind. It is recommended that a duplicate set of records is kept in a secure place other than building itself and is kept up-to-date. 6.3 Following should be typical contents of the maintenance records: a) b) A brief history of property, names and addresses of consultants and contractors. Short specifications, constructional processes, components, material finishes, hidden features, special features, etc. `As built' plans and as subsequently altered with sections, elevations and other detailed drawings. Foundation and structural planslsections such as concrete reinforcement drawings. Detail specification of all materials incorporated, for example, concrete mix, species and grades of timber, etc. Potentially hazardous materials and types or methods of construction that under some circumstances become hazardous may be identified. Information on house keeping and routine maintenance with details of internal and external surfaces and decorations, schedule of cleaning, inspection and maintenance.

c)

d) e)

Special precautions need to be taken when entering a confined space. Such confined spaces should be adequately ventilated, particularly before being entered, to ensure that they are free fi-omharmful concentrations of gases, vapours other airborne substances and that the air is not deficient in oxygen. 5.3.2 Lighting Good lighting is necessary in order that maintenance work can be carried out satisfactorily. This is particularly important in confined spaces. When the normal lighting is inadequate, it should be supplemented by temporary installations. These should provide general and spot illumination as appropriate. 6 RECORDS 6.1 General Good records can save owners and usersloccupiers much unnecessary expense and reduce potential hazards in exploration work when faults arise. 6.2 Use of Building Records 6.2.1 All personnel involved in the maintenance of the building should be made aware of the existence of the building records. 6.2.2 Known hazardous areas should be explicitly marked on the records as well as being marked on site and should be pointed out to such personnel together with any system of work adopted for use in such areas. 6.2.3 Records are of value only if they are kept upto-date and arrangements for this should be included in any provision that may be made for records. 6.2.4 Records should be readily accessible for use and the place of storage should take into account 4

o

@ Means of operating mechanical, electrical and plumbing installations. h) j) Description of renovations, extensions, adaptations and repair to each elements. All plant, machinery and propriety articles including manufacturer's trade literature and instructions for installation, use and maintenance. Methods of work used in construction, such as, assembly of prefabricated units. 1) Location and service arrangements of all fire alarm and call points; 2) Location and service arrangements of all extinguishers, hose reels and other tire fighting installations; Location of all fire compartment walls, doors, floors and screens; Location of all areas of exceptional fire hazard, Fire escape routes; Details of application of any fire protection treatment; and Location details and description of any

k)

m) All information related to fire, such as:

3) 4) 9

9 n

IS 15183( Part 1 ): 2002 installationfor smoke control or protection of escape routes. n) There should be a wall chart showing at a glance the various operations which have to be undertaken. Line drawings of buildings are always useful. apparatus, including the location, identity, size and rating of each apparatus. The information with respect to the size and rating can be presented in schedule form. b) Isometric or diagrammatic views of boiler houses, plant rooms, tank rooms and similar machinery, including valve identification charts. It is useful to fkame and mount a copy of such drawings on the wall of the appropriate room. Comprehensive diagrams that show power wiring and control wiring and/or pneumatic or other control piping including size, type or conductor or piping used and identifying the terminal points of each.

P) Records of security measures should be known to authorised personnel only. @ Where no records exist, information should be slowly built up as it becomes available during the course of maintenance work. r) Use of computers for storing information may be preferred.

c)

6.4 Mechanical Records 6.4.1 Documentation Documentation installed: a) should record the following as

6.5 Electrical Records Documentation should record the following including locations as installed: a) Main and sub-main cables showing origin, route, termination, size and type of each cable; cables providing supplies to specialist equipment, for example, computers, should be identified separately. Lighting conduits and final sub-circuit cables showing origin, route, termination and size of each, together with the number and size of cables within each conduit. The drawings should indicate for each conduit or cable, whether it is run on the surface or concealed, for example, in a wall chase, in a floor screed, cast in-situ, above a false ceiling, etc. These drawings should also indicate the locations of lighting fittings, distribution boards, switches, draw-in-boxes and point boxes, and should indicate circuitry. c) Location and purpose of each emergency lighting fitting including an indication of the circuit to which it is connected. Single and three phase power conduits and final sub-circuit cables showing locations of power distribution boards, motors, isolators, starters, remote control units, socket outlets and other associated equipment. Other miscellaneous equipment, conduits and cables. Lightening conductor, air terminals, conductors, earth electrodes and test clamps. Location of earth tapes, earth electrodes and test points other than those in (f); cables providing earth circuits for specialist equipment, for example, computers, should be identified separately.

The location including level, if buried, of all public service connections (for example, fuel gas and cold water supplies") together with the points of origin and termination, size and materials of pipes, line pressure and other relevant information. The layout, location and extent of all piped services showing pipe sizes, together with all valves for regulation, isolation and other purposes as well as the results of all balancing, testing and commissioning data. The location, identity, size and details of all apparatus and all control equipment served by or associated with each of the various services together with copies of any test certificates for such apparatus where. appropriate. The information with respect to size and details may be presented in schedule form. The layout, location and extent of all air ducts showing dampers and other equipment, acoustic silencers, grills, diffusers or other terminal components. Each duct and each terminal component should be marked with its size, the air quantity flowing and other relevant balancing data. The location and identity of each room or space housing plant, machinery or apparatus.

b)

b)

c)

d)

d)

e) f) g)

e)

6.4.2 Drawings Drawings should record the following as installed: a) Detailed general arrangements of boiler houses, machinery spaces, air handling plants, tank rooms and other plant or 5

IS 15183( Part 1 ) :2002 Documentation should also include, when applicable the following: a) Distribution diagrams or schedules to show size, type and length (to within 1 m ) of each main and sub-main cable together with the measured earth continuity resistance of each. Schedule of lighting fittings installed stating location, manufacturer and type or catalogue number together with the type or manufacturer's reference, voltage and wattage of the lamp installed. Schedule of escape and emergency lighting location, fittings installed stating manufacturer, type or catalogue number together with the type or manufacturer's reference, voltage and wattage of the lamp installed. For battery systems, the position of the battery, its ampere hour rating and battery system rated endurance in hours should be stated. Records of smoke detectors, sprinklers, fire precautions. Incoming supply details, the type of system, vohage, phases, frequency, rated current and short circuit level with details of the supply protection and time of operation as appropriate. Main switchgear details; for purpose made equipment, this should include a set of manufacturers' drawings and the site layout. Transformer, capacitor and power plant details. The leading details should be given, for example, for transformers, the VA rating, voltages and type of cooling. Completion certificate, according to the Indian
Electrici~ 7 INSPECTIONS Act.

back resulting from this type of observation should be encouraged. b)
General -- Visual inspections of main elements should be made annually under the supervision of suitably qualified personnel at appropriate times. Detailed--

b)

c)

The frequency of full inspection of the building fabric by suitably qualified personnel should not normally exceed a 5-year period.
Schedule

7.2.1 Inspection

c)

The preparation of a specific schedule should be encouraged. Once prepared, it can be used for subsequent inspections. 7.3 Inspection of Engineering Services Engineering services generally have a shorter life expectancy than building fabric and because of their dynamic fimction, should be subjected to more ffequent inspections and maintenance. 7.3.1 Inspection of services should be carried out for three purposes as follows: a) b) c) to check if maintenance work is required; to check if maintenance work is being adequately carried out; and for safety reasons to comply with statutory if required, with requirements and relevant recommendations of other organisations.

d) e)

f)

g)

h)

7.3.2 The frequency of inspections for purpose (a) will depend upon types of plant and system, manufacturer's recommendations and subjective judgement. Frequencies for purpose (b) should be carried out on an annual basis. 7.3.3 Method of Inspection The limited life of building services means it is important to record their residual life so that their replacement can be budgeted for and inspection methods should be arranged accordingly. A check list of items of plant to be inspected should be considered. Detailed specifications of how inspections should be carried out are necessary because a simple visual inspection is unlikely to show whether plant is operating correctly and efficiently. Inspections frequently necessitate the use of appropriate instruments by competent persons. An example of this is the inspections carried out to check compliance with statutory requirements. When instruments are used, it is important that adequate training is provided in the use of instruments and the interpretation of the results. 6

7.1 General Regular inspections are actual part of the procedures for the maintenance of buildings. They are needed for a variety of purposes and each purpose requires a different approach if it is to be handled witlimaximum economy and efficiency. A more detailed inspection covering all parts of a building is needed to determine what work should be included in cyclic and planned maintenance programme. 7.2 Frequency
of Inspection

Inspection should be carried frequencies: a)

out at the following

Routine -- Continuous regular observations should be undertaken by the building user as part of the occupancy of building. Feed-

IS 15183(

Part 1 ): 2002

7.4 Records of all inspections should be kept. 7.5 Inspection Report Inspection report may be prepared in the format as given in Annex B. 8 MAINTENANCE OF ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES
8.1 Planning of Maintenance Work

excessive wear to the various components. Examination of the equipment shall reveal any need for conditioning of the contact system, lubrication and adjustment of the mechanisms. 8.2.2 Post-Fault
Maintenance

8.1.1 If the authorized person has complete knowledge of the electrical appliances to be worked upon, then safety will be more assured. If the person attending to the job is not technically competent to handle the job, then more carefhl planning is required beforehand. 8.1.2 Repetitive nature of jobs involve little or no pre-planning whereas infrequent nature of jobs may need careful planning even if the person attending the job is technically competent. 8.1.3 Planned routine maintenance will facilitate continued safe and acceptable operation of an electrical system with a minimum risk of breakdown and consequent "interruption of supply. 8.1.4 As far as the electrical equipments/installations are concerned, it is not possible to lay down precise recommendations for the interval between the maintenance required. The recommendation for frequency of maintenance in this regard from the manufacturer is more relevant. The manufacturer should be requested to speci~ minimum maintenance frequency under specified conditions. These intervals depend greatly upon the design of the equipment, the duty that it is called onto perform and the environment in which it is situated. 8.2 The following two types of maintenance are envisaged. 8.2.1 Routine Maintenance Routine maintenance of the electrical equipments goes alongwith the regular inspections of the equipments. Inspections shall reveal the undue damage and

When there is a breakdown in the system and certain parts are identified for the replacement and then the maintenance/repair of the defective part away from the operating environment is covered under post-fault maintenance. 8.3 Guidelines Appliances
for the Maintenance of Electrical

8.3.1 Uninterrupted and hazard-free functioning of the electrical installations are the basic parameters of maintenance. The equipment should be restored to correct working conditions. Special attention should be paid to the items and settings that might have been disturbed during the operational phase. Loose and extraneous equipment or wiring give rise to potential safety hazards. All covers and locking arrangements should be properly checked and secured to achieve original degree of protection. 8.3.2 Guidelines to be followed for the maintenance of electrical equipment to ensure their smooth functioning are given in Annex C.

9 OPERATING AND MAINTENANCE MANUALS The engineering services within buildings frequently are dynamic, involving complex systems of integrated plant items. Operation of such plant can detailed knowledge and direction. require Maintenance can also require extensive information to be available. It is, therefore, important to have suitable operating and maintenance manuals to provide the necessary guidance. These should be included as part of the contractual requirements for new installations and should ideally be prepared as reference documents for existing installations where no such information exists.

1S 15183 (Part

l) :2002

ANNEX A ( Clause 4.2.2.2)
COMMON CAUSES FOR MAINTENANCE PROBLEMS

A-O MAJOR CAUSES. FOR MAINTENANCE PROBLEMS A-1 FLOORS a) Poor quality of construction which includes quality of construction material and workmanship. Improper slopes, mainly bathrooms/toilets, etc. in kitchen,

e)

Inadequate cleaning eyes at junctions.

f) Inadequate slopes in sewage pipes. g) Throwing of solid wastes in WC'S.
h) J) k) n) Lack of periodical checking and cleaning. Lack of motivation/education proper use. Overflow from service tanks. Inadequate design. to users for

b) c) d) e)

m) Inferior quality of fittings and fixtures.

Lack of rounding at junctions of walls with floors. Lack of damp-proof course treatment in walls and particularly in sunken floors., Poor design of building.

A-4 DRAINAGE

a) b) c) d) e) f) g)

Improper surface dressing around buildings and improper upkeep of surroundings. Growth of wild grass and vegetation. Inadequate building. drainage system around the

A-2 ROOFS a) b) c) d) e) o g) h) Inadequate roof slopes. Inferior quality of construction. Cracks on roof surfaces. Inadequate provision of rain water spouts. Blockages in gratings/rain water pipes. Worn out felts. Bubbling up oftarfelt and separation ofjoints. Leakage from the openings provided on the roof.

Inadequate slope of the drains or drainage pipes. Inadequate number of inspection chambers. Theft of manhole covers, etc. Throwing of solid waste in the open surface drains.

A-5 ELECTRICAL a) b) c) d) Loose connections. Improper earthing and earth connections. Damages to wires, installations. Under rated installations. cables and other and other

A-3 PLUMBING a) b) c) d) Inadequate slopes in soil/waste pipes. Improper lead joints. Joints in walls. Improper junctions of stacks.

cables/wires

8

IS 15183 (Part 1 ) :2002

ANNEX B ( Clause 7.5)
FORMAT FOR INSPECTION REPORT Date :......................... Building/Block :............................... Condition r Sound I
Floors and Staircases

Suspect

7 Defective

a)

Ground floor

Finish Skirting Structure Damp-proofing Ceiling Under floors, spaces ( suspended floors) Termites/insects b)
Upper$oors

Finish Structure Ceiling Suspended ceiling c)
Staircases

Structure Treads" Finishes Balustrade Soffits Finish Roofing Flat/Pitched Finish Insulation Structure Roof lights/glazing Parapets Cutters
9

IS 15183 (Part 1 ) :2002 Date :......................... Building/Block: ............................... Condition `Sound Rain water. pipes Mud phuska Roof interiors ( pitched) Growth of vegetation Sanitary Installations a)
Plumbing

Suspect

Defective

I

I
I

Fittings/pipings, WC's Taps Sinks Basins Urinals Cisterns Geyser: b) Sewage
disposal

Soil pipes Manholes Sewer lines c)
Drainage

Gully chambers Sewers Surface drains Inspection chambers Structural movement Failure of material Design or construction defects Overhead tankslunderground Sumps/terrace tanks Septic tanks
Remarks

I
I I

I I I
I

10

IS 15183( Part 1 ) :2002

ANNEX C ( Clause 8.3.2)
GUIDELINES FOR MAINTENANCE OF ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENTS
C-1 [n case of electrical appliances, manufacturer's

instructions for the usage and maintenance of the equipment should be strictly followed. C-2 The detailed/working drawings of all the components of electrical installations should always be available with the maintenance unit. The following records should be available: a) Manufacturer's name;

mechanical damage. For insulating oils, the interval between tests should be carried out as per the recommendations of the manufacturer and keeping the adverse environmental conditions in mind. C-9 It should be ensured that the earthing connections are sound and all contact screws are tight. During the examination of interlocks, it is necessary to take precautions to prevent danger to plant or persons in the event of malfunction or inadvertent operation. A person responsible for checking and maintaining any interlock system should have thorough knowledge of the extent, nature and function of the interlock.
C-10 C-n If the equipment is ventilated then it should be ensured that the air-flow is smooth and not restricted. If filters are provided, they should be cleaned or replaced as necessary.

b) Name-plate of the equipment and its sailent features, such as, capacity, rating, etc; c) d) Manufacturer's recommendations regarding availability/usage of spare parts; Manufacturer's recommendations for periodical maintenance and post-fault maintenance; and Details of the maintenance performed in the past. operations

e)

C-3 Care should be taken while selecting replacement parts. The spare parts should be correct and suitable, preferably as recommended by the manufacturer of the installation. During the placement of order for the supply of spare parts, name-plate particulars and serial number should be quoted. C-4 The space where the equipment is kept should be clean and properly ventilated. Equipment should not be disturbed needlessly. Before cleaning, the equipment should be made dead. For internal cleaning, a section cleaner should be used. C-5 Covers and doors should not be left open unnecessarily during maintenance. Afterwards they should be promptly and correctly closed and locked. C-6 Before removing the covers and connections, all covers and cable terminations should be marked to ensure correct replacements. Disturbed connections and temporary connections should be marked to facilitate reconnection. Temporary connections and markings should be removed before the installation is put to use. C-7 Those connections, which have not been disturbed, should also be checked for soundness and overheating. C-8 All insulations should be regularly checked. Solid insulations should be checked for cracks and other defects. Fibrous and organic insulations should be checked for sign of blistering, delamination and

C-12 The standby system for tripping and closing supplies should always be kept in good order. Indicators and alarms should be maintained in time with the manufacturer's instructions. C-13 Tools, spares and instruments should be stored near to the installation. These should be regularly checked against an inventory. C-14 Before the start of maintenance of the circuit switches, it should be ensured that all incoming and outgoing main auxiliary circuits are dead and remain so during the maintenance. Overheating of the circuit switches is the root cause for faults. Overheating may be caused by inadequate ventilation, overloading, loose connection, insufficient contact force and malalignment. C-15 Some circuit breakers are not intended to be maintained, such as, miniature circuit breakers ( MCBS ). Such items should not be dismantled for maintenance. These should be renewed periodically. C-16 For the ,maintenance of fuses, periodical inspection should be done for correct rating, security, overheating and correct locatiodorientation. Element of renewable fuses should be renewed when the deterioration is apparent. The availability and correct replacement of fuse links should be ensured. C-17 If a fuse link of certain rating has failed and is replaced, then all fuse-links of same rating apparently subjected to the fault should be destroyed and replaced by new fuse-links.

1S 15183 (Part C-18

l) :2002

In order to bereasonably sure that circuit breaker iscapable ofoperation whenrequired, these should be tripped andreclosed at regular intervals. Tripping should be proved manually and where possible electrically viathe protective relay contacts. The Ieakage ofoil, signofcorrosion and any unusual smell which may indicate overheating should be detected through inspections. C-19 Timing devices aremostly designed for specialist maintenance. These should not be dismantled for maintenanceor overhaul purposes unless specifically

recommended by the manufacturers. Actual timing periods should be verified with set values and application requirements. C-20 In case of cable boxes and terminations, security of mounting and earthing should be examined. Exposed tails should be inspected for good conditions of insulation and freedom from moisture.
C-21 Battery cells should be inspected for shedding of active material, sedimentation and buckling of plates. Level of electrolyte should be regularly checked and the level should be corrected with distilled water.

12

IS 15183(

Part 1 ): 2002

ANNEX D ( Foreword)
COMMI'lTEE COMPOSITION

Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, CED 13
0r~ani7,ati0n
In personal capacity (

Representative(s)
SHRI

D-6, Sector 55, Noida-201301 )

A. K. SARKAR ( Chairman )
Alternate )

Bhabha Atomic Reseach Centre, Mumbai Builders Association of India, Chennai Building Materials New Delhi and Technology Promotion Council,

SHRI K. S. CHAUHAN SHRI K. B. MEHRA ( SHRI M. KARTHIKEYAN SHRI J. K. PRASAD SHRI S. K. GUPTA ( SHRI

Alternate )

Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee Central Public Works Department, New Delhi

M. P. JAISINCiH

CHI~~ ENGINEER ( CDO ) SUPERINTENDINGENGINEER ( CDO ) ( Alternate) SHRI DEEP CHANDRA SHRI R. A. ARUMUGAtd SHRI S. M. MADAN SHRI S. C. AGGARWAL(

Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi Central Vigilance Commission, New Delhi

Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi Engineer-in-chief's Branch,
Army

Alternate ) Alternate )

Headquarters, New Delhi

SHRI SURESH CHANDER SHRI DINESH AGARWAL( SHRI R. S. GARG SHRI A. K. TANDON ( SCIENTIST-SF RESEARCHOFFICER ( SHRI S. MUKHERJEE SHRI M. KUNDU (

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi Forest Research Institute, Debra Dun Hindustan Prefab Ltd, New Delhi Hindustan Steel Works Construction Ltd, Kolkata New Delhi

Alternate )

Alternate)

Alternate ) Alternate ) Alternate )

SHRI N. K. MAJUMDAR SHRI V. K. GUPTA (

Housing and Urban Development Corporation, Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai Indian Oil Corporation, Mathura New Delhi

SHRI K. C. BATRA SHRI K. C. DHARMARAJAN( SHRI P. C. DHAtRYAWAN SHRI J. R. BHALLA (

Alternate ) Alrerrrate )

SHRI D. A. FRANCIS SHRI S. V. LALWANI( ,SHRI H. S. VYAS

Indian Pest Control Association, Life Insurance Corporation

of India, New Delhi

CHIEF ENGINEER DEPUTY CHIEF ENGINEER (

Alternate )

Ministry of Railways, Lucknow

DEPLITYCHIEF ENGINEER ( CONSTRUCTION) EXECUTIVE ENGINEER ( CONSTRUCTION) ( Alternate ) SHRI DALJIT SINGH SHRI G. B. JAHAGIRDAR SHRI Y. N. SHARMA (

National Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd, New Delhi National Industrial Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi National Project Construction Corporation. New Delhi

Alternate ) Alternate )

SHIU K. N. TANEJA SHRI S. V. PATWARDHAN( CHU+ ENGINI=R ( WEST ZONE )

Public Works Department, Government of Arunachal Pradesh. Itznagar Public Works Department. Mumbai Government of Maharashtra.

SHRI A. B. PAWAR SHRI V. B. B(JRG~ (

Alternate ) ( Continued on page 14 )

13

IS 15183 (Part
(Continued,

l) :2002

frompage 13)

Or~aniz,arion
Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, Ptttisda

Representative(s)
CHI~~ EN~INi+iR ( BUILDING ) DIRECTOR ( R & D ) ( Alternate SHRIP. K. LAURIA SHRI K. L. BAIRWA( Alrernafe

)
)

PublicWorksDepartment,Governmentof Rajasthrrn, Jaipur
Public Works Department, Chennai Government of Tamil Nadu,

CHIW ENGINEER ( BUILDINCi) SUPERINT~NOINCi ENCiINEER( BUILtJING ) ( A1/ernate ) SHRI P. L. PATHAK SHRI G. V. CHANANA( Aliernate SHRI K. MANI SHRI H. G. SREENATH( Alternate

State Bank of India, New Delhi Structural Engineering
BIS Directorate

) )

Research Centre, Chennai

General

SHRIS. K. JAIN, Director and Head ( Civ Engg ) [ Representing Director General ( Ex-ofiicio ) ] Member-Secretary
SHRI ALOK K~SARi

Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS

Repairs and Maintenance of Buildings Including Services Subcommittee, CED 13:15
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi Builders Association of India, Chennai
SHRI ASHOK KHURANA( Convener ) SHRI M. KARTHIKEYAN SHRI G. C. SOrAT SHRI AJAY SINGH ( CHILE ENGIN~EIr (

Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee Central Public Works Department, New Delhi Forest Research Institute, Debra Dun Institution of Engineers (India), New Delhi New Delhi of India, New Delhi New Delhi

Alternate )

NDZ )

SHRI R. K. PUNHANI SECtWTARYAND DIRECTOR GISNERAL SECRETARY SHRI P. RAJAMURTHI SHRI ROHtT MISRA SHRI P. K. PANICiRAHI(

Institution of Surveyors,

Life Insurance Corporation Ministry of Communications, National Council New Delhi

Alternate )

for Cement and Building Materials,
Construction Corporation Ltd,

SHRIO. P. GA~YALI DR N. K. JAIN( Alternate ) SHRi R. K. JAIN SHWT. L. SHAN~A
SHRI P. K. SHARMA ( SHIU K. S. SHARMA

National Building New Delhi

Public Works Department, Government of Himachal Pradesh, Shimla Public Works Chandigarh Department, Government Government of Haryana,

Alternate )

Public Works Department, Mumbai

of Maharashtra,

SHItI G. K. DFiSHIIANOI:

Reserve Bank of India, New Delhi State Bank of India, Mumbai Structural Designers and Construction Pvt Ltd, Mumbai

SHW L. D. ACiASH~ SHRI A. G. BHID~ ( Alte nate ) SHRI G. DHANASfiKARAN SHIU T. V. NIRANJANAN Alternate SHIU R. N. RAIKAR SHRI BAI.KAJ MAI.HOTKA

)

Welcome Group of Hotels, New Delhi

14

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of lndian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of In ~ian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. CED 13( 5669).
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional Offices: Central: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern: 1/14 C. 1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Northern: SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices) Telephone
3237617 { 3233841 3378499,3378561 { 3378626,3379120 603843 { 602025 2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315 8329295,8327858 { 8327891,8327892

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM,
Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India

