j UDC

531.717.51

IS: 11498-1985

Indian Standard SPECIFICATION LEVER TYPE DIAL
I. Scope Covers the requirements

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

FOR GAUGES
of 0'01 mm.

of lever type dial gauges of an accuracy

2. Design -The general design shall be such that the performance of the dial gauge shall be undc all normal methods of operation, in concurrence with the requirements laid down herein. 2.1 Dial 2.1 .I The dial shall be graduated ease of reading as shown in Fig. I. 2.1.2 The width with sharp lines which contrast with the background permittin,

of the scale mark shall not be less than 0'15 mm and not more than 0.25 mm_ divisiol line, al

2.1.3 Every tenth division shall be indicated by a numbered longer line and every fifth line shall be slightly shorter than the tenth division line but longer than the unit division ihown in Fig. 1.

O.ZWmax.

W=0.7mm min. L=W TO1.5W ONE GRADUATION READS FIG. 1 O.Olmm DETAILS OF DIAL

1.2 Fixing Devices - Lever type dial gauges shall be clamped by a male dovetail spigot as shown I Fig. 2A which may be integral with the gauge or removable. Fixing may also be effected by clamping the spigot of the gauge. 2.2.1 For dial gauges having the dovetail fixing, the connected clamping device shall have ovetail as shown in Fig. 2B. 2.2.2 In case of spigot clamping, the hole in which the spigot is secured shall be a close round It when tightened. It is recommended that the tolerance on the hole shall be H7. measuring range of .3 Measuring Range -The enerally of the stylus (lever ), which corresponds .4 Pointer f the shortest ridth of one raduation line To reduce these dial gauges is the amount to one revolution of the pointer. of movement,

The length of the pointer shall be such that it covers approximately half of the length The width of the tip of the pointer shall not exceed one fifth of the graduation line. scale division and should preferably be of approximately the same width at the ( see Fig. 1 ). parallax errors, the pointer should be as close to dial as practicable. of the pointer
1986

The movement
Adopted 6 November, .

shall be free from any jerkiness.

I
INDIAN MANAK

@j August

1986,

IS1

.
I
MARCj

Gr 3

STANDARDS INSTITUTION BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI llO(jO?

IS:11498

-1985

.AIL

2A

I+ASURING

STYLUS 2A
All dimensions in millimetres. DIMENSIONS NOMENCLATURE

DE TAIL

OF

DOVETAIL

28

FIG. 2

AND CLAMPING

2.5 Stylus

( Lever)

-

The force required

to operate the dial gauge should

be as light as possible,

It is recommended that this force should not exceed 0'5 N for either direction of operation of the stylus. The stylus spherical tip shall be well finished and of heat treated steel with hardness not less than 700 HV and with 2 mm diameter unless otherwise specified [see IS : 1501-1968 Method for Vickers hardness test for steel (first revision) 1. But for particular applications 1 mm or 3 mm diameter .tip stylus may also be supplied if required by the purchaser. Frictional force of the stylus slip mechanism shall not be less than 2 N.

3. Performance - The dial gauge in either direction of operation and throughout its range shall satisfy the requirements at 3.1 and 3.2. These requirements shall be achieved without resort to tapping the gauge. They shall not be applicable to five divisions at the beginning of the travel and at the end of the travel of the pointer. Methods of testing lever type dial gauges are given in Appendix A.
Note -To minimize inaccuracy, it is recommended normal to the direction of measurement; the inclination, that the gauge shall be applied to the work with if any, of the stylus shall be limited to 15' maximum. the stylus

3.1 Repeatability - Dial gauge shall be able to repeat its readings for a given all normal conditions of use. 3.2 Sensitivity - The dial gauge shall be able to respond to small changes The gauge shall indicate change of 0'002 mm.

measured length

under

of the quantity

measured,

4. Calibration -The calibration shall be the total variation between the maximum and minimum reading obtained by taking several readings at various intervals over the working range of the dial The permissible errors may vary according to the displacements applied at right angles to gauge. the stylus. The measured errors thus obtained shall be within the tolerances given in Table 1 and shall vary according to the magnitude of the displacements. This is applicable to both the directions of the movements of the stylus.
TABLE 1 TOLERANCES READING ON ERRORS OF READING FOR 0.01 mm LEVER TYPE DIAL GAUGES

Requirement Interval Any 0.1 mm

Over an of

Limits

of Error mm 0.005 0.01 0.015

Any half revolution Total

2

1$:11498-1986
g. Hysteresis - The ability of the gauge to repeat to its readings value are made in either of the two directions of the stylus. The difference if any between when measurements of the same

the measured value shall not be more than 0'003 mm. Notes on the care and use of lever type dial gauge

6. Care and Use of Lever Type Dial Gauge are given in Appendix B. 7. Workmanship and Finish plating on all and rusting. parts shall

7.1 The coating and discolouring, peeling

be uniformly

applied

and

shall

be free from

easy

7.2 All working parts shall not produce any inaccuracies working temperature and humidity conditions. 7.3 The appearance of principal shall not show any defect. parts, condition of finish,

detrimental

to

practical

use under normal

stamped

marks,

marking

and scales,

etc,

7.4 When holding the dial gauge in any smooth and without any resistance. 7.5 The rotation of dial shall be smooth.

position,

movement

of the

lever

over

its range

shall be

8. Marking - Each lever type dial gauge shall interval, the manufacturer's name or trade-mark.

be marked

legibly

and permanently

with

the scale

APPENDIX ( Clause 3 )
METHODS OF TESTING

A

LEVER TYPE

DIAL

GAUGES

-The calibration of the A-l. Calibration different gauge blocks to cover the measuring and dial gauge readings taken.

lever type dial gauge shall be carried out by using range at suitable intervals, wrung on a surface plate drum as shown to the axis of

Alternatively, the calibration may be checked against a calibrated micrometer in Fig. 3. The dial gauge is held rigidly with the stylus normally at right angles micrometer drum. In both the methods the several readings taken are compared with specified

tolerances,

FIG.

3 METHOD OF TESTING BY USING MICROMETER DRUM

3

18:11498-1985
A-2. Repeatability - The lever type dial gauge is securely fixed to a rigid stand which can be moved on a surface plate. Then it is applied with stylus normal to the surface of two gauge blocks with a small difference, a number of times and the readings noted (see Fig. 4). It is recommended that the difference between the two slips is 0'01 mm. A-3. Sensitivity -The lever type dial gauge should essentially be free from stickyness or backlash and this can be easily conformed by securely fixing the dial gauge on rigid stand with its stylus in The actual eccentricity of the contact with slightly eccentric mandrel mounted between centres. The gauge under test should indicate mandrel shall be determined by a more sensitive equipment. this eccentricity to within 0'002 mm.

FIG.

4

METHOD

OF TESTING

BY USING

GAUGE

BLOCKS

APPENDIX ( Clause 6 )
CARE AND

B
GAUGES be taken to

USE OF LEVER TYPE DIAL

B-l. General Precautions - To maintain the accuracy of the dial gauge care should avoid shocks to the gauge of such nature which may damage its mechanisms.

B-l.1 When not in use, the gauge should be kept in a case to avoid dust from coming into contact with it. If at any time the movement is found to be faulty, it is advisable to return the gauge to the manufacturer for necessary rectification. B-2. Clamping - The dial gauge should be held in a stand which is robust and heavier than the measuring force of the gauge. The base of the stand should be well polished and should be moved The over-hang of the dial gauge should be as less as on a surface plate with Grade A accuracy. practicable. B-2.1 While transferring close to the workpiece divisions of the pointer. a reading with a lever type dial gauge, the size of the master shall be as as possible so that the movement is restricted to a minimum number of

B-3. Whatever means are provided on the dial gauge for clamping purposes, be it a spigot or dovetail fixing, proper clamping is very essential for getting accurate readings. The base on the stud on which the gauge is mounted should be heavy and stable to ensure accurate readings.

4

IS:11498-1985
EXPLANATORY NOTE

Lever type dial gauge is a type of measuring instrument where the movement of a lever or stylus is transmitted as rotational motion to terminate at a point on a dial suitably marked, to It is suitable for making measurements where indicate the amount of displacement of the lever. Other lever type dial gauges the commonly used plunger type dial gauges would not be suitable. are also made as shown in Fig. 5 for some particular applications.

Side FIG.

Dial Type 5 LEVER TYPE DIAL GAUGES FOR PARTICULAR

Perpendicular APPLICATIONS

Dial Type

In ,preparation standards:

of this standard,

considerable

assistance

has been

derived

from the following issued issued by by

BS 2795 : 1981 DIN 2270-I 976 JIS B 7533-1975

Dial test indicator British Standards Dial test indicator Deutsches lnstitut

( lever type) for Institution ( BSI).

linear

measurement, measurements, Industrial

( lever type) for linear fiir Normung (DIN). issued

Lever type dial test indicator, Committee (JISC ).

by Japanese

Standards

5

,

Printed

at Swatantra

Bharat

Press,

Delhi,

Inrlta

