IS 14216

: 1994

(Reaffirmed 2005)

Indian Standard

CODEFORHYGIENICPRACTICEFOR SPICESANDCONDIMENTS PROCESSINGUNITS

UDC

664.5 : 613.291 : 006.76

Q BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHT 110002 September 1994 Price Group 5

Food Hygiene Sectional Committee,

FAD 45

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Food Hygiene Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. Consumers do not have the knowledge or means for determining the hygienic quality of spices and condiments they purchase. For this, they rely on the industrial units that handle and process spices and condiments. This code has, therefore, been prepared for the guidance of units engaged in the handling and/or processing of spices and condiments in respect of layout, plant and personnel, to ensure that the quality of spices and condiments is good and they are safe for consumption. It is, however, acknowledged that it may be difficult to implement this code in full as regards the site and other requirements in the case of small factories or those already constructed or the existing ones already licensed and approved by the appropriate authorities. Nevertheless, the basic principles of hygiene underlining the technical advice tendered in this code should be applied with appropriate modifications by all units handling and processing spices and condiments. This code is subject to the provisions of Factories Act, 1948 and the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 and the Rules framed thereunder, amended up to date. In the preparation of this code, considerable assistance has been derived from the Proposed Draft Code of Hygienic Practices for Spices and Condiments by the Codex Committee on Food Hygiene, Washington D.C. under the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme.

IS 14216 : 1994

Indian Standard

CODE FORHYGIENTCPRACTICEFOR SPICESANDCONDIMENTSPROCESSINGUNITS
1 SCOPE 1.1 This code of hygienic practices applies to spices and whole, broken or condiments, ground, spice blends or processed spice products. It also covers the minimum requirements of hygiene for post harvest technology ( curing, bleaching, drying, cleaning, grading, packing, transportation and storage including microbial and insect disinfestation ), processing establishment, processing technology ( grinding, blending, of essential oils and extraction oleoresins, frozen and freeze dried or dehydrated, etc ), packaging and storage of processed products. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The Indian Standards listed in Annex A are necessary adjuncts to this standard. 3 SlTE 3.1 Establishments meant for processing of spices and condiments shall preferably be situated in open, clean and healthy surroundings away from cattle sheds, open sewage drains, garbage dumps and other such places likely to breed insects and pests. These establishments should be away from other industrial factories which are sources of obnoxious fumes, smoke, odours or excessive dust. 3.2 These establishments should also be located away from roadside where a lot of dust arises due to vehicular traffic. Such roadways and which are areas serving the establishment, within its boundaries, or in its immediate vicinity, should have a hard paved surface for vehicular traffic. There should be efficient drainage and provision for efficient cleaning. 4 BUILDING 4.1 The structure shall be of permanent nature, of sound construction, and shall be suitable in size and design to facilitate maintenance of It should hygienic processing operations. provide sufficient space for installation of equipment and materials ( raw as well as finished products ) to have hygienic operations. 4.2 Material of construction shall be bricks, plaster, cement, concrete, tiles, asbestos sheets or any other equivalent material which ensures cleanliness. 4.3 Buildings should be designed to prevent the entrance and harbouring of pests and the entry 1 of environmental contaminants such as smoke and dust. Suitable ultrasonic rodent control devices may be installed in the building. 4.4 For elimination of flying insect menace, wherever possible, suitable electrically operated, flying insect control devices consisting of electrified grid and collection tray for collecting dead insects should be provided. These devices may be installed at strategic points in the premises, specially near the entry points. Air curtain may also be provided. 4.5 No portion of the building shall be used for domestic purposes or for other types of food preparations unless separated by suitable partitions or locations or other effective means so as to avoid contamination of the product with undesirable micro-organisms, odour, chemicals filth or other foreign material. 4.6 Lighting The spices and condiments processing unit shall be provided with adequate natural or artificial lighting or a combination of both lighting and shall also be in accordance with the Factories Act, 1948 [see also IS 3646 (Parts 1, 2 and 3 ) : 1966 1. Where appropriate, the lighting should not alter colours. Light bulbs and fixtures suspended in the processing area should be of a safety type and protected to prevent contamination of the material in case of breakage. 4.7 Ventiiation Adequate ventilation shall be provided to prevent excessive heat, steam, vapour condensation, of dust and to remove contaminated air. The direction of the air-flow should never be from dirty area to clean area. Ventilators should be provided with a screen or other protective enclosure of non-corrodible material. Screens should be capable of easily cleaning. Ventilation shall be in accordance with the Factories Act, 1948 ( see also IS 3103 : 1975 ). 4.8 Floor The floor shall be smooth, free of crevices and holes, washable, disinfectable, water-proof, nonabsorbent, non-slippery and properly sloped to gullies connected to sewers or drains. It shall be laid with smooth and easily cleanable material like polished stone tiles or cement. It shall be impervious to water and not affected by weak acids, alkalis or steam. Work room,

IS 14216 : 1994

stcre room, godown cemented floor. 4.9 Walls

should

invariably

have a

4.15 Residential Quarters and Toilets 4.151 These should be completely separated from and should not open directly to handling and processing areas.

Internal walls should have smooth, non-absorbent. light-coloured surface, free from crevices and sharp angles to facilitate their efficient cleaning. The junction of the floor with the walls and the junction between two walls should be rounded to prevent accumulation of dust. The wails should be of water-proof, nonabsorbent, washable and non-toxic material. 4.10 Ceiling Ceilings should have a smooth, non-absorbent, light coloured surface, free from crevices and sharp angles to facilitate their efficient cleaning. They should be so designed, constructed and finished as to prevent the accumulation of dirt and minimize mould growth, fungus development and flaking. They should have proper slope to prevent water logging and should be provided with proper vents for good ventilation and air circulation.
4.11 Windows and Other Openings

4.15.2 Sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences shall be provided, maintained and kept clean. The conveniences shall be properly lighted. 4.15.3 Separate conveniences for each sex. shall be provided

4.15.4 Sufficient number of wash basins with adequate provision of nail brushes, soap and towels should be provided, conveniently situated and accessible to workers at all times while they are at the factory. 4.15.5 The wash basins shall be installed alongside the sanitary conveniences. 4.16 Repairs The building shall be maintained in a proper state of repair and cleanliness at all times. Whenever required, it may be lime-washed, disinfected and deodorized. Any painted, openings in the walls, floor or ceiling, where insects, rodents and birds can enter or hide, must be closed. utensils and all other 4.17 The equipment, physlcal facilities of the establishments, including drains, should be maintained in good condition. As far as practicable, processing areas should not be moist.
4.18 Drainage

in or

These should be so constructed as to avoid accumulation of dirt and those which open should be fitted with suitable screens to make them fly proof and insect proof. Screens should be easily movable for cleaning and kept in good repair. Internal window sills, if present, should be sloped to prevent their use as shelves. Windows should open outside. They should be close fitting. 4.12 Doors Doors should have smooth, non-absorbent surfaces and, where appropriate, be self-closing and close fitting. In addition, suitable external
screen shutters outwards. 4.13 Stairs should be provided which open

Lift cages and auxiliary structures such ah platforms, ladders and chutes should be so situated and constructed as not to cause contamination. Chutes should be constructed with inspection and cleaning batches.

4.14 Overhead

Structures

and Fittings

These should be installed in such a manner as to avoid contamination of the finished products and raw materials by condensation and drip, and should not hamper cleaning operations. These should be insulated, where appropriate, and be so designed and finished as to prevent accumulation of dirt and to minimize condensation, mould development and flaking. They should be easy to ciean. 2

should be provided to drain off a large quantity of water used for washing the raw material, machinery, equipment, furniture, floor, etc; 15 to 30 cm half circular drains with glazed pipe at the bottom should be provided. The slope of the floor should be towards the drains and the farthest end of the floor from the drain should not be more than 5 m. The drain openings should be provided with screen traps to prevent solid matter from clogging the drains. The ends of the drains leading to the outside should be made rodent-proof by providing screens. The screens shall be examined periodically and replaced or cleaned, if necessary. The drains should have water seals of minimum 5 cm dia. At least 50 percent of the length of the drain should be covered to facilitate the movement of trolleys. Mesh type cover for the drain should be better to prevent habitation of cockroaches and rodents in closed areas of the drain. 4.18.2 The factory effluents shall be disposed off away from the factory in a manner which is not detrimental to the hygiene of the factory

4.18.1 Effective drainage

IS 14216 : 1994 and its surroundings. The effluents shall not be left off on road or in the open outside the factory premises. 4.18.3 All effluents and waste disposal lines should be large enough to carry peak loads. All lines should be water-tight and the waste disposal should be effected in such a manner as not to cause contamination with potable watersupplies. 4.19 Water Supply 4.19.1 There shall be an adequate supply of safe and potable water ( see IS 4251 : 1967 ). Running water under pressure shall be easily accessible to all rooms and areas in which food is handled and equipment is washed. 4.19.2 The equipment shall be so installed and used that back siphonage of liquid into the potable water lines is precluded. 4.19.3 Hot and cold water in ample supply shall be provided for plant clean-up needs, where necessary. 4.19.4 The storage tanks fcr water should, unless completely sealed, be kept covered with tight fitting lids, examined regularly and cleaned out at least once every six months. The date of the last cleaning and next cleaning shall be prominently displayed on the storage tanks. 4.19.5 The water shall be periodically examined as desired by /the Licensing Authority, chemic, ally and bacteriologically. A record of such examination shall be maintained. 5 FACTORY HYGIENE 5.1 General Factory Hygiene 5.1.1 Either immediately after cessation of work for the day, or at such other times as may be appropriate, floors including drains, auxiliary structures and walls of handling areas should be thoroughly cleaned. 5.1.2 Waste and rubbish shall be collected in covered receptacles. These shall not be allowed to scatter on the floor. These shall not be disposed off in a manner not detrimental to the hygiene of the surroundings of the disposal. 5.1.3 Window glasses and light fittings shall be maintained clean and dust-free at all times. 5.1.4 There shall be no cobwebs in any part of the establishment. Birds and domestic animals shall not be allowed in any part of the unit. 5.1.5 Adequate precautions should be taken to from being prevent spices and condiments contaminated during cleaning or disinfection of rooms, equipment or utensils, by water and and their detergents and by .disinfectants solutions. Detergents and disinfectants should be suitable for the purpose intended. Any residues of these agents on a surface which may come in contact with spices and condiments should be removed by thorough rinsing with water and dried. 5.1.6 To prevent contamination of spices and condiments, all equipment and utensils should be cleaned as frequently as necessary and disinfected wherever circumstances demand. 5.1.7 Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent mould growth on equipment and internal structures of the processing and storage rooms. Adequate steps shall be taken to prevent infestation by cockroaches and other household pests. 5.1.8 When pesticides are used, due care shall be exercised to prevent contamination of equipment, raw materials and packing materials. Under no circumstances shall pesticides be used during processing. 5.1.9 On no account shall the process used or converted into a store materials or used as eating room. items required for processing on a day shall be kept in the process room. room be room for Only the particular

5.1.10 Proper places shall be provided for storage of brooms, brushes, buckets or other cleaning gear. 5.2 Pest Control 5.2.1 There should be an effective and continuous programme for the control of pests. Establishments and surrounding areas should be regularly examined for evidence of infestation. 5.2.2 Should pests gain entrance to the establishment, eradication measures should be instituted. Control measures irvolving treatment with chemical, physical or biological agents should only be undertaken by or under direct supervision of personnel who have thorough understanding of the potential hazards to health resulting from the use of these agents, including those hazards which may arise from residues retained in the product. Such measures should only be carried out in accordance with the recommendations of the official agency having jurisdiction. 5.2.3 Pesticides should only be used if other precautionary measures cannot be used effectively. Before pesticides are applied, care should be taken to safeguard all spices and condiments, equipment and utensils from contamination. 5.3 Plant and Equipment Hygiene 5.3.1 Material for Equipment
5.3.1.1

handling 3

All equipment and utensils used in areas should be made of material

IS 14216 : 1994 which does not transmit toxic substances, odour or taste, is non-absorbent, resistant to corrosion and is capable of withstanding repeated cleaning and disinfection. 5.3.1.2 Surfaces should from pits and crevices. be smooth and free of spices and condiments so as to organic or inorganic contamination. exclude any

5.3.1.3 The use of wood and other materials which cannot be adequately cleaned and disinfected, should be avoided except when their use would clearly not be a source of contamination. 5.3.1.4 where spices. Cadmium they may and lead shall not come into contact be used with any

6.1.1 Raw materials should be washed/cleaned to remove soil and other contamination. The water so used should not be re-used unless it has been suitably treated to be maintained in a condition which will not cause health hazard. 6.1.2 Spices should be dried on clean concrete floors to a safe moisture level to prevent the growth of micro-organisms, specially mycotoxin producing mould, etc. Excessive heating/drying of material should be avoided in order to retain its aromatic constituents. Suitable precautions shall be taken to protect the spices and condiments from contamination by domestic animals, rodents, birds, mites, other arthropods and other objectionable substances during drying, handling, processing and storage. 6.2 Spice Processing 6.2.1 Acceptance Criteria Spices and condiments for processing should not be accepted if known to contain decomposed, toxic, or extraneous substances which will not be reduced to acceptable levels by normal plant procedures, sorting or preparation. Particular care should be taken to avoid contamination. Spices and condiments with animal or human faecal material suspected of being contaminated should be rejected for human consumption. Special precautions shall be taken to reject spices showing signs of insect damage or mould growth because cf the danger of their containing mycotoxins such as aflatoxins, infestation and mould growth. 6.2.2 Inspection and Sorting

5.3.1.5 Plastics shall be abrasion-resistant, heatresistant to the degree needed for the product and for the cleaning process, and shatter-proof and shall not contain free phenol, formaldehyde, or a constituent which may result in the migration of any of the substances to the spices or otherwise affect the characteristics of the spices with which it comes in contact. 5.3.2 Sanitary Design, Construction and Installation All equipment and utensils should be designed and constructed as to prevent hygienic hazards and permit easy and thorough cleaning and disinfection and, where practicable, be visible for inspection. Stationary equipment should be installed in such a manner as to permit easy access and thorough cleaning. 5.3.3 All refrigerated spaces should be equipped with temperature measuring and recording devices. 5.3.4 Preparation and Filling

Table tops shall be made of smooth non-sticky material when no grain of spice adheres on the top. Other portions of the tables shall be free from corners, cracks and crevices. The same conditions shall apply to work benches and other furniture. They shall be inherently impervious to stickiness. 5.3.5 Containers Waste for Inedible Material and

Raw materials should be inspected and sorted prior to introduction into the processing line. The inspection may include visual inspection of foreign matters, organoleptic evaluation or tests for microbiological or mycotoxin contamination. 6.2.3 prevention of Cross Contamination Effective measures should be taken to prevent contamination of spices by direct or indirect contact with material which may be a source of contamination at earlier stages of the process. 6.2.4 Processing supervised by 6.2.4.1 Processing should be technically competent personnel.

5.3.5.1 These should be leak-proof, constructed of metal or other suitable impervious material which should be easy to clean or easily disposable and be able to be closed securely. 5.3.5.2 Equipment and utensils used for inedible materials or waste should be identified and should not be used for edible products. 6 PROCESSING HYGIENE 6.1 Raw Spices aod Condiments 6.1.0 Adequate during growing, precautions harvesting, should handling be taken and drying
4

6.2.4.2 All steps in the production process, includmg packaging, should be performed without unnecessary delay and under conditions which will prevent the possibility of contamination, deterioration or the development of pathogenic and spoilage micro-organisms.

IS 14216 : 1994

6.2.4.3 Rough handling of containers should be avoided to prevent the possibility of contamination of the processed product. 6.3 Packing
6.3.1 All packaging material should be stored in a clean and sanitary manner. The material should be appropriate for the product to be packed and for the expected conditions of storage and should not transmit to the product The packaging substances. objectionable material should be sound and should provide appropriate protection from contamination.

only in those areas of the building where entry of moisture from precipitation cannot occur. The building should have sufficient ventilation to prevent accumulation of moisture. Provision should be made in existing storages or at the design stage in new storages for gas tightness to permit in situ fumigation of spices.

6.3.2 Containers should not have been used for any purpose which may lead to contamination of the product. Containers should be inspected immediately before use to ensure that they are in a satisfactory condition and where necessary, cleaned and/or disinfected; when washed they should be well drained and dried before filling. Only packaging material required for immediate use should be kept in the packaging or filling area. 6.3.3 The cleaned, dried and processed spices and condiments should be packed in suitable hygienic and non-permeable containers. Second hand containers like jute bags, plastic bags, etc, if used, should be cleaned and disinfected properly before re-use. The jute bags should normally be lined with suitable plastic film in order to avoid transfer of moisture. 6.3.4 Finished products may be packed in hermetically sealed containers preferably under inert gases like nitrogen, etc, or vacuum in order to protect quality and retard possible mould growth. Alternatively, paper fortified polylaminates of non-permeable quality which are cheaper, can be used. The inner lining of the laminates should have negative migration test. 6.3.5 Packing should be done under conditions to avoid contamination. 6.4 Storage 6.4.1 Raw material stored in the plant premises should be maintained under conditions that will protect them against contamination and infestation and minimize deterioration. Spices not scheduled for immediate use should be stored under conditions that prevent infestation and mould growth. 6.4.2 The warehouse should be of sound construction and well equipped so that it will provide suitable storage and adequate protection for spices and condiments. Any breaks or openings in the walls, floors and roof shall have been repaired. Any breaks or openings around should be doors, windows and ventilators repaired or screened. Screens should be used
5

6.4.3 Area with new concrete floors or walls should not be used for storage until it is absolutely certain that the new concrete is wellcured and free of excess water. It is safer to use an approved plastic cover spread over the entire new concrete floor as a moisture barrier prior to use for spice. However, other means of protecting the spices against moisture from `sweating' of concrete can be used such as stacking of containers on pallets. The plastic can be removed when the warehouse is emptied. This system will protect against moulding of the spices due to sweating of new concrete. 6.4.4 Products which affect the storage life, quality or flavour ,of spaces should not be stored in the same room or compartment where spices are stored. For example, such items as fruits, vegetables, fish, fertilizers, kerosene or petrol, lubricating oils, etc, should not be stored along with spices. 6.4.5 Facilities for Storage of Waste and Inedible Material Facilities should be provided for the storage of waste and inedible material prior to removal from the establishment. These facilities should be designed to prevent access to waste or inedible material by pests and to avoid contamination of the product, potable water, equipment and buildings or roadways on the premises.
6.4.5.2 6.4.5.1

hygienic

Immediately after disposal of the waste, receptacles used for storage and any equipment which has come into contact with the waste should be cleaned and disinfected. The waste storage area should also be cleaned and disinfected. 6.4.6 Storage of Hazardous Substances

Pesticides or other substances which may represent a hazard to health should be suitably labelled with a warning about their toxicity and use. They should be stored in locked rooms or cabinets used only for that purpose and dispensed and handled only by authorized and properly-trained personnel or by persons under strict supervision of trained personnel. Extreme care should be taken to avoid contamination. 6.5 Transportation
6.5.1 The conveyance

used for transporting the harvested, cleaned, dried and packed spices and condiments from the place of production

IS 14216 : 1994

to storage godown or for processing should be cleaned and disinfected before loading. In addition, bulk transport such as ship or rail car should be cleaned and well ventilated with dry air to remove moisture resulting from the respiration of spices and condiments and to prevent moisture condensation as the vehicle moves from a warmer to a cooler region or from day to night. 6.5.2 Spice products should be stored and transported under such conditions as will maintain the integrity of the container and the product within it. Carriers should be clean, dry, weather-proof, free from infestation and sealed to prevent water, rodents or insects from reaching the products. Spice products should be loaded, transported and unloaded in a manner so as to protect them from damage. 6.5.3 Properly insulated carriers or refrigerated vehicles are recommended for transport when climatic conditions indicate such a need. Extreme care should be taken to prevent condensation while unloading spice products from a refrigerated vehicle or while taking out of a cold storage. In warm, humid weather, the spices and condiments should be allowed to reach ambient temperature before exposure to external conditions which may require one to three days. 6.5.4 Spices and condiments that have been spilled are vulnerable to contamination and should not be used for edible purposes. 7 SAMPLING AND LABORATORY CONTROL PROCEDURES 7.1 Laboratory procedures used should preferably follow recognized or standard methods to obtain readily reproducible results. 7.2 Each establishment should have its own or contracted laboratory control of the hygienic quality of the spice products processed and of the pest control procedures. The amount and type of such control will vary with the different spice products as well as the needs of the mana.gement. Such control should provide for monitoring of the quality of the finished products and rejection of all spices that are unfit for human consumption. 8 PERSONNEL HYGIENE REQUIREMENTS
8.1 Hygiene Training

8.2 Medical Exam ination Persons who come in contact with spices and condiments in the course of their work should have a medical examination by an authorised registered medical practitioner prior to their employment because of epidemiological considerations, the nature of the spices prepared in particular establishment or the medical history of the prospective handler. Medical examination of a worker should also be carried out at other times when clinically or epidemiologically indicated. 8.3 All employees shall be inoculated against typhoid and paratyphoid `A' on their first appointment and thereafter once in every five years, in case of epidemic. All workers shall be inoculated. A record shall be maintained. 8.3.1 It shall be impressed upon all the employees that they should inform the management in case of fever, vomitting, diarrhoea, typhoid, dysentery, boils, cuts, sores, ulcer or any other notifiable diseases occurring at home and in families. No worker suspected of disorders noted above shall be permitted to work in the unit. Staff/workers having frequent cough and cold should not be deputed in areas prior to packing and storage of finished products. 8.4 Communicable
Diseases

The management should take care to ensure that no person, while known or suspected to be suffering from, or to be a carrier of, a disease likely to be transmitted through spices and condiments or while afflicted with infected wounds, skin infections, sores or with diarrhoea, is permitted to work in any material-handling area in any capacity in which there is any likelihood of such a person directly or indirectly contaminating material with pathogenic microorganisms. 8.5 Injuries Any person who has a cut, a wound, a boil or a sore should not continue to handle the material until the injury is completely protected by a water-proof covering which is firmly secured, and which is conspicuous in colour. Adequate first-aid facilities should be provided for this purpose. 8.6 Personal Cleanliness
8.6.1

AND HEALTH

Establishments should arrange for adequate and continuing training of workers in hygienic handling of spices and condiments and in personal hygiene so that they understand the precaution necessary to prevent coutamination. Instructions should include relevant parts of this code.

Every person engaged in a spice handling area should maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness while on duty.

8.6.2 Persons engaged in spice handling shall be provided with clean uniforms and ( preferably white ) and clean washablea%:: where necessary. 6

IS 14216 : 1994 8.6.3 Separate room or place for changing the clothes shall be provided. The clothes shall not be hung in any processing rooms. The uniforms shall not be worn outside the unit but put in first before starting the work and changed when leaving.

( e.g. gum, sticks, betel nuts, etc ) drinking or unhygienic practices such as spitting, should be prohibited in handling areas. 8.7 Visitors Precautions should be taken to regulate the entry of visitors to handling and processing areas to avoid contamination. These precautions may include the use of protective clothing. Visitors should observe the provision recommended in 8.6. 8.8 Supervision Responsibility for ensuring compliance by all personnel with the requirements of 8.1 to 8.7 should be specifically allocated to a competent supervisory personnel. 9 HYGIENIC
CONTROL

8.6.4 Every person, while on duty in a spicehandling area, should keep his/her finger nails short and clean. He/She should wash his/her hands frequently and thoroughly with a suitable hand-cleaning preparation under running warm water. Hands should always be washed before commencing work, immediately after using the toilet, after handling contaminated material and wherever else necessary. Towels used for drying hands should be clean. 8.6.5 Gloves, if used, should be maintained in a sound, clean, sanitary and dry condition. The wearing of gloves does not exempt the operator from having thoroughly washed hands. Gloves with holes in them or that are torn should be thrown away to avoid leakage of accumulated sweat that may deposit large number of microorganisms on the spices. 8.6.6 Any habit which could result in contamination of spices and condiments, such as eating and storage of food, use of tobacco, chewing

9.1 A check list for use by a responsible

officer of the management is given in Annex B. It should be used at regular intervals, to ensure proper maintenance of sanitation of the unit. 9.2 Check List for Hygiene and Sanitation A check list is given in Annex B. This may be modified to suit as per the needs.

ANNEX

A

( Clause 2.1 )
IS No. 3103 : 1975 Title IS No. Title

revision )

Code of practice for indusventilation ( first trial Code of practice for interior illumination: Part 1 General requirements and recommendations for working interiors
( jirst

of illumination Schedule and glare index 3646 ( Part 3 ) : 1966 Code of practice for interior illumination: Part 3 Calcucoefficients of lation of utilization by the BZ method Quality tolerances for water for processed food industry

3646 ( Part 1 ) : 1966

revision )

3646

( Part 2 ) : 1966

Code of practice interior illumination:

for Part 2

4251 : 1967

IS 14216: 1994

ANNEX B ( Clauses 9.1 and 9.2 )
CHECK LIST FOR HYGIENE AND SANITATION IN SPICES PROCESSING UNITS AND CONDIMENTS

I. SITE

Is the establishment situated in open, clean and health surroundings away from cattle sheds, open sewage drains, garbage dumps and other such places likely to breed insects and pests? 2. Is the establishment away from other industrial factories which are sources of obnoxious fumes, smoke, odours, or excessive dust? 3. Is the establishment located away from the roadside? 4. Do roadways and areas within the boundaries of the establishment or in its immediate vicinity have lead-paved surfaces for vehicular traffic and provision for efficient cleaning? 5. Is the drainage and provision for its cleaning efficient? II. BUILDING 1. Is the structure of permanent nature and sound construction? mainten2. Is the structure suitable in size and design to facilitate ance of hygienic processing operations? of equipment and materials 3. Is there sufficient space for installation ( raw and finished ) for hygienic operation? 4. Are all holes and cracks in the outside wall sealed? 5. Are all holes and cracks in floor and ceiling sealed? 6. Are windows and doors tight-fitting? 7. Are windows and doors screened when open? 8. Is adequate ventilation provided to prevent excessive heat, steam, vapour condensation and dust and to remove contaminated air? 9. Is the direction of the air flow from dirty area to clean one? enclosure 10. Are ventilators provided with a screen or other protective of non-corrodible material? 11. Are screens capable of easy cleaning? 12. Are clean toilets and hand wash facilities available? 13. Is soap and clean water provided? 14. Are floors maintained to prevent water accumulation? 15. Are lights shielded to prevent broken glass from getting into product? 16. Is ground around the building kept weed-free? 111. EMPLOYEES Are employees given adequate and continuing training in hygienic handling of spices and condiments and in personal hygiene? 2. Are employees engaged in spice handling area wearing clean uniforms and aprons ( preferably white )? 3. Are employees keeping finger nails short and clean? and thoroughly with a 4. Are employees washing hands frequently suitable hand-cleaning preparation under running warm water? 5. Are employees washing hands before commencing work, immediahandling contaminated tely after using the toilet and after material? 6. Are hand wash signs pasted?
1.

1.

Yes/No

Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No

Yes/No

Yes/No Yes/No

Y es;No
Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes /No Yes/No Yes/No Yes No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No YeyNo

Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No

Yes/No

8

IS 14216: 1994
7. 8. 9.

Are towels used for drying hands clean? Is any employee chewing tobacco, smoking, manufacturing, packing and storage areas?

eating

or drinking

in

Yes/No Yes/No Yes /No Yes/No Yes/No

Are gloves being used by employees free of holes or other defects? 10. Are employees coming in contact with spices and condiments being medically examined prior to their appointment? 11. Are employees being inoculated against typhoid and para-typhoid `A' on their first appointment and once in every five years thereafter? 12. Is record of such inoculations being maintained? whenever they suffer 13. Are employees informing the Management from fever, vomitting, diarrhoea, typhoid, dysentery, boils, cuts, sores, ulcer or any other notifiable diseases occurring at home and families? TV. PROCESSING Are the raw materials being inspected and sorted? Are the raw materials being cleaned and dried? Is the packing material stored in a clean and sanitary manner'? Are the spices packed in suitable hygienic containers? Is product stored on pallets or off the floor? Is merchandise stored at least 4 metre from wall? Is there space between rows or merchandise for inspection for rodent or insect activity? 8. Are product lots dated and rotated to eliminate vermin nesting areas? 9. Are containers ( bags, drums, cartons ) in good repair to prevent spillage and to eliminate possible entry area? 10. Are damaged container stored in segregated areas? 11. Are employees instructed to segregate incoming product that is damaged or infected? V. SANITATION 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Do employees have available thread, needles and masking tape to repair broken containers? Do employees have access to brooms, mops and cleaning equipment for proper sanitary control? Are flashlights provided for inspection of dark storage areas? Are rodent traps emptied and replaced on schedule? Is pesticide spray equipment full and working? 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.

Yes/No Yes/No

Yes/No

Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No
Yes/No Yes/No Yes!No

Yes/No

Yes/No
Yes/No Yes/No

Yes/No

Bureau of Indian Staudards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments IS reaffirmed when such review indicates that if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. no changes are needed; Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition.
This Indian Standard has beer] developed from

o/ Indian marking

Stan&r& Act, 1986 to promote and quality certification of goods

Dot

No. FAD 45 ( 233 ).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Offices : : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 335-336, Sector Shah

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg,

New Delhi

110002

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone

Zafar

Marg Maniktola 160022 600113

331 01 31 331 13 75 t 37 84 99, 31 86 26, 37 85 61 37 86 62

VII M, V. I. P. Road, 34-A, CHANDIGARH MADRAS

60 38 43 { 60 20 25 235 02 16, 235 04 42 I 235 15 19, 235 23 15 I 632 92 95, 632 78 91, 632 78 58 632 78 92

: C. I. T. Campus, : Manakalaya, BOMBAY

IV Cross Road, Marol,

E9 MIDC, 400093

Andheri

( East )

Branches

BHOPAL. BANGALORE. BHUBANESHWAR. : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. JAIPUR.
Printed 8t New India Printing Prey. Khuria. Indim

