( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS:11208- 1985

hdian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR REGISTRATION OF PLUMBERS
Water
SHKI J. D'Cnuz Members CITIEF ENoINEER ( Clvrr, Shri J. D'Cruz ) AUVl!jEIt ( PI-IL ) DPPUTY AD~ISIG~ ( PIIE Sm1 M. S. ASRANI I j (

Supply

and Sanitation
Water

Sectional

Committee,
Sewage

BDC

24
Iindertaking,

Chairman

Representing Supply and New I)elhi Disposal

Alfernntcto
Ministry of Works and IIousing

) ( Ahmtc )

I'uhlic Works Department, Delhi Administration, New Delhi SlIRI I?. C. SlilvasTnVh ( Alternate ) Public IIealth Engineering Department, `l'rjvandrum SHKI N. S. UHAIRAVAN SUPICRINTENDINQ I~NCINIWX ( Alternate ) Haryana PWD, Public Health Branch, Chandigarh Sllllr I. CHANI)ILA S,II<I K. K. GANUIII ( Alternate ) Uttar Pradesh Jai N~gam, Lucknow CHIEI. ENGrNmI~ ( c `ONSTRU(:`PION )
SIJPISI(INTBNUINCI SlIrrr k c. ISNOINIWIL ( Ahrnatc ) P. CHAUDltARY

Engineers )

India

Ltd,

r\icw Delhi

Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority, Calcutta SHIII S. R. MUICIIIGI~JI~:I~ ( Allernnte ) Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta I'ILOF J. M. Dnvx In personal capacity ( Flat No. 403, Sdffilri Cinenua SHLLI S. G. DEOL.~LTKAI~ Commercial L`omplex, Greater Kdash II, New Ddhi ) Municipal Cal-poration of Greater l~oml~ay, Uumbay ~IYI)K.~TJLI(~ I.:NOINEICK CJII~~~ ENCINBE:~ ( Sxw~rtaox I'no.nsc~s ) ( Alternate ) I'ublic IIealth Engineering Department, Government SII;<I R. A. K~IANNA of Madhya I'radesh, llhopal SHRI D K. MITRA ( iill~ruale I ) SHRI I. S. J~AWICJA ( Alternate II ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SlllL1 I'. Kl:Isrln~nN Wolllis- 1 SuILVEYon OI" ( NDZ ) ( AItrrnnta ) Engineering Research Natiollni Environmental SJXIU S. R. KSHIILS~(:AIL Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur Dn I'. V. R. C. I'ANI(.KICIC ( nllcrrrule ) ( Cou/inrrad on fxq.8 2 )

SJIILI H. V. RAO ( Alfcmulc Sims S . K . DAYOUPTA

INDIAN

STXNDARDS

INSTI'I`UTJON

This publication is protected under the Ikzn CapJright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in wholr- or in part by any means except with written permission of' the publisher shall be dcemetl to be an mfringemrmt of CopFright undt~ the said ACL.

IS :11208 - 1985
( Continued from page 1 ) Members SlilrI hf. Y. Refmsenting

Strttr C. 1;. S. Rno SIIILI S. L. MAINI
Drmcc~o~r

iVfAI)AN

( Altertznfe )

The IIindustan

Construction

Co Ltd, Bombay Health Iloard,

MANAGING

Strnr R. NATARAJAU Sttnt S~n,ri\sn SJ~RI K. J. NATJI

Sttnr D. CVIN ( Ahernale ) SIIXI A. PONNAIIAIAM

V~ttntn ( Ahernnte ) All India Institute Calcutta

Punjab Public Works Department, Public branch, l'atiala Punjnb Water Supply and Sewerage Chandigarh Hindustan Dorr-Oliver Ltd, Bombay of Hygiene and Public

Health, lloard,

Sun1 R\N.It'r SINtill Dn A. V. R. Rno Srrttr 0. P. R.\~I'I~.& ( fllternalc ) Pltor Y. N. RAMACIIANURA I<AO Engineer-in-Chief's llranch ( Ministry of Defense ), New Delhi MAJ TS.S. P.\naratt ( &ernate ) Indian Water Works Association, Bombay ~IV~RETAI~Y SECI~ETAILY ~KNlCI(..\L Institution 0r Public Health Engineers India, Calcutta SHRI R. N. R,YNIC~I.IE:E ( ~l~female) S,,n, L. 1~. Sl~:rlc:al, L. 1~. Schgal Rr C:o, New Delhi Central lluilding Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHI(I S. li. SHAHhlA Roorkee Ikmgalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board, Rangalore Sunr II. S. PTTTTAK~:MPANNA ( Alternate ) R4adras Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage SHRIV.VAlcnI)AIl.\J.\N Roard, Madras Snnr S. DAIV,Z~YNI ( nllernate) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ofi& Membw ) Suttr G. RAM\N, Director ( Civ Engg ) S~trt A K AVAS~TIIY Assistant Dire;& ( Ci; Engg ), IS1

Tamil Nadu Water Supply & Drainage Madras Ministry of Railways National buildings Organization, New Delhi

IS : 11208 - 1985

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR REGISTRATION OF PLUMBERS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 25 January 1985, after the tfraft finalized by the Water Supply and Sanitation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 The regulations for the registration of plumbers has been laid down by the various municipalities and water supply authorities in the country. The regulations, however, differ from place to place and the need for laying down minimum requirements for registration of plumbers is now This stantlartl has bpen formulated with a view to well recognized. bringing about uniformity in the bye-laws and regulations framed by different water supply authorities. Requirements for registration of plumbers were earlier given briefly in IS : 2065-l972*. In the present standard these requirements have been covered in detail. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international coordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in tlic field in this country.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard sets out guidelines for registration of plumbers.

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 Authority Having Jurisdiction - The authority which has been created by a statute and which for the purpose of administering the Code/Part may authorize >I.committee or an official to act on its behalf, hereinafter called the `Authority'. 2.2 Licensed this code. Plumber A pcuon linrensvtl under the provision of

*Codr of practice for water supply

in

L)uildings (jfirst revi~iotl). 3

IS : 11208 - 1985 2.3 Plumbing - The pipes, fixtures and other appurtenances inside the premises for bringing in the water supply and removing the liquid and water borne wastes; and the installation of the foregoing pipes, fixtures and other apparatus. 2.4 Plumbing System - The plumbing system shall include the water supply and cIistl+bution pipes; plumbing fittin:p;s and traps; soil, waste, vent pipe and anti-siphonagc pipe.<; building tlrams and building sewers includirlg their respective connections, c!evicrs aritl appurtenances within the property lines of the premises, and water-treating 0;` water-using equipment. 3. LICENSING OF PLUMBING

3.1 Execution of Work - The work which is required to be carried out under the provisions of this code, shall only be executed by a licensed plurnljer under tile control of the Authority and shall he responsible to carry out all lawful directions given by the Authority. No intliviclual s11all engage in the business of plurnbing unless so licensed under the provisions of this code. 3.1.1 No individual, firm, partnership or corporation shall engage in the business of installing, Inpairing or altering plumbing unless the plumbing work performed in the course of such t,usiness is under the direct supervision of a licensed plumber. 3.2 Examination and Certification - The Authority shall establisll standards and proceclure for qualification, examination and licensing of plumlYXi and shall issue licences to sucll persons who meet the qualificarions thereof and successfully pass the examination. The minilnum standards for qualification for the grant of licences shall be as given in Appendix A. 3.3 Duration of the License ~- A!1 licenccs shall be v:Lli(l for a period of' minimum two the date indicated on the licence, but may be of fees prescribed by the Authority, for further The expired liccnce not renewed at a time. the expiry of the licence may he renewcil upon prescribed by the Allthority. issued by the Authority years and shall expire on renewed, upon payment period of two years each, within prescribed time of payment of the penalty

3.4 Revocation or Suspension of Licence - The Authority may suspend or revoke any licence for non-compliance of the conditions under which the licence has been given, or breach of any regulations or bye-laws of the water supply undertaking. 13efore a licence may be notice in writling, suspended or revoked, the licensee shall have enumerating the charges against l:iIn, and be entitled to a hearing by a duly authorized board or officer of the Authority. The licensee shall be given an opporturiity to present testimony, oral or written, and shall 4

IS : 11208 - 1985 have the right to cross-examination. A person whose licence revoked sha!l not be permitted to re-apply for a licence within from the (late of revocation. has been two years

3.5 Use of Licensee's Name by Another - No person, who has shall allow his name to be used by obtained a plumber's licence, allother person either for the purpose of obtaining permits, or for doing business or work under the licence. Every person Iicensed shall notify the Authority of the address of his place of business, and the name under wirich such business is carried on, and shall give immediate notice to the Authority of any change or either. All plumbers' licences shail be accompanied by a passport size photograph of the licensee. 3.6 Listing of Licensed Plumbers - The Authority shall exhibit from time to time the list of licensed plumbers, or make it available for perusal of the public at any of its Administrative Offices. The Authority shall also notify cases of revocation or suspension of licences. 3.7 Security Deposits - `The Authority may prescribe security which sl~all he deposited by the plumber for the performance of his obligation to the Authority. 4. CONTROL OF LICENSED PLUMBERS

4.1 Inspection - `IXe officer tlcputerl by the Authority may inspect at a.ny time witlrout notice any work done by licensed plumber or place of' business. 4.2 Maintenance of Books of Accounts - Every licensed plumber sl~all maintain the books of account in the manner as may be laid down by the Authoricy and shall produce the same with such other int'ormation if called upon to do so by the Authority. 4.3 Payment of All Lawful Charges - Every l)ay lawful demands made by the Authority for: licensed plumber shall

a) Repairs to roads, drains, pipes, mains or any fittings or appliances connected therewith or any other property whatsoever whether bclongiag to the Authority or not; 1,) IJos~c-s made to any person or property by or through neglect or for want of sufficient care or precarrtion on the part of himself or lri,i servants or workman; and c) Fees for licenses trades. for the time being in force for carrying out

4.4 No Work Should be done Without Permission - Ko licensed plumber shall make any water connection or any addition or alteration in fittings and appliances to carry out any other work in or with refercnce obtaining sanction of to public streets, pipes, sewers, drains without the Authority.

IS:11208

- 1985

4.5 Pipes and Fittings to be Approved - In execution of any work, the pipes, fittings, appliances and material used shall conform to relevant Indian Standards or approved by the Authority. 4.6 Authority Decision on Complaints - All complaints received in respect of the quality of work, materials used, delay in the execution thereof and the charges claimed by the licensed plumbers from the owners or occupants of the premises at whose instance suc11 \vork has been carried out shall be disposed of by the Authority. 4.7 Presence of Licensed Plumber on Job During Execution Every licensed plumber shall remain present on his job during execution. The licensed plumbers who cannot do so shall employ fitters trained in plumbing work to represent them on their jobs during execution and shall exercise supervision over their work. 4.7.1 Fitter shall be tested and approved by the Authority. employment or dismissal of such fitter shall forthwith be notified licensed plumber to the Authority. 5. OBLIGATIONS OF LICENSED PLUMBER Any by the

5.1 Every licensed plumber shall proceed with any work undertaken by him deligenriy and in a proper workman like manner and shall not cause any delay in the execution thereof without sullicient cause 5.2 Every licensed plumber shall report to the Authority defect noticed by him in any premises in connection With any water pipes, fittings or With any other appliances causing waste of Water or in connection drains, water closets, privies, urinals or any fittings, appliances connection therewith rendering such drains privy or urinal insufficient or otherwise objectionab!e for sanitary reasons.

APPENDIX ( ChLsc 3.2 )
GRANT A-I. CONDITIONS OF PLUMBER'S GRANT FOR

A
LICENCE LICENCE provicled,

OF PLUMBER'S for an

A-l.1 A person may be permitted to sit he satisfies the following conditions: a) He is a citizen of India. b) Hc is at least 21 years of age. 6

examination

IS : 11208- 1985 c) Holds
a diploma in civil engineering or an equivalent qualification as approved by the All India Council of Technical Education, a certificate of plumbing or in sanitary engineering recognized by the Institution of Engineers or by the All India Council of Technical Education or produces a certification to the effect that he has a minimum of 3 years experience under a lincensed plumber and that he has practised plumbing under the supervision of a licensed plumber.

A-l.2 The Authorities may grant a plumber's licence to an applicant without asking him to sit for an examination provided he is a graduate in Civil Engineering and satisfies all the conditions except as laid down in A-1.1(c) or he possesses a plumber's licencc given by some other liccncing authorities and which, in the opinion of the Authorities, The Authority maintain adequate standards in the issue of certificate. may consider exempting Diploma holder from appearing in the examination.
A-l.3 The examination may consist of one written paper and a practical The candidate shall be examined in accordance with the syllabus test. given in A-2. A candidate, to qualify for the award of a licence, should obtain a minimurn of 50 percent marks in the theoretical and practical tests considered separately. for the purpose of conducting the examinations A-l.4 The Authorities, for persons to qualify for plumber's licence, shall appoint a Board of examiners consisting of Health Officer, Sanitary Engineer and a Registered Plumber of high reputation. ' A-l.5 `The Authorities shall make all necessary rules and regulations for The Authorities shall also conducting the examination of applicants. lay down the procedure and fix the time for filing applications to obtain the permission for sitting in the examinations. The time within which an applicant will be examined after his application has been filed shall also be notified. A-l.6 The Authorities may grant a licence to a company or a corporation engaged in the business of plumbing provided a person or persons connected with such companies or corporations in responsible charge of such plumbing work is or are in possession of a plumber's licence. It will, however, be the responsibility of the said person or persons holding the licence to notify the Authorities when he severs his connections with the said companies or corporations. The Authorities may in such event revoke the licencc of the company or the corporation unless the company or the corporation can satisfy the authorities by having on the staff another person or persons in responsible charge of such plumbing work is or are in possession of a plumber's licence.

IS:11208 A-2.

- 1985 FOR THE EXAMINATION

SYLLABUS

A-2.1 Written Paper -- Following syllabus shall be followed for the examintation for the grant of plumber's licence with regard to written paper: a) Time 3 hours marks: 100

b) Maximum

c) Section I Water Sz@&

1) Local

bye-laws governing supply of water; knowledge procedure to obtain water connections in new premises.

of

2) A sound knowledge of codes of practice and specifications published by the Indian Standards Institution on water supply and water supply fittings. 3) Hydraulics - Discharge through orifice, flow channel, flow in pipes, hydraulic gradient, tlesign bution system for colonies and housing estates. in of open distri-

4) Pipes Materials, common sizes, pipe flow equations, incrustations, pipe jointing, laying of pipes, selection of size. 5) Fixtures Specials, of mains, appurtenances, ferrules, etc. cocks, meters, etc. be required merits and

6) Tapping

corporation

7) Small size pumps - Different types as may of water to storage reservoirs, for pumping demerits, selection of a type.

8) Storage reservoirs - Undcl ground, surface, overhead as may be needed for maintaining satisfactory supply of water within the premises, capacity, constructional features, precautions to avoid contamination of water. 9) Public health hazards of faulty piumbing, back-siphonage, etc, and remedies. 10) Disinfection disinfection. cross-connections, be usetl, mode of

of

pipes -

Chemicals chemical

to

11) Significance of routine on water samples. d)

and bacteriological

report

Section II Drainage
1) Local bye-laws governing drainage of building. 2) A sound knowledge of codes of practice and specifications published by the Indian Standards Institution on building drainage, septic tanks and sanitary appliances and fittings. 3) Sewer materials governing choice. Kinds, 8 merits and demerits, factors

IS : 11208: 1985
4) Different types of sanitary latrines. use of' of small estates traps

5) Ilydraulics of JOW pipe flow charts, scwerqr system and colonies. G) Manholes, and other 7) Vcntilalion 8) Sewer layin,? 9) Classification single stack the`ir merits 10) Testin? tcstin, 12) Septic efluent, drop types

in sewers - Common formulations, hydraulic element chnr.ts, design as may be required i;)r horlsing catch pits, gully pits,

manholes, of traps. jointing -

grease

of sewers. and stoneware, concrete, brick. one-pipe systems: and smoke of house plunlbing ( partially vcnrilated and demerits. system -two-pipe, ) and single stack testing and

of traps of house

anr! Iixtrlrcs -~ hydraulic drainage system. do ainage, cleaning

11) Maintenance

of house

testing. disposal drainage, of etc,

tanks for housellold design, construction, tlesign of .soil absorption system. hazards of faulty plumbing for

13) Public health and remetlies.

Examination A-2.2 Practical Examination - Maximum marks 100. Field shall consist of n practical test relating to plumbing operation. testing may be laid out as may be consiticlretl suitabltx by the examiners. :;hall also appear for a uiva vote before the examiners `I'he candidate of plumbing science as detailed in the which may cove1 all aspects syllabus for written paper ( see A-2.1 ).

INTERNATIONAL
Base

SYSTEM

OF

:""""

UN113

( S1

, "_ _*w.___ ,
UN113

1

Units
QUANTTTY
UNIT

SYMHOL m kg I

Length Mass Time z lectric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance
Supplementary QUANTITY Plane angle Unit*

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

A K cd
mol

UNIT radian rtcradinn

SYMROL

rad sr

Solid angle
Derived Units

Qu ANTIIT FOWZ

UNIT

SYM

ROL

DEFINITION I

newton joule
watt

Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive
Prewlre, fOrC@

N J
W Wb T HZ s V Pa

N = I kg.m/sx J = 1 N.m W = T = lJ/s 1 Wb/ms 1 c/s (s-I) lW/A

I 1 1 1

webet tesla hertz siemens
Volt pascal

1 Wb = 1 V.t 1 Hz 1 V=

S = 1 A/V

streSS

1 Pa = 1 N/m'

