`,

IS 13591 : 1992 ( Reaffirmed 2004 )

3FnvwJs2ijf~*wm9m~
lndian Standard
CRITERIA FOR DESIGN OF LIFTING BEAMS
c

LJDC

626~422.24

@ BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG 110002 P&e Group 3

November 1992

Hydraulic

Gates and Valves Sectional

Committee,

RVD 12

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. Lifting beams or lifting frames are used for handling gates stop logs and trash racks. The lifting beams/frames make it possible to engage and disengage the curves/hoist from the gate or trash-rack under water. The limit of application ( depth of water ) of lifting beams frame will be set by the depth to which it is possible for a driver to work if it is required in case of failure of the beam. The For dirty grooves lifting beam is operated under balanced condition and with clean grooves. specially during construction the use ramming of lifting beams is not recommended because of frequent ramming. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

`i

IS 13591 : 1992

Indian Standard
CRITERIA FOR DESIGN OF LIFTING BEAMS
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard deals with criteria for design of three types of engaging and disengaging lifting beams. 2 GENERAL REQrJIREMENTS 2.1 The design of lifting bea.ms/frames meet the following general requirements: should lifting beam guide rollers are engaged in the guides. The lifting beam should be counter veighted as required to keep vertically when it s suspended ( see Fig. 1 ). 5 AUTOMATIC LIFTING BEAMS

a) A design with connection

of lifting beam to the gate at one point of suspension can be used for small spans due to rise of gate when held at one single point. lifting beam/frame should not be less than l/lOth of the span or 500 mm whichever is more. the frame should not be less than l/12 of span or 1 m whichever is more.

5.1 Several type of engaging devices are used For such lifting beams. One of the arrangements which are recommended for use are given in 5.2. 5.2 Pipe and Socket Arrangement The general arrangement of this type of lifting beams is shown in Fig. 2. The engagement and disengagement of both are performed after preliminary loading by hand of the grab device which operates under the action of falling load after receiving a mechanical impluse from a movable stop in the gate/trash rack. For reliable operation the following conditions should be fulfilled while designing the lifting beams: The socket ( pipe a> made in such a ) in the gate should be manner that the pipe ( socket ) in the beam matches freely with it, taking into account the gaps in the grooves, the displacement of the engaging elements in the gate, and the possible wrapping of the beam.

b) The spacing between the guides of the

Cl If a lifting frame is used, the height of d) To provide greater
stability the lifting beams should be equipped with two hoisting ropes or a suitable sling. on the gate to guide the book into proper position for grappling and to prevent rotation of the gate when raised above the guides.

4 Spears or pilot rods should be provided

For storing the lifting beam on the should be suitable device ground, provided so that the hooks are not touching the ground. 3 TYPE OF ENGAGING AND DISENGAGING LIFTING BEAMS 3.1 Depending upon the mode of engagement the lifting beams are classified as follows: aj Manually operated lifting beams. b) Automatic lifting beams. c) Lifting beams with electro-hydraulic drive. 4 MANUALLY OPERATED LIFTlNG BEAMS 4.1 The lifting beam hooks and lifting should be located symetrically about central axis and should be in the line of of the gate equipment to be lifted when lugs the C.G the 1

b) To prevent the possibility of disengaging

the beam from the gate, the beam should be made with a stop device controlled from a movable stop in the gate, which is brought into the operating position only when the gate is placed on the slit or the lower section. the possibility of free swinging of the gate with respect to the lifting beam when it is outside the groove the beam cantilivers should have lateral pipe which should enter freely into holes in the gate.

cl To eliminate

The block stem should descend freely by its own weight into the guides within the limits of preset travel.

e) The counterweight

of the lever should have sufficient weight to produce the required torque to overcome the frictional forces in the hinges and

b

---

FIG. 1

TYPICALDETAILSOF MANUALLY OPERATED LIFTINGBEAM

IS 13591: 1992

TYPICALDETAILSOF AUTOMATIC LIFTING BEAMWITH PIPE AND SOCKETARRANGEMENT unforseen resistance in the coupling. which should be filled with working liquid and separated from the external medium by a rubber diaphragm. 7 DOUBLE HOOK ARRANGEMENT

f) The axiai bearings, the shifts, and the bushings should be made from anticorrosive steel. 6 LIFTING BEAMS WITH ELECTROHYDRAULIC DRIVES General arrangement of this type of lifting beams is shown in Fig. 3. The following important points should be kept in view in designing this type of lifting beams:

a) The hydraulic drive is provided by means

of the servomotor. The servomotor should have sufficient capacity. b) After rotation of the grab by 90", the oil should be pumped for some time through a safety valve and then a time relay should disconnect the electric motor. The disconnection may also be performed by an operator from the crane based on readings from grab position gauge. Cl A induction type gauge should be kinematically connected to the rotary stem. d) Two aditional induction gauges should be located at the ends of beam steel structure to signal the position of beam with respect to the gate. e) The cable leadouts should be heremitical sealed. f) To prevent possible infiltration of water into the frame in the drive end, a compensation chamber should be provided 3

In this arrangement the pair of lifting hooks on the liftina beam is actuated bv a counterweight on aTever which is the preset in engaging or disengaging position. The movements of the hooks should be actuated by a single counter weights connected suitably to ensure synchronised operation. Four types with typical arrangements are given in Pig.4, 5, 6 and~7. 8 DESIGN 8.1 Lifting beams should be designed for the capacity of the beam/the gantry crane whichever is higher with impact factor of 1.1. The permissible stresses should be limited to the values given below: a) Structural Steel compression and 1) Direct compression in bending 2) Direct tension and tension in bending 3) Shear stress 4) Combined stress 5) Bearing stress b) Bronze or brass 1) Direct bearing stress 0.55 YP 0.55 YP 0.40 YP 0.75 YP 0.40 UTS 0.40 UTS

SlEEL

BEAM

FIG. 3

TWICAL DETAILS OF LIFTING BEAM ELECTROHYDRAULICDRIVE

8.2 Pinsconnecting the Lifting Hook, Side Guide, Etc

Beam,

Lifting

The pins should be of rolled/forged steel, be used for lifting beam with a factor of safety of 5. Deflection of frame or the structure as a whole ( without considering impact factor ) should be limited to span/SOO. 8.3 Design of Hook The hooks are made out of plate should be designed as curved beam. steel and

to limit lateral movement of gate to not more than 6 mm in either direction. The roller should be adjustable and travel on the guide tracks. Care should be taken that c.g. of the lifting hook should coincide with c.g. of gate, so that no lateral twist is permitted while lifting the gates. 8.5 Counter Weight Suitable counter weight in the formation of dead weight should be added for lifting beam for self balance. The balance of lifting beam should be checked on the shop floor before using the lifting beam for operation in the vents. 8.6 Equipment Beams Required for Handling Lifting

The stress will be limited to that in lifting At the engaging point the profile is to frame. be hard faced to a maximum of 10 mm depth machined smoothly for uniform bearing of pin. In case the thickness of the hooks required more than the plate thickness the plates may be joined with rivet and welded. 8.4 Guide Rollers The guide rollers/shoes should be provided on the sides of lifting beam to suit the gate groove

The hoisting equipment used for lifting beams such as gantry crane, underslung hoist, etc. should be designed with fully balanced bottom blocks suitable for connecting the lifting beams. No lateral twist should be permitted while engaging the hooks. Before connecting the gate balancing of lifting beams should be tested preferably in dry condition.

4

FIG. 5 TYPICALDETAILS OF LIFTING BEAMARRANGEMENTWITH Two INTERLINKING
AUTOMATIC ENGAGING AND DISENGAGINGHOOKS CONNECT TO FOLLOWER

SECONDMETHOD
CRANE

GANTRY
BEAM

OF

FOLLOWER

OF LIFTINGBEAM OPERATED FROMGANTRY CRANE FIG. 6 TYPICAL'ARRANGIZMENT WITH DOUBLE HOOK ARRANGEMENT
CONNECTIONS ul EROM

CO UNfER

WE IGHT

PIG.

WITH DOUBLE HOOK ARRANGEMENT 7 TYPICAL LIFTINGBEAM WITH Two POINT SUSPENSION

6

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of the Indian Standards, Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian StundardP Act, 2986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS.
Revision of Indian Standards

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No.' RVDtl2 ( 4692 1

Amendments

lssued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

110002 Telegrams ( Common
: Manaksanstha

to all Offices ) Telephone I 331 01 31 331 13 75

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054
Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C. CHANDIGARH

37 84 99, 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 53 23 84
235 02 16, 235 15 19,

37 85 61, 37 86 62 53 16 40,
235 04 42, 235.23 15

160036

Southern Western

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113
: Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

632 92 95, 632 78 91,

632 78 58, 632 78 92

Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE FARTDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printedat PrintwollPrinteta. Alimrb. India

