IS 4971:2007
(Reaffirmed 2012)

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SELECTION'OF INDUSTRIAL FLOOR FINISHES

(First Revision)

ICS 91 .040.20; 91.060.30

0 BIS 2007

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

June 2007

Price Group 5

Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee,

CED 5

FOREWORD This ]ndian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. [n the selection of industrial floor finishes, special care is required in view of the diversity of the requirements to be Illet \vith and the different characteristics of individual floor finishes. This standard has, therefore, been prepared to provide necessary guidance in the selection of floor finishes for industrial floors taking into consideration the factors influencing the floor finish and the properties of the individual floor finish. The behaviour of a floor its quality which in turn suitable type of flooring relevant Indian Standard finish under a given set of conditions depends not only on the type of finish but also on is dependent on both the materials and the workmanship. It is thus essential to select a for the purpose and also to insist on the use of the particular material conforming to the and to lay the floor according to the relevant Indian Standard (see Annex A).

The recommendations given in this standard are concerned only with the selection of floor finishes, and their behaviour wi 11.in turn, depend upon the strength and stability of the structural floor, the sub floor or the foundation. Movements due to bad design, overloading and the thermal expansion or shrinkage of the structure may cause fiiilure of an otherwise satisfactory floor tinish. Spillage of chemical solutions, acid, alkalies, etc, on the floor contribute towards the failure of a floor finish. `1-l 1is standard was first published in 1968. In procfuct performance this standard is being dolvn and adding some new provisions for highly resistant to a host of acid/alkali and acids/ alk~ilies. order to accommodate changes in technology and higher demands on revised with a view to modi~ some of the provisions already laid ceramic unglazed vitreous acid/alkali resistant tiles. These tiles are find applications in several chemical process industries employing

1n the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. I:or the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 1S 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 4971:2007

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SELECTION INDUSTRIAL FLOOR FINISHES OF

(First Revision)

1 SCOPE This standard covers the selection of industrial floor finishes where the floor is subjected to heavy abrasion, impact, chemical action due to spillage of acid, alkalies and chemical solutions, etc. Guidance is also given for selection when the floor finish under special circumstances should be non-slippery, dustless, noiseless, non-sparking, " anti-static, etc.

m)

Specific requirements, if any, regarding the colour and appearance of the finished surface and of aggregates to be used. FINISHES

4 TYPES OF FLOOR

A finish for the floor of an industrial building may be generally selected out of the following types to suit the requirements a) b) of a particular case:

2 REFERENCES

Plain concrete, Granolithic hardener), concrete (with or without

The standards listed at Annex B contain provisions which through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated at Annex B. 3 NECESSARY INFORMATION

c) d) e) 9 g) h) j) k)

Precast concrete tile, Paving brick Fire clay brick, Acid resistant brick, Ceramic unglazed vitreous acid/alkali resistant tile, Stone, Steel or cast iron units, Wooden block with lead lining, oxychloride,

For eftlcient planning and execution of work, detailed data and information as given below shall be taken into account: a) b) c) d) e) Purpose for which the floor is to be used; F\oor area to be coverec$ Details of the sub-base or sub-floor; Type of trafllc that will be moving on the flooq Live load on the floor: 1) 2) f) ~) h) j) k) The area where such load occurs with its intensity; and Type of vehicle used.

m) Magnesium n) P) @ r) s)

Bitumen mastic, Linoleum, Rubber, Flexible PVC sheets, and Epoxy resin. FOR SELECTION OF

5 CONSIDERATIONS FLOOR FINISH

Vibrations and impact, if any, on the floor with its magnitude; Resistance Resistance to water and chemical action; to temperatures; in the floor finish; and adjacent floor or

Slope to be provided Treatment at comers walls; and

5.1 The important features that govern the selection of industrial floor finish are durability, incidence of loading, safety, resistance to chemical action, convenience of the user, appearance and overall economy. These requirements are covered under 5.2 to 5.5. Table 1 gives in general a summary of the requirements of floor finishes for various industrial buildings.

1 1--115 Bls/ND/07

n

--l
I

I

L
I
I

I .

:
2

s

/
2

I --

--

--

--

--

--
I

-- .: 2 := -> >

IS 4971:2007 5.2 Durability 5.2.1 Wear composition. A lead lining may be provided over the base concrete or wooden flooring where explosives are being stored. 5.3.3.1 It may sometimes be necessary, in order to avoid i isk of static electricity causing sparking, to use a floor which conducts electricity causing sparking, to use a floor which conducts electricity and thus prevents the accumulation of static electric charges. Floor topping using concrete with metallic aggregate or steel or cast iron grids embedded in concrete may be used for such work. 5.4 Resistance to Chemicals and Water

The nature of mechanical wear that a floor has to resist varies considerably. For general consideration the type of wear may be classified as below: i'jpe of Wear a) Very severe abrasion together with heavy impact b) Very severe abrasion c) Severe abrasion Examples Heavy engineering workshops and places where milk cans are being handled in diaries Places where steel -- Tyred trucks constantly move Floor having traffic of more than 2000 persons a day in definite traftlc lanes

5.2.2 [mpact Consideration should be given for impact as many flooring materials that will stand abrasion may suffer rapid damage under impact. 5.2.3 Load Carrying Capacity Dependingon the nature of loading and type of traffic, such as foot, rubber tyred, metal wheeled, etc, the flooring shall be selected to withstand the service condition. 5.3 Safety 5.3.1 SU/kty Against Falls It should be ensured that the floor finish does not contribute to accidents by falls. Factors causing accidents by falls are slipperiness, uneven wear, potholing, indentation or splintering of surfaces, cracking or lifting of the floor, etc. 5.3.2 Resistance to High Temperature and Fire

The spillage or splashing of chemical solutions, acids and alkalies or chemical powders may cause corrosion, deterioration, induce slipperiness or give rise to any risk to health or risk of fire or explosion. The possibility of wetting or flooding the floor with water should also be taken into awount, 5.5 Appearance In industrial buildings appearance is hot an important factor in the selection of the floor finish but, the floor should be capable of being kept clean and should be free from cracks and crevices. Having satisfied the basic requirements the floor with a better appearance is preferable for an industrial building. 5.6 Resistance to Frost

In cold storage applications where temperatures are below freezing point, there should not be any seepage of water and the water absorption of the flooring should be very low or near zero. Water absorbed by the floor will expand upon freezing leading to buildup of stresses in the floor and may eventually lead to floor failure. 5.7 Easy Maintenance and Repair

In industrial structures, high temperatures occur without spread of fire. Floor finishes do not by themselves add to fire risk, provided that the floor structure has adequate resistance to fire. In certain special circumstances, however, there may be risks arising from the usage of the floor. For example, oil or other flammable liquids spilled on the floor will lead to greater fire risks with floors which are absorbent or themselves combustible, such as timber or bitumen, than with inert dense materials, such as concrete or tiles. 5.3.3 Spark Resistance In factories or stores where explosives and substances liable to cause explosions are being handled, sparks caused by friction on a floor surface may cause fire or explosion, therefore, it is essential to use nonsparking floor finishes, such as rubber or special grade of bitumen mastic or magnesium oxychloride 3

The floor finishing material should be such that it can be maintained with ease using conventional methods and repairs to damaged areas, if any, can be carried out with ease to restore the flooring back to the original condition. 6 PROPERTIES OF FLOOR FINISHES

Properties of floor finishes for industrial buildings are given in Table 2. 6.1 Cement Concrete Finishes 6.1.1 Plain Cement Concrete For industrial floors cement concrete is used for a wide variety of conditions in the in-situ form. Portland cement concrete is resistant to a wide variety of chemicals, including mineral oils and greases but is slowly attacked by acids, vegetable oils, fats and sugar solutions.

Table 2 Properties

of Floor Finishes

(Clause 6)
Heat Resistance

SI

Type of Finish

No.

Resistance to Abrasion

Freedom Evenness Resistance from or to Impact Slipperiness Smoothness

W'armth to .4ppearance Touch (LOW Thermal Conductivity)

Resistance to Attack by Water Minerll Acids @wit Acids Weak Strong Alkaies Solutions of Mineral v% Sulpfrates, Oil and Oil and Fats Phosphates Grease and Nitrates (14) (15) (16)

(1) i)

(2) `ortland cement a) In-situ b) Pre-cast

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(lo)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(17)

VG-P VG-G VG VG VG-F G G

G-P G-F VG VG VG-F G G-F VG VG VG G

VG VG G F G-F VG VG VG VG G

VG-P VG-P P F-P G-P F F F VG VG G VG VG G F F

P P P P P P P P P G F VG F G G G

G G F F G-F F F G VG VG F VG VG VG G G

VG VG VG-F G-F G VG VG VG VG P VG G G VG VG VG

P P P P G-P G VG VG VG F' F-P G G-P F G G

VP VP VP VP F-VP G-P G G VG

F-P F-P F-P G G G G G VG

G G G F G-F F-VP P P VG

P-VP P-VP P-VP F-P F G-P G-P G VG

G G G VG G G G G VG VG F G P VG VG G

P P P G G G G G VG VG F G G VG VG G

G G G VG G G VG VG VG G P F P VG G G ~

ii) iii) iv) v)
A

keel tiles or grids >mbeddedin concrete Dastiron tiles Qaturalstones ~eavy duty burnt clay mic!dpavingbrick `ire brick ~cid resistant brick

vi) vii) viii)

VG
VG VG

ix) Magnesium OXy chloride cement x) xi) Bituminous mastics Lksoleum

xii) Rubber sheets/tiles. xiii) =PVC -- asbestas tiles xiv) xv)

E
F = Fair

VG = Very Good G = Good

E
G-F F F F G G G VG G G G

VP
VP G-P G-VP F G-F G-F

G
P G F VG G G

G
G P G F G G

G
G G G VG VG VG

G

VG VG G G

VG

P = Poor VP = Very Poor

G-P = Denotes a variation with the quality of the material or with the severity of the conditions

IS 4971:2007 Frequent cleaning reduces the attack, but prolonged exposure will bring about a gradual deterioration of the cement concrete flooring. 6.1.2 Granolithic Concrete 6.3 Stone Flooring 6.3.1 The types of stones useful for floorin: are granite, basalt, qwu-tzite and sandstone. 6.3.1.1 Granite is very hard and resistant to wear by abrasion or impact, and to attack by chemical agents. lt is readily cleaned and if kept clean it is non-slippery till unworn; after considerable wear, it may become smooth and slippery and mechanical roughening may be necessary. It is used in thick slabs of various sizes depending upon the conditions of use. Granite slabs are suitable for thk flooring of loading and unloading platforms in workshops, godowns, etc. 6.3.1.2 Basalt flooring will be suitable for heavy engineering factories and garages as it may withstand impact and wear and where the floor need not be too smooth and even. 6.3.1,3 Quartzite slabs are used mainly for entrance halls or where a decorative appearance combined with good wearing properties under heavy foot traffic is required. The stone is easy to clean and does not become slippery. 6.3.1.4 Sandstones (see IS 3622) of suitable variety and thickness may be used for light duty flooring. 6.4 Steel and Cast Iron Floor Finish Metal floor finishes are used where severe wearing conditions are encountered. Several types of steel or cast iron units are used for heavy duty flooring. This type of finish includes: a) 6.2.3 Acid-Resistant Brick b) c) The acid-resistant bricks conforming to IS 4860 have good resistance to all acids except hydrofluoric acid and perchloric acid, and other chemicals. They are suitable for floorings subject to acid attack and abrasion. 6.2.4 Ceramic Resistant Tile Unglazed Vitreous Acid/Alkaliopen metal grids embedded in granolithic concrete or in bitumen mastic, solid tiles or solid plates, and open metal grid suspended floors.

The granolithic concrete when properly compacted and tinished, is hard wearing, resists impact and is resistant to alkalies and mineral oils. On the other hand, it is hard to the feet, cold, noisy and susceptible to chemical attack by many chemical agents including- acids, su Iphates, animal and vegetable oils, fats and sugar. 6.1.3 Precast Concrete Tile Concrete tiles have good resistance to wear and chemical attack but cannot withstand heavy impact. Where good appearance and cleanliness are required for the flooring, concrete tiles may be selected. 6.2 Brick and Tile Finishes These have good resistance to wear and impact. 6.2.1 Paving Brick

Paving bricks conforming to IS 3583 maybe used for heavy duty and industrial floors, loading and unloading platforms where the floor is subjected to heavy wear and tear. 6.2.2 Firecluy Brick In situations where high temperatures are to be met with, such as those around metallurgical furnaces tire clay bricks may be laid in fire clay mortar.

These tiles conforming to IS 4457 have good resistance to acids and are suitable for floorings subject to acid attack, impact and abrasion. Further, the surface of the tiles can be provided with structured self-design to impart anti-skid properties. The vast range of designs and effects available gives necessary aesthetic appeal to the floor. The vitreous nature of these tiles also makes them stain and frost resistant making them suitable for low temperature applications. They can also provide sufficient impact strength depending on the thickness ofthc tile. The high surface hardness also ensures that concentrated point loads do not cause any indentation or damage to the floor. 5

6.4.1 Open metal grids embedded in granolithic concrete are suitable for loading platforms subject to impact and wear caused by movement of trolleys with iron wheels, under wet or greasy conditions as in the case where bottled milk are handled. Steel tiles with a smaller proportion of open space than the grids embedded in granolithic concrete `are suitable for situations subjected to heavy abrasion and impact. The open metal grids and steel tiles tend to become slippery when oily and to corrode when wet. 6.4.2 Solid faced metal tiles (usually made of c,ast iron) are highly resistant to wear and impact and to the action of oils, fats, salts and alkalies provided the joints are also filled with appropriate chemical resistant material. The plain surface types are liable to become slippery if wet or even when dry if polished by wear, and hence special type with a patterned surface shall be used under these conditions. The solid metal tiles are particularly

lS 4971 :2007 useful, on loading bays where there is heavy trucking and in dairies where a high standard of cleanliness combined with high resistance to wear and chemical attack is required. 6.4.3 Steel or cast iron grid suspended floors are used for elevated platforms or walkways around large machinery. Floors on which liquids or solids are continuously being spilled may be made of supported steel grids with suitable channels beneath, from which the spilled material may be drained or recovered. 6.5 Wooden Block With Lead Lining This provides anon-sparking floor finish and is suitable for tloors where explosives are stored. 6.6 Magnesium Oxychloride 6.10 Flexibie PVC Flooring The PVC flooring provides a clean, dust free, and resilient flooring. The flooring may be easily cleaned with a wet cloth, as dirt and grime do not penetrate the surface. 6.11 Epoxy Resin Floor Topping The use of epoxy resin for industrial floor toppings is characterized by its exceptional physical and chemical properties, such as chemical resistance, hardness, abrasion resistance, compressive, impact and structural strengths, dimensional stability and adhesion to concrete, metals and other surfaces. This is suitable for use on industrial floors, such as in chemicals plants manufacturing fertilizers, pharmaceuticals, acids, solvents, etc; in dairies, tanneries, breweries, garages, service stations, warehouses, metal plating and pickling areas. 7 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FLOOR FOR INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS Recommendations for floor finishes buildings are given in Table 3. 7.1 Floors for Heavy Engineering Workshops and Garages , FINISH

This flooring mix gives a fairly strong and durable floor with good appearance. However, the flooring is affected by continued exposure to water, acids and salt solutions.
"rQQ

wet a mix with

excess

of magnesium

chloride

in sweating of the floor surface. Mineral oils, greases, vegetable oils, milk products and milk alkalies do not aflect the floor.
results

for industrial

Factories

6.7 Bitumen

Mastic Flooring

Bitumen mastic flooring has been considered suitable for use in industrial buildings, storage houses, etc, because of its resiliency, wearing quality and ease of maintenance. Bitumen mastic flooring (see IS 1196) is dustless, odourless, jointless and impervious to the transmission of moisture, either in liquid or vapour form. The flooring may be easily cleaned, quite under traffic and resilient. Bitumen mastic flooring is also durable. While it may carry heavy loads, application of concentrated point load may cause indentation. In selecting bitumen mastic flooring consideration shall be given to the anticipated service conditions, particularly the type of traffic and possible contact with oils, acids and the like. The surface of bitumen mastic flooring is liable to become slowly softened by prolonged contact with greases, fats and oils. Contamination with such materials shall be avoided. 6.8 Linoleum Flooring

Floors in heavy engineering factories, workshops and garages shall be resistant to impact, abrasion, and attack by lubricating oils. The epoxy resin floor topping is suitable for heavy industrial floors. The extent to which the floors will be subjected to heavy wear or impact will often vary widely in different parts, and since the more resistant type of finish are more expensive it is advisable to ascertain as far as possible, before laying the finishes, where trucking gangways or processes involving impact will be located and to provide accordingly. Steel or cast iron tiles or plates, embedded in granolithic concrete may be used for areas of heavy abrasion by steel-tyred trucks or where a high resistance to impact is required. High thickness tiles such as 15 mm or 20 mm thick vitrified ceramic tiles are also suitable for high impact resistance applications. 7.1.1 Granolithic concrete with suitable materials and good workmanship will provide in light industrial workshops and garages a floor finish of reasonable durability. Special aggregates and metallic floor hardeners may be added to the granolithic concrete where impact and wear is expected. Vitrified ceramic unglazed tiles of thickness 12 mm and 15 mm are extreme] y durable and can be used for light industrial workshop floors. 7.2 Loading and Unloading Platforms and industrial

Linoleum provides clean, dust free and resilient flooring. In light industry, such as in electronic industry, linoleum flooring may be used as the risk of damage by cutting to which linoleum is vulnerable is small. If linoleum gets wet, it expands mildews and eventually rots. 6.9 Rubber Flooring The flooring is resilient and noiseless. The flooring is suitable for electronic industry, computer rooms, etc. 6

7.2.1 The requirements

for platforms

1S4971 Table 3 Recommended Floor Finishes for Industrial (Cluuse 7)
Recommended Floor Finish (4) Granolithic concrete or paving bricks

:2007

Buildings

SI No. (1)

Type of Building (2)

Situation and Conditions fiIet With (3) a) Conditions normal b) Heavy impactor wear

Jointing and Bcddiag Mortar (5) . --

Epoxy resin tloor topping and high
(1S-20 mm) thickness unglazed ceramic tiles vitreous

O

for heavy `;loor factories, mgineering workshops and garages

c) Places where spillage is expected to contain lubricating oils d) Floors subjected to heavy abtasiott by steel tyred trucks a) Platforms involving loading conditions normal

Epoxy resin 11OOI topping or vitreous unglazed ceramic tiles Steel or cast iron tiles or plates embedded in graoolithic concrete Granolithic concrete or granite shtbs or paving bricks or vitreous unglazed ceramic tiles Steel tiles or anchor plates or metal grids embedded in granolithic concrete Epoxy resin tloor topping or paving

-- -- .

ii)

l.oadioE and uploading platforms

b) Platforms impact

involving

heavy

--

iii)

Food factories. factories processing meat, animal or vegetable oiIs, breweries beer cellars, Ctc

a) Floors sL]bjectedto the action of lubricating oils combined with the action of hot water b) Abrasion resistance not severe c) Severe abrasion a) Places where abrasion impact are not excessive and

--

bricks or ceramic unglazed vitreous
acid-resistant tiles Magoesiltm oxychloride flooring Epoxy resin floor topping or paving bricks Epoxy resin tloor topping or unglazed vitreous acid/alkali-resistant tiies or acid-resistantbricks acid/alkalivitreous unglazed resistant tile or acid-resistant bricks -- -- --

iv)

PclctoriesLlsingprocesses involving sugar solution and weak acids

b) Places where hot sugar solution or molasses are used

Tiles or bricks shall bedded be and jointed in acid resistant mortar --

v)

Factories handling or usiog salts or salt solLit ions and fertilizers

a) Places where common salt is the nmio constituent of spiflage

Graoolithic concrete or bitumen mostic or v@ous acid/alkaliresistant uttglazed.cerarnictik Epoxy resirs%or topping or ceramic unglazed vitreous acidhdkofi-resistant ~ks or acid-resistantbricks,

b) Spillage containing any type of salts or fertilizers

-- .,

loading bays are primarily high resistance and abrasion and non-slipperiness.

to impact

7.2.2 Steel tiles or `anchor-plates' or metal grids etmbedded in granolithic concrete are suitable for loading and unloading platforms subjected to heavy impact. Granite stone slabs or paving bricks when properly embedded are suitable for platform flooring. Granolithic concrete may also be used for flooring of normal loading platforms not subjected to heavy impact. 7.3 Food Factories, Factories Processing Meat, Vegetables, Animal or Vegetable Oils, Breweries, Beer Cellars, etc There are many factories making soap, candles, and
7

lubricating oils, in which the floors are subjected to the action of animal or vegetable oils or fats due to spillage combined with abrasion. The epoxy resin floor topping is suitable in such situations. Magnesium oxychloride flooring or heavy duty brick flooring may also be adopted. The very low water absorption of ceramic unglazed vitrified tiles makes them ideally suited for applicatiorts where hygiene is of paramount importance, such as in food processing and pharmaceutical industries. The low water absorption of these tiles makes them resistant to growth of algae or bacteria or other forms of organic growth. The joints between such tiles can be filled with epoxy-based grouts to make the floor completely impervious.

1S4971

:2007 involving Sugar Ung[azed vitreous acid.resigant tiles

7.4 Factories Using Processes Solutions and Weak Acids

or acid-resistant

bricks will be suitable in such situations. 7.6 Dairy Floors In a dairy the requirements of the flooring differ in different areas. A careful study and understanding of the conditions met with in various processing areas of a dairy shall have to be taken into account in order to select a tinish suitable for a particular area in a dairy. The types of floor finish found in general to be most satisfactory for use in different areas of a dairy are given in Table 4. 8 BEDDING AND JOINTING MATERIALS

7.4.1 In factories processing fruits or vegetables or using sugar syrups, as for example, preserve, canning; pickle, fruit drink, sweet or sugar factories, the floors m-e subject to chemical action by fruit acids, vinegar and sugar syrup and often to impact and abrasion by movement of casks and by trucking. 7.4.2 Unglazed vitreous acid-resistant tiles or acidresistant bricks properly bedded and jointed with chemical-resistant mortar provide a satisfactory floor for such situations. Epoxy resin floor topping is also suitable for such situations. 7.5 Factories Handling Solutions and Fertilizers or Using Salts or Salt

7.5.1 The risk of deterioration of floors upon which salts or salt solutions maybe spilled as in tanning, bacon
curins, or chemical factories depends upon the nature

8.1 Appropriate choice of bedding and jointing materials is essential if the risk of defective floors or premature failure is to be avoided, even when the main flooring material, that is, block, slab or tile, is of a type which would otherwise be satisfactory.
8.1.1 The bedding and jointing material shall adhere properly to the base on which the finish is laid, and to the finishing units. It shall be durable in itself and shall resist chemical attack to which the floor may be exposed. The bedding is also sometimes required to stop moisture penetrating the structural floor from the surface. Other points, besides these shall, however be given consideration in deciding upon the suitability of jointing and bedding materials for specific conditions of exposure. The various materials used for bedding ancijointing are given in Table 5 and their resistance to , deterioration is indicated. "

salt when spilled are not very harmful to the floor finishes. Bitumen mastic flooring is suitable for such situations because of its impcnmeability and resistance to chemical action. Granolithic concrete may also be used. Ceramic unglazed vitreous acid/alkali-resistant tiles,can also be used for this application.
of the salts. Chlorides, as in common

7.5.2 Nitrates, sulphates and phosphates which are widely handled in the fertilizer industry, may lead' to rapid deterioration of the cement concrete floor. Epoxy resin floor topping or floor paved with ceramic Table 4 Recommended

Surface Finishes for Dairy Floors (C/ause"7.6)

s]
No. (1) i)

Situation (2) Loading platforms for milk cans and paths tbr rolling of cans Loading platforms for trucks carrying milk bottles

Condition of Wear (3) Most severe conditions of wear with repeated heavy impact abrasion Heavy but conditions not as severe as on can platfonns

Type of Finish (4) Steel tiles or steel plates or open metal grids embedded in granolithic concrete Steel tiles or steel plates or open metal grids elmbcdded in gr.anolithic concrete or bitumen mastic; paving bricks, vitreousuog[azcdceramictiles of high
thiCklleSS

Jointing and Bedding Mortw (5) --

ii)

--

SLICh &

15 Or 20 mln

I

iii) Processing bottling area

and

Subject to continuously wet conditions and exposed to milk fats, sugar acids and various cleaning agents. Alsd subject to considerable wear

Paving bricks or stone flooring or vitreous textured (self-design) unglazed ceramic tile

The satisfactory jointing and bedding material is cbemicalresistant mortar of resin type
I

i})

Parts of dairy not Conditions not so critical covered by item I, 11 and 111

a) Granoli[bic concrete b) Bitumen nrastic with hard granite aggregate c) Ceramic onglazed vitreous acid/ alkali-resistant tiles Ceramic unglazed vitreous acidl The tiles or bricks should be alkali-resistanr tiles or acid-resistant embedded in cement mortar with joints tilled with resin mortar bricks or paving bricks

v)

Cold storage rooms

Moderate

8

Table 5 Properties

Of

Bedding and Jointing (Clause 8.1. 1)

Materials

for Floors

s]
No.

Tvpcof Tlatcrial

Nlannerof Use

Hardness

.Adhesion to Smooth Surface

Resistance to W'ear

Resistance to At@ch by Water Mineral Acids Weak Strong (9) VP P P VG G-F Organic Acids (10) F-P P P VG G Alkalies Solwions of Sopbate. Phosphates and Nmated Mineral Oil and Greases (1~) P G F G G (13) G P F G G Vegetable Oils and Fats (14) P P F G F

Resistance Tenl p&tu r-e

(1) i) ii) iii) iv) v)

(2) Portland cement mortar Bituminous mastics Robber latex cement Imortar Chemical-resistant silicate-type mortars Chemical-resistant sulphor-t) pe mortar

(3) 1:3 Hot. as supplied Rubber latex with Portland cement Silicate solution and fillers Sulpbrrr and tillers. DO motlar to be melted before LISC Resin syrup. tillers and hardeners -- Hard

(4)

(5) F G VG G G

(6) F G-F G F G

(7) VG VG G P VG

(8) VP F G-P VG G

(11) VG G G P G

(15) G P P G VG

Plastic Resilient Hard and Rather Brittle Hard

vi)

Chemical-resistant i-csi n-type mortars a) Epoxy resin mortar or furane resin mortar b) Cashew nut shell liquid resin c) Other resin mortars

>-Hard and
TOLIgb

VG

VG

VG

VG

G-F

G

VG

G

G

G

VG

do do

do do

VG G

VG G

- VG G

VG G

G-F ~

P G-P

G G-P

VG G-F

P G

P G

VG-P --

.._
VG = Ver> Good

F = Fair
P = Poor

VP = Very Poor

G = Good

..
N
4

o 0

lS 4971 :2007 8.1.2 Itmaynot always benecessary touse the same material for bedding and for finishing the joints. Where the spillage of harmful material is not likely to be appreciable or where the floor may be cleaned down frequently, it maybe sufficient to point the joints with the chemical-resistant mortar and to use cement mortar for bedding. It may also sometimes be an advantage to bed the units in a bituminous waterproof colmpound and to point the joints with a chemicalresistant mortar, In general, however, the use of one type of mortar with very thin joints requiring no pointing should be preferred even if separate bitumen or other waterproof layer is laid before bedding and jointing the tiles.

ANNEX A (Foreword)
RELEVANT
1.7No.

INDIAN STANDARD Title

FOR LAYING OF FLOORING IS No. chemical revision) 4443:1980 Title resistant mortars ~irst

658:1982

Code of practice for magnesium oxychloride composition floors (second revision) Code of practice for laying bitumen mastic flooring (second revision) Code of practice for laying of rubber floors ('jirst revision) Code of practice for laying,, fixing and maintenance of linoleum floors (jhst revision) Code of practice for laying and finishing of cement concrete flooring tiles @rst revision) Code of practice for laying in-situ terrazzo floor finish (#irst revision) Code of practice for laying in-situ cement concrete flooring (firLYt revision) Code of practice for use of silicate type chemical resistant mortars (first revision) Code of practice for use of sulphur type

1196:1978 197:1970 198:1982

Code of practice for use of resin type chemical resistant mortars (first revision) Code of practice for laying of epoxy resin floor toppings @st revision) Code of practice for laying of flexible PVC sheet and tile flooring Code of practice for laying of in-situ granolithic concrete flooring topping Code of practice for laying of burnt clay brick flooring Code of practice for laying of bitumen mastic flooring for industries handling LPG and other light hydrocarbon products Laying of pitch-mastic flooring for industries handling heavy hydrocarbon products like kerosene, diesel and furnace oil -- Code of practice

4631: 5318: 5491:

986 969 969

443:1972

5766:1970 13074:1991

2114:

1984

`?57] : 1970 4441:1980

15193:2002

4442:1980

ANNEX

B

(Clause 2)
LIST OF REFERRED
IS No.

INDIAN STANDARDS 1S No. 4457:2007 Title Specification for ceramic unglazed vitreous acid resisting tile (second revision) Specification bricks for acid-resistant

Title Code of practice for laying bitumen mastic flooring (second revision) Specification for burnt clay paving bricks (second revision) Specification for sandstone (slabs and tiles) (jirst revision)

1196:1978 3583 : 1988 3622 : 1977

4860:1968

10
GMGIPN--115 Bls/ND/07--3oo

Bureau of Indian Standards B 1S is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright B IS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This [ndian Standard has bum developed of comments. Standards are also reviewed such review indicates that no changes are up for revision. Users of Indian Standards or edition by referring to the latest issue of of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods

from Doc : No. CED 5 (7356).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF fNDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 2609285 { 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional OffIces : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Eastern

Northern

Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Mare\, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.

PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER

GOVERNMENT

OF INDIA PRESS,NASHIK

