**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9234 (1979) : Methods for preparation of solid waste 
sample for chemical and microbiological analysis [CHD 32: 
Environmental Protection and Waste Management] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 9234 - 1979 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



Indian Standard 



METHOD FOR PREPARATION OF 

SOLID WASTE SAMPLE FOR CHEMICAL 

AND MICROBIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS 



l DC 628-312 I : 543*05 : 543 "9-0 7H 




© Copyright ] 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK 151 E WAN, B BAHADUR SHAH /AKAk MARC 

K*:u in: i. hi warn 




Oil 



December 1979 



IS : 9234 - 1979 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR PREPARATION OF 

SOLID WASTE SAMPLE FOR CHEMICAL 

AND MICROBIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS 

Solid Wastes Sectional Committee, GDC 54 

Members Representing 

Adviser ( PHE ) Ministry of Works & Housing, New Delhi 

Shri M. An and Indian Sugar Mills Association, Calcutta 

Shri S. C. Anand Rajasthan State Agro Industries Corporation Ltd, 

Jaipur 
Shri Y. K. Ltjmb ( Alternate ) 
Shri F. A. Attarwala Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay 

Shri V. B. Shirodkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Banerjee The Corporation of Calcutta, Calcutta 

Chocjdhtjry 
Shri B. B. Bhalerao Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri A. D. Jalgaonkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. K. Bhave Steel Authority of India Ltd, Rourkela Steel 

Plant, Rourkela 
Shri T. A. Stjbramanian ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. L. Burman Indian Paper Mills Association, Calcutta 

Shri T. C. Ghandaran Kaira District Co-operative Milk Processors 

Union Ltd, Anand 
Dr H. C. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. H. Gandhi Municipal Corporation, Ahmadabad 

Shri J. D. Goel, Municipal Corporation of Delhi 

Shri Jwala Prasad Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation ( Animal 

Husbandry Division ), New Delhi 
Shri J. N. Mukherjee Steel Authority of India Ltd, Durgapur Steel 

Plant, Durgapur 
Shri H. C. Nandi Central Fuel Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Dhanbad 
Shri A. Rama Rao Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Bombay 

Shri S. Scjbba Rao AU India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, 

Calcutta 
Shri A. V. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. V. Rotkar Maharashtra Prevention of Water Pollution 

Board, Bombay 



Shri A, G. Pandit ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1979 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 9234 - 1979 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Dr A. Roy 

She i P. K. Saha 

Shri Daljit Singh 

Shri J. C Sehgal ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. K. Sinha 
Shri C. S. Sridharan 

Dr B. B. Sundaresan 

Shri A. D. Bhide ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Ve^kataraman 
Dr G M. Saxena, 
Director ( Chem ) 



Representing 
Indian Jute Industries Research Association, 

Calcutta 
Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority, 

Calcutta 
Steel Authority of India Ltd, Bhilai Steel Plant, 

Bhilai 

The Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, 

New Delhi 
National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur 

King Institute, Madras 

Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Secretary 

Shri A. K. Bahl 
Assistant Director ( Chem ), ISI 

Panel for Methods of Sampling and Test for Solid Wastes, 
CDC 54 : P 4 



Members 
Shri J. C. Paul 

Dr A . V. S. Prabhakara Rao 
Shri S. C. Sharma 
Shri C. S.Sridharan 

Dr D. C. Tapadar 

Shri A. Satyakabayana ( 
Shri V. P. Thergaonkar 

Shri S. K. Titus ( Alternate 
Shri S. Venkataeaman 



Steel Authority of India Ltd, Bhilai Steel Plant, 

Bhilai 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 
Indian Sugar Mills Association, Calcutta 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, 

New Delhi 
Indian Paper Mills Association, Calcutta 
Alternate ) 

National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur 

King Institute, Madras 



IS : 9234 - 1979 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR PREPARATION OF 

SOLID WASTE SAMPLE FOR CHEMICAL 

AND MICROBIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 16 July 1979, after the draft finalized by the Solid Wastes 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 

0.2 The term 'solid waste' as used in this standard refers to: (a) raw 
refuse that is delivered to a processing facility for disposal, (b) residues 
of the incineration process, and (c) refuse in various stages of composting. 
It is assumed that gross pieces of glass, ceramics, metal, plastics, leather 
components, etc, have been removed before submission to the laboratory. 

0.3 In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been 
derived from the publication 'Physical, chemical and microbiological 
methods of solid waste testing' issued by the US Environmental Protec- 
tion Agency, USA, 1973. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a method for preparation of samples of solid 
wastes for chemical and microbiological analysis. 

2. PREPARATION OF SAMPLE FOR ANALYSIS 

2.1 The three basic operations required to prepare the sample for detailed 
analysis are drying, grinding or pulverizing, and mixing. The end 
products of these operations should be so thoroughly homogenized that 
portions weighing 100 to 200 mg may be extracted for analysis. The 
procedure for all types of organic materials is essentially similar, if 
compost samples have already been coarsely ground either in a hammer- 
mill or rasping device. The sample is dried before grinding. After 
grinding, it is subjected to mixing in a rotating mixer. 

Note — When handling refuse, the analyst should use gloves, if possible of 
neoprene-coated canvas. He should also wear a face mask, such as a surgical mask, 
when preparing samples, especially when they are in finely divided form. 



IS . 9234 - 1979 

3. DRYING 

3.1 A laboratory oven may be used for drying a small sample, and an 
industrial oven for a large sample. Weigh a pan, transfer the material 
to it and reweigh. Note the mass of the sample and dry in an oven at 
70 to 75 C C for 24 hours if the material is combustible, otherwise dry at 
105 ± 1 C C. Remove the sample and allow to cool, preferably in a 
desiccator. Weigh, and again place in the oven for 1 to 2 hours. Repeat 
the process of heating, cooling and weighing till the difference in mass 
between two successive weighings is less than one percent of the total 
previous loss in mass. Calculate the moisture content as percentage of 
the original mass. However, if microbiological tests are also to be 
conducted, drying shall be done at 40 to 50°C. 

4. GRINDING 

4.1 Waste material may contain glass, ferrous and non-ferrous metals, 
plastics, etc. Glass and ceramics may be separated by judicious sieving, 
plastics may be hand-picked as they are not degradable and interfere in 
the determination of carbon/nitrogen ratio, and ferrous metals may be 
removed by a strong magnet. After removal of these, proceed with 
grinding using a hammer-mill, grinding mill or pulverizer. 

4.1.1 Procedure for Combustibles — Place the sample collection box under 
the grinding machine. Plug the lead into the power outlet. Open the 
cut-off in the dust collecting system . Oil the grinder bearings with engine 
oil. Put on personal safety equipment. Start the motor and feed the 
sample into the mill. Turn off grinder motor and turn off the blower. 
Clean out the grinder and add this material to the ground sample. 

Note — It is advisable to wear a transparent plastics face shield while feeding the 
material into the grinder. The analyst should not use his hand to help push 
material into the grinder past the feed slot. Do not open any grinding device while 
it is running. If the grinder clogs, turn off the motor before cleaning the apparatus. 

4.1.2 Procedure for Compost — Put a 2-mm sieve into the grinding mill. 
Open the cut-off in the dust collection duct. Position the container under 
the delivery spout. Replace the 2-mm sieve with a 1-mm sieve and 
regrind the sample. Brush out all inside surfaces of the mill into a 
separate container. Put this material through a micro mill. Add the 
product to the main sample. 

4.1*3 Procedure for Non-Combustibles — Adjust the movable pulverizer 
plate to give a maximum size of about 2 mm. Put the sample through 
the pulverizer. Screen the ground material through 2-mm and 250-micron 



IS : 9234 - 1979 

sieves. The material passing through 250-micron sieve is the required 
sample. 

5. MIXING 

5.1 The final mixing or homogenization is accomplished by transferring 
the sample to a suitable container that is not more than half filled by it. 
Close the container tightly, position it in a rotating mixer and allow to 
mix for not less than 2 hours. Reduce the mixed sample in size if 
desired, by passing it through a sample splitter or by quartering. Weigh 
all metal, ceramic, plastics and glass removed during processing. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 



Base Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mass 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 






Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 




Supplementary Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 




Derived Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Definition 


Force 


newton 


N 


IN =1 kg.m/s* 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J - 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W = 1 J/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb « 1 V.s 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


IT - 1 Wb/m 1 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


1 Hz = 1 c/s (s- 1 ) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


IS - 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


IV =1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa - 1 N/m 2 



