( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 9272 ( Part

I ) - 1979

Indian Standard
DISK SPECIFICATION FOR RECORD PLAYING EQUIPMENT
PART
Recording
Chairman SHRI P. R. NARASIMHAN Members SHRI J. N. BISARIA ( Alternate to Shri P. R. Narasimhan ) Polydor of India Ltd, Bombay SRRI L. H. BHATIA Department of Teaching Aids, New Delhi SHRI N. P. BHATTACHARYA National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DR A. F. CHHAPQAR Department of Electronics, New Delhi DR R. C. CHOPRA Vimal Enterprises Ltd, Bombay SERI P. H. GANATRA SHRI M. SAJJAD ( Alternate ) The Gramophone Co of India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI~D. K. GHOSR Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) COL L. G. KETKAR LT-COL G. R. MAHADEVAN (Alternate ) Railway Board, New Delhi DR C. G. KHOT SBRI S. JAIN ( Alternate ) Electronic Component Industries Association, SHRI V. P. LUTHRA New Delhi General Electronics of Haryana Pvt Ltd, Faridabad SHRI S. C. MAZUMDAR SHRI DEEPAK BHARDWAJ ( Alternate ) SHRI M. N. MEHTANI Directorate General Doordarshan, New Delhi SHRI S. S. SWAN1 ( Alternate) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI A. G. NARASIMRA SIT V. RATNAVATI ( Alternate ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SRRI S. C. PATEL Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute SHRI K. D. PAVATE ( CSIR ), Pilani SHRI M. R. KAPOOR ( Alternate ) Films Division, Bombay SHRI A. V. RAMANAN Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, SHRI M. SANKARALINQAM New Delhi SHRI J. S. PASSI ( Alternate ) Directorate

I

RECORD

PLAYER
LTDC 23

Sectional

Committee,

Representing General of All India Radio, New Delhi

( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1980 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

I

IS : 9272 ( Part I ) - 1979
(Cmtinucd from

page1 )
Rcflressnting Peico Electronics & Elrctricals Ltd Bombay; and The Radio Electronic & Tel&ion Manufactwers Association, Bombay Pcico Electronics & Elcctricals Ltd, Bombay Director General, IS1 ( Ex-r&o Member )

Mrmbcrs SERI S. K. SARAB SHRI A. DAS GUPTA ( Altrrnatc ) SHRI R. C. JAIN, Head ( Electronics )

Secretary

SHRI PAVAN KUMAR
Assistant Director ( Electronics ), IS1

2

IS : 9272 ( Part I ) - 1979

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR DISK RECORD PLAYING EQUIPMENT
PART I RECORD PLAYER

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 24 August 1979, after the draft finalized by the Recording Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This standard specifies the characteristics of turntable, tone-arm and The characteristics of cartridge of disk record playing equipment. amplifiers and loudspeakers of disk record playing equipment are covered in Part II of this standard. 0.3 The requirements of the characteristics `Signal-to-Rumble Ratio', `Channel Sensitivity at 1 000 Hz' and `Tracking Ability' are under investigation. These will be incorporated in this standard, through an amendment, after the investigations are completed. 0.4 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Publication 98-1964 `Processed disk record and reproducing equipment' issued by International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded IS : Z-1960*. off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part I ) covers the characteristics arm and cartridge of disk record playing equipment. to high fidelity equipment and for professional use.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

of turntable, toneThis does not apply

3

IS : 9272 ( Part I ) - 1979 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions in IS : 1885 ( Part XLVIII/Sec 2 )-1979* shall apply.
3. DESIGN covered

AND CONSTRUCTION

3.1 General - The equipment shall be operating from ac a.nd/or battery. It shall be complete with all accessories and control for operation. It shall be capable of use in horizontal position and shall be designed to use under tropical conditions.
3.2 Housing - Housing shall be an integral part of the equipment. The housing shall be strong enough to withstand the normal shocks and stresses. 3.3 Carrying Means - A suitable carrying means shall be provided for portable equipment. Facilities for carrying accessories shall be provided. Where a separate carrying case is provided, it shall also have facilities for storing the normal accessories. 4. DISK

RECORDS
shall be capable of handling all disk records conforStandard Specification for processed disk records ( under

4.1 The equipment
ming to `Indian preparation )`. 5. INDICATORS,

CONTROLS

AND OTHER COMPONENT

PARTS

5.1 Power Switch - A power switch shall be provided which shall disconnect the power supply line when in `OFF' position. This may form part of the amplifier gain control.
5.2 Motors - The motors shall be capable of operating satisfactorily in all -modes of operation. The motors shall be provided with a speed regulating device so that the speed is controlled at reduced battery voltages up to 0.9 V per cell. 5.3 Tripping Mechanism become operative at a diameter 5.4 A tripping mechanism which shall not of more than 127 mm shall be provided. - A suitable may be provided. automatic automatic return

Optional Indicators and Controls 5.4.1 Automatic Pick-Up Lowering and Lifting
lowering and lifting control Automatic Pick-Up may be provided. Return A suitable

pick-up 5.4.2 control

pick-up

5.4.3 Automatic Motor Stop - A suitable auto-stop control for automatic switching off at the end of disk record for the motor may be provided.
*Elcctrotechnical vocabulary: Part XLVIII Recording, Section 2 Disk recording.

4

IS : 9272 ( Part I ) - 1979
5.4.4 Automatic Record Change - A suitable control for automatic tion of the size -and changing of the disk record may be provided. 6. POWER SUPPLY shall be capable of operating either from selec-

6.1 Supply - The equipment ac mains or battery or both.

6.1.1 Battery Operation - The equipment shall operate from suitable batteries as specified by the manufacturers. The number and type of cells shall be indicated. The battery shall be housed in a suitable compartment. The battery compartment should permit easy insertion/ removal of cells and firm/positive electrical connection. The corrosive and other deleterious effects of accidental leakage from the cells shall be confined to the battery compartment. The current drain of the batteries during normal operation shall be specified. 6.1.2 percent, Mains Operation The equipment shall operate from 240 V 4 $' 50 Hz ac power source.

7. SAFETY 7.1 The equipment shall conform to the relevant requirements in IS : 616-1957* so far as mains operation is concerned. 8. 8.1 PERFORMANCE Reproduction REQUIREMENTS Stylus specified

8.1 .l Tip Radius - In a plane perpendicular to the record surface and passing through a line joining the stylus tip to the record centre, the tip radius of the reproducing stylus shall be as follows. 8.1.1.1 Coarse groove Maximum Minimum 8.1.1.2 Fine groove Monojhonic Maximum Minimum
NOTE - For both monophonic of tip radius should be: from 0.015 mm Min to 0'018 mm Max for mains-operated radio receivers.

0.076 mm 0.051 mm Stereophonic 0.018 0'013
application,

O-025 mm 0.013 mm
and stereophonic

mm mm
range

the preferred

*Code of safety requirements

5

IS : 9272 ( Part I ) - k979 8.1.2 Included Angle - In a plane perpendicular to the record surface and passing through a line joining the stylus tip to the record centre, the included angle of the reproducing stylus tip shall be not greater than 55"' nor less than 40". 8.2 Speed of Rotation of Reproducing Turntable 8.2.1 While reproducing the speed of the turntable shall be or shall be adjustable to be within & 2 percent, of the following speeds when measured in accordance with `Indian Standard Methods of measurement on disk record playing equipment ( under preQaration )`. 77.92, 45.11 and 33 l/3 rev/min 8.3 Wow and Flutter ( Weighted ) - The maximum wow and flutter measured in accordance with 5.5 of `Indian Standard Methods of measurement on disk record playing equipment ( under preparation )' shall be Q 0.3 percent peak weighted. 8.4 Signal accordance disk record to Hum Ratio - The signal to hum ratio measured with 5.7 of `Indian Standard Methods of measurement playing equipment ( under preparation )' shall be: > 50 dB ref velocity 3.83 cm/s rms at 315 Hz. in on

8.5 Channel Unbalance at 1000 Hz - The channel unbalance measured in accordance with 5.9 of `Indian Standard Methods of measurement on disk record playing equipment ( under Preparation )' shall be < 2'5 dB. 8.6 Minimum Separation at 1000 Hz - The minimum separation measured in accordance with 5.10 of `Indian Standard Methods of measurement on disk record playing equipment ( under preparation )' shall be > 16 dB. 9. COLOUR 9.1 If colour be as follows. 9.1.1 CODING coding is used for any of the following cartridges and pick-up purposes, it shall

For stylus supports,

heads Geometrical Code Square Triangle Two interlinked circles

TiQ Radius of Reproducing Stvlus 0.05 l-O*076 mm 0*018-O-025 0*013-0.018 mm mm

Intended Use Coarse groove only

Colour Code Green Red Blue

Fine groove monophonic Fine groove monophonic stereophonic

and

NOTE 1 -

The geometrical

codes are not mandatory.

6

IS : 9272 ( Part

I ) - 1979

NOTE 2 - The use of the same colour and geometrical codes to indicate the posichangers is tion of control knobs on record players and automatic record recommended. NOTE 3 The colour codes from 9.1.1 and 9.1.2 may be used simultaneously.

9.1.2 For identification

of stylus material gold or yellow silver

Diamond Sapphire 9.1.3 For Pick-Up Leads Three-&e ~jGk-ups Right-hand Left-hand Return 9.1.3.2

5.1.3.1

channel channel

: : :

red white black

or ground

Four-wire pick-ups Right-hand Left-hand channel channel

: :

red and green* white and blue*

9.1.3.3

Five-wire pick-ups Right-hand Left-hand Return channel channel or ground

: : :

red and green* white and blue* black

10.

MARKING
equipment shall be clearly and indelibly marked with the

10.1 The following:
a)

Manufacturer's

name or trade-mark;

b) Model c) Supply

No. and serial number; voltage [ type of supply( ies ), voltage(s), frequency 1;

d) Maximum e) Rated f) Country

power consumption; and

speed(s);

of manufacture.

*NOTE -

Green and blue are

` earth ' connections.
7

IS : 9272 ( Part I ) - 1979 10.1.1 The
Mark.
NOTE - The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection. testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. IS1 marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 11.

equipment

may

also be marked

with

the IS1 Certification

OPERATING

AND MAINTENANCE

INSTRUCTION

MANUAL

11.1 This manual shall contain relevant operating, maintenance and any other special instruction required for long operating life of the equipment. Service manual containing a list of parts, spares and accessories and circuit diagram shall be supplied on request. 12. TEST

DATA
and the test

12.1 Each equipment should be tested by the manufacturers data should be supplied with the equipment.

8

