IS : 232- 1985

Indian Standard

(Reaffirmed 2004)

GLOSSARY OF TEXTILE TERMS - NATURAL FIBRES

( Second Revision )
First Reprint AUGUST 1990

UDC

677'11'3 f 001'4

0 Copytigbll986
BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAPAR MARG

Gr 11

December 1986

IS:232 -1985

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TEXTiLE TERMS - NATURAL FIBRES

( Second Revision ).
Physical Methods of Test Sectional bommittee, TDC 1
DRV. Chairnmi SUNDARAM

R0jW0UntiRg
Cotton Technological (ICAR), Bombay Research Laboratory

Members
Da V. G. MUNSHI ( Altmatr to Dr V. Sundaram ) MARKETING Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry AQRICTJLTURAL of Agriculture ), Faridabad ADVISER TO THE GOVERNMENT or INDIA Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SHRI A. T. BASAK ( Inspection Wing), New Delhi SHRI D. K. NANDY ( Ahnate ) Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, Vadodara SEEI C. BHATTAOHARYA SHRI H. C. BHATI~ ( Altrmatr ) _ GENERAL MANAQER ( OPERATIONS ) National Rayon Corporation Ltd, Bombay SERI D. S. NADKARNI ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI R. GEOSE Sam S. S. BAHIA ( Altemah ) Nirlon Synthetic Fibres & Chemicals Ltd, Bombay DR V. G. KAMATH DR A. R. MUKHE~JEE ( Altrmatc) Silk & Art Silk Mills Research Association, SHRIMATI A. KAPLESH Bombay Ministry of Defence ( DC1 ) SHRI M. K. M.&u Snn~ P. C. BASU ( Akwufe) DR ( SRRIJIATI ) G. R. PHALQU~ANI Textiles Committee, Bombay Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay SERI M. RADE~KRISHNAN SHRI A. V. R~VI~DRANATHAN (Ah-) Wool Research Association, Bombay SBRI~ATI G. P. R.~NE Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, DR S. R. RANGAN~THAN Calcutta DR U. MUGOPADHAY ( Alternate) Office ofihe Jute Commissioner, Calcutta REPRESENTATIVE South India Textile Research Association, SHRI K. N. SESHAN Coimbatore ( Continuedon page 2 )

Q CoMriy
BUREAU OF INDIAN

1966 STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Ca@ght Art ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the oublisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS t 232 - 1Mk5 ( Continuedfran
#iage 1) Rcpr8sesttng

luembcrs

Raymond Woollen Mills Limited, Thane DR G. S. SIN~H Srtnx J. K. BANERJEE ( Al&mats ) Central Silk Board, Bangalore Sass T. N. SONWALKAB Office of the Textile Commisdoner, Bombay DE T. V. K. SBIVASTAVA SH~I S. RAV~NDRAN ( Altanats ) Textile Ahmedabad Industry's Smw T. A. SIJBRAMU~IAIU Research Association, Ahmadabad M. Best Cotton Rope Mfg Co, Bombay SH~I M. G. THANAWALA Punjab State Hosiery & Knitwear Development SHBI J. N. Vormn Corporation Ltd, Chaudigarh SHEI P. T. BANILHJI ( Ahnatc ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-o&i0 Mcmbrr) SHRI R. I. MIDHA, Director ( Tex ) SW_ SERI D. R. KOHLI Joint Director ( Tex ), ISJ Definitions

of Textile Terms Pertaining to Natural Fibres Subcommittee, TDC 1 : 19
Indian Jute Indurtries' Research Association. . Cslcutta Silk & Art Silk Millr' Association Ltd, Bombay

Mnnbars
SHBI S. K. CHATTEBJEE S&I D. A. JOSHI S-I ~~ K. A. h,AUAL ____

( Alternate 1 ' Textile Association ( India ) Regd, Bombay SH~I K. C. KOTHAWALA . P~oa R. P. GUPTA ( Alternatr ) Directorate of Industries, Government of West DB S. M MUKHEBJEE Bengal, Calcutta Miniatry of Defence ( DGI ) SHBI N. K. NAOPAL _\ SHRI A. N. MUSHBAN (Al&sets 1 Dp. ( SHBIHATI ) U. N. NANDUEKAB Wool Research Association, Bombay Silk & Art Silk Millr Research Aesociatioo, SH~I M. R. PABANJA~E Bombay Cotton Technological Research Laboratory DB N. B. PATIL ( ICAR ), Bombay Da K. R. KRISHNA IYER ( Altemute ) DE ( SHRIMATI ) G. R. PEAL~UXANI Textiles Committee. Bombay Bombay Textile Reiearch Akociation, Bombay SHRI M. RADH~~BISENAN Directorate of Inspection 6r Audit (Custom & Central Excise ) ( Ministry of Finance ), New Delhi Office of the Jute Commissioner, Calcutta REPRESENTATIVE Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi -DR K. R. SALHOTBA South India Textile Research Association, SHRI K. N. SEBHCoimbatore Bombay Millowners' Association, Bombay SHRI N. D. SHETH Central Silk Board, Bangalore Saar T. N. SONWALKAB Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay DR T. V. K. SS~VASTAVA SEBI S. RAV~E~DBPN ( Altmutc ) Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research SH~I T. A. SUBXUHA~~ Amociatioh, Abmadabad

2

IS:232

-1985

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TEXTILE TERMS - NATURAL FIBRES

( Second Revision )
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 November 1985, after the draft finalized by the Physical Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 0.2 This standard published in 1958 was first revised in 1967. Based on the experience gained during the use of this standard, some of the definitions of terms have been revised and many new terms have been included. 0.3 In preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the Textile terms and definitions, 7 Ed. published by the Textile Institute, Manchester. 0.4 The other related standards on glossary different fields are listed below: of terms pertaining to

IS : 1324-1966 Glossary of textile terms relating to man-made and fabric industry (Jht revision )
IS : 2364-1979

fibre

Glossary of textile terms-fabrics fibres (Jirst revision ) terms relating to

made from natural fibre ropes and

IS : 3871- 1984 Glossary of cordages (jirst revision ) IS : 4125-1967

Glossary of terms pertaining to defects in'fabrics Glossary of terms pertaining to textile processing to defects in yarns

IS : 9603-1980

IS : 11265-1985 Glossary of terms pertaining made from natural fibres 1. SCOPE

1.1 This standard prescribes definitions of terms commonly used in the textile industry and trade relating to natural fibres. 3

IS : 232 - 1985 2. DEFINITIONS

A
Abaca SeeManila Hemp.

Absolute Humidity - The mass of water vapour present in unit volume of air. This is expressed in g/ms ( SCG also Relative Humidity). Absorbent Cotton - Cotton fibre chemically treated after removing as completely as possible all fatty and other non-cellulosic ingradients, to render it adequately absorbent. Absorbent cotton may be sterilized for certain end uses, for example, medical purposes. Alapat Yarn See Coir Yarn (a). Fibre from the fleece of the semi-domesticated or of the llama, both of which inhabit the high America. It is soft, lustrous, of various colour~ length of 18-30 cm.

Alpaca Fibre (Hair ) animal of the same name, mountain regions of South and of fine quality with a

Ambhar Charkha - A simple hand-operated wooden frame contrivance for spinning yarn from natural fibres, working on principle of ring spinning with roller drafting. Angle of Wind - The angle contained between a wrap of yam on the surface of a package and the diametrical plane of the package.
NOTE-Other (ccc Fig. 1 ). angles are

yam;crorsing angle and yam-reversal .a~gle

A - Angle of wind B - Angle of crokiig C- Angle of reversal

FIG. 1

Axorz.s MADE BY YARN WIUPS ONTXE SURFACE OFA PACIW~E ( CxmEsE) 4

IS : 232 - 1985
Angola

a) Ezrn -A yarn spun on the woollen system from a mixture of wool and cotton or other fibres. b) Fob& - A plain or twill fabric made from a cotton warp and an angola-yam weft. ancient breed of goats originally from Asia Minor Angora Goat -An but now largely grown in Texas, Turkey and South Africa. They range from 35 to 60 kg in mass and grow a long curly fleece which often reaches the ground. The commerci$ name for the fibre is Mohair.
YarnAn extremely soft yarn made from the hair of the angora rabbit. In most cases, it also contains a proportion of other fibres, the amount of which is limited to that which is necessary to facilitate spinning and must not be greater thar 7 percent of the materials. Angora Anjcngo

Yarn -

SeeCoir Yarn (b). SeeCoir Yarn (c).

Aratory Yarn Asbestos -

A naturally occurring mineral of fibrous texture. A twisted assemblage of

Asbestos Yarn -

a) asbestos fibre; b) asbestos and other fibres; c) asbestos, other fibres and wires; and d) asbestos and other fibres with an insert of cotton or other yarn. Ashtamkdy Yarn SeeCoir Yarn (d).

Assortment (Jute ) - The &election and classification of raw jute according to grades prior to packing or baling ( see Grading of Jute ). Atmospheric Conditions for Testing ( Standard ) - The atmosphere in which physical tests on textile materials are performed. It has a relative humidity of 65 f 2 percent and a temperature of 27 f'2"C (see &oIS : 6359-1971* ). B tick Benm A beam from which yarn is fed during the sizing process.

l&thod for conditioning of textile.

5

IS : 232 - 1985

Back Warp ( or Weft ), Backing Warp ( or Weft ) - Additional warp (or weft ) on the back of a fabric, bound or stitched to the ground structure so that it does not interfere with the appearance of the face, giving greater weight, thickness, warmth, etc. Bagging ( Wool ) milling. Sewing a piece of cloth along the selvedge before

Balanced Twist - The twist in a plied yarn ( or cord ) is said to be balanced if the yarn or cord does not twist on itself when held in the form of an open-loop. Bale - A compressed package of defined quantlry OI textile material in a form convenient for transit.
,

K~TCHA .) (Jute ) - A package of raw jute consisting of various usually weighing 150 or 130 kg and sometimea heads ( or MORAHS), only 55 kg. It is compressed in a hand or steam-operated press and is bound with jute ropes.
Bale (

is hydraulically pressed bale of raw jute Bale ( PUCCA > (Jute 1 -It usually bound with jute ropes. Its standard size is 120 x 45 x 50 cm and its nominal net and gross mass are 180 and 185 kg respectively. ale ( Loose ) or BORASEA - A partly-pressed pressed ) package containing textile material. defined quantity Bale ( Silk ) -A cotton `shirt' and gunny cloth. Ball Top - A cross-wound the worsted system. ( also called half-

of raw silk carerully packed in a on

self-supporting sliver package produced

Ball Warp - Parallel threads in the form of a leased twistless rope wound into a large ball by hand or by a mechanical balling machine. Ballooning ( Yarn ) - The appearance of the curved paths of running yarns during spinning, doubling, or winding on, or while they are being withdgawn over-end from packages under appropriate yam-winding conditions, for example, when yam is withdrawn through a guide (often called a ballooning eye) placed above and in line with the axis of the package at an adequate distance from it; the yam (travelling at sufficient yarn-winding speed) assumes the apearance of a balloon shape as it revolves during withdrawal from the package. The package may be stationary or rotated in the opposite direction from that of the original winding of the packages.

6

_.
IS t 232 - 1985
NOTE W: a) air-resistance b) centrifugal of the passage of yarn ar+nd force exerted on the revolving a package, yarn, The shape of the balloon is determined by several facton, among which

c) the count and type of yarn, d) yarn-winding apeed, and

e) the length of the balloon.

Bands Bassinas

Straps tightly bound round a bale or case to keep it secure.
-

The waste silk obtained from the residue cocoon after reeling.

Bast Fibre - Fibre obtained from the cell layers surrounding the steams of various plants. Bast Liquor - A bath liquor prepared by acidifying soap solution that has been used for degumming of silk. It is used in silk dyeing as it greatly facilitates the production of a level shade. (An artificial bast liquor is prepared from a solution of gelatin in soap.) Batch Process - A process in which a treatment is given to a textile material and stored for a specific period prior to further processing.

Batch

quantity of raw jute which has been selected from (Jute) -A various assortments and is intended to be mixed together to produce yam of desired type or quality.

Batching (Jute) - T,he process of selection into batches and treating jute fibres with oil-in-water emulsion and piling it, if needed, prior to carding. - An American term used to denote superimposed carded webs of the fibre in sheet form, for example, wadding. Batt: Batting

slats put on the bales and held in place by means of Battens -Wooden bands to keep the shape of the bale intact.
Bave (Silk) - The bifilar thread spun by the silkworm. It consists of two filaments (bring) that are cemented together by gum or sericin.

B-Bottom Jute). Beach

(Jute)

-

Indicates a quality

of raw jute (s<t Grading

of

Yarn -

See Coir Yarn (e). 7

,fS : 232 - 1985 operation of winding the warp Beaming -The preparatory to slashing or weaving. The operation the cloth on to the beams in wet processing. Bearded Belani Motes -See Motes. SeeCHARKHA
Gin.

yarn on includes

to a beam winding of

Beypore Yarn -See

Coir Yarn (f). cut from a woven fabric at an acute and sometimes folded along one or

Bias Binding - A strip of material angle to the warp (usually 45') both edges.

BZMLIIt is a substitute for jute. It is generally inferior and coarser than jute obtained from the bast of Hibiscus Catznabinw. Chemically the fibre Bimli is different from jute mainly in its lower lignin content. ,Bit Mats Blaze Blending a) General - A process of mixing fibres of different lots, types and varieties to produce yarns having desired characteristics; and b) IlrDolfir Market - A process of mixing and yield of wool fibres having desired Bloom Brightness small lines of similar characteristics. type SeeMats (a).

SeeFloss silk.

and lustre in raw cotton (see also Grading is blown

of Cotton). through the

wherein steam Blowing - A type of crabbing material after it is wound on a perforated roller.

mainly consisting of seeds, motes, Blow-Room Droppings -Waste fibres leaves, stalks, seed coats, burrs besides short and entangled resulting from the blow-room treatment of cotton (ice also Gutter Fly). Boile&Off`-Liq~or - SGCBast Liquor. se&in from silk or other gummy

Boiling-off - The procers of remeving material from fibres like ramie.

Boll - The fruit of cotton plant; generally it has 3 to 5 loculi, each. of which contains about 6 to 10 seeds, the seeds b&g `covered with cotton fibres. 8

IS:23201933 -I
from the bast of the plant Hibircru Canxabanus and other Hib&us species. The plant reaches a height of 3 to 4'5 m and gives long and lustrous fibres fairly similar to jute.

Bmlskay-Hemp- A soft fibre obtained

Book (Silk) - A compressed package of raw silk weighing about 2 kg
and containing a suitable number of skeins.

Book4lk-See Tsatlee Silk.
Bottom Bourre (Jute) (French) Indicates a quality of raw jute ($#eGrading of Jute). (Silk) Sss Gum waste.
See Noils (b).

Bourettee
BOW

(French)

(Sjlk) -

a) A device on a.shuttle tip to separate the warp threads when they are likely to stick or'hang together, or b) A device for opening cotton.

Braid- The product of the braiding process.
fabrics produced on the loom or on trimming described as braids.

Certain types of narrow machinery are sometimes

Bmidiag:Plaitiq-The process of interlacing three or more thread

in such a way that they cross one another and are laid together in Flat, tubular, or solid constructions may be formed diagonal formation. in this way.
are diametrically opposed opinions between sections of the NOT= 1 --There industry regarding the exact meanings of `braiding' and `plaiting'. It h ntggested, and `plaiting' should be considered therefore, that Y generic terms `braiding' aynonymour. NOT% 2 - Fabrirx made by this process may be constructed with or without core, gut, filler, or stu6ng tbreada, which are not mterlaced in the fabrics. For soma applications, the core may be of insulated or uninsulated wire, or of rubber or other material. The tubular fabrica be used aa sheathr or rurrounda. NOTE 3 - In the cordage trade, the term braided denotes a particular form of In solid-braided `cordage, carriera usually travel in one cordage manufacture. directiov but the movement provider for interlocking between the atranda. In a sense, tbts cord ia more of an interlocked Mated cord than a plaited cord.

- A number obtained by multiplying the breaking load of skein of yam by the count of yam expressed in an indirect system This is also known aa count strength (that is, cotton count x pounds). product (CSP).

Break Factor

9

X8:232-198!5
NATE- A statement of tbe breAk factor of the skein must indicate the circumfermce and number of wraps in the skein if this ia not otberwiae apparent; without information on the number of wraps and circumference, i statement of the break factor ir not correct. Br&ng Lengeb -The length of a specimen whose mass is equal to the breaking load. Breaking length expressed in kilometres is numerically equal to the breaking tenacity expressed in gltex. The Newton ir the SI NOTE - Breaking tenacity isexpressed in Newtonsltex. having a mesa of one unit of force. It ir that force which when applied to a wy kilogram, giver it an acceleration of one metre per second square (1 N = 9.81 kgf).

Breaking

Load - The load that develops correctly expressed in Newtons.

the breaking

tension.

It is

NOTE- The breakiig load, if egresaed in gram weight or kilogram weight will vary from place to place depending on the value of the.qccelaration due to gravity (g).

Breaking Stress -The maximum SV~SS developed in a specimen stretched to rupture. The force is usually related to the area of the unstrained specimen. If the actual stress, defined in terms of the area of strained specimen, is used, then its maximum value is called the actual breaking stress.

Breahing Tension-The maximun tension developed in a specimen stretched to rupture. It is correctly expressed in Newtons.
NOTE gravity (9). Breaking tension, a defined, is independent of the acceleration due to

Breaking
Bright

Tenacity

-

See Tenacity.

Silk -

Thrown silk completely

boiled-off or dyed or both.

ultimate filament of silk as emanating from each gland of Two brins (age from each gland on either side of the body the silkworm. of silkworm) are cemented together by gum or sericin at the rpinneret of the silkworm to emerge as bave or silk strand.
Brin -The

Bristle

Fibre

(a) Gn~ral - A generic term for a short, rt8 fibre, and

and coap hog.

(W Spcc&Broad

A restricted term for the hair that has no natural crimp

of the
or

particularly

-

(Wool) -Wool

elasticity,

straight fibres.
See Mats (b).

Brush Mats -

10

IS:232 -1985
Brushing (Silk) - Act of transferring newly hatched silkworms from the egg sheets or muslin cells on to the rearing trays, or act of removal of floss from the cooked or boiled cocoons for collection of ends for reeling. Bulked Yarn - A yarn that has been prepared in such a way as to have greater covering capacity, or apparent volume than that of conventional yam of equal linear density and of the same basic material with normal twist (see also texturixed yarn). Bump Yarn - Very coarse condenser yarn. from 260 to 1 250 tex. The count normaily ranges

Bundle (Yarn) -Skeins or hanks of yarn of definite length made up into a package of definite mass. Burrs (Wool) - Dry seeds of certain weeds which get entang1e.d in the fibrous coat of the sheep before it is shorn. Barry Wool -Raw wool containing burrs.

Bursting Strength - The force required to rupture a fabric by distending it with pressure applied at right angles to the plane of the fabric. It is expressed in terms of force per unit area. cultivated as a bush to give more Bush Mulberry ( Si!Jk) -Mulberry yield per unit area and to facilitate easy picking of leaves as compared to tree system of cultivation ( SGC also Mulberry ). C Cable Twist -~.&eabled yarn, cord or rope construction in which each successive twist ii in the opposite direction to the preceding twist, as S/Z/S or Z!S/Z construction. Cabled Y~rm - A composite yam produced by. twisting together two or more plied yams. The individual plied yarns have the same nominal length and tension (see also Cable Twist and Hawser Twist ). Caddis (Jute ) - The short jute fibre droppings from different machines ( such as preparatory machines and looms ) during processing. Camel &it -The hair of the camel. There are two types:

a) the strong, coarse outer hair, ranging in length from 13 to 15 cm; and b) the soft undercoat, from 4 to 5 cm. light tan in colour and ranging in length 11

xSr232-19S5 Cmnouhgc - Net used for camouflage purposes made from hard and soft twisted coir yarns with mesh size of 5-cm square or larger.

wy

India.

-

One of the units of mass ( 355.6 kg ) used in cotton trade in

titi Sliver - The long continuous twistless strand of fibres produced by the carding machine. Carded Yarn - Yarn, made from cotton or other fibres, which has been carded but not combed. Card- The separation and partial cleaning by processing of a tangled or matted mass of fibres to a filmy web by working the fibres between two closely-spaced, relatively moving surfaces, clothed with pointed wire, pins, spikes or saw teeth. fibre or yarn introduced at some stage Carrier ( Pibre or Yarn) -A of processing to support the main component, generally as an aid to further manufacture. CARWA Yarn SGC Coir Yarn (d).

Ca8e Cord - A cord consisting of two or more yarns twisted together, each yarn consisting of a cotton yarn covered in a long spiral by several rayon yarns. The resultant cord is soft and pliable. fine soft wool fibre which forms the downy Cashmere Wool -The undercoat of Cashmere goat. um Root ( Book Ckal ) ( Jute )-The hard bark present in the middle part of the jute fibre strand. It OCCURS due to faulty retting. wtre wte Chain Selvedge Ssc Patent Selvedge.

Nett silk from which natural gum has been completely removed. -Warp yarn in a coir matting, Waste silk from native reeling skin to CHARKHA vam spun from inferior cocoons and silk

(Coir)

Ckapands-( Prenck ) silk waste. Cbaple Silk Yarn -Silk spinners waste. yam from natural fit&.

CrnRgBA

Gottod - A simple hand-operated contrivance for SDil,l&g 1
_

CHARKIZA Cotton-Cotton ginned with the aid of CHARKHA ( aho called BELJvr), which is worked invariably by hand; 12

IS I 232 - MS3 ginning of cotton.

CEARKEA

(Gin) - A simple
simple

hand-operated hand-operated

contrivance contrivance

used

for

C'a!~,V.Z3~ (Silk) -A .

for reeling

CEIARKHA Silk - Raw silk reeled on CHARKHAS. CEARKEA Yarn - Yarn produced from natural fibres on CHARKHAS.

CEASSU.. (Silk) - A term popular in West Bengal, to denote the silk waste obtained during reeling of cocoons, from. polyvohine races, for example, Iiengal Chassum.

CHAVARA Yarn -See cheese -A

Coir Yarn (g). cross-wound on a

cylindrical package of yarn usually flangeless tube of wood, paper or other material.

Qsemidcetton

- Chemically purified cellulose from cotton or cotton linters intended for use in the cellulose industries. non-protein fibre materials by

GkemickingA process of bleaching means of a dilute hypochlorite solution.

Cheatirg - A process for compacting cloth in which the material after Fing between all the bowls, usually 5, of a calender from bottom to top, rs wound upon itself or either of the two upper bowls and later stripped ,L therefrom. chifllopl Twist - Hand-twisted, single, raw silk thread having about 2 000 to 4 @IO tpm; used for making chiffons, `mousseline do seie' (French), etc. Chop - A trade-mark or ticket on a book of raw silk indicating its grade and name of the producer or shipper. Cl-s Defectm - Defects found in raw silk, such as waste, slugs, bad casts, kuots, corkscrews, joops and loose ends.

.cl+m

The degree of clearmess of raw silk panels, (Raw siIk)demrmmed on the basis of incidence of cleatmess defecu classified in super major, `major and minor defects by using official standard photographr for cleanaecr. Ckameas ia expressedas a percentage. 13

IS t 232 - 1385 Cloth See Fabric.

Cloudy Web - Generally refers to card web giving a patchy appearance due to uneven distribution of fibres. Cobbler CockIed A piece returned for redyeing due to off-shade. Yarn with lumpy places in it.

Yarn -

Cowonage (Silk) - Appliance used for mounting mature silkworms to enable them to spin cocoons; also; known as CHANDRZKE.

C&con

(!I&) - The silken shell spun by the silkworm larvae for their protection in the pupal stage. spherical or cylindrical bundle of coii ropes or Coir Fenders -A twisted yarns used as a shock absorber at the side of ship, or boat for protecting it against the piers. Coir Rugs - Matting pieces with or without bristles cut to the required sizes and finished at the edges. Coir A retted fibre obtained from husks of the coconut (Cocos nu$ra).

spun fern coir fibres by hand or machine usually Coir Yarn -Yarn z-ply. Different varieties of coir yarn are as follows: a) ALAPAT ram - Superior quality yam spun by hand or machine and having soft twist. and b) ANJEJVGO rum - Yam made of clean natural-coioumd hard twisted coir with smooth appearance and good. wearing properities. c) ARATORT ram - Yarn made of clean, natural colourtd hard twisted coir with reasonable smooth appearance and `being slightly hairy. d) ASHTAMUD2"or CARUVA ram - Yarn made from soaked 5bre with medium twist and reasonable thickness, its rnnnage varies from- 100 to 200 ft-lb. e) Beach Tdrn - Yam spun from fibres of unsoaked or partly&aked It is of light to,dark brown colour with varying coconut hurk. quantities of pith adhering to the fibrgs. f) BErPOZtE rarr.- Ifand-#pun yarii having substantial amount of pith a-dhered to the 5bres. 14

IS':.232 - 19S!5

8) CHAVARA

Yarn -Yarn produced from partly-soaked hand spun, having medium twist and is pithy. Tarn - Hard-twisted

husk,

h) MANGADAN
l

for the manufacture purpzner

machine-spun yarn. It is used of floor covering, ropes and for agricultural of

8
k)

@oP;ng ran, -Thick hand-spun yarn used in the manufacture ropes; also known as ` VANNUM yam'.

Tarn -Yarn similar to vycome yam spun from 1-YZCO ahaving 4? `ts of yam collected during spooling or rehanking procv for baling.
-Yarn which is comparatively colour, even in twist, and is soft. clean, light in

4 VrCOh@% ram

Co&ingStraightening and parallelixing fibres and removing short fibres and impuritieq by using a comb or combs assisted by brushes and rollers, pins and sometimes by knives. Combing yarn. Wool Long wool suitable for the manufacture of worsted

Comeback Wool - The wool produced by crossing two breeds of sheep to produce a cross-bred, then crossing the cross-bred with one of the original breeds; thus a comeback to the original. .
towards

NOTE - This term is usually used in the trade for wools which have bred back
the marino.

value equivalent to the Commerdal, Allowance - An arbitrary commercial moisture regain plus an approved allowance for finish, formally adopted for use with the oven-dry mass when calculating: a) the linear density, or b) the commercial or legal mass of a shipment specific textile material. or delivery of any

Commercial Mass -The calculated mass that a consignment of textile material would have if either the commercial moisture regain were added to the dried mass of the material or tbe commercial allowance were added to the extracted and dried mass of the material. CommerciaI Moisture Regain - The agreed value to be added to the mass of a de&red material (after drying it using prescribed methods) in order to obtain its commercial mass, linear density or mass Per unit 15,

area. It is exprerred aa a percentage dried material.

of the nlw

of the extracted

and

N&m -The `tommeccid mouture rapid and the %ommercid allowance' ue Iomet&er referred to u the `conv8adod allowance'.

Co4onaer Yarn -Yam spun from sliver which has been consolidated from atrips of card web by rubbii aprons. Copdttioned Moma -The mama of-a textile material conditioned standard atmosphere for testing. in the

Conditioning -To allow textile materiala ( raw materials, slivers, vns and fabrics) to come to hygroacopic equlibrium with the surrounding atmosphere or with the standard `atmosphere for testing (se@IS : 6359-1971*).

a) A conical support on which yarn b wound, an@ b) A conical package of yam wound on a conical support. Continaoux Pilrmwt Yu~A yarn composed 5lamenta that run the whole length of the yarn. Convolution Natural twist in cotton fibre. of one or more

Cooking (Silk) -The proag by Which the silk cocoona are treated in boiling water for a short time with a view to softening the. filament for eary unwindii &ring the subsequent reeling proarr. Oep-ApacLageofyarn,tapered;rtoworbothen&,prod~~cw spinning frames or weft windm. The cop from spidng re-wound or directly used as weft. in shut&e. Cord frame is either 8'

A term applied !oosely' to a variety of textile rtrands including:

a) cabled yarns; b) piied yaqs wed in tyrea; and c) structurea made by ptithg or braidiag~ fer aampk, cords ( w also Cabled Yarn ). ~ordnge -All Lmdr,of ropes, linu, from natural or man-made 5bru. W&hodfOrceoditiooiqrofcextil~ 16 cordsVaad e perrchuta

m;rauf$u&

IS t 232 - I9S5 Gordonnet Silk - Thick soft silk y&n consisting of two or more strands twisted together in one direction, e&h strand being made of a number of singles loosely twisted in the opposite direction. mass of a consignment of a textile Correct Invoice Mass -The material which is declared on the invoice. It is usually numerically equal to the commercial mass. Corridor Mats Gortex-The cortical cells. SeeMats (c). body of wool fibre made up of elongated

principal

Cotted Wool -Wool fibres which have felted together to form a, cotted fleece, Also known as Matted Wool. cotton IJnicellular seed hairs of the GenusCossypium. linear density of cotton yarn expressed as number

cotton Count -The of 840-yd hanks/lb.

Count of Yarn, Yarn Count, Yarn Number, Yarn Linear Density (n) - ,4 number indicating the mass per unit length or the length per unit mass of a yarn.
NOTE -Various counting systems, using different units of mass and length, have been in use, so the system used must be stated. The recommended system is rex.

YARN

COUNT

SYSTEMS ,I

a) Direct systems system Unit of Mass

Unit of Length kilometre 9 000 metres 14 400 yards ( spyndle ) 1 000 yards 14 400 yards 20 yards

Conversion Factor to TAX

Tex Denier Linen (dry hemp, jute Silk Woollen ( Aberdeen ) Woollen grain ) ( American spun ), I

gram gram Pound

1 0.111 11 34.45

dram Pound grain

l-938 34.45 3.543

17

`IS I 232 - 19k
b) Indirect Syrth Asbestos ( American ) Asbestos ( British ) . Cotton bump yarn Cotbn ( British ) Cotton ( Continental ) Glass (USA and Great Britain ) Linen ( wet spun ) Metric Spun silk Woollen ( Alloa ) Woollen ( American cut ) Woollen ( American run ) Woollen ( Dewsbury ) Woollen ( Gal.arhielr ) Woollen ( Hawick ) Woollen ( Yorkshne ) Woollen ( Yorkshire ) Worsted Conversions
a)

systems Unit of Length 100 yards ( cut ) 50 yards yard 848 yards ( hank ) kilometre 100 yards 300 yardr ( lea ) kilometre 840 yards ( hank ) 11520 yardr ( apyndle ) 300 yards ( cut ) 100 yardr
Yard

unit

of Ma.98 tzblwws& Foc@r to Tex
4968 9921 31080 590.5 500 4960

pound pound ounce pound f kilogram pound pound kilogram pound 24 pounds pound ounce ounce 24 ounce 26 ounce . pound dram pound

1654
loo0 590.5 1033 1654 310.0 31000 2480 2687 I 938 1 938 885-S

300 yards 300 yardr 256 yards yard 560 yards

( cut ) ( cut ) ( skein ) ( hank )

Direct System - To find the count in tex, given that in another system, multipiy the given count by the conversion factor. To find the count in any system, given that in tex, divide the count in tex by the conversion factor.

b) Indirect .Systcms - TO find the count in tex, .given that in a&t&r system divide the conversion factor by the given count. To find the count in any other system, given that in tex, divide the conversion factor by the.tex value. c) General Conutrsions -To convert the count in one system to that in another, convert to tex and then convert to the second system by means of the above rules. Count (Jute)' Count of Reed SeeGrist. See Reed Number.

Count Strength Product -See Break Factor. 18

IS : 232 - 1985 Creel Mats SeeMats (d).

Crepe-de-Chine ( French ) Yarn - Hard twisted yarn, usually with 1 600 to 2 800 tpm generally made from 3 to.5 raw silk threads. It is used as weft in crepe-de-chine. usually Crepe-Georgette Yarn - Twisted yarn to 3 600 tpm, generally made of two threads of raw silk. with 2000

Crepe Yarn - Highly twisted yarn generally with 1200 to 4 000 tpm, used for producing crepe effect in woken or knitted fabrics.

a) Fibre -

The waviness of fibre.

fibre characterirtic may de expressed numerically by reference to the number of waves or crimps per unit length or -by the difference in distance between points on the fibre as it lies in an unstretched

NOT* -This

condition and the same two points when suitable tension, expreared aa a percentage

the fibre is rtraightened of the unstretched length.

under

b) Tam - The waviness or distortion in the fabric.

of a yarn due to interlacing

~OTB 1 -In woven fabriu, the crimp `is measured by the relation between cloth length and the corresponding length of yarn when it haa been removed from the cloth and rtraightened under suitable tenaion.

NOTE 2 -Crimp may be expressed numerically as (a) percentage crimp, which ia 100 x difference between yarn and cloth length divided by cloth length; or (b) crimp ratio, which is the ratio of yarn length to cloth length. definition could logically by applied to knitted fabrics NOTIE 3 -This or fabrics of pile construction,,but it ia preferable to employ special terms, such as, `stitch length', `take-up,' and `terry ratio'.

Croisure - A technique of,twisting raw silk over itself in the process of reeling with the object *of consolidating the different filaments constituting raw silk, rounding off the angularities of the thread and squeezing off the extra moisture and gum. CropEnd (Jute ) - The hard bark at the tip part of the jute strand. It occurs due to defective retting. Cropping -A process of shearing the protruding fibres from the surface of the cloth in order to give the cloth an improved appearance. Cross-Bred Wool Wool obtained from the cross-bred sheep. Yam made from cross-bred wool. 19

Cross-Bred Yam -

IS:232-1995 Crntchings - Wool removed from the back portion of the thigh of the sheep a month or two before final shearing. Cuticle See Epidermis.

Cut Marks ( or Kc*1 ) on warp during sizing.
Cuttings

Marks made at intervals of definite length

(Jute ) - Hard and barky portions of jute strand cut off from the root end or crop end of the raw jute strands.
Cattle a) To

place width.

cloth

in loose

transverse

folds,

usually in open and place it in

b) To fold finished cloth down the middle transverse folds of pre-determined length.

NOTE- Folding finished cloth down the middle in termd `rigging' in the wool trade.

Cut (Yarn) a) A length of warp required to weave a piece of cloth; or b) In the jute and flax trade, a skein measuring 274 m.
D -Locks of wool clotted with earth or dung removed, from fleece sometimes prior to final shearing. Daggings

DAISEE Jute -

SeeJute.

DALA or Tray -Local
Dead Cotton -

term to denote the receptacles silk-worms during the period of rearing. fibre wall.
Dead Wool -

to hold

the

An extreme form of immature cotton with a very thin

Wool taken fro& sheep that have died from natural causes ( see Skin Wool ).
-

Deciter

One tenth of a tex unit ( SICTex ).

Decortication

- A process of separating fibres from other vegetable material especially in the case of leaf fibres and coconut husk.

20

IS t 232 - 1555 change in the shape of a specimen, for example, the Deformation -A increase in length produced as a result of the application of a tensile load or force. removal of grease, suint and extraneous Degreasing ( Wool ) -The matter from wool by an aqueous or solvent process. Degamming SeeBoiling-Off. conversion of the protein of silk gland into

Denaturation - The . insoluble silk filament.

unit for expressing the'linear density of man made fibrer Denier -The and silk filaments and yarns; weight in grams per 9 000 m of material. unit of a reed comprising Dent -The between the adjacent wires. a reed wire and the space

Disease Free Seed ( Silk ) - Silkworm seed which has been certified as disease-free after microscopic examination of the mothe-moths. Doffing -An operation of removing filled packages from a machine and usually followed by the operation of replacing them with empties. Dollop (Jute ) - A specified weight of jute fibres to be spread on the feed cloth of a breaker card or a hackling machine, as the case may be, in a given time usually indicated by the revoluation of a clock hand of the machine. Double Cocoon - A cocoon jointly built by two silkiorms; it serves as protective shell for both the worms during their pupal stage of existence. Such cocoons are readily distinguished by their size and toughness. D&bring ( Drawing ) - A number of slivers, slubbings, rovings or laps fed simultaneously into a machine for drafting into a single end. Draft - The amount of attenuation of textile material at different stages of spinning process; for example, 1.m of material delivered as 5 m is- said to have undergone a draft of 5. Drafting a) The process of attenuating laps,, slivers, slubbings and rovings to decrease the mass per, unit length ( see Drawing ); and b) The order in which threads are drawn through the heald eyes before weaving ( see Drawing-in ). 21

IS : 232 - 1985 Draft PIan- The order of drawing warp threads through the eyes of healds or cambs. Drawing -Operations by which slivers are blended (or doubled), levelled, and by drafting reduced to the stage of roving. In the cotton textile industry the term is applied exclusively to processing by the draw frame. Drawing-in - An operation of drawing warp threads through the eyes of the healds or cambs and the dents or slits of the reed, in the order as indicated by the draft plan.
NOTE -In automatic weaving, this operation includes`the rawing of warp threads through the eyes of the closed-end drop- wires whenever use 2 .

Dressing (Jute) -A weaving.

process of treating warp yarns with size prior to

bressing ( Silk ) - In the spun silk industry, the process of sorting out fibres into groups of different lengths. Neps and noils are also removed during the process Dressing ( Warp Preparation ) - The operation of assembling, on a beam, yams, from ball warp, beam, or chain immediately prior to weaving. Dry Spinning - A method of spinning used for flax tow, hemp, jute, etc. The essential feature is that the `reach' must be quite long to prevent breaking of fibres. Usually the dry spinning frames are of flyer type. Dumping Mats SueMats (e).

Dmpion ( French ) - Silk reeled from double cocoon, also `known as `Duppione ( Italian ). E Ecru Silk - Thrown silk that has been washed in tepid soap solution to remove dirt, the original gum content being retained. Elongation - Increase in length; extension. The increare may be expressed in units of length, percentage of initial length or fraction of initial length. elongation corresponding Elongation at Break -The load, that is, the maximum load. 22 to the breaking

IS t,d 32 - 1985 ENDI ( Silk) - Silk of white or brick red colour obtained from a species of omesticated lepidopteran insect ( Attacur Ricini) belonging to the famt s y Sutumiduc. It feeds on castor leaves and is mostly a habitant of Assam,`Bihar, Orissa and Andhra Pradesh. Ends 4 Spinning - An individual strand; b) Weaving 4 Fabric 4 An individ_ual warp thread; A length of finished fabric less than a customary unit;

qece _-- Length ( in certain districts a half-piece ); and

4 Finishing- (i) Each p assag e of a length of fabric through a machine, for example, in jig-dyeing; and (ii) A joint between pieces of cloth due, for example, to damage or short lengths in weaving or damage in bleaching, dyeing and finishing. Epiders&a - In mammalian hair gbres, the outside or surface layer of the fibres consisting of flat, irregular, horny cells or scales. BRI ( Silk ) Etching

See ENDI. A hard-twisted silk sewing thread used for outlining

Silk embroidery. Evenness

a) The uniformity of any textile material in terms of thickness or diameter or mass per unit length, and b) ( See aLFo Unevenness Appearance ). Examined Silk .Worm Seed SeeElongation. F Fabric Textile A planer structure consisting of yarns or fibres.
See Disease-Free Seed.

Extension -

planer structure produced by interlacing two or Fabric Woven -A more sets of yarns, fibres, rovings, or filaments where the elements pass each other essentially at right angles and one set of elements is parallel to the fabric axis. 23

IS I 232 - 898!5 Face - That side of a fabric which is meant woven. for outer appearance whea

A yarn that differs significantly from the normal Fancy Yarnappearance of Hingle or plied yarn due to the presence of irregularities deliberately produced during its formation. In single yarns, the irregularities may be due to the inclusion of' knots, loops, curls, slubs In plied yams, the irregula?ities may be due to a variable and the like. delivery of' one or more of its components or to twisting together dissimilar single yams. in opposite directions and in equal False Twist - Tur`ns inserted numbers in adjacent elements of yam, sliver, or similar aggregations of fibres or filaments, characterized by their temporary nature.
NOTE1 - The extreme endr of the yarn or sliver are prevented from rotating, aad the false-twisting element, through which the yam or sliver passes, ir situaft'd between there ends.
the start of the operation, turns of twist are inserted by the NOTE2 -At revolution of the twisting element ( one turn in each direction on either side of the twisting element) but, &s the yarn or sliver passes through the twisting element, each turn of twist carried through from one aide cancels a turn present on the other side.

NOTE3 - The amount of twist actually inserted depends not only on the relative speeds of the twisting element ( revlmin ) and yarn or sliver (m/s), but also on the effectiveness of the means adopted in the twisting element to rerist rotation, and on the restoring torque exerted by the twisted yam or sliver. NOTE4 - False twist may be used:
a) to produce effects, for example; (1) `the entanglement false-twisted, (2) a measure of permanence to the heat-retting the false-twisted yarns; and

`of fibres while twisted form, by

b) To iwit processing for example, (1) the passa e of sliver from Noble comb to can, (2) *he attenuation of rovings on a con d enser ringframe. IUse Twisting - A process inserted and removed from ( see alro Bulked yarn ).

dy which successive

equal amounts of a twist are sections of a textile strand

-The Groperty of resistance to the agency Fastness example_, washing, light, rubbing, cracking, gas-fumes ). Peel Se< Hindle.

named

( for

Few Marki -Marks in the form of a few pieces of yam usually coloured, woven into fabrics at certain intervals to indicate where one piece finishes and another starts. 24

rsr232-1985 Felting - The matting together of fibreo during processina or.wear. by flexibility, fineness, and

unit .of matter characterized Fibre -A high ratio of length to thickness. Fibre Fineness & Fineness Fibre.

Fibre Length
extent [see (b) ] of a crimped a) Crimped Length -The substantially freed from external restraint, measured respect to its general axis of orientation; and fibre with

b) Fibre Extent - The distance in a given direction between two planes ( each perpendicular to the given direction ) that just enclose the$ibre without intersecting it.
Nois 1 - If the fibre ir in a sliver ( or yarn, roving, etc ) and the direction of the extent is not specified, the `given direction' is to be taken as the axis of the sli rer.
NOTE 2 -It should be noted that the extent of a fibre is a variable quantity which differs from the straightened length of the fibre according to circumstances; thus, in a card web, for example, where the fibres are in a state of considerable same disarry, the extent of a fibre is markedly different from the extent of the same fibre after it has been passed through one or more drawing processes. If, for any reason, a fibre is subject to a stretching force, it8 extent in the direction of the force may be grebter than ite straightened length.

c)

&a@

Length - A quantity by whi& a sample of fibrous raw material is characterized as- regards its technically most important fibre length.

staple length of wool is usually taken as the length ofthe NOTE -The longer fibres in a hand-prepared tuft or `staple' in its naturally crimped and wavy condition (see crimp 1. With cotton, on the other hand, the staple length corresponda very closely to the model or most frequent length of the fibres when measured in a straightened condition.

length. of a fibre when tensioned d) Straightened Length -The sufficiently to remove crimp or other axial -deformation. /
this dimension should be the length of the curving axis NOTE -Ideally, of the fibre when free from all restraint, but in practice it can be measured conveniently only after a small load has been applied. The application of a load sufficient to remove all crimp may in some cases result in an elongation ofthe fibre axis. Hence the most appropriate load to uae will vary according to the form and properties of the fibre under examination. Fibre

aturity

Count

-

See Maturity 25

Count, Fibre,

IS I 232 - 1985 Fibre Mats SeeMats ( f ).

bast fibre in the jute plant situated Fibre Strand (Jute) -The between the outer bark and the central woody core and running the whole length of the stem as a lace work sheaih usually ' several layers thick. Fibre Strength Average breaking load of a single fibre ( see Strength ).

Fibre Tenacity - SeeTenacity. aggregate of cellulose molecules Fibril ( Cotton) - Thread-like constituting a morphological unit in cotton fibre. The fibril has a thickness of about 1 pm and is visible under a light microscope when the fibre is swollen in certain chemical reagents. Fibrillation ( Cotton ) - The process of separation of fibres into fibrils by chemical-cum-mechanical treatment. Fib& ( Silk ) _- Fibrils are globules of fibroin formed in silk gland, but which subsequently did not fuse into thq fibroin core during spinning of the filament by the worm and as svlch appear as tiny specks on the surface of the filaments. Fibrillation ( Silk) -The formation of fibrils on the silk filament. It is responsible for the defect known as `lousiness' in dyed silk yarn. Fibroin ( Silk ) .- The fibre material of raw silk thread which is a protein not soluble in boiling water. Filament-A fibre of indefinite length.

Filature - An establishment fir the production of raw silk from cocoons, employing modern techniques, such as, steam for heating and power for driviphe reels. Fiiling 4 A synonym for weft yarn; and b) Non-substantive and generally`insoluble material, such as, china clay and gypsum, added to fabrics together with starches or gums during finishing to add weight to modify the appearance and handle of fabrics. which is thinner than the rest of yarn in a Fine End ( Silk ) -Yarn hank; also called thin end.
NOTE- Thi is producedwhenreelm fail to cast filaments from the required number of cocoons.

26

IS I 232 - l9sS Fibre - A measure related to the transverse dimensions of the fibre, like cross-sectional area, diameter, linear density, expressed in a variety of units Fineriess Finishing-

The processing of fabrics to impart to them the desir-d appearance and feel by means of bleaching, dyeing, printing or in any other manner.
Flaggings See Strings.

Flat Packed -

Describes bales or trusses packed in a flat condition.

flax produced from deseeded Flax Green: Natural Flax -Scutched straw without any intermediate treatment such as retting. Flax Fibre Bundles -The aggregates of ultimate fjbre (see fibre ultimate ) that run from the base of the stem up to the top of the branches of the flax straw. They are each composed of large numbers of ultimate fibres overlapping each other.
Flax Fibre Strands - Flax fibres after removal from consisting in the cross-section more than one ultimate fibres. Fleece ( Wool

the

plant,

) - The entire fibrous crop shorn from a living sheep at one time in one piece.

Float -That

length of warp or weft yarn which passes over two or more weft or warp yams rerpectively. Floats are flaws, if they are accidental, a feature of design, if introduced purposefully.
Flocks - The stripped wool fibre obtained during various operations of scouring, milling, cutting, raising, etc. Floss

Silk from the outer part of the cocoon; it is of low grade Silkand is available only in small amounts. It is also known as Blaze ( French ). The term is also applied to soft silk yarn or singles without twist, used in embroidery and*lectrical insulation of wires. Loose fibres which fly out into the atmosphere Flnff(o+Fly)processes, such as, cartiing, drawing, spinning and weaving. Fluidity-The reciprocal ( 1 CP = 1 mPar). Folded Yarn-Yarn together. of the viscosity expressed .in during poises

composed

of two or more single yarns twisted 27

I* Wool - Short tufts of wool obtained as a result of,second during one shearing.

dutr

Priror (French) -The silk waste brushed from the outer layers of cocoons prior to reeling. Such waste is also des&ibed as Strusa ( Italian ), Kaubs ( English ) and 300 TH ( Hiidi~I.

l_
h@mt -

- se0 MilJing.
A term used for weak, gummy and immature
se6

jute fibres.

Fw

Motem-

Mates,
G

4

A term specifying the spacing of the loop-forming elements in knitting and ancillary machines and expressed as the number of elements per unit of length; and specifying the physical dimensions, usually thickness, of loop-forming elements. silk from the inner part of cocoons ($66 also

W A term

G&tame -Waste Bassinas 1.

QunettingA process of recovering the fibres from hard-twisted thread wastes, rags; clippings, etc, especially of wool. The object is to thoroughly break-up the material and return it to a flu* fibrour condition so that it may be reused in blends, or in some cases alone. Gasmad YarnA yarn that has been I'.lsred through a gas flame to remove protruding fibres and improve the yam by making it smoother in appearance. Garring - A process of burning off protruding @es from the surface of yarn or cloth to obtain a smooth surface. Also known as singing. Gauge-Length Nominal

4

The length of a specimen under specified pre-tension measured from nip-to-nip of the jaws of the holding clamps at the beginning of the test; and to tabs, measured while the specimen is under specified tension. 28

W The distance between points at which the specimen in attached

GHNXU - The yam drawn by hand out of War cocoons without any twisting.
Gilling - An operation, preparatory to #pinning, of parting wool or jute or flax or spun-rilk fibrer through one or more gill boxer in order to improve fibre parallelization.

Ginning - A procetr of separating lint from seed-cotton. Ginning Percentage- The ratio of the mass of lint to the mass of seed cotton ( KAPAS) exprerled as a percentage. Gianti ( Roller ) -A ginning procers `in which the fibrer on rad cotton are made to adhere t? the roughened surface of a rotating leather coated roller and are pulled out from the reed by the actiotl of one or more kniver. Ginning ( saw ) - A ginning procerr in which the fibrer on teed cotton are gripped by saw teeth bordering a number of parallel dirce on a rotating shaft. A suitably placed grid prevents the reedr from advancing with the fibres and thus the latter get wrenched from the seeds. Glaze - The smooth, glossy and plane appearance of the surface of .a fabric produced by the application of heat along with heavy prerrure.
Grade (Cotton ) -

Clarri%ation matter and ginning percentage.

of cotton according to colour, ,foreign

Grade ( SiIk) - Clarsificatiqn of raw rilk of the basis of testr carried out according to rtandard method6 in silk conditidniag hourer. The qualities taken into con$deration are windin , size, tenacity, elongation, eyenneu, t 1964* ). cleahness and neatnesr ( see IS : 293 Grade ( Wool) -Classification of' wool according length and yield. Grade ( Yarn ) -Sea Yam Appearance. Gzaclipg of Jate - _Tu(efibrer are grown mainly in different district8 of Aaram,`West-Bengal'and Bihar and alao in rmall quantitiea in Orissa, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradeih, Tripura, etc. Becaure of the difference in climatic conditions, seeds, coilr, methodr umd and availability of water in different districtr, these dbrea vary widely in quality. Fibres grown even in the same district vary ao widely that they are usually lorted
*Method of grading rsw

to their fineneu,

silk. 29

IS t 232 - 1985 out into various grades, such as tops, middles, bottoms, B-bottoms, X-bottoms and HABIj'ABI, the tops being the best and HABIJABI the worst. Grainage -An rearers. Grainbur institution where silkworm seed is produced and sold to

The person engaged in the production of silkworm seed.

Grandrelle Yarn -A 2-ply yarn composed.of single yarns which differ from each other in colour or lustre. Greasy Wool Wool which has not been scoured. Yarn which has not been scoured.

Greasy Yarn (Wool) Green Cotton condition.

Cotton lint obtained from bolls picked in an immature Raw silk produced by filatures.

Grege ( French ) -

Grenadine Twist - Hard-twisted plied slk yarn with 800 to 2 400 tpm, composed of singles, which have been first twisted in the same direction and then have been twisted together in the reverse direction.
NOTE -It friction. is used in the $arp of greaadiper which have to withstand
revere

Grey Cloth dyed.

Cloth in the `loom state before it is scoured, bleached or

Grist - The linear density of bast fibre ' yarns. spun on jute system expressed in terms of weight in pounds of one spyndle ( 14 400 yd ) of, yarn (See Count of Yarn ). Guna ( Silk ) - A sticky protein material that coats the'filaments of raw silk. This is otherwise known as `sericin'.
NOTE - The gum serves to cement together the two filamentr of silk have and aids in the formation of the cocoon; in silk manufacture, the gum ir useful as a natural-size in weaving and in the conrtruction of fabrics such al bolting cloth.

Gum Silk removed.

Thrown

silk from which gum or

sericin has not been

Gum Spots -Hardened places in skiens of raw silk caused, when, at some stage of production excessive moisture softens the gum in raw ailk 30

IS : 232 - 1985 and the gum later hardens to form an aggregated mass of filaments and gum. Gum Waste - Bits of silk collected as waste in the re-reeling of raw silk at the filatures or during throwing and weaving. It is also called `STRA<<A' ( Indian ) or `Bourre' ( French ). Gun Cotton - Raw cotton treated with a mixture of nitric acid and sulphuric acid having powerful explosive properties. Cat Thread - A thread incorporated in a woven, knitted, or braided structure, primarily for the purpose of limiting its extensibility.

Gutter Fly -Very short fibres and dust taken out of cotton through the dust extracting cages during the blow room treatment; generally this is treated as a part of invisible loss.
H

HABIL.ABtThis indicates a grade of raw jute in entangled form ( not in MORAHS ) ( see Grading of Jute ).
HairAnimal fibre other than sheep's wool or silk. used for elongated cells growing from epidermis. The term is also

Hairiness - The condition of a textile material with numerous loose fib& ends or loops or both, projecting from its surface. Halo-Length -A on a cotton seed. measure of fibre length made on a halo combed out ,

Handle - The subjective assessment of a textile material obtained from the sense of touch.
NOTE - It is concerned wit4 the subjective judgementof roughness, smoothness, harahneu, pliability, thickness, etc.

Hank a) A synonym for skein; b) A yarn or twine in coiled form; 4 A definite length of sliver, slubbmg, roving or yarn, for example, 848 yards of cotton yam; 568 yards for worsted yarn, etc; 4 A synonym, for count as applied to sliver, slubbing or roving, for example, 2-hank roving; and

4 The skein of a reel rilk. 31

ISr232-1985 Hard Twisted Yarn Hard Waste -Yarn weaving processes. - Yarn having waste produced more twist than bormal. during spinning, preparatory and

Hawser Twist - A cabled yam, cord or rope construction in which the single and first ply twist are in the same direction and the second ply twist in the opposite direction, S/S/Z or Z/Z/S construction. Head (Jute) - Bundles of jute in a bale or raw jute usually weighing from 2'25 to 4.50 kg. Each head is given a twnt and folded prior to packing in the bale. Heavy-Conditioned and foreign matter.
Wool -

Wool containing

a large

amount

of yolk

from the inner bark of the hemp plant, Hemp - A soft fibre obtajned &nnabis Sutioa. The fibres are steel grey to creamy white in cqlour It is usually occuring in a narrow flat ribbons of 1 to 2.5 m in length. used in the manufacture of ropes, twines and rugs.
NOTB The term `hemp' is indiscriminately applied to a great many fibrea, for example, Manila heinp, Sisal hemp, Bombay hemp and Madras hemp.

Hoops

-

SeeBands. The outer hard shells of cotton seeds.

Hulls ( Cotton 1 -

hard jute strands running from the lower end HUN&A (Jute 1-Very up to practically the tip of the fibre. This is due to insufficient or no retting.

yssdia Hemp -

SeeSunn.

bt&sic Stren&k - The value obtained by dividing the mean single fibre strength by the mean fibre weight per unit length (synonemour with tenacity ).

J
is an inferior variety of jute coming mainly JAffiLI (Jute ) -This `from some Bihar districts. This variety of jute is usually not properly retted or cleaned. J.Z opening (Silk) -Yam processes. spun out of tasar waste without subjeoting it to

32

Is:2322-1985

hxmz-

see Frison.

Jpre - A multicellular fibre obtained from the bast of various species of corchorus, of which the round pod jute ( Corchorus capnclark or white jute ) and the long pod jute ( Corchorus olitoriusor Tossa or DAZSEE jute ) are the most important. The fibres are long usually varying from 1.5 to 3.5 m. K

KAPAS - A term used for seed cotton.
Kapok - A unicellular fibre.obtained from the seed pods of the kapok tree, ceiba pntandra ( Eriodendron anfracluosum) and Bombax malabaricum. The fibres are about 2'5 cm in length, white or twany in colour and have silky lustre. It cannot be spun into yarn. It is very light and is used mainly for stuffing purposes.

KATIA - The yarn spun out of tasar waste after opening and cleaning.
Keel - See Cut Marks. Kemp - A coarse animal fibre with a wide lattice-type medulla, which is shed from the skin at least once a year; it is often shorter than fibres of the fleece, has a long tapering tip and, when completely shed, tapers sharply toward8 the root end. NOTX 1 - Kemp fibrea are usually chalky white in appearance, but may be coloured either very dark brown to black or reddish. Kemps are usually very rtrongiy inherited. When dyed, because the cortex is relatively thin, they appear even much lihter in c010ur than normal fibrer.
No~x 2 The use of'thii term ia not necessarily confined to wool fibrea.

Kepnf -

The fibre obtained
gen$ is commonly

from the bast layer of the plant
known as Mwta in India. of ita properties,

Hibiscus

&pwubitw.t. Nom 1 -

NOTE 2 - Beiv Jmiiar to jute in m&y an alternative to or UI admixture with jute.

kenaf is used either

as

Kete ( SUk ) M -

A term used for handspun

taaar thread. yarn.

Fabric woven on handloom

using handspun

&BANDY - Sm Candy.
A type of Brazilian cotton in which the seeds adhere Kidney cotton together in clusters, making ginning difficult, 33

Kink -A definite deflection of a portion of the length of a fibre or yam from the general .direction of the remainder. Kinky Yarn or Thread Se6Snarly Yarn.

Knop Yarn or Thread - A fancy yarn with knops or lumps of one,$ tiore components at regular or irregular intervals, Knot a) A joining by tying together, b) A tuft of yarn inserted in hand-made pile carpets, or

c) A package made up of a number of skeins.

Lamb's Wool - First clip of wool sheaGed off lambs which are less than 6 months old.

Lap
a) General - A sheet of fibres or cloth wrapped round a core with specific applications in different sections of the industry, for example, sheets of fibre wound on rollers or round endless aprons to facilitate transfer from one process to the next.
cotton spinning, the rheets of fibre from openers and NOTE -In acutchers, sliver-lap machines, and ribbon-lap machines arewound oti the cores; in worsted preparing, the gilled libres from the sheeter box are wrapped rounda wide aaron.

b) Flax

-An arrangement of the fibre strands in scutched flax pieced out of hacking or in pieces of hackled flax to facilitate their removal ;os separate units from built-up bundles.
one method, a small bunch of fibres is aeparated from one NOTE -In side of the root laid across the centre of the pieces; the end t then folded round od to the under-side. In another method a half twist is inserted at the centre of the piece and compressed between thumb and first linger until the piece is placed in position in the bundle.

4

length of cloth between the successive tra;yerse Cloth -The folds when pieces are plaited down or folded. Cloth An, individual layer of cloth in roll form. The entire quality of eggs lajd by a single moth. 34

4

Laying ( Silk ) -

IS I 232 - 1985 J&a ( cotton ) - A continuous length of yarn the form of coil made on 1'5 yards girth reel. measuring 120 yards in

LeasingThe operation of. inserting a crossed traverse lease-cord in wraps of yarn on a reel for the purpose either of separating wraps into groups of specific numbers, for example, 120 or to prevent entangling of wraps of yarn during processing, for example, hank dying, to facilitate subsequent winding on a yarn package from hank supply after removal of the lease-cords. Lea Strength ( Lea Breaking Strength) yarn ( see qlso Breaking Load ). Light Conditioned Wool -Wool and foreign matter. containing Breaking load of a lea of

a small

amount

of yolk

per unit length. The preferred Linear Density -Mass measurements are in grams and metres, or their multiples The tex ( grams per kilometre ) is recommended ~z!Ezt )* Linen - Yarn, thread or fabric made from Aax fibres ( see also

units of or subfor yarns

Flax ).

Linen Count - The linear density of linen yam as number of 300 yards hanks/lb ( see Count ). Lint a) The main fibres separated

( wet spun ), expressed

from the cotton seed by ginning;

or

b) A plain-weave sterilized material with a raised Aeecy surface, being highly absorbent and of a tybe made for surgical purposes made from cotton. short Linter -Very seed already ginned. %bres removed by delinting process from cotton

plied ( usually two-ply), good-quality Lisle Thread - A highly-twisted, All lisle threads are cotton hosiery yam, spun generally in %ne counts. gassed and some may be mercerized ( mercerized lisle ). Lists Llama Ssc Selvedges. Hair of the South American llama (see also Alpaca).

Lock ( Wool ) -

A tuft of wool. 35

Looming

- A term covering the processes involved in preparing, the weaver's beam for the loom, for example, drawing-in, dropper-pinning, sleying, knotting, tying, etc.

Loop Length ( Pile Structurei ) - The continuous length of yam or fibres between the two successive lowest points of bindings of the pile in the substrate. Louminers - A defect in silk due to fibrillation of rilk,6laments. ,The filament splits up into fine fibrils, which form small neps and which in dyed fabric, are evident as white specks ( set also Fibrillation ). Lovers-Knot-Mat Llunell SeeMats (g).

A canal or central cavity in the fibre.

Lump - A length of unfinished fabric usually longer than the customary piece length. Lustl% - The display of different intensities `,of light reflected both specularly and diffusely from different parts of a surface expored to the same incident light. Due to this reflection of light, the surface of textiles ( fibre, yarn or fabrics ) looks glossy or shinning.

M
Madras Hemp SeeBombay Hemp.

MANGADAN

Yarn - See Coir Yarn (b).

Manila Hemp-A hard 6bre obtained from the leaf stems forming the trunk of the Abaca plant Musa textiles. The fibrea are long ( 1 to 3 m ), rather coarse, creamy white to brown in colour quite strong and durable. It is extensively used for the manufacture of ropes and cordages. Marabout Silk - Hard-twisted, stiff silk yam dyed in the gum state, consisting of 2 or 3 untwisted or slightly twisted singles. It is used for crepes. Marl Yarn Matching

-Yarn made by running together and drafting into one, two slubbings or rovings of different colour or lustre.

a) General - A process in which the proportions of the dyes present in a material are adjusted so that the final colour resembles that of a given sample as closely as possible; and 36

b)

Wool- A process in wo61 sorting tihich conrirta of putting together .those portiont of different fleeces which correspond in quality. cut of mulberry pierced

MAZY&4 -The yarn spun by hand appliancea and other warte cmoons. Mats ( Coir ) These are charact&ed

by their method of production of bits of coir yarn

8B fObVS:

4

Bit Ma& - The pile is prod&d by insertiin in place of the fibre or the PUn3;a yti.

W Brush Mats - The
barn fabric.

piie ia obtained by cutting topping or PUJVJA yarxu wound on a flat iron rod with groved rod interlacing'the Also called `Rod Mats'.

4

Co+ri&r Ma& - The yams forming the face of the ,' it are taken alternatively over metal rodr in a series to m 2 e the`required lea th. When the fabric is formed, the metal rods gre removed an 1 thick coir yarn ia ,inaerted to obtain'Xlf& con&dated mat, Creel iUat#- The pile is produced by cutting the loop0 made from an additional ret of warp yarn. ' The base fabric of a creel mat may be either of coir or jute or a mixture of the two depending on the quality.

4

4

Dumpins Mats -Pillow

like structures with straight sides from heavy grade matting made from AJVJENGO or ARATORT yarn. It is tightly filled ,with cut coir fibrea or coir yarn to give The sides are sewn thoroughly with rufficient reaihency. These mats act as shock absorbers when high-twist coir yam. material are unloaded from a lorry or a truck, thus preventing the material unloadbd being damaged. TWO loops of coir rope are provided at the two endr for lifting the mats. Fibrs Mats-The alternate warps. pile is produced by insertion of fibre around The fibre ils held in place by weft yarn.

f)

d

Lovers-Knot Mat - Obtained in a similar manner to the sinnet mat but instead of the braided yam, ropes are u&d. A set of five ropes are used to form the mat in which neither the beginning nor the end of the rope can be detected.
Mut - Obtained ruitably finished. from 37 cut-lengths of matting, and

W Mutt@

I8 I 232 - 1985 j ) Rod Mats - See Brush Mats (b) above. \ k) Simst Mat yarn. Matted Matting Wool Produced by suitable arrangement of braided coir

SeeCotted

Wool.

4

Coir - Coir floor covering fabric woven on handlooms in plain, Mattings are sold in standard dobby and jacquard designs. length of 45. m but in different widths ranging from 30 to 275 cm. One individual piece of matting is called a unit. 7ute -Jute floor covering jacquard designs. fabric woven in plain, striped, dobby

b)

Mattress Fibre ( Coir ) - The waste extraction of bristle fibre along with pith.

fibre

obtained

during

the

Maturity - The degree to which the lumen ( or canal ) of cotton fibre has been obtiterated by the cellulose laid down in the walls of the fibre. Mean Fibrc Length The average measure of the fibre length. obtained by

Mean Fibre Mass per Unit Length -The quantity dividing the mean fibre mass by the mean fibre length. Medium Cross-Bred Wool of about 29 to 34 micrometres. Wools lying in the fibre

diameter

range

more or less continuous cellular narrow cavity/canal Mednlla -The inside the cortical layer in most of the medium and coarse wools and hairy fibres. Melange Yarn - A`yarn produced from coloured printed tops or slivers, being distinguished from a mixture. yarn, in that thefibres have more than one colour upon them. Mercerization - The treatment of cellulosic textiles and blends in yarn or fabric form with caustic soda solution of desired strength whereby the yams or fabrics are swollen, dye affinity and lustre of the materials are increased. Merino Wool -Wool from pure bred merino mean fibre diameter of 25 microns or less. 38 sheep, normally having a

IS t 232 - lgg!i Merino Yhrn Yam made from merino quality wool.. A fabric having appreciable openings/spaces r4 etween

Mesh ( Fabric ) the threads.

MESTA - See Kenaf.
Metric Count - The linear density of yams, expressed as number of 1 O()Om hanks/kg ( see Count of Yarn ). Middle (Jute ) Mildew variation

Indicates a quality of raw jute ( set Grading ofJute ).

A superficial growth produced by certain species of fungi,
this may lead to diacolouration, tendering, and in dyeing properties.

NOTE- On textile materials,

Milling (Cloth Finishing ) - The process of `consolidating or compacting woven or knitted fabrics which usually, though not exclusively, contain wool.
NOTE -The treatment, which is usual& given, in a cylinder milling machine or iu milling rtock, produces relative motion between the fibres of a fabric which have been wetted out and swollen with a liquid of ruitable fiH. Depending on the type of fibre and the structure of the fabric and on variations in the conditions of milling a wide range of effects can be obtained from a slight alteration in handle to a de-e matting with considerable reduction in area.

Mill Rigs -

Creases produced in milling.

Mixture Fabric - Cloth made of mixture yarns or of yams made of different types' of fibres, for example, wool and cotton, or wool and man-made fibres. Mixture Yarn -Yarn made by mixing together of fibres of different &ara&eri&ics, such as, colour, lustre, etc. Mock GrandrelIt Yarn A single yarn with a grandrelle effect. .

Modal Length - The central length of the group which in a fib+ length frequency dirtrrbutron contams the largest number of fibrer. &hair The hair of the angora goat. in a textile material

Moisture ContentThe weight of moisture expressed as a percentage of the total weight. 39

x8:232-1985 . If 100 parts by weight of material contain8 20 parta by weight of moisture, the moisture content is 100

-100

x 20 = 20 percent

Moisture Equilibrium- The condition reached by a sample or specimen in a controlled atmosphere when the net difference beMeen the amount of moisture absorbed and the amount desorbed, as shown by a change in weight, shows no trend and becomes insigniticant. For tert purpose, moisture equilibrium shall be reached by absorption, starting from a relatively low moisture content.
Moisture Regain - The weight of moisture present in a textile material expressed aa a percentage of the oven-dry weight.

EXmnplc If 100 parts by weight of material contains 20 parts by weight of moisture, the regain is 100 x 20 = 25 percent 80 Morah See Head. vegetable matter other than jute adhering to the

jute fibre strands.
Motes

Moss (Jute ) -The

- small pieces.of broken or crushed seeds or small immature seeds found in ginned'cotton.

a) Fuzzy Motes - The largest of this type of mote consists of whole aborted or immature seeds covered with fuzz fibres and possibly also with very short iint fibres, the development of which ceased at a very early stage. Small fuzzy motes originate as either undeveloped or fully grown seeds, which are broken in ginning and disintegrate still further in the opening, cleaning, and carding processes. b) Bearded Motes attached.
Mottle Yarn -

A piece of seed coat with fairly long lint fibres

See Grandrelle Yarn.

Moulting - Shedding of skin by silkworm during its larval stage. The silkworm normally sheds its ski-t four times during its development.

40

IS : 232 - 1985
Mourzouke - A floor covering produced on special looms, the surface and pattern of which is formed by the weft yarn and not by warp yarns as in coir matting; the warp threads are drawn back into the fabric after weaving ( see also Carpets ).

Silk from the cocoons built by partly domesticated moth Antheraea Assamensis.
Muga Silk Mulberry -An urticaceous, hardy and perrenial tree of the genus morus; silkworms ( Bombayx Mori ) feed on its leaves. Malberry Silk - Silk mainly of yellow, white or greenish yellow colour obtained from domesticated silkworm Bombyx mori belonging to the family Bombycidae which feed on mulberry leaves.

MuIe Spinning - A system of spinning on a mule frame in which the drafting of the roving, twisting of the yarn and winding it on the bobbin, takes place intermittently and not continuously (see also Ring Spinning ).
Mdtivoltine Cocoons - Cocoons built by a silkworm race ,vith more than two geqerations ( life cycles ) in a year.

Mungo - The fibrous material made in the woollen trade by pulling down new or old hard woven or milled cloth or felt in rag f&m (see also Shoddy ). Mushy Wool - Without any regularity of staple, obtained usually from old sheep in bad seasons. It is usually not combed as its yield of top is poor and the quantity of nails is large. N
Nap ( Wool ) -

Pile or cover obtained on cloth by raising, rubbing, etc.

fiPPis% cloth.

-

A finishing process used for obtaining nap on the surface of

Naps ( Cotton ) -

Small aggregates of loosely entangled cotton fibres. They are comparatively easy to remove from cotton and generally their individual fibres can be easily separated. They are larger than neps.
Nep - A small knot-like aggregate of tightly entangled fibres, usually not larger than a common pin-head ( about 2 mm in diameter ).

Ntp Count - The number of neps per unit weight of material, expressed in terms of number of neps per gram. 41

usually

IS : 232 - 1985 Nett Silk -Raw Nails

silk filaments or strands which have been processed into yarns by twisting or folding or both.

a) General - Shorter fibres separated process of combing; or

from longer fibres durmg the

b) SilkShort stapled residue from the dressing operations in silk spinning.
?loils Yarn ( Silk ) -

Yarn s@.tn from silk noils.

sheet, web or batt or Non-woven - A non-woven is manufactured directionally or randomly orientated fibres, bonded by friction, and/or cohesion and/or adhesion, excluding paper and products which are even, knitted, tufted, stitch-bonded incorporating binding yarns or filaments or felted by wet-milling whether additionaliy needled or not. The fibres may be of natural or man-made origin. They may be staple or continuous filaments or be formed in situ.
Northrow Silk - Two or more untwisted' singles, which are doubled together with no more twist than is necessary to bind together the filaments of silk.

loops.

NOTE

-The

treatment given makesa very soft yarn and eliminate formationof 0

Omatt

Fibre ( Coir ) -

The shorter fibres obtained while combing the

bristle fibre.
Opening a) A general

term covering several processes in the preliminary treatment of raw cotton. The primary objects of which are to separate the compressed and matted masses of cotton into loose tufts and to remove the heavier and bulkier impurities.

b) A geqeral term for opening of cloth. from rope form to open width form through scutcher or opener machine. consisting of 2 or 3 single threads with Z-twist Organizine -Yarn of400 to 800 tpm, doubled with S-twist of 400 to 700 tpm. mass of a sample of textile materials dried Oven Dry Mass -The to constant mass in a drying oven maintained at 140 f 2�C for silk and 105 f 3�C for other fibres. 42

IS : 232 - 1985 Open Boil - Scouring of` cellulosic textiles with alkaline liquors in open-topped vessels at or near to boiling point ( see Sctiuring ).
`Steeps'.

NOTE-

Scour:

at temperatures

lower than

the boil are usually I

refer+

to a

production of spun yams by a process in Open-end Spis+ng -The which the sliver or roving is opened or separated to its individual fibres or tufts and is subsequently reassembled in the spinning element into a yarn. Ovule Small undeveloped seed present in cotton. P Par Weighting - A degree of weighting that results in a degummed silk returning to its original weight. Thus it is considered that 100 lb of raw silk yields 75 lb of degummed silk and from this will be produced 100 lb of par-weighted silk. Par weighted silk is also known as 16 oz, weighted silk. Thus- weighted silk of which 150' lb is produced from 100 lb of raw silk is silk of 24 oz weighting.

PASEMINA

- See Cashmere Wool.

Patent Selvedge - A type ot selvedge formed within the width of cloth between the real selvedges of the cloth. This enables the cloth to be subsequently cut into narrower widths and prevents the cut edges so formed from frying; it is also called Split Selvedge. When the selvedge is at the centre of the width of the fabric it is called Centre Selvedge. PAT A The local Beegali names for raw jute. Photo Degradation - Degradationcaused by electromagnetic in the ultra-voilet, visible, and near infra-red wave-bands. radiation
on

radiationfallr NOTE 1 - Photo degradation occurs only when electromagnetic the textile, but the resulting total degradation may depend on other factors. NOTE 2 -The practical purposes photo chemically 296-800

limits of the visible spertrum are ill-defined, but for most the lower limit is 380 nm and the upper 780 nm. In daylight, the are principally in the wavelength range active radiations

Pick a~& Pick - Putting in regular succession single picks of different character'stics, such as count and colour. Picking a) The operation of passing the Weft through ( see shed ) during weaving. 43 the warp shed

,ISr232-1985
b) The rectification of the face and back of a carpet after manufacture including inserting missing tufts, replacing incorrect ones, and repairing broken yarns in the backing ( local mending ). c) A process carried out before the final stage of cloth finishing to remove by hand any contamination ( such, as kemp, `wrong fibre, coloured hair, etc ) which has not been removed by previous processing, `This process is carried out particularly during the finishing of suitings, face-finished cloths, and cream or off-white cloths. Picks The weft or filling yarn which lies across the length of fabric. A customarily accepted continuous length of cloth.

Piece Length -

from which the moth has emerged after Pierced Cocoon -Cocoon softening the end of the cocoon and forcing its way out.
NOTE- Pierced cucoons are not reelable and are wed in spunsilk manufacture.

Pile - The raised loops or tufts forming al!. or a portion of: surface of certain types of fabrics or carpets. Pitch - The average number of tufts or knots in carpets per unit area. Traditionally number of knot per sq inch. Pilling - Small accumulations of fibres on the surface of a fabric. Pills can develop during wear, are held to the fabric by an entanglement with the surface fibres of the material. Plain Weave - The type of weave in a cloth in which each warp thread for a pair of warp threads passes alternatively over and'under each weft thread. Plied Yarn Ply SeeFolded Ywn.

One of the component threads in plied or cabled yarn. SeeDoubling.
l

Plying -

Porter (Jute ) a) Fabric - The value obtained by counting in a jute fabric or jute product as marketed, the number of warp threads per full gauge length of 47 mm ( or 37/20 in) and dividing it by the number of threads per split. ( 2 for hessian, 4 for-double warp plain fabric and 6 for double warp twill cloth). b) Reed - Number of groups of 20 splits over 94 cm ( 37 in). 44

IS t 232 - 1985 bring a sample or specimen to a relatively low Preconditioning -To [equilibrium m an atmosphere between 10 content moiature and 25 percent RH and not exceeding 50�C (see Note) ] prior to atmosphere conditioning in a controlled for testing. ( While preconditioning is frequently translated as predrying, specimens should not, in fact, be brought to the oven-dry state ).
NOTE-Thw conditions may be obtained by heating air +t 65 percent RH and 27�C ( the standard atmorphere.) to a temperature up io %I`%.

relatively Jow tension used to remove kinks and Pre-tension -The crimp when mounting a specimen preparatory to making a test and used to establish the nominal gauge length. PioOfiXlg - A chemical treatment fire, insects, rot, moth, etc. Protein - A natural polymer, by the peptide group (--CO and other animal hair fibres. of fabric to make it resistant to water,

consisting --NH-

of amino acids linked together -). Examples are silk, wool

abstracting a sample of fibres Pull ( Sampling) - The act of manually from a bulk lot of raw material or sliver with a view to assessing the length and,`or distribution of length,of fibre within the sample. Pulled Wool SeeSkin Wool.

Puppa ( Silk ) - The resting stage in the life cycle of a lepidopteran insects ( it is also called Chrysalis Stage ). During this stage, replacement of larval organs by that of the adult is realized. Pure Dye Silk Silk dyed but neither weighted nor adulterated.

Raising ( Wool ) -

SeeNapping.

soft fibre obtained from the bark of the ramie plant, Ramie -A Bothmria nivea and B. tenacissima, belonging to the nettle family. The fibres are from 10 to 100 cm in length, white in eolour, very strong and durable and have silky lustre. It is still being used in the manufacture of fabrics for dress goods, sports clothes, table cloths, etc. .Ratch
a) The distance

roller

drafting

between the nips of the front and back system ( synonym, reach ). 45

rohers

in a

X3:232-1983
b) A. slight additional drafting of the yarn, which taken place towards the end of the mule draw.
Raw Silk -The silk reeled by drawing together the required number of filaments from cocoons; it contains its original gum or serioin. See `Patent Selvedge' and `Selvedge'.

Real Selvedg? Rearing

House - The house wherein silkworms hatching of eggs to formation of cocoons. Wool -

are reared

from

Reclaimed

`mungo'.
Reach

Wool recovered `from rags, known as `shoddy' or

a) See Ratch (a), and b) The distance from the back heald to the back rest or back roller of a loom ( locally Ratch or Perry ).
Reed

a) A device consisting of a number of wires closely set between two slats or baulks which may serve any or all the following purposes: i) Separating the warp threads, ii) Determining the spacing of the warp threads, iii) Guiding the shuttle, and iv) Beating up the weft. b)

Juti -

The fibre coming from one jute plant, held together as a unit by the meshy structure of the fibre system; and

c) To draw ends through a,reed. Reed Number or Count of Reeql - The number of dents per unit width of reed. There have been many units in common use. The recommended SI unit is dents/cm.
Reed Length Reediness

(jute

)-

The average length of jute fibre strands.

-Crack between groups of warp ends appearing either uniformly across the cloth or in an isolated manner.
-

Reeling

The process of winding silk filament from the cocoon. 46

IS ! 232 - 1985 Relative Humidity -The ratio of the actual pressure of .the water vapour in the atmosphere to the saturation vapour pressure at the same temperature. The ratio is usually expressed as a percentage ( see also Absolute Humidity ). Recommended Allowance -The percentage that, in the calculation of commercial weight and of yarn linear density is added to the oven-dry weight with or without previous washing to remove natural or added oils and dressings. For such materials, the recommended allowance is arbitrarily chosen according to commercial practice and includes the moisture regain. It may also include the normal finish that is added to impart satisfactory textile qualities to the material. Regain Renditta of raw silk. Example If 18 kg of cocoons give 1 kg of raw silk, the yield is said to be 18 renditta. Rereeling - The process of winding yarn reeled on small reels on to standard reel ( 150 cm ) to make hanks for marketing. RESHAiU lndian name for natural silk ( see also Raw Silk ), SeeMoisture Regain. The number of kilograms of cocoons required to yield 1 kg The cocoons yield is expressed in terms of renditta,

treatment on the crop to make the bast fibre strands Retting -The more easily separable from the woody part ( stick ) of the stem by immersing the plants in water which sets up certain chemical and biological changes to help the procesr. Ribbon Width ( Cotton ) - The width of the broadest part of a fibre between two successive convolutions. Rigging See Cuttle.

Ring Spinning - A system of spinning on a ring frame in which drafting of the roving, twisting of the yarn and winding it on the bobbin takes place simultaneously and continuously ( see also Mule Spinning ). Rings ( Raw `Silk ) -Places where a length of raw silk thread has, in reeling, been inadvertently wound in the form of ring instead of in its usual cross form, due to the thread having escaped from the travemmg guide of the reeling machine. Rings increase waste in
Winding.

47

us t 232 - a85 Rod Mats SeeMats (b). hard, of barky portions at the lower end of jute construction with a circumference

Roots (Jute ) -`The strand. Rope - A material of 25 mm or more. Roping Yam -

cordage

SueCoir Yarn ( j ).

Rove ( or Roving )
a) General -

A continuous, slightly twisted strand of fibres produced on a roving frame and from which yam is spun; or

b) Wool - A continuous strand of fibres with no twist, made from the web produced on condenser card by splitting the web into a number of parts and then condensing each part by rubbing; R=g A piece of thick, heavy fabric used for floor covering. as

Runnage

( Coir ) -Unit of linear density for coir yarn expressed number of metres per kilogram or yards per pound.

Runners (Jute ) -The hard barky jute strand running from its lower end to the middle or sometimes up to the tip of the fibre. This-is due to incomplete retting. . . ..
S

Sappy Wool -Wool containing abundance of grease; consequently the yield of such wool is IOW. Schappe' - Spun silk yarn, particularly that which is made from stock which has been partly degummed by the schapping or maceration process.
NOTE-Such a fermentation process' does not remove the gum entirely and hence schappe contains up to 10 to 12 percent of gum. gcorrrsge of Yarn ( Coir ) - A number indicating the fineness or coarseness of the coir yarn which is obtained by dividing the number of strands that could be laid very close to each other without ,overlapping in a length of 0'914 m ( OF 1 yd) by 20.

Scouring - Treatment of textile materials in aqueous or other solutions in order to remove natural fats, waxes, proteins and other constituents, as well as dirt, oil and other impurities. Pg

IS I 232 - 1985 property of finished silk such that the material has a ScfooP -A characteristic feel and gives a crunching noise when crushed by hand. It is produced by acid treatment and appears to be due to the presence of fatty acids or some ruch lubricant. Scatching

4

- An operation in preparing cotton for spinning that has three objects, namely, to reduce the cotton to loose open condition by beating it, removal of `impurities.remaining in the cotton after opening, and the formation of a continuous lap or web of cotton wound on to a rod for use on carding machine. A cleaning operation given to bast fibres like flax and hemp, after they have heen retted, to separate the fibres from the woody portion of the stalk.

&m

b)

So&&ng ( ConditiosGag of Hot Airing) -The technique of killing and drying the pupae in the cocoons by subjecting the cocoons to hot air of specific temperature in an enclosed chamber for required time without damaging the quality of silk in the cocoons. Se4 coooOrn propagation. cocoons of pure race of selected quality chosen for It to

&ad Cotton - Raw cotton ( including seeds.) as removed from-boils. is also called &4PAS. &edy Wool-Wool remove. containing a variety of grass seeds difficult

&ad HairFibrei growing from the rurface of seeds or from the inner surfacesof fruit cases orpodr. Such fibres ( seed hairs ) art formed by &t marked elongation of tpidtrmal cells. NOTE - From a botanical asp+, cotton is a seed hair, since it is an outgrowth in the form ofshgld cells from the eprdermis or outer skin of cotton seeds. h this mpect, cotton Meti from fine vegetable fib which are composed of 8 number of plant cells, usually joined and cemented together to form a bundle and often occurring in Pe stems ( for example, flax) or leaves ( for ex8mple, sisal ) of plants ofshrubs. Nevertheless, in COIXUIW~~X and industry, it is customary to refer to cottou as a vegetable fibre. Calotropis ( akund ) and Asclepiaa ( milkweed ) are other examplar of hain growing on seeds, whereas Jkiodendron (Java kapok ) grows on -the inuer surface and the placenta of seed pods.
@elvedgea - The longitudinal tdgts of a fabric formed in such a way that its ,eomponent threads cannot ravel. to distinguih

Nom - In jute industry, a selvedge is somrimer called RS or Real Selv~ it from PS or Pknt Sehdge.

49

IS:232919S5 Sericin SeeGum. and science of raising silkworms for the

art f3ewiculture -The production of COCOOIIS. Serriqtions WOOlS.

The scales of wool fibre, more in evidence on the finer

Set or Sett a) A term used to indicate the spacing of ends or picks, or both per unit length. It is usually expressed as ends or picks per decimetre ( or centimetre ); or b) A synonym for `Count of Reed'. Shafty Wool -Well staples. Shaming ( Wool) -To Shives a) Vegetable matter other than burr found in fleece, and b) The short pieces of woody waste beaten from the straw during scutching. smddy ( Wool ) - The fibrous material made in the woollen trade by pulling down new or old knitted or loosely woven fabrics in rag form ( see also Mung0 ). Shorn Wool Wool obtained by shearing live sheep. grown fleece wools having long uniform, sound cut the fleece from a sheep.

Sliot (Jmtc ) - A single thread of weft yam running from seivedge to relvedge; it is inserted in one.pasaage ef the shuttle across the 1-m. t$dmg . Shrinkage

(Jute 1-The
-A

number of weft threads per dm of the finished

decrease in dimensions-of a fabric.

Silk -A protein substance which is secreted in the fluid state by silk worm ( Caterpillar Stage of several silk moths) and which on exposure to air hardens in the form of a thread. It is composed m&y of fibroin hd partly of sericin and other substances. (see u&o Mulberry Silk, 50

ENDI* Muga Silk and Tasar Silk ). The term is also used to denote a
fabric or a yam made from silk or waste ailk. a) All Silk-- A term which may be applied to fabrics where no textile fibre other than siik is present, irrespective of the amount of weighing. b) Pm Silk - A term which may be used oniy where there is no metallic or other weighting of any kind, except that which is an essential part `of dyeing. c) Raw Silk d) Silk Spun Singed Yarn Sissgeiqg -See

See Raw Silk See Spun Silk.

Sec.Gassed Yarn. Gassing. silk when its single threads have

Singlea - A term applied to thrown been twisted; used for chiffon.

Single Filament ( Bast Fibre ) - The finest fibre strand which appears single, to the naked eye. It tends to be identical with a small fibre strand. Single Yarn - A yam whieb is either twistless in a single untwisting operation. Sinkage a) loss ot tieight percentage. in W~OI cleaning, usually expressed as a twistless or can be rendeted

b) Unaccounted or `invisible' loss of weight expressed as a percentage.'
Now-

in processing, usually

It k incorrect to use the word Shrink&e as a synonym for Shtkage.

Sinnot

Mat -See

(j ) under Mats.

Sisal - A hard fib& obtained from the sword like leaves of the d plant, Agava sisalana and other Agava :species. T&e flm:' &a J&g ( 60 to 180 cm ), white or creamy white in colour, and -`strong and durable. It is used extensively for the manufbcturt of bin&t twlB& cummer rugs, brushes, etc. Also known as Sisal hemp. 51

IS:232-1985 Sixe - A colloidal solution of materials, s#ch as starch and glue, which is generally applied when hot before weaving and which when cold forms a film. It strengthens and stiffens the warp- The main typw of subrtancc used are corbohydratm and their dcrivatea; NOTE gelatin, *nd animal glues, althoughpther su&tances, such u kueed oil, polyacrylic acid, and polyvinyl alcohol are also used. Sixe(RawSilk)-

Term used in respect of raw silk synonymous to count in respect of cotton, woollen and jute yarns. The sixe of raw silk is expressed in deniers ( $+re also Denier ). ' sizingA process of applying size to the warp.

Skein - A definite .length of sliver, slubbing, roving or yarn in the form of a coil made on a reel of a speci&d girth. h synonym for hank ( see Hank ). Skein Breaking Ten&&y -The maximum tensile stress developed in a test skein before rupture, expressed in force per unit linear density of the yarn co&ituting the skein. This is expressed in grams per tex. Therefore, skein breaking tenacity, grams per tex p breaking load in grams of skein 2 x number' of wraps in test skein x linear unstrained yarn in tex. density of

Skin WoolWool obtained known as pulled wool.

from the skins of slaughtered

sheep, also

Skirting 2 Portion of the fleece obtained from head, face, legs and britch of sheep, usually removed from the fleece to make it uniform. Sl&hissg-slnta slipe See Sizing.

Srs Battens. Wool see Skin Wool. assemblage of a strand of fibres without twist. by thick unevenportiosu Sucha on a

Sliver -

A continuous

&I& - A defect in yak characterimd yam is called Slubby Yarn.

Slubbiag - A slightly twisted continuous strand of fibrea produced slubbmg .machin+ 52

Slob Yarn -It SUWlS -

is a type of fancy .yam having sluk at intervals.

Small curly portionsin a yarn with twist.

tendencyto twistround itself Snuly Yarn - A yam that shows excessive if held with insufficient tension. It is also known as Kinky Yarn. gorldy ( Silk) i A processof treating raw `silk with oil-in-water. of emulsions to soften the gum and render tht threads pliable ?I?r winding, throwing and knitting. Soft S3lk - Thrown silk yar&.undyed or dyed;ftom which the gum has been removed. Soft-Twisted Yarr -A yam ivith twist less than the no&l.

Soft Waste - Waste which is soft in nature and which has a little or no twist produced durin the spinning @recess; obtained mostly in machines, such as, scutchersand tar&, also includesckarer laps, sweepings,fly, etc.
So(Wool) - Classi&ation and separation of a fleece into parts on the basis of the quality of the fibre. !3ouple Silk - Silk which has been dyed and from which only a part of the gum has been removed. process of treating loose cotton, yarn or cloth in dilute Soaring -A solutionof an acid..

specific strakgth - A eynonym for Tenacity.
SpeciSc Stroas - The ratio of force to mass per unit length ( This ratio is equal to the stress per unit density). it is w~ressed as mN/tex or N/ttx. Specimen- A speci6c portion of material or laboratory sample upon which a single test is performed .or which is selected fat that purpose: of dry leaves and bark which Specks and Leava (Jute) -Spots appear above the root portion of the jute fibre and af&ct the appearance of the fabric. This is due to defectiveretting. Spider SilkThe. product ma&y of Ncphilo ma&qatca@nsi. One characmristic of spider silk is its firianesr,the diameter of filament of Epriru &u&mu is about onetwentieth of that of silk filaments. Spider silk can be srmn and woven but with great difficulty. 53

IS : 232 - !985 Spinner's Waste of fibres into yarn. Spinning a) Generalb) Silk i)_ The process of making yarn out of discontinuous filaments of silk, and ii) An operation by which silkworms produce cocoons. space ~between two adjacent wires of a. loom reed. Split -The term is also used for a wire of the loom reed. Splits Fabrics woven with split selvedges. SeePatent Selvedge. The The process or processes for producing single yams. All types of waste produced during the conversion

Split ,Stlvedge Spool-

See Cheese.

Spun-Silk ( Yarn ) - Yarn made from waste silk and pierced cocoons, by dressing and spinning; it is composed of short lengths of filaments ranging from 2.5 to 20 cm. trjz$arn; Staining a) Any adventitious ( unwanted ) colour, iron, on textile material. for example, dye, dirt, or A unit of length used in the determination of count or grist it is equal to 13 167 m ( 14 400 yd ).

b) The fugitive or permanent colouring of textile materials with different colours for example, in histology for identification. Standard Atmosphere SeeAtmospheric Conditions for Testing. of a majority of fibres in a

Staple Length - An estirfiated length sample of raw cotton. steeping

a) General - The treatment of textile materials in a bath of liquid, usually, though not necessarily, without wntinuour or intermittent agitation. The term is also applied to processes
!i4

.I6 11232d 1985' whereby the materials are impregnated squeezed, and then allowed to lie. -The b) FLUX aqueous Stenterhsg StMng process liquor. of retting with a liquor, highly in an

flax straw by immersion

The stretching to required width and drying of cloth.

- See'Sechoiring.

skeins made by direct reeling that is Straight Reeled Skeins -The without re-reeling, for example, chaskha and domestic basin reeling. Strand a) A single fibre, filament or monofilament; or

b) A single ordered assemblage of textile fibres having a high ratio of length to diameter and normally used as a unit including slivers, rovings, single yarns, plied yarns, cords, braids, ropes, etc. Strazxa ( Italian ) - See Gum Waste.

ability of a material to resist rupture induced by Strength -The external forces, for example, breaking strength, tear strength, bursting strength; etc. Strings - Small pieces of thread inserted at the selvedges Also known as `flaggings'. indicate defects. St&k ( Flax/Jmte ) - A small bunch of flax straw&of of hackled flax, of a aixe that can be held in the hand. of fabrics to

scutched flax, or

Norm-In the jute section of the textile industry, it is also known as strike, and .rcfen to a bunch of jute similar to a `head' but smaller, uaudly 1-2 kg.

Strusa ( Italian)
S-Twist -

-

SeeFrison.'

See Twist.

suiat a) Excretions from the sweat glands of sheep, princifialiy consisting of pOta+& salt; or b) The water-soluble portion of yolk. 55

xsr232-1985 Sunn -A soft fibre obtained from the &er bark of sunn plant, C~otolario,Jua~a. The fibres are long ( 45 to 150 cm ), grey or brown with a wide range of colour and quality due to difEerenctr in preparation. It is used mainly for twines and cordages. It is also bwn as Sunn Hemp, Bombay Hemp, Madras Hemp, India Hemp, Sana, etc. Sweeping W8Stc a textile mill.
ollcn Fibre Sweepings from the floors or from various

rooma in

Dirmetcr

% SW0 n to its maximum

( Cotton ) -The diameter of a fibre when extent in IS-percent caustic soda rolution. T

Tail End -

The finishing end of a woven piece or a package of yarn. 10 cm in width and not

Tape - A woven narrow fabric not exceeding exceeding 3'4 g/m/cm width.
Tape

Length - The distance between the successive cut marks inserted during sizing of warps.

Tare - The weight of all external and internal packing materials of a case, bale, or other type of container including the weight of bobbins, tubes, etc. Tasar Silk - Silk of natural copperish colour obtained from a species of wild lepidopteran insect ( Antircruen Mylitta) belonging to the It feeds on the leaves of a variety of forest trees such Assamensis group. as Asan ( Teiminalia tomcntosa ), Arjun ( Terminalia Arjuna ), Ber ( <+#u.J Jijuba ), Sal ( Shorea robusta ), and Himalayari oak ( Quercus Sevuta ), and is habitant of Bihar, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh; West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh. Tearing Strength - The force required to start or continue a tern in a fabric under specified conditions. Tenacity

-`The breaking load of a material under test divided linear density of the unstrained material expressed as mN/tex.

by the

Tensile

The relative length deformation exhibited by a Strainspecimen subjected to a tensile force. Strain is expressed as a fraction of the nominal gauge length; also as a percentage ( see a&e Elongation ): 56

IS : 232 - 1985 Tensile Strength

4

General-I The strength shown by a specimen subjected to tension as distinct from torsion, compression or shear. The maximum tensile stress expressed in force unit cross-sectional. area of the unstrained specimen, example, kg/mm2. per for

b) SpGciJic

4
Tensile

True -The maximum tensile stress expressed in force per unit cross-sectional area of the specimen at the time of maximum load.

Stress - The resistance to tensile deformation developed within a specimen subjected to tension by external force. The tensile stress is expressed in two ways, as the force per unit cross-sectional area of the unstrained specimen or as the force per unit linear density of the unstrained specimen. The latter is more frequently used in textile testing and is referred to as specific stress. Tensile Test - A test in which the resistance,of tending to stretch it in one direction is measured. Tentering Be Stentering. material to a force

Tex - The direct decimal .system based on metric units as the universal system for describing the linear density ( mass per unit length ) of fibres, filaments, slivers, and yarns; it is also the name given to the combination grams per kilometre ( see also Count ). The multiple and sub-multiples recommended for use in preference to other possible combinations are as follows: Crams per metre or kilograms per kilometre Milligrams per kilometre Decigrams per kilometre millitex. Decitex. Kilotex,

Textile - Originally a woven fabric; the term is now applied to any manufacture *from fibres, filaments or yarns, natural or man-made, obtained by interlacing.
NOTE- For example, thread, cordn, roper braids, lace, embroidery, cloths made by weaving, knitting, felting, bond,ing, and tufting are texti]-.
nets, and

Thread - The result of twisting together in one or more operations two or more singIe, folded, or cabled yams. 57

as: 232-

1985

,
The term is frequently used to describe single yarn% threada is used an a synonym of fold, for

NOTE1 -

NOTE 2 - In the natural silk industry, example, 3 thread 15/15 denier yarn. Throwing ( Silk ) -A

doubling and twisting knitting, weaving, etc.
Threads

process of winding with or wihtout soaking and of raw silk to make it itnto yarn suitable for The number of weft.

per Unit Length ( Woven Fabric ) yarns ( picks) in a specified length of fabric.

traditional unit of length has been the inch but the value should NOTE 1 -The now be expressed as `threads/cm although the actual count may be made over 1 cm, 2'5 cm, 5 cm or 10 cm, according to the nature of the fabric. NOTE 2 Counting may be done at the following stages of manufacture:

a) lnthr Lom-The position of the count rhould be agreed. It is urually taken between the fall of the cloth and the take up roller, with the cloth under weaving tension. b) Lcom.rtite - The count is taken after the cloth has been removed from the loom and is relaxed from weaving tension, but before it is subjected to any further treatment that modify its dimensions. c) FinishedThe contemplated. count is taken when no further processing in the piece is

Ixt all cases, the condition taken should be specified.

of the cloth at the time the count was
Fabric ) -

Threads

per Unit

Width

( Woven

yarns ( ends ) in a specified width of fabric. See Threads

The number

of warp

per Unit Length ( Woven Fabrics Notes 1 and 2.

- Those unwoven parts of warp yam at the beginning and ThrPmt3 end of the loom beam which are cut off and generally used for joining broken warp threads during weaving.
Time-to-Break - The time interval during which a specimen ( a generally increasing) tension, to reach the breaking load.

is under

doea not include the time required to remove alack from NOTE - Time-to-break On machines supplied with an autographic recorder, the the specimen. time-to-break is indicated by the time elapsing after the pen registers the initial tension auatained by the specimen until the pen registera the maximum force. Tinting - Colouring easy distinction.

of fibres and yarns with fugitive 58

COIOWS

to permit

IS t 232 - IL%5
Top

a) See Wool Top. b) Jute Top Dyeisig Topping

Indicates a quality of raw jute ( see also Grading of Jute ). Dyeing of wool fibres in the form of worstid tops.

a) Bringing up to shade by dyeing on the top of other colours, or b) A light cut on a shearing machine; also called `Ending . Toughness ( or Specific Work of Rupture ) -It is the energy per unit mass required to rupture the specimen. It is the integral of the nominal stress strain curve and is calculated by dividing the work of rupture by the mass of the specimen under test. Tow a) Flax or Hemf - Any scutched length, substantially clean fibre. of less than

b) Mutt-made Fibres- A large number of filaments collected into a loose strand or assemblage substantially' without twist. \ Tram - Soft silk yarn consisting of raw silk threads ( usually two ) twisted together with a few turns, say, 1 to 2 cm; used for weft.
Trash ( Cotton ) - Foreign matter present in bales of raw cotton, exchiding abnormal items such as stone, timber, pieces of old iron, etc.
NOTE 1 -Normal wholes seeds, either ginned or unginned, are frequently excluded from this category, but broken portions of them and also whole or broken undeveloped seeds are usually regarded as trash. NOTE 2 - The main component of trash is chaff including bits of seeds, leaver and stem. Dirt in the form of soil or sand is another component of crash. Fragments of foreign fibres, such as sisal, jute, hemp, etc, are sometimes regarded as trash but usually receive special reference when easily recognizable.

-

A bundle or small bale? suitably covered or wraped but nor machine pressed.

Tsatlee Silk - Chinese hand-reeled silk which is uneven and is more imperfect than filature silk. It is sometimes called `Book-silk'; Tussah Silk See Tasar Silk.

59

IS : 232'- 1985

T-VYCOME
Twill

Yarn -

See Coir Yarn (k).

the cloth.
-

Weave

A weave that produces diagonal lines on the surface of

Twine

A plied yarn made by twisting together two or more strands of

yarn.
Twist

a) The spiral disposition of th components of a yam which is $ ation of the two ends. usually the result of relative ro b) The number of turns `per unit length of a yarn expressed as turns per metre ( tpm ) or turns per inch ( tpi ). c) S-Twist - The twist in- yarn due to whi:h its spirals are in line with central portion of letter S, when the yarn is held in a vertical position ( see Fig. 2 ).

4

twist in yam due to which its spirals are in line Z-l-W& -The with central portion of letter 5, when the yarn is .held in a vertical position ( see Fig. 2 ).

S-TWIST

Z-TWIST

FIG. 2 Twist&d Twisting

S- AND_,<-TWISTS

Yarn -

Set Folded Yarn.

&e Doubling.

Twist Factor, Twist Matliplier - A measure of the `twist hardness' of a yarn determined by the multiplication of the turns per unit length by the square root of the linear density on a direct system, or the division

60

IS:282-1985
of

the turns per unit length by the square root of the count on indirect system. Tprpical examples of units of twist factor are:
a) Turns per centimetre multiplied by 1/lmear denacity of yarn in tex; b) Turns per inch divided by $/cotton Unit (a) is the recommended SI Unit. count of yam.

an

Twistless Yarn - A yarn prepared without twist in order to obtain special properties, for example, increased softness and dyeability. Twist-on-Twist - Descriptive of a folded yarn in which the direction of the folding twist is the same as that of the single twist. NoTE-T~~ discouraged. use of this term to indicate a specific direction of twist should be

extension in length of yam Twist Release -The expressed as a percentage of the length of twisted yam.
Twist

on untwisting,

Take-up - The decrease in length of yarn on twisting, expressed as a percentage of the, yarn before twisting. NOTE-AS the length of yam before twisting may not be known, the length of the yarn after untwisting may be treated as equal to the length of the untwisted yarn for practical purposes.

.

Twitty

places.

-

Describes yarn of irregular thickness and twist, and brittle in

U Uldmate Fibre -

A botanical cell of leaf and bast fibres.

Unevenness - The non-uniformity of the linear density of a continuous Following three principal expressions for strand or portion of a strand. unevenness are in usez a) Gmmw ss, Co&&t of Vahtion - The square root of the average of the squares of the deviation of linear density from the average 4 Linear density; expressed as percentage of the average linear density within the tested length of strand. b) lJncvmw.w, Percent Mean Deviation - The average of the absolute valuea of the deviation of linear density from the average linear density, expressed as percentage of the average linear density with the tested length of strand. 61

average of the ranges of c) Umenncss, Percent Mean Range -The linear density found within units of equal length, expressed as the percentage of linear density within the tested length of strand. Union Cloth -A of another. cloth made with warp of one kind of fibre and weft

NOTE - Originally the term related to clothea made from cotton warp and wool weft or from linen warp and cotton weft.

Univoltine Cocoons -Cocoons generation ( life cycle ) in a year.

built. by a silk-worm

race with one

Maltivoltine Cocoons - Cocoons built by a silk worm race with more than two generations ( life cycle ) in a year. V Vicuna ( Fibre ) llama family. Virgin
material

Undercoat

hair of the vicuna,

an animal

of the

Wo61-

has not been spun into yarn or felted.

Wool which previous to its present use as a textile raw
See Coir Yarn (m).

VYCOME

Yarn -

W
Wall Thickness Thickness of the cell wall of a fibre.

Warp (iVarp Yarn)
a)

Threads

lengthways

in a fabric as woven, or in *the same

b) A number of threads in long lengths and running direction intended for weaving or knitting.

Warping-The process of preparing a warp for weaving or knitting. A number of methods are employed such as beam warping? chain warping and pectional `warping. Washed Wastes ( or Steeped ) Silk,Processing by-products
warm soap solution so as to soften itr gum and loosen its threads.

Raw

silk which

has been soaked in of yarn and cloth.

in the manufacture 62

IS i 252 - 1985 Waste Silk-- Silk fmm wild and cultivated cocoons which cannot be It also includes reeled and silk from the unreelable parts of the cocoons. the waste produced during the various processes of silk reeling and It is used as a raw material for spun-silk. throwing. waleo mnd courses a) Wufc - A longitudinal chain of loops in a knitted fabric or garment formed by one needle, b) Course - A transverse row of loops garment. Weaving a fabric. Webbing a) A woven narrow fabric which (or 2.5 lb gross yd/in width ); or weighs over 3.4 g/m width in a knitted fabric or

The interlacing of warp and weft with one another to form

b) A term of classification referring to webbings in general. number Weftage ( Coir ) -The matting per decimetre (or foot ). Weft ( Weft Yarn ) a) Yam widthways in a fabric as woven; or b) Yarn intended for use in a fabric widthways. total weight of a consignment, case, bale or Weight ( GROSS) -The sample; includes the weight of packing materials, containers and- of supports, such as cones and bobbins. Weight ( Net ) The difference between the gross weight and the tare. of transverse strands of yam in a

Weighted Silk - Silk which has been increased in weight and bulk by the addition of chemicals. Wet Spun a) Descriptive of a yarn of flax, hemp, or similar fibre spun from roving that has been thoroughly wetted out in hot water immediately prior to the drafting operation. b) Descriptive of.man-made filaments, the coagulation of which is effected by extrusion into a liquid bath. 63

,IS:232-1985 Winding - Au operation package to another.

of

transferring

yarn

from

one form

of

WoolPrimarily, hair from the fleece or coat of the sheep, but extended by usage to include also that of the alpaca, camel, dromedary, llama, vicuna, Cashmere goat and Angora Rabbit.
Woollen Count

a) Dcufsbury -The linear dencity of woollen yarn, expressed as number of yards per ounce. b) y&skire -The linear. density of woollen 256yd skeins per pound. yarn, expressed as

Woollenized Jute -Jute fibre when subjected to mercerising treatment under controlled conditions becomes crimpy like wool and soft and fluffy; the treated jute with or without further chemical softening treatment; Woollen Yarn - A yarn spun from wool which has been carded but not gilled or combed before spinning and which the fibres cross each other in every direction presenting a rough surface. Wool Quality

-The spinning quality of wool assessed primarily on the basis of:fibre fineness. Crimp, waviness, handle, etc, also influence wool quality. - Continuous untwisted sliver of wool libres from which the shorter fibre.: :W nails have been removed and the fibres brought parallel to each other by combmg.

Wool Top

Wool Yield (Clean Wool Fibre Content) -The weight of wool fibres, free from vegetable matter, grease, dirt and other impurities and adjusted to the standard condition of 13.8 percent moisture content, 1.5 percent alcohol extractable matter content and 0.5 percent ash content; the latter two calculated on the basis of the oven-dry weight of the scoured specimen ( IS : 1349- 1964* ). Work of Rapture - It is the energy required to bring a specimen to rupture under a `( tensile ) deformation test. It is the integral of the load-elongation curve and is dependent on the linear density and length of the specimen. Worsted Count - The linear density of worsted yam number of 560 yd hanks lb. ( see also Count of Yarn ).

expressed as

*Methodfor determination of wool fibrecoatent of raw wool ( WUW). 64

Worsted Yarn-_ yarn qwn from wool carded and either gilled or combed or both.

fibres which

have

been

X
xaottoln Indicates a quality of raw jute ( see Grading of Jute ).

Yarn - A continuous strand of textile fibres .of filaments with or without twist, suitable for plying, knitting, braiding, weaving or otherwise inter Yarn occurs in the following twining to form a textile end product. formri Tam 4 Spun - A yarn timposed.of twisted together. assembled fibres ( short length or staple ) of coxitinuous filaments

b) Filamtxt . cl 4

Tam - A yarn composed with or" without twist. With or without twist.

MonoJiamnt -

Narrow Strip of Material - Such as, paper, cellophane or metal foil, with or without twist.
NOTEVarieties include ._ thread, tanry yarn etc. single yarn, plied yam, croled yam, cot-d,

Y

yams ConsttPCti~ - Construction which indicates the material, comt of single yarn, numb$r of .turns per unit length, number of plies and the direcdon of twist in the plies.
yarn count see count.

Yarn Packsge - A length or lengths of yarn in a form suitable for handling, storing or shipping. Packages may be unsupported as skcinr or cakes, or prepared with various winding patterns on bobbins, cops, cona, pirns, spools, tubes or beams. yptrr ReguIarity - Pertaining to evenness of yarn.

Yam Strtagth Index ( YgI ) ( Cotton ) - Tht breaking load, in grams of a 100-m skein divided by the linear density of yarn expressed in tex units [ sdc &o Break Factor ( skeins ) and Count Strength Products 1. 65
'

Yolk

-Extrarmous

matter of animal origin in greasy wool. m text& discolouration that May dewI use or storage over a long perio"g. Z

YeUowhg - The yellow materials during proming,

STwimt - .!beTwist.

66

\

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDAkjD"h94

`4 ?.:,I Tt.1 ,

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( Common to al&offices)

Regional
Central *Eastern Northern

Offices: : Manak

Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI-110002 : 1 /14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Tel&phones 331 01 31 [ 3311375 36 24 99 21843 C31641 r 44: ;; ;; I 41 2916 6329295

Southern *Western

: C. I. T. Campus, : Manakalaya,
BOMBAY

MADRAS

600113 Andheri (East),

E9 MIDC, 400093

Marol,

Branch

Ofices: 26348 1 2 63 49 38 49 55 1 38 49 56 66716 5 36 27 3 31 77 231083 6 3471 1 6 98 32 21 68 76 1 21 82 92 6 23 05 6 21 04 [ 621 17 2 51 71
Nagar,

`Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 tPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 Plot NO. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 53/5, Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road), HYDERABAD 500001 RI4 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, Nagar, JAIPUR 302005 208005

117/418

B Sarvodaya

KANPUR

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA T C. No. 14/1421, University P.C., TRIVANDRUM 695038

800013 Palayam

Ofice (With Sale Point) : Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji PUNE 411005
*Sales Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee
Street, Calcutta
700072

Inspection

52435
27 68 00 89 65 28 22 36 71
India

Approach, Chambers,

P.O. Princep Grant Road, Square

tsales Office in Bombay Bombay 400007 Bales Office in Bangalore Bangalore 560002

is at

Novelty

is at Unity Building,

Narasimharaja

Printed at Slmco Printing Press. Delhi,

