Indian Standard

IS:l2OO(Part23)-1988 (Reaffirmed 2002)

METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF BUILDING AND CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKS
PART ( 23 PILING

Fourth Revision)

Second Reprint DECEMBER 1996

UDC

69.003.12:624.155

@ Copyright 1989 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS

MANAKBHAVAN,9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002
Gr3

March

1989

ISr12oO(Part23)-1908

Indian Standard

METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF BUILDING AND CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKS
PART ( 23 PILING

Fourth Revision )
0. FOREWORD
one another, the Sectional Committee during its second revision decided that each trade as given in IS : 1200-1964* shall be issued separately as a different part as it would be helpful to users in using the specific standard. This part covers the method of measurement of piling work applicable to buildings as well as to civil engineering works was published separately in the year 1971 and further revised in 1977. In view of the large number of comments received on this part, the Sectional Committee decided to issue a fourth revision incorporating the changes to keep the latest method as being followed by most of the organizations. The principal modifications are in respect of reinforced cement concrete sheet, timber sheet, and bored piles. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a of this standard is requirement. particular complied with,' the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a measurement, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places IS : 2-1960*. retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified valud in this standard.
*Method of measurement of building and civil engineering works (jrst revision 1. iRules for rounding off numerical values ( rcvisad ).

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part 23 ) ( Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 16 November 1988, after the draft finalized by the Method of Measurement of Works of Civil Engineering ( Excluding River Valley Projects ) Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Measurement occupies a very important place in the planning and execution of any civil engineering work from the time of first estimates to the final completion and settlement of payments of project. Methods followed for measurement are not uniform and considerable differfollowed by ences exist between practices different construction agencies and also between various Central and State Government Departments. While it is recognized that each system of measurement has to be specifically related to and financial organizations administrative within a department responsible for the work, a unification of the various systems at technical level has been accepted as very desirable specially as it permits a wider range of operation for civil engineering contractors and eliminates ambiguities and misunderstandings arising out of inadequate understanding of the various systems followed. 0.3 Since different trades are not related to

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part 23 ) covers of measurement of piling. 2. GENERAL 2.1 Clubbing RULES of Items _ Items may be clubbthe method

generally in the sequence of length, height or depth of thickness.

width

and

ed together and that the break-up of the clubbed items is agreed to be on the basis of &tailed description of the items stated in this standard. - In booking 2.2 Booking of Dimelnsions dimensions, the order shall be consistent and 1

2.3 Description of Items - The description of each item shall unless otherwise stated, be held to include where necessary, conveyance and delivery, handling, unloading. storing, fabrication, hoisting, all labour for finishing to required shape and size, settin!;, fitting and fixing in position, straight cutting and waste, return of packings, etc. 2.4 Measwements - All work shall be measured net in decimal system as fixed in its

place as given below: a) Linear dimensions shall be measured the nearest 0'01 m, to

b) Areas shall be worked out to the nearest 0'01 ms, and
C)

3.2 The cement concrete in piles shall be measured in cubic metres, arrived at by multiplying the cross-sectional area of the pile by the length of the pile as cast from the head of the pile to the tip of shoes. 3.3 NO deduction shall be made for chamfers, tapered points or the volume of reinforcement or holes for lifting piles. 3.4 The formwork, links included in the description and sleeves shall be of the item. sepa-

Cubic contents shall nearest 0'01 ms.

be worked

to the

2.5 Work to be Measured Separately - The situations, such as, in/under water, liquid mud, marshy land, tidal condition, etc, in which work is to be executed shall be stated. 2.5.1 The level of high and low water tides where occurring, shall be stated. 2.6 Bills of Quantities - The bills of quantities shall fully describe the materials and and accurately represent the workmanship, work to be executed. 2.7 A general description shall be stated. of the nature of site

3.5 The reinforcement shall be measured rately [see IS : 1200 (Part 8)-1975* 1.

3.6 The sho:ts for each size shall be enumerated separately, stating the approximate weight. 3.7 Driving piles to a given level and redriving of lengthened piles shall be measured in running metres, separate measurements being made for piles of 5 m length and less and subsequently for every 1 m length range. The driving of piles shall be measured from the tip of the shoes up to the level as shown in the drawings. The raker piles shall be measured along the axis of the pile. 3.8 The measurement of handling, transportation and pitching of piles shall be enumerated for each occasion. 3.9 For stripping the heads of the piles, the length to be stripped shall be stated and measured per linear metre. 3.10 Stripping off the head of the piles for bond length shall be enumerated. 3.11 When concrete piles are lengthened in position, after they have been lowered, the cement concrete when used for lengthening This shall be measured as a separate item. item shall include the extra labour involved in stripping the exposed end to form connection of new with old work and any excavation, if required. 4. METHOD OF TIMBER PILES MEASUREMENT OF

2.8, The available information as to the strata through which the piles are to be driven shall be stated or reference showing records of bores be given. 2.9 If piles are to be provided from any level other than the ground level, it shall be stated. If the piling frame is to be lowered or raised, the exact height and nature of working shall be described, separate items shall be provided for driving raker/in groups/isolated/lengthened/ trial piles. 2.10 Items shall include any extra excavation filling and/or ramming required at the time of construction for the movement of piling frame for executing piling work. 2.11 Bringing plant to the site and erecting it and dismantling and taking it back, shall be measured separately as lump sum items.
NOTE-Shifting of plant included in the item of piles. at site of work shall be

2.12 If load testing is to be done, the provision for such, test shall be specified and measured separately. 3. METHOD PRECAST PILES OF MEASUREMENT OF REINFORCED CONCRETE

3.1 The precast reinforced concrete piles shall be described accordmg to the grade of concrete, section and length, the extra strength of the heads being stated. Any requisite mould shall be included in the description as also the necessary strapping, bolts and lifting holes.

4.1 Timber piles shall be described and measured in running metre stating the species of timber [see IS : 2911 (Part 2 )-198071 and If over 5'0 m in length, the size of the pile. length extra over 5 m shall be measured in stages of one metre.
civil *Method of measurement of building and engineering works: Part 8 Steel-work and ironwork ( third revision ) . iCode of practice for design and construction of pile foundations: Part 2 Timber piles ( Jrst revision ).

2

IS : 1'200 ( Part 4.1.1 The diameter of the pile shall be arrived at by measuring girth at two metres below the Any tolerance on the large end of the pile. cross-sectional dimensions of timber in permitting above or below those shown in drawings shall be specified.
4.1.2 Shaping and shoeing of pile shall enumerated, stating the approximate weight the shoe and size of the pile. 4.2 Handling, transportation and pitching piles shall be enumerated for each occasion. be of

23 ) - 1988

of

handling, pitching, engaging through interlocks or clutches of an adjacent sheet piles and driving shall be measured separately for each type in square metres obtained by multiplying the length of the embedded portion of the pile in soil and half of the perimeter as defined in IS : 2314-1986*. The length of the embedded portion shall be obtained by measuring from the level of the ground where the tip of the sheet pile first touches before driving, to the ultimate level of the tip of the piles after driving. 5.5 Wherever sheet piles are to be driven under/ in water necessitating the use of special hammers and/or loader frames, such piles shall be described and measured separately. 5.6 Driving corner piles and junction piles shall be measured in running metres representing the length of embedment. 5.7 Cutting or burning through steel piles shall be measured in running metres as extra over the pile. The disposal of cut length shall be described. 5.8 Extraction of piles other than those described in 5.6 shall be measured separately in square metres obtained by multiplying the embedded length in soil by the nominal width clutches. of piles from the centre of the Operations such as lifting, handling and removing from the site shall be described and included in the item. 6. METHOD

5.4 Lifting,

4.3 Driving timber piles shall be measured from the tip of the shoe to the ground level as shown in the drawings or as found at site at the time of driving. The method of measurement of driving pile shall be the same as given in 3.7. This item shall also include cutting the top of the pile and dressing it for fixing mild steel ring against splitting during driving. 4.4 The supply and fixing of iron rings to the pile head before driving and also the labour involved in cutting off the ringed portion or any portion damaged in driving shall be included in the description of the item. 4.5 Joints merated. in piles shall be described and enu-

5. METHOD

STEEL

MEASUREMENT OF OF SHEET PILES ( PERMANENT)

5.1 Supply only of sheet piles shall be measured by weight [see IS : 1200 ( Part 8)-1975*]. The description of the item shall include the cross-sectional shape, nomenclature .of manufacture, specification of material, deta.ils of fabrication, such as, lengthening by means of welding; riveting, drilling or burning holes, joining or fixing of structural rolled steel sections, handling and transportation to the site, etc. Piles exceeding 12 m in length shall be described separately stating the lengths in further stages of 3 m.
5.2 All struts, anchor bolts, anchor plates, turn buckles, walling, etc, shall be measured separately in accordance with IS : 1200 ( Part 8)1975*. 5.3 When sheet piles are to be painted prior to driving, such painting shall be measured in square metres obtained by multiplying the , length by the perimeter of the fabricated sheet pile measured along the profile. Description of the item shall include the method of preparation of surface, number of coats, mode of painting and the like.
`Method of measurement of building and civil engineering works: Part 8 Steelwork and ironwork (t&d revision ) .

CAST PILES

ZNSZTU DRIVEN

OF

MEASUREMENT OF CONCRETE

6.1 The

description of the pile shall state the nominal diameter, grade of concrete, size of aggregate reinforcing bars, length of the cage and the pile. 6.2 Forming pile shafts including concrete, and driving casings to a given level shall be measured as one item in running metres. 6.3 Reinforcement including bars to be left in the pile cap for embedding shall be measured separately [see IS : 1200 ( Part 8 )-19757 1. 6.4 The length of the cast in situ piles shall be measured from the toe of the pile to the pile cut off level. The description of the pile shall state the diameter land the type of casing, the grade of concrete, and details of reinforcement of the core. 6.5 The provision in the item. of pile shoes shall be included

*Specification for steel sheet pilling sections (Jirst revision ) . TMethod of measurement of building ; and civil engineering works: Part 8 Steelwork and ironwork ( third revision ).

3

ISr126o(Part23)-1988 6.6 Empty boring shall be measured separately in running metres and the length shall be from working ground level to the cut off level of the pile. The type of filling shall be stated. 7. METHOb CAST IN CONCRETE touches before driving to the ultimate the tip of the piles after driving. level of

SITU BORED
PILES

OF

MEASUREMENT OF REINFORCED

8.4 Wherever sheet piles are to be driven under/in water necessitating the use of special hammers and,`or loader frames, such piles shall
be described by measuring separately. piles shall 8.5 Driving corner piles and junction be measured separately.

7.1 Empty boring in running metres working level to The type of filling

shall be measured separately and the length shall be from the cut off level of the pile. shall be stated. and rock

7.2 The boring through boulders strata shall be measured extra over.

8.6 Cutting piles shall be measured in running metres as extra over. The disposal of cut length shall be described. 8.7 The extraction of piles other than due to defective driving shall be measured separately in square metres as mentioned in 8.3. 9. METHOD

7.3 Reinforcement .in pile including bars to be left in the pile cap for embedment shall be measured separately. 7.4 The description of the pile shall state the nominal diameter, grade of concrete, size of aggregate, the reinforcing bars, the length of cage, and the provision of liners, if any. 7.5 Permanent mild steel liners, if provided, shall be measured separately in weight in accordance with IS : 1200 ( Part 8)-1975* from working level to foundation level. 7.6 In case of under-reamed or bulb based piles, the bulbs shall be measured and enumerated. The description of piles shall state the diameter of the bulb. 8. METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF REINFORCED CEMENT CONCRETE SHEET PILES 8.1 The reinforced cement concrete sheet piles shall be measured in cubic metres arrived at by multiplying the cross-sectional area of the pile by the length of the pile as cast from the head of the pile to the tip of the shoes. 8.2 The description of the item shall include the cross-sectional shape, grade of concrete, size of aggregate and extra strength of the head. Any requisite mould shall be included in the description as also necessary strapping, bolts and lifting holes. 8.3 Lifting, handling, pitching engaging through adjacent piles and driving shall be measured separately for each type in square metres obtained by mu!tiplying the length of the embedded portion of the pile and half the parameter of the section. The length of the embeded portion shall be obtained by measuring from the level of the ground where the tip of the pile first
*Method of measurement of building and civil engineering works: Part 8 Steelwork and ironwork (U&-d rcoision ) .

TIMBER

QF MEASUREMENT SHEET PILES

OF

9.1 The

timber sheet piles shall be described and measured in running metres stating the species of timber and cross-section. 9.2 Handling, transportation and pitching piles shall be enumerated for each occasion. of

9.3 Driving timber sheet piles shall be measured in square metres obtained by multiplying the length of the embedded portion of the pile in soil and half the perimeter of the construction. 9.4 Whenever sheet piles are to be driven under/in water necessitating the use of special hammers and/or loader frames, such piles shall be described and measured separately. 9.5 The measured corner and separately. junction piles shall be

9.6 Cutting pile shall be measured in running metres as extra over. The disposal of cut length shall be described. 9.7 The extraction of piles other than due to defective driving shall be measured separately as in 9.3.

10. METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF BORED PRECAST CONCRETE PILES concrete bored 10.1 The precast reinforced piles shall be described according to grade of concrete, and size of aggregate section and

length, the extra strength of the heads being Any requisite mould shall be included stated. also the necessary in the description as strapping, bolts and lifting holes.

10.2 The cement concrete shall be measured separately in cubic metres arrived at by multiplying the cross-sectional area of the pile by the length of pije as cast from the head of the pile

4

lsrl2oo(Part23)-I986
to the tip. No deduction shall be made for chamfers, tapered points or the volume of reinforcement or holes for lifting piles. 10.3 The formwork, links and sleeves shall be included in the description of the item. 10.4 The separately reinforcement shall be measured [see IS : 1200 (Part 8)-1975*]. working ground level to the cut off level of the pile. The boring through boulders and rock strata except in respect of isolated boulders not exceeding the diameter of the pile shaft shall be made measured as extra over. 10.7 The measurement of handling, transF portation and pitching of piles shall be enumerated for each occasion. 10.8 For strapping the heads of the pile, the length to be stripped shall be stated and measured in running metres. 10.9 Stripping off the heads of the pile for bond length shall be enumerated. 10.10 Grouting shall be measured in cubic metres describing fully the type of method.

10.3 Placing

pile shaft shall be measured in running metres from founding level to working level of the pile.

10.6 Empty boring shall be measured separately in running metres and the length shall be from
*Method of measurement of building and civil engineering works: Part 8 Steelwork and ironwork ( third revision ).

5

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Stundurds Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form BIS has the copyright of all its publications. without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions*.

Amendments Amend No. Date of Issue

Issued Since Publication Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17,323 38 41 337 84 99,337 85 61 337 86 26,337 9120 60 38 43 { 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 1 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 832 78 91,832 78 92

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branohes
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah &far Marg

NEW DELHI 110002
: l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA

700054 160022 600113

: SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

: Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

: AHMADABAD.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at P%ograph,
New Delhi (INDIA).

