IS 13236 : 1991 IEC Pub 970 ~(1989 )

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR COUNTING AND SIZING PARTICLES I'N INSULATING LIQUIDS

UDC

621.315 : 615 : 620~168.36

Q BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 8 ZAFAR MARG

November 1991

IS 13236 : 1991 IECl'ub970(1989)

Indian Starrdard

METHODS FOR COUNTING AND SIZING PARTICLES IN INSULATING LIQUIDS
NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard, which is identical with. IEC Pub 970 ( 1989 ) sMethods for counting and sizing particles in insulating liquids', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Fluids for ( ETD 03 ), and approval of the Electrotechnical Applications Sectional Committee Electrotechnical Division Council. In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are not identical in Indian Standards, attention is specially drawn to the following: with those used

a) Wherever the words `International Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'. b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker w,hile in Indian Standard, the current practice is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. In the adopted standard, reference appears to an International Standard for which Indian Standard also exists. The corresponding Indian Standard which is to be substituted in its place is listed below along with its degree of equivalence for the edition indicated: $ International Standard IEC Pub 475 ( 1974 ) Method of sampling liquid dielectrics Corresponding Indian Standard IS 6855 : 1973 Method of sampling for liquid .-dielectrics Degree of Equivalence Technically equivalent

The concerned technical Committee has reviewed the provisions of IS0 4402, ISO/DIS 4407 and ISO/DIS 4408 referred in the adopted standard and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. Only the English language text in the International it in this Indian Standard. Standard has been retained while adopting

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS 13236 : 1991 IEC Pub 9% (~l989)

SECTION, 1. Scope

ONE

- GENERAL

This standard describes sampling procedures and methods for determinating particle concentration and particle size distribution. Three methods are recommended, one using an automatic particle size analyzer working on the light interruption principle and two based on the with an optical microscope, of particles on the surface of a counting, filtering membrane with transmitted or incident light., The latter two methods are described in ISO/DIS 4407 and ISO/DIS 4408. All methods are applicable both to unused liquids and to liquids in service.

Appendix `-A contains an `alternative syringe and Appendix B describes three automatic counters.
Notes l.The methods are not intended

sampling methods

procedure using for the calibration

a of

to

measure particulate

matter

in liquids containing sludge. 2.The methods
related to

specified

are only applicable

to musuramonts

a limited range of size and numbor.

2.

Reference

documents : Method of sampling liquid dielectrics

I EC publication 475 IS0 4402 (1974) : standard: (1977):

Hydraulic fluid power - Calibration particle-count instruments -' Method Fine Test Dust contaminant.

of liquid automatic using Air Cleaner

Draft

international 4497:

standards: Hydraulic fluid power - Fluids - Determination particle contamination Counting method microscope under transmitted light. Hvdraulic fluid Dower - Fluids - Determination particle contamination Counting method microscope under incident light. of solid using a

ISO/DIS

ISO/DIS

4409:

of solid using l

3

Is13$36:1991 IECqub970(1989) 3.
significance It is well known that particles have a detrimental effect on the dielectric strength of insulating liquids. It has long been the practice to include in s~pecifications of insulating liquids the requirement that the fluid be clear and free of visible particulate matter. However, there has been no standard method for quantitativk estimates, so that practices have differed. This standard provides standard procedures for the test.

Filtration of insulating liquids is an establ~ished practice in the electrical industry. The procedube described may serve to assess the performance of the filter system. The results of the measurements depend -on the method used. With the automatic counter the measured values also depend on the calibration procedure and in particular eon the calibration substance (fine test dust or spherical standards). It is therefore essential that the methods of analysis and calibration are specified when quoting results.

The particle content of a sample may depend on the sampling point, time elapsed since filling, oil circulation flow rate, and/or the time an oil is left to stand. Circulation of. an oil filling will lead to ~more consistent particle count. results. With aged liquids, oil oxidation products which are dissolved at operating temperatures may precipitate under conditions of prolonged stand time at room temperature. This process, which depends on the length of stand time, the storage temperature and the ageing condition of the liquid, may have an effect on the partiqte count determination.

Storage of the samples will generally lead to a particles. Fine particles may be also coalesce to form Unless all the contents of the sampling vessel are single test, shaking will be necessary.

sedimentation of larger particles. analyzed in one

This can be done manually, in a shaking machine, or by ultrasonic treatment. If high-energy ultrasonic treatment or higher shear mixing is used, there is a risk that the particle count determined will be enhanced owing to breakdown of sludge and other large particles.

4.

Comparison Automatic quick and mind: 1)

and

limitations

-of the

methods principle mare be borne in

particle easy to

counters use, but

using t-he light interruption the following points should

With some liquids it may be necessary to modify comply with the instrument's running parameters.

their

viscosity

to

~I 2)

IS 13236 : 1991 IECPubWO(1989)

It is necessary to choose a sensor head suitable for counting in No single head can count both very small the size range required. particles (~2 pm) and very large particles (QOO pm).

3)

The inst-rument records the light interruption area of the particle and from this calculates the diameter of a `sphere having the same area (or the longer axis of a specified ellipsoid with the same area). This means that no information on' the shape of the particles is obtained, which especially `constitutes a limitation where the reTheir narrow and elon~gated shape cognition qf fibres is concerned. results in a slight light -obturation and consequently in a very When it is important to evajuate small equivalent sphere diameter. the concentration of fibres, automatic counters cannot perform this task adequately.

4)

When air-saturated or over-saturated liquids are shaken manually or given high-energy ultrasonic treator in a shak-ing machine, ment, or treated -at full vacuum, finely dispersed microbubbles may be formed in the liquid. In the optical system of the automatic counter, these microbubbles will be counted as solid particles.

These difficulties are avoided when using optical mi'croscopic methods. In addition, optical microscopy may give some information about which types of particles are present. These methods are, -however, much more time-consuming and operator-dependent and it may often be very difficult to count particles of less than 5 urn.

5.

Types

and

identification

of particles

Particles found -in an insulating liquid may be metal-working residues in the form of iron, copper, brass and aluminium particles, weldin~g cinder and sandblasting material. Metal particles may also originate from pump wear. Other types of particles include soot and sludge from arcing in or ageing of the liquid, ceHulose lint, sand, dust, and particles of varnish, ~plastic or rubber.

.

A knowledge of which particle types are present in the insulating liquid can, -help id ass-essing the condition of the in certain cases, equipment or in diagnosing a fault. Certain particles may be identified by filtering a liquid sample through a membrane filter and examining the residue under a microscope. Some fibres can be identified with specific identification stains, and a number of metals by means of spot tests or microscopic chemical methods. Metallic materials may also be identified and quantified `by instrumental methods and wet chemical analysis. A detailed description of methods for the identification of particles is, however, outside the sc6pe of this standard.

5

'

IS13236:1991 -IECpOb970(1989) 6.
6.1 Sampling General remark taken should only be used for the particle count deter-

The sample mination

6.2

Sampling

vessels cylindrical, a polyprothe use of

The sampling vessels recommended in this standard are clear glass bottles fitted with flatbottomed, wide-necked, pylene threaded cap forming a seal with the bottle without any inserts. When automatic particle size analyzer is bottle shall be between 150 cm3 and 500 cm'. used, the

volume

of

the

the bottles shall have at least 100 cm' For microscopy, be permanently -marked to indicate 100 cm' sample size.

capacity

and

An alternative ves-sels is given

method for in Appendix

oils A.

in service

using

syringes

as sampling

6.3

Cleaning

of sampling

bottles that the bottl.es be cleaned to achieve a blank 200 particles above 5 urn per 100 cm3. The test on the filtered solvent used in the last stage of

It is recommended count of less than chould be performed the cleaning process.

A cleanming method is indicated ,for guidance, but other be used provided they have at least the same effectiveness.

methods

can

a) 6) c)

Wash with Rinse Rinse water with

warm'water warm water with

containing and 0.45 drain

detergent

thoroughly

pm membrane

filtered

acetone

to remove

d)

Rinse with 0.45 urn' membrane another suitable solvent. Leave bottle and close the' bottle.

filtered ~petroleum ether or with 1 cm3 or 2 cm' of solvent in the

If ultrasonic agitation is used ,before' counting particles, Plunge procedure shall include ultrasonic treatment. bottle filled with 0.45 pm membrane `filtered acetone in bath for 15 min in place of step c) above

the cleaning the sampling an ultrasonic

A residue of solvent in the bottle creates a positive pressure bottle helping to prevent contamination from. the atmosphere opening the bottle.

in the when

IS'13236 : 1991

IECPab970(1989)
warning. -

Attention is called to national regulations associated with the use of solvents.

6.4

General

directions

for

sampling

It is difficult to obtain representative samples from a drum. If the procedure given in Clause A5 sampling is found to be necessary, the procedures given in of Appendix A may be used or, alternatively; IE-C 475. In the -case of sealed power transformers and instrument the equipment with small liquid volume, transformers or similar manufacturer's instructions on sampling procedure and quantity shall be followed. A sample from a transformer should preferably be ta-ken during oil circulation or immediately afterwards. The analysis obtained may depend on the sampling point selected. Confirmatory or follow-up samples should therefore always be taken from the same point.

Every precaution the sample. Outdoor
-wind is

shall

be

taken

when

sampling

not

to

contaminate

sampling
only

of

permitted

contamination necessary.

of the

liquids in rain, fog, snowfall or high if all precautions have been taken to avoid samples. In this special case the use of a cover is

in, sulating

En~sure that

sampling

is done

by an experienced

person.

6.5

Sampling

procedure

Prior to taking the the adjacent parts wiping materials. Connect sampled)

sample, the exterior shall be thoroughly

of t~he sampling valve and cleaned using lint-free

a length of a suitable to the sampling valve.

plastic

tube

(res i: stant

to

the

liquid

If the sampling bottle contains filtered solvent, it may be necessary at low ambient temperature to warm the bottle with the hands, in order to create a posit-ive pressure and thereby prevent the in$ress of atmospheric particulate matter.
Warning.

-

Petroleum ether, as well as many of its alternatives, is a highly flammable solvent, and appropriate safety measures must be observed when the bottle is opened. '

flush Thoroughly quantity of liquid.

the (e.g.

valve and line by draining 5 I) intq a waste container.

,a

sufficient

Isl3236:1991 IEC pPb970(/1989)
do not empty out the solvent. Remove the cap from the bottle; Without interrupting the flow from the valve, substitute the bottle for the waste container and collect the required volume of sample Then remove the sample bottle and replace as quickly as possible. the waste container.

Replace

the

bottle sampling

cap wit~hout overtightening. valve and replace any protection. Label the

Close the sample. The and 6.6 6.6.1 Labelling Samples Labels tank sample storage.

shall

be

protected

against

light

during

transportation

sf samples
from tanks the following markings:

shall

carry

identification; point; liquid;

sampling type date 6.6.2

of insulating of sampling. from

Samples

electrlcal

equipment

Labels

shall

carry

the

following

markings:

equipment sampling equipment

identification; point; in factory/in service;

Ciquid identification; temperature date of liquid;

of sampling.

7.

Preparation Samples

of the should

samples

for

analysis as soon as possible.

be processed

The effects of storage of samples are described in Clause 3. The samples can be mixed by shaking (manually or in a shaking machine) or by ultrasonic treatment. If high-energy ultrasonic treatment is used, however, there is a risk that the particle number is enhanced owing to breakdown of large particles, and also that finely dispersed microbubbles -are formed in the liquid. As in the optical system of the

Is 13236 : 1991 IEC Peb 9704 1989 ) automatic cou_nter `such microbubbles will be counted vacuum treatment is- necessary (see Sub-clause 8.6.2). a vacuum is app-lied to air-saturated or over-saturated ever, microbubbles may be released from the liquid. as particles, a When too high liquids, how-

Note.-

-It is advisabl-e that the agitation and vacuum procedure developed be test'ed for effectiveness. This can be done by taking several samples simultaneously. One sample is tested immediately after sampling, with no agitation or vacuum treatment at all, another after treatment and a third after some storage time. The test should be applied to liquids with a varying degree of particle content, state of ageing, and air content.

SECTION

TWO - METHOD

8.

Counting and sizing & particulate matter using an automatic particle size analyzer Summary of method

in insulating

liquids

8.1

The sample is -agitated to suspend the particles, then passed -at an optimum flow rate through the sensor unit of th'ei particle counter. After the required fluid volume has been passed through the sensor the count is terminated and the results recorded. 8.2 8.2.1 Apparatus and auxiliary materials a sensor counting ~operating on the within the range

An automatic particle counter fitted with light interruption principle and suitable for of 2.5 urn to greater than 100 pm. The automatic particle counter shall five

be capable size ranges.

of:

al
bl

Sorting

particles

in at least

Providing a specific particle count and distribution for a measured quantity of reference material suspended in 100 cm3 of a suitable liquid to a precjsion of 210% of the total count. To obtain sufficient accuracy, the number of particles counted shall be greater than or equal to 200 in the smallest size ranges.

C)

Not saturating (i.e. provide result of particle coincidence lyzing a suspension containing centimeter of fluid. Note.-

a lower than expected count as a within the sensing zone) when analess than 2 000 particles per cubic

Alternative detectors may be used to extend the size range of the particles measured.

IS13236:1991

8.2.2

Compressed gas - a pressurized source of air or nitrogen free from oil or water contamination filtered through a 0.45 vrn membrane fitter. The capacity, pressure range and constant pressure controls should meet the requirements of tlie particular equipment in use. Vacuum Solvent outlet. Solvent or suitable pump capable of supplying with a steady a 0.45 urn vacuum. membrane filter at the

8.2.3 8.2.4

dispenser

fitted

8.2.5

- r>etroleum ether alt'ernative filtered

with a boilina-ranae of 40 *C to 60 *C, through a 0.45 vmYmembrane filter.

8.2.6 8.2.7

Detergent Calibration

- liquid, standard of

water

soluble,

commercial following: and size

grade.

- one of the known numbers

Latex spheres suitable liquid.

ranges in

dispersed liquid.

in

a

A set of `mono-sized Air 8.2.8 8.3 8.3.1 the 8.3.2 Cleaner Fine Test

latex. spheres Dust

dispersed

a suitable-

(A.C.F.T.D.). bath (see Clause 7).

Optional:
Lalibration

ultrasonic
procedures

cleaning

The calibration of the instrument shatl procedures given in Appendix B.

be carried

out

using

one of

Calibration shall .be carried out annually or when many repair/change is made to the sensor or whenever results are suspect.

8.4

Preparation

of

the

apparatus

for

counting

Check that the instrument is set required size -ranges in accordance instrument manual.

to Ithe calibration numbers with the procedure given

for in

the the

When the instrument has been swirched off, the check procedure shall be carried out prior to use or daily, whichever is less frequent If the instrument shall be carried out 8.5 8.5.1
Preparation of

is permanently switched at least monthly.
before counting

on,

the

check

procedure

sample

Remove

any

visible

contamination

from

the

exterior

of the

bottle.

8.5.2

Samples which 7 re found on visual suspended solids (e.g. Sludge) likely sensor shall be rejected.

examination to contain water or to affect the performance of the

IS 13236 : lkl IECPubWO(l!HB$) 8.5.3 Sample dilution should be avoided `tas far as possible. However, if dilution is necessary in order to comply with the instrument run a dilution with a liquid of the same type as the sample parameters, filtered through a 0.45 urn memb~rane [or with a compatible solvent), filter', may be used. Then record the dilution ratio. Note.In horder to meet the instrument run parameters, viscosity ~modification of the liquid may be achiaved by heating. 'If ret Ursa to this is necessary, due regard to the instrument A mqncifacturer's recommendations regarding sensor life should be noted. It should also be established that the precision ob.tained is ac&ptabls. of sump/e for counting

~

8.6 8.6.1

iPreparatIon

Mix the prepared sample either by shaking gently by hand for 1 min and/or' by immersing the -bottle in an ultrasonic cleaning bath.

8.6.2 air 8.6.3

If necessary, bubbles. Flush the

apply

a -moderate

vacuum

for

at least

1 min to remove

sensor

with

a small amount

of the

test

sample.

8.6-4

Count the test sample received. If the counting dures 8.6.1 and 8.6.2:` Note.-

wherever possible from is not commenced within

the sample bottle as 2 min repeat proce-

It is advisable, when using automatic bottle ,sampling apparatus, that the sensor uptake tube be filled with the test fluid before applying the-vacuum. procedure on long enough to

8.7 8.7.1

Counting

Ensure that the instrument has been switched' become stabilized before ~counting is initiated.

8.7.2

The counting procedure shall be carried out in accordance with the paying particular instrument manufacturer's operating instructions, attention to the required flow rate and selecting the differential (delta) The cumulative mode may be used if a delta mode is mode of counting. not available bn the instrument. The sample shall be counted in at ,least two equal volumes, greater 10% in than or equal to 20 cm'. These two. counts should agree within Jf this requirement is not attained the sample the sma~llest size range. shall be discarded or, re-agitated and re-counted. It is desirable that in each size range the sum of the two counts should be not less than 200. In the event of therd not being sufficient particles to reach a total count of 200 in any size range, report the actual number counted as well as the concentration.

8.7.3

Note.-

> The

above minimum coun+ of 200 ensures that accuracy is within flO% with a 95% confidence.

the

counting

IS ,13236 : 1991 IEC Pub 970 ( 196) 8.7.4 After eacn sample has been counted filtered flush the system with solve+it, filter. It is not recommended that sensor remove the sample bottle and through a 0.45 )~TI membrane be dried out after flushing.

8.7.5

Calculate the particle concentration in each size range from mean of the counts obtained for each sample 3 aliquot, -taking account the volume of the aliquot and the dilution ratio.

the into

8.8

Report Report the number at least the following of particles size ranges per {see 100 `cm3 of the note): original sample in

Particle

size

range (vm) 5 15 25 50

(p)

Micromet res 2.5 5 15 25 50 < p S <pS <pS <pS

< p S 100

p > 100 Total Total Total number number number of particles of particles of particles > > > 2.5 5 15

The

report method method date date

shall

also include

the

following:

of calibration; of agitation;

of samp-ling; of janalysis.
For liquids in service, it may be sufficient to number of particles greater than 5 yrn a-nd greater

Note.-

report just the
than 15 WI.

8.9

Precision The repeatability been established. and reproducibility of this method have not yet

ls 13236 : 199-1 IEcPab9?0(1989) SECTION THREE - METHOD B

9.

Counting and sizing of particulate using optical microscopy
Principle

matter

in insulating

liquid

9.1

A known volume of insulating liquid is Siltered under vacuum conditions through a membrane filter to collect contaminants on the filter The membrane is then mounted between glass slides and surface. examined microscopically by transmitted OCRincident light to measure, count and size particles according to their largest dimension.

9.2

Procedure

by

transmitted

light

Counting and sizing mitted -light shall be ISO/DIS 4407. 9.3
Procedure by incident

of particulate made according

matter microscopically by transto the procedure described in

light

Counting and sizing of particulate matter by incident `light made according to the .procedure described in ISO/DIS 4408.

shall

be

Is13236:199# IECPmb970(11989)
APPENOlX
* USE

A VESSELS

OF SYRINGES

AS SAMPLING

Al.

Type

qf syringe

Syringes shall be made of polypropylenei or other suitable polymeric materials and have a volume of at least 150 cm3 when using automatic the syringe capacity shall be at least counters. For microscopy, 100 cm'.
Note. -

For automatic counters an alternative is to use three syringes of 50 cm' capacity per samplq. This will, however, reduce the accuracy of the result. For: liquids with a high particle content one syringe with 50 cm' capacity may suffice.

A2.

Cleaning The except

of syringes as for bottles (Sub-clause shall be left in t~he syringe. 6.3) can

same procedure that no solvent

be

used,

A3

Genenal The

directions

far

sampling given in Sub-clause 6.4 apply here.

same considerations

A4 .

Sampling

from

apparatus

or tank

with

sampiing

valve

of the sampling valve and Prior to taking the sample, the exterior the adjacent parts shall be thoroughly cleaned with lint-free wiping materials. Connect the sampling valve directly plastic tube resistant to the liquid. Thoroughly flush cock by draining container. Connect sample. D-isconnect Close The and the the the a sampling sufficient to a two-way cock with a

valve, the tube and the two-way quantity of liquid into a waste

syringe

directly

to

the

two-way

cock

and

take

the

the

syringe valve

and

plug

its bottom. any protection. during transportation

sampling shall

and

replace against

sample storage.

be -protected

light

14

I~13~:19!M IECPmb970(191b)
A5. Sampling Connect from tonk or drum without bottom tube valve resistant to the liquid.

a two-way

cock to ~a plastic

Plunge Connect

the

tube

into

the

container. two-way cock. rinse the system, by

a syringe

to the

Suck a sufficient quantity of liquid to repeatedly.filling and emptying the syringe. Replace the syringe the with a new one and take plug its bottom. against light

the

sample.

Disconnect The and A6. Labelling sample storage.

syringe be

and

shall

protected

during

transportation

of samples 6.6. for analysis

See Sub-clause A7. Preparation See Clause

of the samples 7.

15

: 1991 Is 13 IJtC," b970(19@9) APPENDIX CALIBRATION OF LIQUID B PARTICLE COUNTERS

AUTOMATIC

Three

methods

for

calibration

of the

instrument

are described.

Note.-

An

approximate conversion can be made between spherical and A.C.F.T.D. calibration by multiplying the figure obtained using spherical calibration by 1.54. To convert from A.C.F.T.D. to spherical, multiply by 0.65.

Bl.

Calibration

using

A.C.

F. T. 0.

(Air

Cleaner

Fine

Test

Dust)

Calibration with A.C. F.T.D. shall IS0 4402. The procedure given in IS0 saturation levels for the counter. 82. Calibration using mono-sized calibrated

be accomplished accbrding to 4402 may be used to determine I

latex

spheres

82.1

A suspension of known mono-sized latex spheres shall be prepared in a compatible 0.45 pm filtered liquid. The size of the latex spheres shall correspond to the lower end of the sensor range.

82.2

Prepare the clause 8.6.1.

suspension

in

the

same

way

as

described

in

Sub-

82.3

Count the calibrating suspension at the manufacturer's recommended flow rate with the threshold level of the first channel set so that all the spheres are counted in a narrow Gaussian distribution. The flow all counting unless the instrument is rate shall be maintained for recalibrated under another flow rate condition.

B2.4

Adjust the first

the second phannel's channel is obtained.

threshold

setti~ng

until

a half-count

of

82.5

Determi-ne the calibration (voltage) number of the second channel's This number represents the mean size of the monothreshold setting. spheres. Repeat points 82.1 to 82.5 for at least four larger calibrated sized latex spheres within the range of the sensor head. mono-

82.6

82.7

Plot a graph of mean particle log paper as follows: a)

size against

voltage

setting

using

log -

Use. the horizontal axis for calibration setting for particle size for each channel threshold.

and

the

vertical

axis

16

IS,13236: 1991 IEC Pob 970( 1989 ) 6) Plot calibration threshold . setting against particle size for each channel

c]

Draw a smooth curve through bration setting corresponding graph by interpolation.

the points and read off the calito the required side ranges- on the

Note. -

linear regression may be used to obtain the best linear calibration graph when this technique is applied to automatic particle counferwwhich incorporate a.c. gmplifiers.

83.

CaJCbration

using

a known

distribution

of latex

spheres

83.1

Set the first channel of the automatic particle counter at its smallest particle size setting and fix the other channels at progressively higher -calibration numbers as recommended by the man~ufacturer's instructions. A suspension of a known prepared in a compatible 0.45 distribution Mm filtered of latex liquid. spheres shall be

83.2

83.3

Prepare the clause 8.6.1. Introduce the

suspension

in

the

same

way

as

described

in

Sub-

83.4 83.5

calibration

solution

into the

apparatus.

Adjust the flow through the sensor to the manufacturer's recommended flow rate. This flow rate shall be maintained for atl counting unless the instrument is recalibrated under another flow rate condition. Count an manufacturer's accurately measured volume of instructions. Record the count. suspension, using the

B3.6

83.7

Adjust controls

each channel in accordance

threshold setting by altering with the instrument manual.

the

potentiometer

83.8

Repeat until the counts for the specified channel are within lowing percentage of the count for the calibration standard.

the

fol-

Size

range:

up to and above above

including

15 urn:

25% k l-O% 225% limits do not each channel

15 urn up to 50 pm: 50 vm:

83.9 Once the channels_ thresholds are set within acceptable / "change Determine the calibration numbers for them. threshold setting as recommended by the manufacturer. B3.`tO Prepare a graph in the same way as described

in Sub-clause

82.7.

17

Printed at +

Kay Printg.

New Delhi. India

Bureau of Indian Standards

,

established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to BIS is a statutory institution promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Director Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the or grade designations. Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this' Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. ETD 03 ( 3264 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters
:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone I 311 01 31 331 13 75 37 86 62 53 38 43 235 02 16 6 32 92 95

Regional Offices : Central Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar ~Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054
: Manak

Northern Southern Western

: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: Manakalaya,

160036

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 .

Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR,

Printed

at Printwell

Printers,

Aligarh,

India

