(Reaffirmed 1999)

IS:4596-1968,

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO OIL EXPELLERS
Oil Expellers and Allied Oil Mill Machinery EDC 54
Chairman DR C. R. Rao Oval View, Churchgate Reclamation, Members SHRI ATMA Rasl SHRI N. N. CHAVAN
SHRI CHIZABIL DASS SHRI SHIAM SINCGI ( .&tXnafC ) SERI R. K. DUBEY SH~I B. K. Covm

Sectional Committee,

Bombay

1

Reflesenting Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow Shri Shakti Engineering Works Pvt Ltd, Baroda All India Oil Mill Machinery Manufacturers' Associa. tion, New Delhi National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur The United Provinces Oil Millers' Association, Kanpur Directorate General of Technical Develonment. 1 I New Delhi

SHRI C. R. GUPTA

SHRI V. RAMU ( Alternate ) The Hyderahad Iron-& Steel Works Ltd, Hyderahad SHRI RAM KRISHAN GUPTA Regional Office, Oil Seeds Development, Hyderahad SERI NIRMAL SIN~H MAINI Oil Technological Research Institute, Anantapur SHRI S. D. TIRUMALA RAO SHRI M. ALLABAKSH ( AltemaL Cl ' Oil Technologists Association of India, Kanpur SRRI T. R. SHARYA ' SHRI K. P. BHAR~AVA ( Alternate ) The Delhi Kanodia Oil Mills, Delhi SHRI S. L. SETHI The Punjab Oil Expeller Co, Gbaziabad SHRI WAZIR CHAND SHARMA SHRI HARISH CHANDER SEARMA ( Alternate ) The Central Organization of Oil Industry & Trade, SHRI N. M. Srrrrrr~ Bombay SHRI R. M. DESAI ( Altermarc) S. P. Engineering Corporation, Kanpur SHRI SHAMSHERSINQH TALUJA SHRI SAJJAN SINC+H ( Alternate ) Small Industries Service Institute, Kanpur SHRI N. K. WIDHANI Director General, ISI ( Ex-&ia Member) SHRI M. V. PATANKAR Director ( Mech Engg ) Secretary
SERI M.

G. KRISHNA RAO ( Mech Engg ), IS1

Deputy Director

, ( Conthud cm pogc 2 )

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAPAR MARG

.

NEW DELHI

IS:45!&1968 ( contimccd frompage 1)
The Panel on Oil Expellers, EDC 54/P 1
Convener

Re~rimnting S. P. Foundries, Kanpur

SHEI MANOEAR SINQH Members
SHRI ATXA RAM SHRI T. R. SEARMA

Government of Uttar rraderh, Lucknow Gil Technologists Association of India, Kanpur

2

Is:4!596-1968

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO OIL EXPELLERS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 18 April 1968, after the draft finalized by the Oil Expellers and Allied Oil Mill Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 0.2 This standard has been prepared for the guidance of manufacturers and users to assist them in the correct interpretation of the common terms It is hoped that this standard will help in used in oil expeller industry. establishing a generally recognized usage and eliminate ambiguity and confusion arising out of individual interpretation of terms used in the industry. 0.3 Figures given after the definitions are solely for the purpose of identifying the various parts of an expeller.

1.

SCOPE

1.1 This standard gives the definitions of terms used in oil expeller trade. The assembly of various parts of the oil expeller defined in this standard is illustrated in Fig. 1 and 2. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 Agitator -An assembly of steel blades mounted on a central shaft and rotating in long heating kettles. The blades agitate and push the cooked seed towards the hopper. Agitation avoids the buning or overheating of the seed. 2.2 Barrel See` Chamber `. ` Chamber plate `.

2.3 Barrel Ring -See 2.4 Bearing-A

support or carrier of a rotating shaft.

2.5 Bevel Gear -A gear pair used for transmitting power, whose axes intersect approximately at right angles, used in end driven expellers and kettles. 3

IS : 4596 - 1968 2.6 Body-The
2.7 Cage cast or fabricated frame of the expeller.

See ` Chamber

'.

2.8 Cage Bar-A steel bar usually of rectangular cross-section and sometimes chamfered, fitted inside the chamber so as to provide slit gaps for the Slide and centre bars screwed to chamber bars expelled oil to drain out. give support to cage bars. 2.9 Cage Bar Set -The entire fitting of the chamber bars, taper bars, side bars, centre bars and spacers. co:lsisting of cage

2.10 Centre Bar-A steel bar of trapezoidal cross-section fastened on the chamber bar in the centre of `half' of a chamber. Usually three centre bars cover the entire length of the chamber. They facilitate the filling of cage bars in the chamber. 2.11 Chamber (Cage or Barrel)-The enclosure within which the worm assembly works, consisting of two chamber ` halves ' assembled by chamber bars, chamber plates, centre bars, side bars, cage bars and screws. Twd halves of the chamber placed in their position and fastened by clamping bars and chamber bolts, form a hollow cylinder within which the worm assembly works. 2.12 Frame Bar (Chamber Bar) - A bar of square cross-section to which chamber plates are fixed in their position to make ` half' of a chamber. 2.13 Chamber Bolt (Clamping Bolt)-Bolts (25 to 37 mm dia) used to keep the two halves of chamber in position with the help of clamping bars. They pass through the gaps between the chamber plates. 2.14 Chamber Plate ( Barrelled Ring Half ) - Plates suitably cut into shape to provide support to frame bars, centre bars, side bars and cage bars They provide space to clamping bars in forming a semicircular chamber. on the outside. 2.15 Chamber Screw-Cheese to chamber plates. 2.16 Clamping Bolt head screws used for fastening bolt `. frame bars

See ` Chamber

2.17 Collar-A ring formed on a shaft, either by forging integrally or made as a separate casting or forging, bored or turned, and held in a place with a set-screw or a' split pin. 2.18 Cone (Pressure Cone or Cone Paint )-A hollow truncated cone The annular space between the cone and cone fitted on the cone head. collar is controlled by its linear movement.

4

IS : 4596 -1968 2.19 Cone Base See ` Cone head `. spacing collar between the sleeve and the

2.20 Cone Bush ( Sleeve) -A pressing worm.

2.21 Cone Collar (Discharge Collar or Discharge Ring) - A ring shaped member fixed in the cone body on which the chamber rests. It is generally in two pieces with a tapered bore forming an annular space with the cone, through which the cake discharges. 2.22 Cone Driving Pinion-A pinion with clutches on both sides loose fitted on cone driving shaft, and in teeth with cone gear. It can be clutched with the expeller body to stop rotation or with cone driving shaft to increase rotation. 2.23 Cone Driving ShaftIt is fitted with a clutch and has a speed Cone driving pinion can be clutched about double that of the main shaft. with it. 2.24 Cone Gear-A gear fitted on sleeve nut, At driving pinion and generally in two parts. By giving a has the same speed as cone shaft. this gear with the help of cone driving pinion, the cone head and sleeve nut is caused to move in or position of the cone. in teeth with the cone normal position this gear higher or lower speed to whole assembly of cone, out in order to adjust the

2.25 Cone Head-A mild steel member, keyed with the sleeve, screwed with the cone and fastened loose to sleeve nut with the help of cone head Its function is to hold the cone in position and to transmit only collar. the linear motion of the sleeve nut to the cone. 2.26 Cone Head .Collar ( Ring for Cone Base ) -A ring shaped member It is generally in two used to clamp the cone head and sleeve nut loosely. pieces. 2.27 Cone Point See ` Cone `. the

2.28 Dead Clutch - A clutch fixed to the expeller body. By clutching cone driving pinion to it the rotation of cone assembly stops. 2.29 2.30 2.31 Discharge Distance Double Collar-See Collar -See

` Cone collar `. ` Spacing
collar `. shaft gears `. pulley made of cast iron or

Gear Drive -See

also ` Main

2.32 Driving Pulley-A plain or V-grooved mild steel fitted on the driving shaft. 2.33 2.34 Driving Driving Shaft-See Sleeve -See

' Side shaft `. ` Gudgeon `.
5

IS:4!596-1968
2.35 Fan ( Stirrer) - Cast iron or steel member with blades used in round kettle for stirring and sweeping the feed towards the outlet. I 2.36 Feed-Hopper-The hopper through which the feed passes from the A vertical push worm is provided in kettle to the expeller feed chamber. some models. 2.37 2.36 Feed Worm-See Frame Bar-See

` Quill worm `. ` Chamber
bar `. or receive motion by

2.39 Gear-A toothed member designed to transmit successively engaging teeth with another gear.

2.49 GudgeonIn single drive expeller, gudgeon carries the main shaft gear and is keyed to the main shaft and revolves inside the bearings of It also acts as a pivot to transfer the thrust of main bodies No. 1 and 2. shaft to the thrust bearing. 2.40.1 In double drive expeller it carries the quill worm gear and quill worm is screwed to it. It bears in the body No. 2 and on the main shaft. 2.41 KettleKettle may be long and round. In medium and large kettles a steam jacket is provided for cooking the feed. The fan or agitator working in the kettle pushes the feed towards the outlet. 2.42 Key Bar -See

` Centre bar `.

2.43 Knife Bar-Mild steel flat with projections to scrap the material In one chamber two knife collected around the spacing and taper collars. bars are fi!ted at the joining line of the two chamber halves. 2.44 Main Shaft ( Worm Shaft) -A round shaft of steel to which are keyed worm assembly, gudgeon, pivot and sleeve. It rotates in bearings fitted in the body. It may be hollow for passing coolant to control the temperature. 2.45 Main Shaft Gears-Gears mounted on the main shaft directly or on a gudgeon for reducing the number of revolutions. Single drive expellers have one gear and double drive expellers two gears -one for the quill worm and the other for main shaft. 2.46 Oil Pan-See

` Tray'.
of the two gears in a pair which has the smaller

2.47 Pinion -One number of teeth.

2.46 Pivot-A steel member used in double gear expellers, fitted on the It takes the thrust of the main shaft and main shaft near the driving end. transfers it to the main thrust bearing.

/

6

IS: 4596-1968
2.49 Pressing
A steel worm with a helical thread on its length equal to one revolution and mounted on the main shaft in the chamber. The setting of the worm It pushes the feed ahead towards the cone head. assembly differs with the expeller and the type of seed to be crushed. 2.59 Pressure Cone -See

worm-

` Cone `.
to push

2.51 Push Worm -A vertical worm arranged in' feed hopper meal coming from the cooking kettle to the expeller.

2.52 QtiII Worm (Feed Worm) -A member having a helical thread running throughout its length which receives the feed from the hopper and Quill worm is longer than the pushes it to the pressing worm assembly. pressing worm. 2.53 Reverse Worm-A pressing worm with reverse thread. The thread It is used, occasionally, of the helix winds away in clockwise direction. between pressing worms to increase pressure-on the meal. 2.54 2.55 256 Ring Screw Screw for -See Cone Base-See

` Cone head collar `.

' Sleeve `. ` Sleeve nut `.
in bearings and carries pulleys or Cone driving

Nut-See

2.57 Shaft-A spindle which revolves gears for transmission of power. 2.58 Shaft Clutch-A pinion can be clutched

clutch keyed to cone driving shaft. to it.

2.59 Side Bar (Shoe Bar) -A steel bar with Projection on side, whicn The side bars are fitted on the frame bar lengthwise is sometimes tapered. on both the sides of the chamber halves to provide support for cage bars. 2.69 Side Stand-A shaft. stand with a bearing block to support the rotating

2.61 Side Shaft (Driving Shaft)-A shaft on which are mounted the drive pulleys and the pinion. The pinion mates with the gear of the main shaft. It is supported by side stand, and side brackets fixed to the body. 2.62 Single Gear Drive Expeller -See also ` Main shaft gear `. the

hollow cylinder threaded on the outside and fixed on 2.63 Sleeve -A main shaft with the key. It rotates with the main shaft.

2.64 Sleeve Nut-A threaded member made of steel or cast iron fastened to the cone through cone head, which can be made to move forwards or backwards on the sleeve for adjusting the position of the cone. 2.65 Spacers - Mild steel strips ranging from O-25 to 0.63 mm in thickness inserted between unchamfered cage bars to provide slit gaps.

IS:4596-1968 2.66 Spacing Collar (Distance worms. Collar) A collar used to space the

2.67 Stand- The cast iron frame used to raise the level of the expeller from the ground. Stands are fixed to the floor with the help of foundation or anchor bolts. 2.66 Stirrer See ` Fan `.

2.69 Taper Bar-A cage bar with a taper on one or both sides used for fixing cage bars in proper position. 2.70 Taper Collar-A collar which tapers to join two worms of varying diameters and also serves as a spacing collar for the generation of pressure. 2.71 Thrust Bearing-Specially designed bearing to take tangential load.

2.72 Tie Rod-A round bar threaded at both ends and used in connecting all the bodies and for tying them in their positions. 2.73 Tray - The cast iron tray attached to the body below the chamber. The expressed oil collects into the tray and flows down to the outlet hole. 2.74 Worm-A form of helical gear consisting of a continuous screw thread wrapped around a cylinder which continuously engages a segment of helix of the worm wheel. 2.75 Worm Assembly-Mountings on the main shaft from quill worm to cone bush including quill worm, pressing worms, reversible pressing worms, spacing collars, taper collars, cone bush, and cone. 2.76 Worm Wheel-One of the gear pairs, each of whose teeth consists of small segment of a helix and mates with worm. 2.77 Worm Wheel Assembly-An assembly of a worm wheel which changes the direction of rotation by a right angle and also plane of rotation. It gives a high reduction ratio of rotation.

8

Is : 4596 - 1968

TIMUS

GEARING

RESSlNG WORM

L PRESSING

b?EMRSE
p%~~G

LIAPER

COLLAR

&ONE bit30 caLAa

MAIN WAFT-J

FIG. 2

NOMENCLATUREAND ASSEMBLYOF MAIN SHAFT OF DOUBLE GEAR OIL EXPELLER

IO

