URC AT 879% IS 4410 (Part 6) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


та чта чачта а аа Beara 
WNT 6 SAAT 
( жч тат) 


Glossary of Terms Relating to 


River Valley Projects 


Part 6 Reservoirs 
( Second Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2022 


мт 979% SRI 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Ly AM HAA, 9 TSR WMS WH AMT, 15 feet - 110002 
ИТФ: ЧЕЙ 
аќ МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2022 Price Group 4 


Reservoirs and Lakes Sectional Committee, WRD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard 4410 (Part 6) (second revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards 
after the draft finalized by the Reservoirs and Lakes Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Water Resources Division Council. 


A number of Indian Standards have already been published covering various aspects of River Valley 
Projects. These standards include technical terms and definitions of terms which are required to avoid 
ambiguity in their interpretation. To achieve this end, the Sectional Committee on relating to River Valley 
Projects has brought out ‘Glossary of terms relating to River Valley Projects’ which has been published 
in 23 parts. This (Part 6) contains definitions of terms relating to reservoirs and to its various 
components. Other published parts of this standard are: 


Part 1 Irrigation Practice 

Part 2 Project Planning 

Part 3 River and River Training 
Part 4 Drawings 

Part 5 Canals 


Part 7 Engineering Geology 

Part 8 Dams and Dam Section 

Part 9 Spillways and Siphons 

Part 10 Hydro-electric Power Station Including Water Conductor System 
Part 11 Hydrology 

Part 12 Diversion works 

Part 13 Operation, Maintenance and Repair of River Valley Projects 
Part 14 Soil Conservation and Reclamation 

Part 15 Canal Structures 

Part 16 Gates and Valves 


Part 17 Water Requirements of Crops 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 4410 (Part 6) : 2022 


Indian Standard 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 
PART 6 RESERVOIRS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 6) contains definitions of terms 
relating to the various types of reservoirs, storage 
and sedimentation in reservoirs, and evaporation 
losses from reservoirs, but does not contain 
definitions of terms relating to sub-surface or ground 
water reservoirs. 


2 REFERNCES 


The Indian Standards listed below contain 
provisions which through reference in this text 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on these standards are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards indicated below : 


IS No. Title 

5477 (Part 1) : Fixing the capacities of 

1999 reservoirs methods: Part 1 
General requirements (first 
revision) 

3 RESERVOIRS 


A pond, lake, or other space, either natural in its 
origin or created in whole or in part by building of 
engineering structures, which is used for storage, 
regulation, and control of water. Small reservoirs are 
also called tanks. 


4 TYPES OF RESERVOIRS 


4.1 Auxiliary or Compensatory Reservoir — A 
reservoir which supplements or absorbs the 
spill/release of upstream main reservoir. 


4.2 Balancing Reservoir — A reservoir down 
stream of (or subsidiary to) the main reservoir for 
holding water released from the main reservoir in 
excess of that required for irrigation, power 
generation or other purposes. 


4.3 Bank Side Reservoir — Reservoirs that are 
made by diverting water from local rivers or streams 
to an existing reservoir. 


4.4 Conservation —_Reservoir/Conservation 
Storage Capacity — A reservoir impounding water 
for useful purposes, such as irrigation, power 


generation, recreation, domestic, industrial, and 
municipal supply, etc. 


4.5 Detention Reservoir — A reservoir wherein 
water is stored for a relatively brief period of time, 
part of it being retained until the stream can safely 
carry the ordinary flow plus the released water. Such 
reservoirs usually have outlets without control gates 
and are used for flood regulation; also called ‘Flood 
Control Reservoir’ ог ‘Retarding Reservoir’. 


4.6 Distribution Reservoir — A reservoir 
connected with distribution system of a water supply 
project, used primarily to care for fluctuations in 
demand which occur over short periods and also as 
local storage in case of emergency (such as a break 
in a main supply line failure of pumping plant). 


4.7 Grit Reservoir — A reservoir used for storage 
of turbid water for the purpose of sedimentation; 
also called ‘Settling Reservoir’ or ‘Silting 
Reservoir’. 


4.8 Impounding Reservoir — A reservoir with 
gate-controlled outlets wherein surface water can be 
retained for a considerable period of time and 
released for use at a time when the normal flow of 
the stream is insufficient to satisfy requirements; 
also called ‘Storage Reservoir’. 


4.9 Multipurpose Reservoir — A reservoir 
constructed and equipped to provide storage and 
release of water for two or more purposes such as 
irrigation, flood control, power generation, 
navigation, pollution abatement, domestic and 
industrial water supply, fish culture and recreation; 
also called ‘Multiuse Reservoir’. 


4.10 Natural Reservoirs — Reservoirs created by 
natural means; also called ‘Lakes’. 


4.11 Normal Ponded Reservoir — Storage 
reservoir normally ponded up to full reservoir. 


5 TERMS RELATING TO STORAGE IN 
RESERVOIRS 


5.1 Active Capacity — The storage available for 
project purpose, usually the storage between the 
lowest allowable level of release (minimum draw 
down level) and the highest controlled water surface 
(static full pool level); also called ‘Effective 
Capacity’ or ‘Useful Capacity’ or “Active Storage 
Capacity’ or ‘Effective Storage Capacity’ or ‘Useful 
Storage Capacity’ or ‘Usable Storage Capacity’. The 


IS 4410 (Part 6) : 2022 


active capacity is thus the difference of gross storage 
capacity, and the sum of dead storage capacity and 
inactive capacity. 


5.1.1 Active Power Storage Capacity/Effective 
Power Storage Capacity — It is the storage capacity 
available for hydro power generation; and is the 
difference in gross storage capacity between 
capacity at full reservoir level (FRL) and capacity at 
minimum draw down level (MDDL) for hydro 
power generation. 


5.2 Annual Storage/Within the Year Storage — 
The difference between the maximum and minimum 
volumes in storage over a year of reservoir 
operation. This term is used to denote the storage of 
a reservoir meant for meeting the demands of a 


TOP OF DAM 


specific hydrologic year used for planning the 
project (see IS 5477 Part 1). 


5.3 Bank Storage — Water absorbed and stored in 
the bed and banks of a stream, lake or reservoir, and 
returned in whole or in part as the level of the surface 
of the water body falls. 


5.4 Buffer Storage — The space located between 
dead storage level (DSL) and minimum draw down 
level (MDDL) is termed as buffer storage. As the 
name implies, this zone is a buffer between the 
active and dead storage zones and releases from this 
zone are made in dry situations to cater for essential 
requirements only. Dead storage and buffer storage 
together is called inactive storage (see Fig. 1) (see IS 
5477 Part 1). 


SURCHARGE STORAGE MWL 


TOP OF FLOOD CONTROL POOL ~~~ 


FRL (TOP OF CONSERVATION STORAGE) 


SPILLWAY CREST LEVEL 


ACTIVE STORAGE 
CAPACITY 


MDDL 


BUFFER STORAGE 
LIVE STORAGE CAPACITY 


DEAD STORAGE 
LEVEL(D S L) 


SILT STORAGE CAPACITY D 


PENSTOCK 


AN 


RA 


у 


NACTIVE STORAGE CAPACITY 


FIG. 1 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM SHOWING STORAGE (CAPACITY) NOMENCLATURE 


5.5 Capacity/Storage Capacity — Space available 
in a reservoir between specified levels whether 
actually occupied by water or empty. 


5.6 Carry-over Storage — Storage collected during 
surplus years for making up deficiencies in 
subsequent dry or lean year. It is the minimum 
storage during the year over and above the inactive 
storage capacity usable for the relevant purpose; also 
called ‘Over Year Storage’. When the entire water 
stored in a reservoir is not used up in a year, the 
unused water is stored as carry-over storage for use 
in subsequent years (see IS 5477 Part 1). 


5.7 Coefficient of Storage — A coefficient to 
express the relation of live storage capacity in a 
reservoir, to the mean annual inflow in the reservoir; 


also called ‘Reservoir Factor’. When expressed as 
percentage it is also termed ‘Tank Percentage’. 


5.8 Conservation Storage Capacity 


a) Water storage capacity available for 
conservation purposes, such as domestic 
and industrial supply, power generation, 
and irrigation. 


b) Capacity between the top of conservation 
pool level and bottom level of lowest 
minimum draw down level (MDDL) 
provided for releasing water for 
conservation purpose. 


5.9 Controlled Storage Capacity — Reservoir 
storage capacity subject to control by operation of 


gates or other control devices. It is the capacity 
available between highest controlled water level and 
bottom level of control devices provided for 
regulation or release of water. 


5.10 Dead Storage — Storage of a reservoir not 
susceptible to release by the in-built sluices/outlet 
means. It is the storage between the dead storage 
level (DSL) and the ground level. Generally, this is 
occupied by silt/sediment (see Fig. 1) (see IS 5477 
Part 1). 


5.11 Elevation Area Capacity Curve — The graph 
of area of water spread and the storage volume of 
reservoir each as function of assumed horizontal 
water surface elevation at specified reference time. 
This is a combined plot of elevation-capacity and 
elevation-area curve (see Fig. 2). 


5.12 Flood Control Storage Capacity/Exclusive 
Flood Control Storage Capacity — Capacity 


IS 4410 (Part 6) : 2022 


reserved for temporary storage of water during 
floods to be released later. This represents the 
capacity between top of conservation pool and the 
Maximum Water level (MWL); азо called 
‘Effective Flood Control Storage’. This is the 
storage capacity provided to attenuate the flood peak 
depending on its volume and downstream releasing 
constraints (see IS 5477 Part 1). 


5.13 Field Storage — The water which is above full 
reservoir level (ЕКІ) spreading towards the 
catchment area constitutes field storage (see IS 5477 
Part 1). 


5.14 Flowage Line — A reservoir contour 
corresponding to a definite water level (maximum, 
mean, low, spillway crest, etc) generally used in 
connection with acquisition of rights to flood land 
for storage purposes. 


—— CAPACITY IN 10° т? 


| | | | ELEVATION v/s CAPACITY 


CURVE 


ELEVATION IN т —= 


ELEVATION v/s AREA 
CURVE 


AREA IN 10° m? —= 


FIG. 2 AREA CAPACITY CURVE 


5.15 Full Reservoir Level (F.R.L.)/Static Full 
Pool Level/Static Full Reservoir 
Level/Permanent Water Level or Full Supply 
Level — The highest reservoir level that can be 
maintained without spillway discharge or without 
passing water downstream through sluiceways. It 
does not include any depth of surcharge. It is the 
level corresponding to the storage which includes 
both active and inactive storages as also the flood 
storage; if provided for (see IS 5477 Part 1). 


5.16 Highest Controlled Water Level — The 
highest reservoir level up to which the outflow from 


the reservoir is planned to be controlled by operation 
of gates and outlets. For reservoir not having 
included surcharge operation, this corresponds to 
‘Full Reservoir Level’. 


5.17 Inactive Capacity — Storage capacity; 
exclusive of dead storage, below which release of 
water is not contemplated because of minimum 
irrigation and power load requirements, or of 
operating agreements not to draw the reservoir 
below a given capacity or elevation for the relevant 


purposes. 


IS 4410 (Part 6) : 2022 


5.18 Induced Surcharge Capacity — Capacity 
which is assigned to flood control purpose during 
certain period of the year and to conservation 
purposes during other period of the year. This 
capacity is available between the highest controlled 
water level and full reservoir level. 


5.19 Joint Use Capacity (Flood Control and 
Conservation) — Capacity between the lowest of 
the seasonally fluctuating maximum rule curve level 
and the top of conservation pool level. 


5.20 Live Capacity/Live Storage, Capacity — 
Capacity available between dead storage level and 
full reservoir level. 


5.21 Live Storage — Volume of water actually 
available at any time between dead storage level, 
and the lower of actual water level and full reservoir 
level. 


5.22 Maximum Rule Curve Level — The level up 
to which the storage accumulation for 
conservational purposes is allowed. This level can 
fluctuate seasonally and the highest of these 
seasonal levels will correspond to the top of 
conservation pool. 


5.23 Maximum Water Level (M.W.L.) — The 
maximum water level likely to be attained in the 
reservoir at the dam face while negotiating the 
adopted design flood. It also depends on the 
specified initial reservoir level and the spillway 
regulation rule. Also called ‘Highest Reservoir 
Level’ or ‘Highest Floor Level’. 


5.24 Maximum Water Surface Elevation — The 
level attained at any specified location in a reservoir 
while negotiating the adopted design flood. At the 
dam face this corresponds to maximum water level 
(see 4.24). 


5.25 Minimum Draw Down Level (M.D.D.L) — It 
is the lowest level at which the full release towards 
meeting the specified purpose is physically possible 
and allowable under operating instructions. 


5.26 New Zero Elevation/Zero Elevation — The 
level up to which all the available capacity of the 
reservoir was or is expected to be lost due to 
progressive sedimentation of the reservoir, up to the 
specified time. 


5.27 Reservoir Rim — The boundary line 
corresponding to maximum water surface elevation. 


5.28 Silt Storage or Silt/Sedimentation Zone — 
Storage designed for accumulation of silt in a 
reservoir both below and above dead storage level. 
The space occupied by the sediment in the reservoir 
can be divided into separate zones. A schematic 
diagram on sedimentation zones of reservoirs is 
given in Fig. 1 (see IS 5477 Part 1). 


5.29 Storage — Volume of water available in the 
reservoir at any specified time and between 
specified levels. 


5.30 Storage Cycle — A period at the beginning and 
end of which the reservoir contents are the same. 
The period may vary from a few hours to years 
depending upon inflow and outflow rates. 


5.31 Storage Equation — An axiom that the 
volume of inflow equals the volume of outflow plus 
or minus the change in storage. 


5.32 Submerged Area — The area that gets under 
submergence with the formation of the reservoir 
corresponding to specified reservoir elevation. 


5.33 Surcharge Storage — Storage capacity 
between maximum operating level of a reservoir (or 
full reservoir level) and maximum water level. It is 
the storage between the full reservoir level (FRL) 
and the maximum water level (MWL) of a reservoir 
which may be attained with the spillway surplus at 
full capacity and the reservoir being at FRL (see Fig 
1) (see IS 5477 Part 1). 


5.34 Top of Conservation Pool Level — The 
highest water level permissible for storing water for 
conservation use, such as municipal supply, 
irrigation and power generation, but excluding flood 
control. 


5.35 Total Storage Capacity/Gross Storage 
Capacity — Capacity below full reservoir level. It 
would correspond to the sum of Dead Storage 
Capacity and Live Capacity. It would also 
correspond to the sum of Dead Storage Capacity, 
Inactive Capacity and Active Storage Capacity. 


5.36 Uncontrolled Storage — Reservoir storage not 
controlled by gates or other devices. Storage at any 
time above the Highest Controlled Water Level; that 
is Full Reservoir Level. 


6 TERMS RELATING TO SEDIMENTATION 
IN RESERVOIR 


6.1 Density Currents — The gravity flow of a fluid 
through, under or over another similar fluid of 
different density. Also called, ‘Stratified Flow’ or 
‘Density Flow’. 


6.2 Bottom Set Beds — These are formed from the 
finer particles usually of silt and clay carried by the 
stream water in suspension. The particles settle very 
slowly in the bottom of the reservoir. 


6.2.1 Fore-set Beds — These are formed from the 
coarse sediments carried by the stream usually 
travelling on or near the stream bottom and 
deposited where the current retards as it flows out 
into the reservoir. These are inclined downward in 
the direction of flow, the inclination increasing with 
coarseness of the sediment (see Fig. 3). Fore-set 
deposits represent the face of the sediment deposit 


advancing into the reservoir and are differentiated 
from Top-set beds by an increase in slope and 


TOP - SET BEDS 


FORE - SET BEDS 


IS 4410 (Part 6) : 2022 


decrease in grain size. 


RESERVOIR WATER 


FIG. 3 LONGITUDINAL CROSS SECTION OF A RESERVOIR, SHOWING VARIOUS TYPES OF DEPOSITS 


6.2.2 Top-set Beds — These are usually composed 
of rapid setting coarse sediments and are sloping at 
a low gradient from the edge of the Fore-set bed 
which extends as far as the back water curve extends 
upstream of the reservoir (see Fig 3). 


6.3 Inflow Density Currents — The density 
currents which flow through turbid media of varying 
density of similar fluid. 


6.4 Inflow Turbidity Currents — Turbidity 
currents flowing between the lighter water and 
heavier water, for example, water in a reservoir at 
the surface is warmer and lighter, and at bottom; it 
is colder and heavier. 
NOTE — This difference in densities of water will 
induce interflow turbidity currents in the reach where 


the interflowing water has a greater density 
overlying top water. 


6.5 Overflow Density Currents — Density currents 
which overflow another fluid. 


6.6 Overflow Turbidity Currents — Turbidity 
currents formed by the inflowing turbid water 
having lesser density than the water in the reservoir. 
The case occurs when the turbid water of the river 
enters the salt water (heavier) of the ocean. These 
currents can also occur with the water streams 
discharging into comparatively cold lakes. 


6.7 Plunge Point/Plunge Line — The zone where 
the inflowing turbid water entering a reservoir 
plunges beneath the clear water, thereby producing 
stratified flow is called the plunge point or plunge 
line. 


6.8 Sediment Yield — It is the total quantity of 
sediment brought in a year to a reservoir as a result 
of erosion in the watershed. Sediment yield is 


dependent on the hydro-physical conditions of the 
watershed. It is expressed in millimeters over unit 
area of the watershed/catchment per year. 


6.9 Sediment Detention Basin — This is designed 
to trap sediment for water quality control, protecting 
downstream aquatic environments and structures 
from both suspended bed material and the associated 
pollutants. 


6.10 Trap Efficiency — The trap efficiency of the 
reservoir is defined as the ratio of the total deposited 
sediment in the reservoir to the total sediment inflow 
in a year. It is expressed as a percentage of the 
annual sediment inflow (see IS 5477 Part 1). 


6.11 Turbidity Currents — A class of density 
currents associated with the suspension of sediment 
in the flowing water and usually involving the 
deposition of sediment in reservoirs. The turbidity 
currents are those density currents caused primarily 
or entirely by presence of turbidity. 


6.12 Underflow Density Currents — The density 
currents flowing under another fluid. 


6.13 Underflow Turbidity Currents — The 
common type of density currents, which move down 
the bottom of a reservoir, lake or deep channel due 
to greater density of the turbid water resulting from 
the inclusion of suspended sediment. 


6.14 Types of Underflow Turbidity Currents 


6.14.1 Underflow Turbidity Currents, Plunging 
Type — The turbid water flowing into a reservoir 
plunging directly under the clear water in the lake. 
The formation of this type is indicated by the 
collection of flowing drift on the surface and the 


IS 4410 (Part 6) : 2022 


sharp line of separation of the muddy and the clear 
water (see Fig. 4). 


MUDDY WATER RIPPLES 


SILT DEPOSITION 


RESERVOIR BED 


FIG. 4 UNDERFLOW TURBIDITY CURRENTS, PLUNGING TYPE 


6.14.2 Underflow Turbidity Currents, Settling Type 
— The flowing muddy water not diving under the 
clear water, but pushing it downstream and forms a 
considerable body of muddy water in which the 
sediment slowly settles to the bottom, which later on 


el 


SILT DEPOSITION 


RESERVOIR BED 


flows down into the reservoir in the form of 
underflow turbidity currents. The existence of these 
currents is indirectly inferred from the deep deposit 
of fine materials in the stream bed near the upper 
ends of some large reservoirs (see Fig. 5). 


DAM 


FIG. 5 UNDERFLOW CURRENTS, SETTLING TYPE TURBIDITY 


7 TERMS RELATING TO EVAPORATION 
FROM RESERVOIR AND ITS CONTROL 


7.1 Broadcast Method — Spreading of dry powder 
of retardant on the water surface through dusting 
machine like grinder-spreader mounted on a boat 
which travels over the water surface, the powder 
spontaneously forms a protecting film; also called 
‘Dusting Method’. 


7.2 Dispenser — The equipment used for spraying 
protective films to retard evaporation. 


7.3 Dispensing Method — A method of adding 
retardants to the water surface by first dissolving or 


emulsifying them in a volatile solvent which 
evaporates leaving the film of retardants behind the 
water surface. 


7.4 Dosage — The quantity of the retardant 
substance required to form a monolayer on a unit of 
water surface in the first instance, or for subsequent 
regular replenishment of the film formed. 


7.5 Evaporation 


a) The process by which the water is changed 
from the liquid state to a gaseous state 
below the boiling point through the transfer 
of heat energy. 


b) The quantity of water that is evaporated; the 
rate is expressed in depth of water, measured 
as liquid water, removed from a specified 
surface per unit of time generally in 
millimeter per day, month or year. 


7.6 Evaporation Pan — An experimental tank used 
to determine the amount of evaporation from the 
surface of water. 


7.7 Evaporation Rate — Quantity of water which 
is evaporated from a given water surface per unit of 
time, expressed in terms of mm depth per day. 


7.8 Evaporation Retardants — Methods or 
measures of evaporation reduction from water 
surface, such as wind breaks, shading and protective 
films; also called ‘Evaporation Retarders’ or 
‘Evaporation Suppressor’. 


7.9 Evaporimeter — Ап instrument which 
measures rate of evaporation of water into 
atmosphere. 


7.10 Feasible Service Time — For a specified 
purpose, the period or notional period for which the 
reservoir provided, or is/was expected to provide, a 
planned benefit to some extent of the reservoir being 
impaired by sedimentation. Customarily, it is 
estimated as the time when the ‘New Zero 
Elevation’ of the reservoir equals the SIL level of the 
outlet relevant for the purpose. 


7.11 Film Generation — The spreading of retardant 
chemical to form a monolayer on the water surface. 


7.12 Film Generator — A component of the 
dispenser containing the retardant and releasing it on 
the water surface for film generation. 


IS 4410 (Part 6) : 2022 


7.13 Fixed Dispenser — A dispensing equipment in 
which the retardant containers are located on the 
periphery of the water spread, which dispense the 
retardant through tubing, laid submerged in the 
reservoir and operated through hand contact valve 
and fitted with or without automatic wind controlled 
stopcocks; also called ‘Shore Line Dispensing Unit’ 
or ‘Land Based Dispenser’. 


7.14 Floating Dispenser — Dispenser mounted on 
a boat or launch which moves through the water 
surface for dispensing the retardants. 


7.15 Full Service Time — For a specified purpose, 
the period or notional period for which the reservoir 
provided or is/was expected to provide, the full 
planned benefit unaffected by the reason of 
sedimentation. 


7.16 Potential Evaporation — Quantity of water 
vapour which could be emitted by a surface of pure 
water, per unit surface area and unit time, in the 
existing condition. 


7.17 Surface Evaporation — Evaporation from the 
surface of water/snow or ice. 


7.18 Suspension Process — A patented method of 
application of Сә - Сі fatty alcohols of specified 
particle sizes in aqueous suspension or emulsion to 
water surface. 


7.19 Wind Breaks — A barrier composed of planted 
trees, on the shores of reservoir, designed to break 
the velocity of the wind over water surface in order 
to reduce evaporation. 


IS 4410 (Part 6) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITON 


Reservoirs and Lakes, Sectional Committee, WRD 10 


Organisation 
National Institute Of Hydrology, Roorkee 


Bhakra Beas Management Board, Chandigarh 


Central Water And Power Research Station, Pune 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Department Of Water Resources, Govt. Of 
Odisha 


Department Of Water Resources, Govt. Of 


Punjab, India 


Indian Institute Of Technology, Roorkee 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


J&K Lakes And Water Way Development 
Authority, Srinagar 


Maharashtra Engineering Research Institute, 
Nashik 


Narmada Water Resources,Water Supply & 
Kalpasar, Gandhinagar 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation, 
Faridabad 


National Institute Of Hydrology, Roorkee 


National Remote Sensing Centre, Hyderabad 


Representative(s) 
DR JAIVIR TYAGI DIRECTOR (Chairman) 


SHRI H. L. KAMBOSH 


EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 


DR NEENA ISAAC 
SHRI SRISHAILAM (Alternate I) 


DR V. M. PRABHAKAR (Alternate II) 


SHRI S. K. SINHA 


SHRI M. SAI SUDARSANAM (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (D&R) 


DIRECTOR (HEAD WORKS) (Alternate) 


SHRI PAWAN KAPOOR 
SHRI K. K. GUPTA (Alternate Г) 
SHRIN. K. JAIN (Alternate IT) 


PROF ARUN KUMAR 


PROF SUMIT SEN (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA 


SHRI SHANKAR KUMAR SAHA (Alternate) 


EXECUTIVE ENGINEER 


SHRI YASHAVANT RAO BHADANE 


SHRI A. M. BARVE 
SHRIP. У. VYAS (Alternate I) 


SHRI В. Н. CHAUDHARY (Alternate IT) 


SHRI RAJEEV BABOOTA 
MISS BHARTI GUPTA (Alternate I) 


MR ANKUR SHARMA (Alternate IT) 


DR M. K. GOEL 


DR S. D. KHOBRAGADE (Alternate) 


DR V. VENKATESHWAR RAO 


Organisation 


National Thermal Power Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 


National Water Academy, Pune 


National Water Development Agency, New Delhi 


Office Of The Engineer In Chief, Bhopal 


Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Limited, 
Gandhinagar 


Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam Limited, Shimla 


Tehri Hydel Development Corporation India 
Limited, Rishikesh 


Water And Power Consultancy Services Limited, 
New Delhi 


Water Resources Department, Govt. of Andhra 
Pradesh 


Water Resources Department, Govt. of 
Maharashatra 


Wetlands International South Asia 


In Personal Capacity, New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 4410 (Part 6) : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ABDUL HAKEEM (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH SHARMA 
DR A. K. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR KHARYA 


SHRIS. N. PANDE (Alternate) 


SHRIR. K. JAIN 


SHRI MUZAFFAR AHMED (Alternate) 


SHRI B. С. PURANDARE 


SHRIS R UIKEY (Alternate) 


SHRIC. V. NADPARA 


SHRIR. G. KANOONGO (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAY GULERIA 


SHRIMATI SUDHA DEVI (Alternate) 


SHRI VIRENDRA SINGH 


SHRI ATUL KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


DR A. K. SHARMA 


SHRI A. STEPHEN LEO (Alternate) 


SHRI A. SURI BABU 


SHRI. RAJESH M. MORE 


SHRI A. P. KOHIKAR (Alternate) 


DR RITESH KUMAR DIRECTOR 


SHRI HARSH GANAPATHI (Alternate) 


DR A. L. RAMANATHAN 


SHRI R BHANU PRAKASH, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (WRD) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-Officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI NAVDEEP YADAV 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (WRD), BIS 


WRD (10) 


(Continued to third cover) 


The revision of the standard has been taken up in the light of the experience gained during the last many years in 
the use of this standard. The terms which have been modified are Reservoirs, Auxiliary or Compensatory 
Reservoir, Balancing Reservoir, Carry-over Storage, Conservation Storage Capacity, Elevation Area Capacity 
Curve, Flood Control Storage Capacity, Flowage Line, Inactive capacity, Induced Surcharge Capacity, 
Submerged Area, Total Storage Capacity, Foreset Beds, Suspension Process, Wind Breaks and new terms like 
Normal Ponded Reservoir, Bank Side Reservoir, Sediment Detention Basin, Plunge Point/Plunge Line, 
Evaporimeter have been added. In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international 
co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the 
practices in the field in this country. In this standard assistance is taken from ICID multilingual technical 
dictionary on irrigation and drainage for definition of terms related to river valley projects. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test or analysis, should be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 
: 2022 “Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)”. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 10 (16886). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : СІ.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot Мо. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


