**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 2632 (1964): Crotonaldehyde [PCD 9: Organic Chemicals 
Alcohols and Allied Products and Dye Intermediates] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS :2632 - 1964 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
CROTONALDEHYDE 



First Reprint AUGUST 1976 

( Incorporating Amrndmrni No. 1 ) 



UDC 661-72V3 




© Copyright 1976 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DhLllI 110002 



June 1964 



IS : 2632 - 1964 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
CROTONALDEHYDE 

Alcohols and Allied Products Sectional Committee, CDC 2 

Chairman R«prtsmhng 

Shai G. Gundu Rao All India Distillers' Association, New Delhi 

Members 

SbbiR. C. AiTKBN £. I. D, Pan7 Ltd., Nellikuppam 

Shri T. K. Rakgaswami ( Alternate ) 
Db V. R. S. Abni Union Carbide India Ltd., Calcutta 

Db H. C. Bijawat ( AUsmaU ) 
Shbi B. B. Baoalkot Indian Chemical Manufacturers* Association, Bombay 

Db A. H. AuiM ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. J. Bakbs Central Revenues Control Laboratory ( Ministry of 

Finance ) 

Shbt D. K. Sankaban ( Alternate ) 
SbbtA. M. Curlb Carcw & Co Ltd., Calcutta 

Shbi W. R. Damlk Government of Uttar Pradesh 

Shri M. A. Ekambabam The Sirsilk Limited, Sirpur-Kaghaznagar 

Shki T. S. Modi ( Alternate ) 
Db B. G. Gunde The Tata Oil Mills Co Ltd., Bombay 

Db (Miss) B. S. Khambata ( Alternate ) 
Shbi O. P. Gupta Directorate General, Ordnance Factories ( Ministry of 

Defence ), Calcutta 

Dr V. M. I. Namdissan ( Aiternaie ) 
Shbi G. Narabimua Iyenqab The Mysore Sugar Co Ltd., Bangalore 

Shbi K. Lakkappa ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Krishnamurty Indian Chemical Manufacturers* Association^ Calcutta 

Dr S. RoHATOi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi B. Narayan The Hindusthan Sugar Mills Ltd., Golagokarannath 

Shri N, B. Sen Gupta Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

Shri K. L. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Dr K. K. G. Sikohi Th^ Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India, Ltd, 

Calcutta 

Db S. Ganguly ( Alternate ) 
Shbi L. R. Sud Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri A. P. Chakraverty ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. N. Tbwari Directorate of Medical and Health Scrvicct, 

Government of Uttar Pradesh 
Shbi D. M. Trtvedi Synthetics & Chemicals Ltd., Bombay 

Shri P. R. Mahaxinoah ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on pags 2 ) 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, f BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS 1 2632 ■ 1964 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Shri S. L. Vknkiteswaran 
Dr Sadoopal, 
Deputy Director ( Chcm ) 



fUpresenitng 

Directorate General of Technical Development 
Director, IS! ( Ex-officto Member ) 



Secretaries 

Shui D. Das Gupta 

Assistant Director (Chem), ISI 

Shri M S Saxkna 

Extra Assistant Director ( Chem ), ISI 



Convener 
Shri M. A. Exambaram 

Member 
Dr H. C. Bijawat 



Grotonaldchvdc Panel, CDC 2 ; P7 

The Sirsilk Ltd,, Sirpur-Kaghaznagar 
Union Carbide India Ltd,, Calcutta 



IS 12632-1964 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
CROTONALDEHYDE 

0. FOREWORD 

OJ This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standard* 
Institution on 15 January 1964, after the draft finalized by the Alcohols 
and Allied Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Chemical Division Council. 

0.2 Crotonaldehydc is a useful chemical intermediate by virtue of its 
highly reactive character. It undergoes the characteristic reactions of the 
cthylenic double bond as well as those of simple aldehydes. It is a 
starting material for a wide range of aldehydc-aminc type of rubber 
antioxidants and acceleiators; for example, crotonic acid, butyraldehyde 
and butanol, quinolinc yelJow and other dyes and for certain synthetic 
resins. It is also used as a dcnaturant for industrial alcohol. The produc- 
tion of crotonaldehydc has been recently established in the country. This 
standard is expected to assist manufacturers in regulating the quality of 
material produced and the consumers in selecting a material of acceptable 
quality for use as a dcnaturant for industrial alcohol. 

0.3 Wherever a reference to any Indian Standard appears in this specifica- 
tion, it shall be taken as a reference to the latest version of the standard. 

0»4 This standard is one of a scries of Indian Standards on alcohols and 
allied products. 

0,5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS: 2-1960 Rules for Rounding Off Numerical Values (Revised). 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 

0.6 This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical provisions 
relating to the supply of crotonaldehydc, and it does not include all 
the necessary provisions of a contract. 



1. SCOPE 



1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and the methods of test for 
crotonaldehydc suitable for use as a dcnaturant for industrial alcohol. 



18x2632-1964 

2. REQjUIREMENTS 

2.1 Description — The material shall be a clear liquid with a pungent 
suffocating odour consisting essentially of crotonaldehyde. The material 
shall be free from sediment and suspended matter. 

2.2 The material shall also comply with the requirements given in Tabic I, 





TABLE I REQUIREMENTS FOR CROTONALDEHYDE 




Sl 

No. 


Chabactkbistic 


REQUlBteMBNT 


Method of Test 
( Rkf to Cl No. 
IN Appendix A ) 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 




(4) 


i) 


Specific gravity at 'n°j2TO, Max 


0*872 




A-1 


») 


Aldehyde content ( as crotonalde- 
hyde ), percent by weight, Mtn 


85 




A'2 


iii) 


Acidity ( aa CH3 COOH ), percent 
by weight, Max 


0-3 




A-3 



3. PACKING AND MARKING 

3.1 Packing 

3.1,1 The material shall be packed in suitable containers as agreed to 
between the purchaser and the supplier, and subject to the provisions of 
Red Tariff No. 18 Rules and Rates for Conveyance by Rail of Explosives 
and Other Dangerous Goods, issued by the Indian Railway Conference 
Association with any alterations or additions made thereafter. 

3.1*2 All containers in which the material is packed shall be dry and clean 
so that no impurities harmful to the end use of the material are introduced. 

3.2 Marking 

3.2.1 The material shall be supplied in accordance with the marking and 
delivery instructions given by the purchaser. 

3.2»2 Each container shaU he marked with: 

a) name of the material; 

b) manufacturer's name, initials or trade-mark, if any; 

c) net, gross and tare weight; and 

d) month and year of manufacture. 

3.2.3 Each container may also be marked sMitably with the ISI Certifi- 
cation Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the proviaions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations 



ISt2632«19M 

made thereunder. The 1SI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requiremcnti 
of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection* testing and quality control 
which IS devised and suprrvised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI marked 
products are also continuously checked by ISI for confohnity to that standard as a 
farther safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI 
Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained 
fromithe Indian Standards Institution. 

4. SAMPLING 

4.1 Preparation of Test Samples — Representative samples of the 
material shall be drawn as prescribed in Appendix B. 

4.2 Number of Testa — Tests for the determmation of all the charac- 
teristics specified shall be conducted on the composite sample. 

4J3 Criteria for Conformity — The material shall be taken as conform- 
ing to this specification, if the test results of the composite test sample 
satisfy all the requirements prescribed. 

5. TEST METHODS 

5.1 Tests shall be conducted according to the methods prescribed in 
Appendix A. References to relevant clauses of Appendix A arc given in 
coi4ofTable I. 

5-2 Q,aality of Reagents — Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals 
and distilled water [see 18:1070-1960 Specification for Water, Distilled 
Quality ( Revised ) ] shall be employed in tests. 

NOTK — * Pure chcmjcah ' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities which 
affect the results of analysis 



APPENDIX A 

[ Table h,-ftems (i) to (iii) ] 
METHODS OF TEST FOR CROTONALDEHYDE 

A-1. DETERMINATION OF SPECIFIC tiRAVYTY 

A-1.1 Apparatus 

A-1. 1.1 Spectfic Gravity Bottle — 50-ml capacity of Regnault type. 

A«L2 Procedure — Clean, dry and weigh the specific gravity bottle and 
ihc stopper. Fill the bottle with water and immerse it up to the neck in a 
constant temperature bath mamtained at 270 ±0'2°C for 20 minutes and 



ISt2632-lM4 

keep at this temperature for additional 20 minutes. Suck off the water with 
a bit of filter paper till the level reaches the graduation mark and weigh 
again. Empty the bottle, clean and dry. Repeat the operation with the 
material at 27**C. 



A — B 
C~B 



A-1.3 Calculation 

Specific gravity at 27^/27'C = 

where 

A = weight, in g, of the specific gravity bottle with the 

material at 27^*0; 
B = weight, in g, of the specific gravity bottle; and 
C ^ weight, in g, of the specific gravity bottle with water 

at 27°C. 

A-2. DETERMINATION OF ALDEHYDE CONTENT 
A-2.1 Reagents 

A-'2«l.l Alcoholic Solution of Hydroxylamine Hydrochloride^ 0*5 N — Dissolve 
35 g of hydroxylamine hydrochloride in 150 ml of distilled water and 
dilute to one litre with methanol. 

A-2.1.2 Aqueous Solution of Triethanolamine, 0'5 jV — Transfer 65 ml 
( 74 g ) of 98 percent triethanolamine to a 1 000 ml volumetric flask and 
dilute to the mark with water. 

A-2.1.3 Standard Sulphuric Acid Solution ( Dilute ) — 0*5 N. 

A-2.1 .4 Bromophenol Blue Indicator — 004 percent {wjv) alcoholic 
solution. 

A-2.2 Procedure 

A-2.2J Preparation of J/eutral Alcoholic Solution of Hydroxylamine Hydro- 
chloride — Add 30 ml of alcoholic solution of bromophenol blue indicator to 
one litre of the hydroxylamine hydrochloride reagent. From a burette 
add triethanolamine solution until the solution appears greenish-blue by 
transmitted light. Prepare the solution fresh before each series of the 
analysis. 

A-2.2.2 Prepare a sufficient number of heat-resistant pressure bottles to 
make all the blank and sample determinations in duplicate. To each 
bottle add 65 ml of neutralized alcoholic solution of hydroxylamine hydro- 
chloride and from a burette add exactly 50 ml of triethanolamine solution. 
Before capping, purge the bottle for 2 minutes with a gentle stream of 
nitrogen. This is best accomplished by means of a glass tube inserted 
through the neck of the bottle and clamped so that the opening is just above 
the surface of the liquid. Reserve two of the bottles for blanks and into 



18:2632-1964 

each of the other bottles introduce about one gram of the sample weighed 
to the nearest O'l mg. Allow the samples to stand together with the blanks 
at room temperature for 60 minutes. Shake the bottles occasionally. Cool 
each of the bottle slightly with tap water and uncap carefully to prevent 
loss of contents. Allow the contents to return to room temperature and 
titrate each of the blanks with standardized dilute sulphuric acid to 
greenish-blue end-point. Titrate each of the samples with standardized 
dilute sulphuric acid to the colour of the blanks approaching the end point 
dropwise until the colours match by transmitted light. 



A-2 J Calcnlatioai 

Aldehyde content ( as crotonaldchyde ), / P _. ^ ^ v 7*nft v v 
percent by weight = ^— "U^iy^LJ^Jl 



where 



B = average volume in ml of standard sulphuric acid solution 
required for the blanks, 

A ^ volume in mtllilitres of standard sulphuric acid solution 
required for the sample, 

^■a normality of standard sulphuric acid solution, and 

W = weight in g of sample taken for the test. 



A.3. DETERMINATION OF ACIDITY 

A-3.1 Reagents 

A«3.1.1 Rectified Spirit — 95 percent [conforming to IS : 323-1959 Speci- 
fication for Rectified Spirit ( Revised ) ]. 

A«3.L2 Standard Sodium ffydroxide Solution — 0* I N, 

A-^.l.S Phenolphthalein Indicator — Dissolve 0*5 g of phcnolphthalein in 
60 ml of rectified spirit [conforming to IS : 323-1959 Specification for Recti- 
fied Spirit {Revised)] diluted with water to 100 ml. Make the solution 
faintly pink by adding dilute sodium hydroxide solution. 

A-3.2 Procedure — Depending on the degree of acidity, choose a suitable 
quantity of the material. Dissolve 10 ml of the material in 50 ml of 
rectified spirit, neutralized to phenolphthalein and titrate the mixture with 
standard sodium hydroxide solution using 0*5 ml of the phenolphthalein 
indicator. 



IS 12632- 1964 

A-3.3 Calculation 

Acidity ( as acetic acid ), 6 F JV* 
percent by weight = — ^ — 

where 

V a= volume, in ml, of standard sodium hydroxide solution; 

N = normality of standard sodium hydroxide solution; and 

W — weight, in g, of the material taken for the test. 



APPENDIX B 

( Clause 4. 1 ) 
SAMPLING OF CROTONALDEHYDE 

B-L GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF SAMPLING 

B-1.0 In drawing, preparing, storing and handling test samples, the 
following precautions and directions shall be observed. 

B-l.I Samples shall be taken in a protected area with good ventilation. 

J^l.2 Sampling instrument shall be clean and dry. 

B-1.3 Precautions shall be taken to protect the samples, the material being 
sampled, the sampling instrument and the containers for samples from 
adventitious contamination. 

B-1.4 To draw a represent^itive* sample, the contents of each container 
selected for sampling shall be mixed as thoroughly as possible by shaking, 
stirring, rolling or by any other suitable means. 

B-1.5 The samples shall be placed in suitable, clean, dry and air-tight, 
amber-coloured glass or metal containers on which the material has no 
acti^on. 

B*L6 The sample containers shall be of such a size that they are almost 
completely filled by the sample. 

B*L7 Each sample container shall be scaled air-tight with a suitable 
stopper after filling and marked with the manufacturer's name or trade- 
mark, the month and year of manufacture of the material, the batch number 
( if available ),and other details of sampling, such as the date of sampling, 
sampler's name, etc. 



18:2632-1964 



B.2. SAMPLING INSTRUMENT 

B-2.1 It is made of thick glass or metal on which the material has no 
action and is 20 to 40 mm in diameter and 400 to 800 mm in length ( see 
Fig. 1 ). 

-•-|^-^5 TO 10mm 



A 



E 
E 
o 
o 

CD 



o 
o 



.*-20 TO AOmm 



y 



Fro. 1 Sampling Tube 



The upper and lower ends are conical and reach 5 to 10 mm 
diameter at the narrow ends. Handling is facilitated by two rings at 
the upper end. For drawing samples, the apparatus is first closed at 
the top with the thumb or a stopper and lowered till a desired depth 
is reached. It is then opened for a short time to admit the material at the 
desired depth and finally closed and withdrawn. 



IS 12632-1964 

B-2.1.1 For small containers, the size of the sampling tube may be 
altered suitably. 

B.3. SCALE OF SAMPLING 

B-34 Lot— In any consignment, all the containers of the same size 
and drawn from the same batch of manufacture shall constitute a lot. 
If a consignment is known to consist of different batches of manufacture or 
of different sizes of containers, the containers belonging to the same batch 
and size shall be grouped together and each such group shall constitute a 
separate lot. 

B-3.2 For ascertaining the conformity of the material in a lot to the 
requirements of the specification, tests shall be carried out for each 
lot separately. The number of containers to be selected for this purpose 
from a lot shall depend on the si/e of the lot and shall be in accordance 
with the col 1 and 2 of Table 11. 



TABLE II SCALE OF SAMPLING 

No. OF Contain* Rs to 
UK Sklectkd 

n 
(2) 

« 

3 
4 
5 

7 

8 

9 

10 

•When the lot hi7c is 3 or less, thr number of containers to be selected and the method 
ofjudgmg (he conformity of the lot to the specificauon leqiurements shaH be as agreed 
to between the purchaser and the supplier. 



B>3.3 These containers shall be selected at landotn fiom the lot and 
in Older to ensuie landomness of selection a random number table as 
agreed to between tlie purchaser and ihe suppln-t shall be nsrd. In osc 
such a table is not available, the following prorcdmc is iTfommondrd for 
use: 

Arrange aJI the containers in the lot in a systematic manner 
and startingfrom any container, count them as 1, 2,. .. up to r and 
wo on, where r is the integral part of N/n ( J{ being the lot size 
and n the number ofcontaincrs to be selected ). Every rth container 
thus counted shall be withdrawn to give a sample for tests. 

10 



Lot Si/t 




A 






(I) 




Up 


to 


3 


4 


J, 


15 


10 


)> 


40 


41 


i» 


65 


()(> 


i» 


110 


111 


»» 


180 


181 




300 


301 


and above 



IS 1 2632* 1964 

BA. PREPARATION OF TEST SAMPLES 

B-4.1 From each oi the containers selected according to B-3.3, a small 
representative portion of the material sufficient for carrying out tests as 
indicated in 2 shall be drawn with the help of the sampling tube ( see B-2.1 ). 

B-4.2 Out of these portions, equal quantity of material shall be taken and 
mixed thoroughly to form a composite sample, not less than I 500 ml 
The composite test sample shall be divided into three equal parts, one for 
the purchaser, another for the supplier and the third to be used as a referee 
sample 

B-4.3 The composite samples shall be tiansferrcd to containers of 600-ml 
capacity and shall be sealed and marked with full identification particulars 
given in B-1.7 

B-4.4 The referee test sample shall also bear the seal of both the purchaser 
and the supplier It shall be kept at a place agreed to between the 
purchaser and the supplier, to be used m the case of any dispute between 
the two 



11 



PUBLICATIONS OF INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
INDIAN STANDARDS 

Over 8 500 Indian Standards covering various subjects have been 
issued so far. Of these, the standards belonging to the Chemical Group 
fall under the following categories: 



Acids 

Adhrsivrs 

AlfohoU and allifd products 

Alkalis 

Bi ushwarr 

Crramirware, enamrlwarc and 

laboratory porcelain 
Chemical hazards and saffly 
Chrrnirals, inorganic ( miscrllanrous ) 
Ghrnnicali, orp^anic (miscellaneous ) 
Coal and coke 
Coal carbonization products 
Coated fabriCJ 
Cosmetics and toilet goods 
Drntal material 
Dj'ying oils 
Hye intei mediates 
Kleclroplating chemicals 
Explosive and pyioiechnic materials 
Fei tilizeis 

Filleis. stopper? and putties 
Footwpar 

Glass and glassware 
Industrial jic^srs 
Inks and allird pioducli 
Labor at oiy Rlassware thermometers 



and rrlated appaialus 
I.ac and lac products 

OTHER PUBLICATIONS 

ISI Bulletin ( Published Every Month ) 

Simple Copy ,,, 

Annual Subscription 
Standards : Monthly Addilioni 

Sinple Copy 

Annual Subscription ... ... ,,, 

Annual Reports ( fiom 1946-49 Onward* ) ... 
ISI Handbook, 1975 



heather, leather goods and leather 

dress in (fs 
I.inf*»rs and alli<*d produrts 
Lubricants and related products 
Oil pastes 

Oils & fats, olfflE^inous seeds and fruits 
Painters* materials ( miscellaneous ) 
Paper and its products 
Paprr and pulp boaid packaging 

materials 
Perfumery materials^ natural and synthetic 
Petroleum and poti oleum products 
Photogiaphic chemicals 
Pigments and extenders 
Plastits 
Polishes 
Printing inks 

Ready mixed paints and enamels 
Rubber and rubber products 
Soaps and other surface active agents 
T.(nni»qr materials and allied products 
Theimal in^iilation matri ials 
Thmners and solvents 
Varnishes and lacquers 
\\'ater and watc/ tieatment 
Water based paints 
Unclassified 



Rs 


4»00 


Rs 


36-00 


Re 


0-30 


Rs 


300 


Rs 2-00 to 6-00 


Rs 


30 00 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 1 10002 



Telephone I 27 01 31 ( 20 line* ) 

Regional Offices: 

Western : Novelty Chambers, Grant Road 
Eastern : 5 Chowringhec Appioach 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, Adyar 

Branch O^c/s: 

*Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur 

'F* Blocks Unity Bldg. Narasimharaja Square 

Ahimsa Bldg, SCO 82-83, Sector 17G 

5-B- 56/57 Nampally Station Road 

1 17/418 B Sarvodava Nagar 

B r.L Bldp; ( 3rd Floor ), Oandhi Maidan East 

Hatitrx Bldg( 2nd Tloot ), Rly Sraiion Road 



Telegrams : Manaksanatha 

Telephone 
BOMBAY 400007 37 97 29 

CALCUTTA 700072 23-08 02 

MADRAS 600020 41 24 42 



AHMADABAD 380001 


2 03 91 


BANGALORE 560002 


2 76 49 


CHANDIGARH 160017 


2 83 20 


HYDERABAD 500001 


4 57 11 


KANPUR 208005 


82 72 


PATNA 800004 


5 36 55 


TRIVANDRUM 695001 


32 27 



Printed at rodnv €t Tomorrow's Printers & Pubtiihers, N«w Oetht, (ndia 



