INRI AAF IS 12662 (Part 1) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Sle aaee UNS AR St & ae areal H 
saat A few meisten 


AT 1 AE Hl Aaa 
( Teel TREAT ) 


Guidelines for Use of Vehicles for 
Collection and Transportation of 
Solid Wastes 


Part 1 Selection of Vehicles 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.030.10 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, ay Reef — 110002 


A et / MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2021 Price Group 3 


Solid Waste Management Sectional Committee, CHD 33 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft 
finalized by the Solid Waste Management Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 


The solid waste is normally transported in variety of vehicles from one place to other, such as from collection 
point to transfer stations. The vehicles involve a large amount of capital investment as well as running expenditure 
and hence need to be selected with proper care. 


Different types of vehicles are suitable for different situations and it is necessary to keep this in mind and select 
appropriate vehicles to obtain maximum efficiency at least cost. These guidelines are therefore prepared with a 
view to give an idea about the various types of vehicles, their advantages and disadvantages and suitability under 
different conditions. It is felt that by using these guidelines, the users can select appropriate vehicles. 


This standard was originally published in 1989. Over a period of time, varieties of vehicles with relevant 
accessories/attachments have been developed exclusively for collection and transportation of solid waste. These 
new varieties also have been included in this revision and the relevant guidelines for selection of those vehicles 
for collection and transportation of solid waste have been provided. 


The composition of technical committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 12662 (Part 1) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


GUIDELINES FOR USE OF VEHICLES FOR 
COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION 
OF SOLID WASTES 


PART 1 SELECTION OF VEHICLES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) prescribes the guidelines for 
selection of vehicles for collection and transportation 
of solid wastes to processing or disposal site. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed below contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate by dated 
or undated the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards. 


IS No. Title 
IS 12647: Solid waste management collection 
2021 equipment — Requirements and 


guidelines (first revision) (under print) 


3 GENERAL GUIDELINES 


Vehicles used in collection and transportation of solid 
wastes should consider the following guidelines: 


a) The solid waste, generally municipal solid waste 
has a low density (as compared to building 
materials) and hence for optimum utilization 
of the engine capacity of the vehicles, the body 
capacity should be large. 


b 


wm 


Solid waste is normally corrosive in nature and 
hence the vehicle body should be such that the 
chances of material accumulating leading to 
corrosion are minimal. 

The vehicle body should be such that the material 
is not exposed to the atmosphere. This can be done 
either by using a closed body vehicle or by using a 
simple method of covering the collected waste. 


c 


wa 


d 


— 


Majority of the vehicles works on fossil fuel and 
hence (to reduce the cost) it is desirable that they 
should be CNG/Diesel driven. 


e) Method of unloading the contents should be such 
that it can be quickly carried out. In the case of 
hydraulic tipping arrangement, it is desirable 
to use 2 stage telescopic cylinder type tipping 
device with a minimum tipping angle of 45°. 
The hydraulically operated tipping arrangement 
should be powered by the prime mover of the 
same vehicle. 


f) Where the transportation distance is going to 
be very large, smaller vehicles can be used for 
collection from individual areas. These vehicles 
can then discharge their contents in larger vehicles 
at a transfer station. 


g) As far as possible, the number of types of vehicles 
should be least so that inventory for spare parts for 
maintenance is kept to a minimum. 


h) If loading in the vehicles is manually carried out, 
the loading height should be less-than 1.2 m. 


j) Vehicle should be of rugged construction and 
should have at least two coats of anticorrosive 
paint. It is advantageous if a specific colour is used 
with help in identifying the refuse vehicles. 


k) As the roads/lanes in Indian towns and cities are 
quite narrow, the turning radius of the vehicle 


should be as small as possible. 


=— 


m 


== 


As the vehicles have to move in rough terrain, the 
vehicle should be in good condition. Sometimes, 
it is observed that new vehicles are used for 
some other purpose and are assigned for refuse 
transportation after they become old. Such 
old vehicles breakdown often due to difficult 
conditions under which they have to work and 
hence such practice should be avoided. 
n) The vehicle should conform to the various 
provisions of relevant Motor Vehicle Act. 
p) The vehicle should be such that its maintenance is 
easy and does not require highly skilled personnel. 
q) The unladen weight of the vehicle and its 
equipment should be minimum to enable 
maximum utilization of the pay lead capacity. 


IS 12662 (Part 1) : 2021 


Some of the common types of vehicles used for 
transportation of refuse are described and discussed 
in 4. 


4 COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION 
VEHICLES 


4.1 Hand Cart 


These carts are sometimes used for removal of refuse 
from individual houses and have a small capacity. These 
vehicles are slow in movement and may pose problems 
when used on main road. Hence, their use should be 
restricted to subsidiary reads and for such periods when 
traffic is not heavy. The wheels are often provided with 
iron tyres which reduce the maintenance cost but tend 
to damage the pavement. Hence, the wheels should 
be provided with rubber lining. Whenever adequate 
maintenance facilities are available, pneumatic type 
wheels should be preferred. The wheels should be 
mounted on roller bearings supporting the axle for 
better transportation. The container should be properly 
designed to contain the refuse without spillage. 
Provision should be made for covering the material. 
The loading and unloading should be quite simple and 
not pose any problem. This type of vehicle saves on 
fuel cost but due to its lesser speed can operate only on 
short distances. Details of design of hand cart are given 
in IS 12647. 


4.2 Padal Tricycle 


As an alternative to the hand carts, tricycles can be used. 
These can have a container of 0.2 to 0.25 m? capacity 
mounted on the back side of the driver’s seat. These 
vehicles will have the advantage of being able to move 
through lanes and can move at a speed higher than hand 
cart. The container should have loading flaps at the top 
hinged at the middle. The unloading should be done at 
the rear end by tilting the container over an axis located 
above the rear axle. A simple working arrangement 
should keep the container locked horizontally under 
normal operating conditions. 


A fractional horsepower petrol engine is sometimes 
used for such vehicles driven by batteries/renewable 
energy but is found to be requiring higher maintenance 
cost. 


4.3 Short Range Small Capacity Vehicle 


Vehicles with small diesel engine (3.728 5 to 5.592 8 kW) 
carry 1 to 1.5 tonnes of material. These have a low 
loading height (1.5 m), short turning radius (2.8-4.5 m) 
and offer fuel economy (8-12 km/litre). In one type of 
these vehicles, a simple tipping arrangement is provided 
in which the container held in position by a chain can be 
tilted by releasing the chain. In another type in addition 
to covered body, covered space to seat a driver and 
2 laborers is also provided. These vehicles have a simple, 
robust construction and are economical to operate. These 


vehicles may be useful as satellite vehicles fitted into 
larger vehicles. 


4.4 Tractor Trailor System 


This combination is commonly used in the case of 
smaller towns where the distance through which the 
waste has to be transported is less and where the roads 
are not completely paved. However, if they are used in 
bigger cities, they pose problems due to their slower 
speed. For optimum use, it is desirable to have a single 
tractor serving a number of trailors parked at different 
locations as bins. This helps in reducing the number 
of handling steps and enables a tractor to make more 
number of trips. Permanently fixed tractor trailor does 
not give this flexibility and can make lesser number of 
trips and will prove uneconomical. However, when the 
trailors are being used as refuse bins, they should be 
protected from theft of tyres and other mischieves. 


4.5 Container Carrier System 


This system comprises of a number of standardized 
containers which are towed by a tractor with the help of 
a hydraulic carrier. During operation, the tractor along 
with the hydraulic carrier carries an empty container 
which is deposited at the bin site and the bill container 
is taken away to the processing or disposal site. In 
this way, 1t is claimed that a single tractor and carrier 
combination can take care of a number of containers. 


The system has the advantage of having a low loading 
height and reduction in number of handling steps. 
The number of containers that can be handled in a 
day depends upon the distance to the disposal site. 
However, this system has a slow speed of movement 
and poses problems in maneuvering due to longer 
length requiring wider roads and also larger space at 
container site. Further, it has been observed that the 
ground clearance of the hoisted container is low which 
poses problems on the uneven roads at the disposal 
sites. As the system has a number of moving parts, even 
if one of the parts is out of order, the whole system 
remains idle. 


4.6 Conventional Trucks System 


In a large majority of towns, it is observed that 
conventional trucks are used for refuse transportation. 
As refuse is a low density material, for proper utilization 
of engine capacity a larger body size should be used. 
Alternatively, mini trucks with raised sides can result 
in better utilization of engine capacity. 


It is also observed that the conventional trucks have a 
higher loading height posing problems in the loading 
of the vehicle. 


Such vehicles should be provided with simple 
arrangement for covering the material by the use of the 
tarpaulin, etc, should be considered. 


4.7 Special Municipal Vehicles 


In this system, large size containers of 6 to 10 km? 
capacity are normally used as refuse bins and when 
full, they are lifted and put on the chassis by the use 
of a special winch mechanism provided on the truck 
chassis. Thus this system enables transportation of 
larger quantity of material through bigger bins which 
are taken away by a normal truck prime-mover. This 
gives a higher speed and higher ground clearance 
during movement. However, it requires larger space 
where bins are provided as normally the prime-mover 
comes with an empty container, unloads it at the site 
and transports away the filled container. Further, due 
to the large capacity of the bins, this system can be 
used only at such points where large amount of waste is 
expected to accumulate. 


The containers have movable flaps and unloading of 
the wheel-barrow after lifting the flaps poses problem 
with the result that it is common that the refuse workers 
dump the refuse from wheelbarrow on the ground and 
then deposit it into the container. This increases the 
number of handling steps and results in environmental 
pollution. It is also observed that to keep the sur- 
rounding clean, a worker has normally to be posted at 
such points thus increasing the cost. 


4.8 Compactor Vehicles 


These vehicles are commonly used where low density 
material (containing paper, plastics etc) is compacted 
from an initial density of 125 to 150 kg/m? to about 
500 kg/m’. As the Indian municipal refuse (containing 
large proportion of fines and inorganic) already has 
a higher density of about 500 kg/m”, the increase in 
density after compaction (compaction ratio) is not high. 
Further, as the capital cost is comparatively higher, it 
proves uneconomical for operation. 


It is also observed that due to poor maintenance, the 
body is not regularly cleaned leading to its corrosion. 
Unless the workers are properly trained in the use of 
various mechanical gadgets, optimum utilization of the 
vehicle will not occur. 


IS 12662 (Part 1) : 2021 


Thus these vehicles can be used only in such cases 
when the refuse has a low density, is amenable for 
compaction and the maintenance facilities are good. 


4.9 Refuse Collector 


These vehicles have recently been introduced and are 
normally having a covered body with a low loading 
height. In one type, a mechanism is provided which 
ensures that the waste put in the hopper is pushed 
inside so that the body can be completely filled. This 
mechanism may also give some incidental compaction. 
Due to low loading height, the productivity of workers 
is also expected to increase. 


The closed body should be regularly cleaned to avoid 
corrosion due to organic matter retained in corners, etc. 
The workers should also be properly trained to ensure 
proper use of collector plate. The vehicle due to its 
size may not be able to turn and move in small lanes 
and by lanes. These have been recently introduced 
and the actual productivity and operational experience 
(maintenance problems and replacement of parts, etc.) 
over a reasonable period will help in its evaluation. 


5 SELECTION OF VEHICLES 


A wide variety of vehicles are available in the country 
each suitable for specific situation. Hence, selection of 
a vehicle should be made after carefully evaluating all 
possible alternatives. For evaluating the comparative 
cost, it is desirable to find out cost/tonne/km. 


This can be calculated in the following manner. 
a) Annualized cost over 7 years. 


b) Waste transported/year = Weight per trip x no. of 
trips/day x average no. of working days/year. 


c) Manpower cost= No. of persons/vehicle x annual 
salaries of these persons 


d) Fuel cost/year = litres consumed/year x cost/litre. 


e) Maintenance cost @ 10 percent per year of capital 
cost. 


f) Supervisory cost @ 10 percent of labour cost. 
a+c+d+e+f 
b 


g) Cost/tonne/km = 


IS 12662 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Solid Waste Management Sectional Committee, CHD 33 


Organization 


In personal capacity 


Alkali Manufacturers’ Association of India 


Avantha Centre for Industrial Research, Yamunanagar 


Cement Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 
Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 
Delhi Technological University, Delhi 
Development Alternative 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry, New Delhi 


Fly Ash Mission, Department of Science and 
Technology, Ministry of Science, GOI 


In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 


Indian Centre for Plastics in the Environment, 
Mumbai 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Faridabad 


Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services 


ITC Limited 
Ministry of Defence, DRDO, New Delhi 


Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 


Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dr ANURADHA SHUKLA (Chairman) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
Dr H. S. Das (Alternate) 


DR NisHI KANT BHARDWAJ 
SHRI SANJEEV GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL KUMAR TRIVEDI 
SHRI P. SREENIVASA RAJU (Alternate) 


SHRI J. S. KAMYOTRA 


SHRI GURUVITTAL 
DR NEERAJ SHARMA (Alternate) 


Mrs SEEMA ARORA 
SHRI KAMAL SHARMA (Alternate) 


Dr RAKESH MEHROTRA 
Dr (SHRIMATI) ANUBHA MANDAL (Alternate) 


Dr K. VIJAYA LAKSHMI 
DR SOUMEN Marty (Alternate) 


SHRI R. S. PRASAD 
SHRI VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


Ms ARCHANA DATTA 
Ms SUCHISMITA MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


Dr R. K. JosHI 


Dr N. B. MAJUMDAR 

Dr VIMAL KUMAR 

Mrs SANCHITA JINDAL 

SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR KHANDELWAL 


SHRI T. K. BANDOPADHYAY 
SHRI GOPAL JHA (Alternate) 


Dr N. J. SINGH 
SHRI A. A. PANJWANI (Alternate) 


Dr M. P. SINGH 


SHRI NEERAJ CHANDRA 
SHRI SANDEEP MALHOTRA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIB BEZBAROA 


AWAITED 
DR S. Mary CELIN (Alternate) 


AWAITED SHRI E. THIRUNAVUKKARASU (Alternate) 


SHRI UDIT RATNA 
SHRI P. K. DURIA (Alternate) 


IS 12662 (Part 1) : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 


National Council for Cement and Building Material, SHRIN.K. TIWARY 


New Delhi SHRI M. SELVARAJAN (Alternate) 

National Solid Waste Association of India SHRI AMIYA KUMAR SAHU 

Capt MANJU MINHAS (Alternate) 
NTPC Limited, New Delhi Dr S. K. JAIN 

Dr SUDHIR DAHIYA (Alternate) 
PHD Chamber of Commerce NOMINATION AWAITED 
Steel Authority of India Limited, New Delhi Dr MEENAKSHI KAKKAR 

SHRI SUNIL SINGAL (Alternate) 
Steps Pvt Ltd SHRI T. RAGHAVENDRA RAO 
Sulabh International Social Service Organization AWAITED 
The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi CoL R. K. JOHRI (RETD) 


DR SUNEEL PANDEY (Alternate) 


The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi SHRI MANISH GOSWAMI 
Suri G. M. PATEL (Alternate) 


Town and Country Planning Organization, M/o Urban Suri K. K. JOADDER 
Development and Poverty Alleviation, New Delhi DR SANTHOSHVIDYADHARAN (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (CHD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRISHTI DIXIT 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (CHD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 33 (17168). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


