**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10399 (1998) : Automotive Vehicles - Noise Emitted by 
Stationary Vehicles - Method of Measurement [TED 4: 
Automotive Braking Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



1810998:1998 

(m&TFrftm) 

Indian Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — NOISE EMITTED 

BY STATIONARY VEHICLES — METHOD 

OF MEASUREMENT 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 17.140.30 



C BIS 1998 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



December 1998 Price Group 3 



Automotive Vehicles Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee, TED 8 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Automotive Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Transport Engineering Division Council. 

This standard was first published in 1982. The standard is now being revised to bring it in line with the 
procedures outlined in the latest EEC directives. In view of the growing noise pollution, it has necessitated the 
Government to lay down limits for different categories of vehicles in Central Motor Vehicle Rules (CMVR). 
Hence, the limits are not specified in this standard. 

This standard specifies a test method for measuring the noise emitted by stationary road vehicles in use, the 
noise being measured in proximity to the exhaust and also the noise made near the engine. 

The method is intended to check vehicles in service, and also to determine variations in the noise emitted by 
different parts of the vehicle under test, which can result from: 

a) the wear or abnormal working or modification of certain components, when the defect does not 
appear by visual inspection; and 

b) the partial or complete removal of devices reducing the emission of certain noises. 

These variations shall be determined by comparing the roadside measurements with reference measurements 
made under similar conditions, for example, during the type approval. 

While revising this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following documents: 

a) ISO 5130 : 1982 'Measurement of noise emitted by stationary road vehicles — Survey method', 
issued by International Organization for Standardization (ISO). 

b) 70/157/EEC Amended by directive 96/20/EC. 

The values obtained by this method are not representative of the total noise emitted by the vehicles in motion, 
measured in accordance with IS 3028 : 1998 'Automotive vehicles — Noise emitted by moving vehicles — 
Method of measurement ( second revision )'. These should not be used to make comparison between the total 
noise emitted by different vehicles. 

The composition of the committee responsible for preparation of this standard is given in Annex A. 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 APRIL 2006 

TO 

IS 10399 : 1998 AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — NOISE 

EMITTED BY STATIONARY VEHICLES —METHOD OF MEASUREMENT 

(First Revision) 

( Page 3, Fig. 1 ) — Substitute the following for the existing figure: 




HEIGHT OF EXHAUST PIPE CENTRELINE 
P'?fflnt . 

J T> £0-3 





«5»*10» 





I—\L< 




UHW 




HEIGHT OF EXHAUST PIPE CENTRELINE 



-«»22|ih- 




All dimensions in metre*. 

Fig. 1 Test Site and Microphone Positions for Measuring Exhaust Noise 



(TCD4) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



IS 10399 : 1998 



Indian Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — NOISE EMITTED 

BY STATIONARY VEHICLES — METHOD 

OF MEASUREMENT 

( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

This standard specifies method for measuring the noise 
produced by a stationary road vehicles other than 
agricultural vehicles at a readily obtainable site along 
motor roadways, having specific characteristics. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 



ISNo. 


Title 




3028 : 


1998 


Automotive vehicles — Noise emit- 






ted by moving vehicles 


— Method 






of measurement 




9779: 


1981 


Sound level meters 




1885(Part3/ 


Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 3 


Seel) 


: 1965 Acoustics, Section 1 


Physical 






acoustics 





For the purpose of this standard, definitions of terms 
given in IS 188S (Part 3) shall apply. 

4 TECHNICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 
VEHICLE 

4.1 Technical characteristics of the vehicle as 
relevant to noise performance, shall be declared by 
vehicle manufacturer and shall contain at least the 
details given in Annex A to IS 3028. 

NOTE — If the specifications submitted for complete type 
approval of a vehicle contain the details given in Annex A of 
IS 3028, there is no necessity of submitting this information 



in Technical 



4.2 Modifications/Changes 
Characteristics 



4.11 In case test is conducted for verification of 
compliance to statutory requirement the following 
shall be carried out 



4.2.2 Every functional modification pertaining to 
technical characteristics of noise performance of 
vehicle declared in accordance with 3.1 shall be 
intimated to the testing agency. Testing agency may 
then consider, whether the vehicle with modifications 
complies with specified performance requirements; 
or any further testing is required. For considering 
whether testing is required or not, guidelines given in 
Annex B of IS 3028 shall be followed. 

After successful compliance to the performance 
requirements, if needed, the earlier test results shall 
be validated for the modifications/changes also. These 
conditions are applicable irrespective of any change 
in commercial name of the model. 

S INSTRUMENTATION 

5.1 The sound level meter shall be of the precision 
type as described in IS 9779 or equivalent IEC 
publication. 

5.2 The measurements shall be made using the 
weighing network 'A', and the dynamic characteristic 
'fast' and 'frontal mode*. 

5.3 The sound level meter shall be calibrated and 
adjusted according to the instrument manufacturer's 
instructions or with a standard sound source (for 
example, a pistonphone) at the beginning and at the 
end of each series of measurements. 

5.4 If the errors of the sound level meter obtained 
from these calibrations change by more than 1 dB 
during a series of measurements the test shall be 
considered invalid. 

NOTES 

1 The sound level meter shell be calibrated at an interval of 
not more than two years for compliance with IS 9779 or equiva- 
lent IEC publication. 

2 If a windscreen is used, it shall be of the type specified by 
the instrument manufacturer suitable for that particular micro- 
phone. It shall be ascertained from the manufacturer that the 
use of the windscreen does not influence the accuracy of the 
sound level meter detectable under the ambient conditions of 



IS 10399 : 1998 

5.5 A revolution counter external to the vehicle shall 
be used, with an accuracy of not less than 3 percent 
for engine speed measurement. 

6 TEST SITE REQUIREMENTS 

6.1 To reduce the influence of the surroundings on 
the noise measurements, a test site complying with 
the requirements specified in 5.1.1 to 5.1.3 shall be 



6.1.1 Eveiy open space shall be considered as a 
suitable test site, if it consists of a flat area made of 
concrete, asphalt or hard material having a high 
acoustical reflectivity, excluding compressed or other 
earth surfaces. In that space a rectangle may be traced 
whose sides are at least 3 metres from the extremities 
of the vehicle and inside of which there is no 
noticeable obstacle. The vehicle in particular shall 
be at a distance not less than one metre from a 
pavement edge when the exhaust noise is measured 
and no significant obstacle shall be situated within 3 
metres of the microphone. 

6.1.2 With the exception of the observer and driver, 
no person whose presence influences the meter reading 
shall remain in the measurement area during the test. 

6.1.3 The measurements shall not be made in adverse 
weather conditions. Care shall be taken that gusts of 
wind do not distort the results of the measurements. 
It is recommended that tests should not be made if 
the wind speed at microphone height exceeds 5 m/s. 

7 AMBIENT NOISE AND WIND INTERFERENCE 

The ambient noise (including the wind noise) at each 
measuring position shall be at least 10 dB less than 
the levels measured during the test. 

8 TEST 

8.1 Number of Measurements 

8.1.1 At least three measurements shall be carried 
out at each measuring position. The measurements 
shall be considered valid if the range of three 
measurements made immediately one after the other 
is not greater than 2 dB. The arithmetic mean value 
given by these three measurements shall constitute 
the result. 

8.2 Positioning and Preparation of the Vehicle 

8.2.1 The vehicle shall be located in the centre of the 
test area, with the gear in neutral and with the clutch 
engaged. 

8.2.2 Before each series of measurements the 
engine shall be brought to its normal operating 
temperature. 



8.2.3 In the case of a two wheeler having no neutral 
gear position, measurements shall be carried out with 
the rear wheel raised off the ground. 

8.3 Measurement of Noise in Proximity to the 
Exhaust (see Fit. 1) 

8.3.1 Microphone Position 

8.3.1.1 The height of the microphone above the 
ground shall be equal to that of the outlet pipe of the 
exhaust gases, but in any event shall be limited to a 
minimum value of 0.2 m. 

8.3.1.2 The microphone shall be pointed towards the 
orifice of the gas flow and located at a distance of 
0.5 m from the latter. 

8.3.1.3 Unless otherwise indicated by the 
manufacturer of the sound level meter, its axis of 
maximum sensitivity shall be parallel to the ground 
and shall make an angle of 45 ± 10° with the vertical 
plane containing the direction of the gas flow on both 
sides. 

8.3.1.4 In relation to this plane, the microphone shall 
be placed towards the external side of the vehicle, as 
shown in Fig. 1. 

8.3.1.5 In the case of a vehicle provided with two or 
more exhaust outlets spaced less than 0.3 m apart and 
connected to a single silencer, only one measurement 
shall be made; the microphone position shall be related 
to the outlet nearest to the external side of the vehicle 
or, when such outlet does not exist, to the outlet which 
is the highest above the ground. 

8.3.1.6 For vehicles with a vertical exhaust, the 
microphone shall be placed at the height of the exhaust 
outlet, oriented upwards and with its axis vertical. It 
shall be placed at a distance of 0.5 m from the side of 
the vehicle nearest to the exhaust. 

8.3.1.7 For vehicles provided with exhaust outlets 
spaced at or more than 0.3 m apart, one measurement 
shall be made for each outlet as if it were the only 
one, and the highest level noted. 

8.3.1.8 When the vehicle design is such that the 
microphone cannot be placed according to Fig. 1 
because of the presence of obstacles being part of the 
vehicle (for example, spare wheel, oij tank, battery), 
a figure clearly showing the place chosen for the 
microphone shall be drawn when the measurement is 
carried out. As far as possible, the microphone shall 
be placed at a distance greater than 50 cm from the 
nearest obstacle and its maximum sensitivity axis shall 
be oriented towards the exhaust gas orifice at a place 
which is the least marked by the above mentioned 
obstacles. 



IS 10399 : 1998 



m » i 


>3 



HEIGHT OF EXHAUST PIPE CENTRELINE 




J 



T 

*3 



6 



v o*S 



>3^ 






Q2 min. 



i 



Oimiiw. 



•yr 





Key* 48 ** 10 * 








HEIGHT OF EXHAUST PIPE CENTRELINE 




All dimensions in metres. 



Fio. 1 Test Site and Microphone Positions for Measuring Exhaust Noise 



IS 10399 : 1998 



8.3.2 Engine Operating Conditions 

8.3.2.1 The engine speed shall be stabilized at one of 
the following values: 

a) For two and three wheeled vehicles: 

S/2, if S £ 5 000 rev/min, or 
3 S/4, if S < 5 000 rev/min, and 

b) For other vehicles: 3 S/4. 

where S is the engine speed at which the engine 
produces its maximum power as indicated by the 
manufacturer. 

8.3.2.2 The throttle shall rapidly be returned to the 
idling position. The sound level shall be measured 
during the entire operation consisting of a short period 
of above constant speed and through deceleration 
period. The highest sound level reading shall 
constitute the test value. 



9 TEST REPORT 



The test report shall contain the following information: 

a) A reference to this standard; 

The vehicle model/registration number type 
tested; 

The test site, ground conditions and weather 
conditions; 

The measurement instrumentation (includ- 
ing windscreen, if used); 
The location and orientation of the micro- 
phone; 

Engine operating speeds used for the tests; 
The A-weighted sound pressure levels 
determined by the tests: 
A-weighted sound pressure levels of the 
background noise at each measuring position; 
and 

j) Any abnormal conditions. 



b) 



o) 

d) 

c) 


g) 

h) 



IS 10399 : 1998 



ANNEX A 

{Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Automotive Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee, TED 8 

Chairman 

Shri R. Ramakrishnan 

28, 1 Cross Road, Kasturi Bai Nagar, Adyar, Chennai 600 020 



Members 
Shri R. R. G. Menon 

Shri R. C. Balakrishanan (Alternate) 
Shri Rajat Nandi 

ShriS. O. Shah {Alternate) 
Shri V. K. Bhatia 

ShriHiraLal (Alternate) 
Shri K. E. Takavale 

Shri Akbar Badush (Alternate) 
Shri T. M. Balaraman 

Shri V. M. Manbl (Alternate) 
Shri V. M. Mundada 

Shri R. M. Kanitkar (Alternate) 
Shri S. R. Tapadb 

Shri P. C. Barjatia (Alternate) 
Shri R. S. Dass 

Shri M. L Mehta (Alternate) 
Shri P. K. Saha 

Major Bal winder Singh (Alternate) 
Shri Dinbsh Tyaoi 

Shri Surya Patnadc (Alternate) 
Shri N. K. Kaushal 

Shri S. K. Oautam (Alternate) 
Shri S. K. Bharu 

Shri R. K. Tripati (Alternate) 
Shri Veenu Mathur 
Shri K. C. Jain 

Shri R. K. Gupta (Alternate) 
Shri S. B. Gupta 

Shri Harjit Sinqh (Alternate) 
Shri U. K. Kini 

Shri M. G. Jhtnoran (Alternate) 
DrK. K. Gandhi 

Shri Mukesh Saxena (Alternate) 
Shri P. V. Bhandare 
Shri S. K. Mukherjee 

Shri Z. A. Muiawar (Alternate) 
Shri I. V. Rao 

Shri. P. Panda (Alternate) 
Shri S. N. Srinivasan 

Shri K. D. Diohb (Alternate) 
Dr Y. Satyanarayana 

Shri M. LOorb (Alternate) 
Shri Lakhhobr Sinoh 

Shri S. R. Aqrahari (Alternate) 
Shri A. T. Phatak 

Shri A. V. Kulkarni (Alternate) 
Shri R. C Sethi 

Shri R. Raiaraman (Alternate) 
Shri M. K. Mishra 

Shri R. G. Karbmorb (Alternate) 
Shri P. N. Randan 
Shri A. R. GulatIj 
Director (Transport Engg) 



Representing 
Ashok Leyland Ltd, Chennai 

Association of Indian Automobile Maufacturers, New Delhi 

Association of State Road Transport Undertakings, New Delhi 

Automotive Research Association of India Ltd, Pune 

Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune 

Bajaj Tempo Ltd, Pune 

Central Institute of Road Transport, Pune 

Central Farm Machine Training and Testing Institute, Budni 

Controllerate of Quality Assurance (Vehicles) (DOAQ(V)J, Ministry of 
Defence, Ahmednagar 

Daewoo Motors India Ltd, New Delhi 

Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 

Department of Industrial Development, New Delhi 

Royal Enfield Motors Ltd, Chennai 
Escorts lid, Faridabad 

Hero Honda Motors Ltd, New Delhi 

Hindustan Motors Ltd, Hooghly 

Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehra Dun 

Kinetic Engineering Ltd, Pune 
Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Mumbai 

Maruti Udyog Ltd, Gurgaon 

Premier Automobiles Ltd, Mumbai 

Standing Committee (Technical and Stores) CIRT, Pune 

Swaraj Mazda Ltd, Chandigarh 

Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Pune 

Vehicle Research & Development Establishment, Ahmednagar 

Vehicle Factory, Jabalpur 

Volvo India Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 

Director General, BIS (Ex-officio Member) 

Member Secretary 

Shri A. K. Naopal 

Additional Director (Transport Engg), BIS 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

, Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes arc 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook 9 and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. TED 8 (263). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 
iDate of Issue 



Amend No. 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34- A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 7617,323 3841 



/337 84 99, 337 85 61 
133786 26,3379120 



{ 



603843 
602025 



J 235 02 16, 235 04 42 
12351519,2352315 

/ 832 92 95, 832 7858 
18327811,8327892 



M^tfSiMoMMiaiWJtatinBE 



