UDC

02i'642-: 01'004'74 : 661'Ql-403'3

IS : 9200 - 1988
Indian Standard

(Reaffirmed 2002)

METHODS OF DISPOSAL OF UNSERVICEABLE COMPRESSED GAS CYLINDERS ( First
1. scop-eunsuitable Revision )

Covers the methods of disposal of cylinders in use which for further use and shave been recommended to be destroyed. of Cylinder Content

have

been

found

to be

2. Idontificrtion

2.1 The first step is to identify the contents legible, clues to the contents may be obtained Rules, 1981 as amended from time to time, with the name or thechemical symbol of the also to be stamped on the valve. Similarly properly compressed into porous substance'is No. M. 1268(l) dated 09 January, 1939 of the 2.2 Where no conclusion can cylinder, this may be attempted valve outlet connections, etc. procedure should be carried out 3. Disposal of Cylinder

of the cylinder. If the labelling on the cylinder is not from the markings on the cylinder. Under Gas Cylinder every cylinder has to be stamped permanently and legibly gas for which the cylinder is to be used. This marking is in case of acetylene cylinders, the marking `Acetylene to be conspicuously displayed as stipulated in Notification Department of Labour, Government of India.

be drawn on the identification of contents from the markings on the to be established from other factors, such as ownership identification, If the contents of the cylinder cannot be positively identified, further under the assumption that the worst possible conditions may exist,

Contents

3.1 The contents

of an unserviceable cylinder shall be discharged safely. Any cylinder containing a combustible or toxic gas shall be emptied under controlled conditions in the open air or through vent tubing discharging to a safe area. 3.2 In the event that a cylinder valve is damaged preventing the discharge normal manner, the procedure in 3.2.1, 3.2.2 and 3.2.3may be applied. 3.2.1 In case the valve spindle of an easy out. is broken or seized, the spindle of the commodity unscrewed in a

may be carefully

by means

3.2.2 If method under 3.2.1 is not effective, a small hole may be drilled at the back of the valve using a hand drill or sawed across the back of the valve using a fine tooth hacksaw to just sufficient depth as will reach the gas passage below the seating. The operation is stopped immediately on the first sign of escaping gas. It is desirable that during sawing or drilling operation, a small continuous jet of water is directed on to the cutter. In case of cylinders containing combustible or toxic gas, this work shall be done in the open air. It is important that the above method of releasing cylinder contents under the supervision of experienced persons deputed by the filler of the gas. shall be adopted by or

3.2.3 It may also be possible to release the pressure in the cylinder through the safety device where fitted. This method of releasing cylinder contents shall be adopted by or under the supervision of experienced persons deputed:by-the filler of the gas. It is also recommended that the cylinder is firmly held in a vice or by other suitable -means so that there is no possibility of the cylinder being tossed around. 3.3 Many of the compressed gases may be safely vented to the atmosphere. Obviously the inert gases If flammable gas or gases which may present a can be so vented without creating any undue hazard. health hazard are vented to the atmosphere, it shall be done very carefully and at an isolated location in such a manner and at such a rate as is necessary to ensure safety from fire or contamination of the atmosphere. 3.4 After completely discharging the cylinder contents, the cylinder valve and all safety fittings may be removed. In the case of dissolved acetylene cylinders where it can safely be assumed that all the gas has been discharged, then, before the valve is entirely removed, it shall be screwed up again hand tight, and the cylinder bumped by dropping it on its base two or three times, from a height of about 15 cm

Adopted 16 May 1938 I BUREAU
MANAK

Q Deceber 1988, BIS

Gr 2 I

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN, B BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

lS:9200-

1988

The so as to overcome any tendency for restriction under the filter which is situated below the valve. If there is any doubt about the cylinder being properly empty, valve shall then be carefully removed. the valve shall be screwed-in firmly and the cylinder weighed so that its mass can be compared with the tare. 4. Disposal of Unserviceable Empty Cylinders ( Other than Acetylene )

4.1 Subsequent to complete discharge of the cylinder contents and removal of the cylinder valve from an unserviceable cylinder, the cylinder shall be purged, if it previously contained a flammable or toxic Purging can be accomplished material, before any attempt is made to destory it with a cutting torch. with the use ot nitrogen, steam or by filling the cylinder with water. 4.2 All the markings on a condemned cylinder shall be defaced beyond recognition and the word CONDEMNED' shall be punched deeply on the shoulder in capital letters of 12 mm size. 4.3 The cylinder neck threads cylinder unserviceable. shall be completely damaged in such a manner so as to render the

Cut pieces shall be deshaped 4.4 The cylinder shall thereafter be cut into pieces. so that they cannot be reconstructed by welding or otherwise. 5. Disposal of Unserviceable Acetylene Cylinders

in such a manner

5.1 Subsequent to complete discharge of the cylinder contents, and removal of the cylinder valve and safety fittings, the cylinder shall be allowed to remain in the open for at least 48 hours. 5.2 The cylinder shall be filled with water and allowed to stand for another 10 to 12 hours. `CONDEMNED'

5.3 All the marking on the cylinder shall be defaced beyond recognition an-d the world shall be punched deeply on the shoulder in capital letters of 12 mm size. 5.4 The cylinder neck cylinder unserviceable. 5.5 The cylinder threads shall be completely demaged

in such a manner so as to render the

shall be parted at the centre using a hacksaw.

5.6 The porous mass may be removed from the shell and the shell pieces shall be deshaped. 6. Disposal of Unserviceable Charged Cylinders When Contents Cannot be Discharged It may sometimes be necessary to dispose of a cylinder which cannot be de-energized safely by releasing the pressure and removing the contents. In such a case, the disposal shall be carried out in accordance with the specific instructions obtained from the statutory authority.

EXPLANATORY
standard

NOTE
for preparation of this

This standard was first published in 1979. The Committee responsible decided to revise the same to bring it in line with current practice.

Manufacture, possession and use of any gas, when contained in cylinders in a compressed or liquefied state, is regulated under the Gas Cylinder Rules, 1981 of the Government of India as amended from time to time. This standard has been prepared in consultation and agreement with the statutory authorities under those rules. Gas cylinders which are in use are subject to wear and tear during handling. Thus, with the passage of time, they may become unsafe for further use. In order that their safety might be ascertained, gas cylinders which have been in use, are periodically inspected and tested at regular intervals. The periodical inspection comprises visual examination, measurement of wall thickness, The gas cylinders are also subjected to external internal cleaning, weighing and hydrostatic testing. The inspector, on the basis of inspection, visual examination whenever they come for refilling. decides whether the cylinder: a) may be taken into use as it is, b) may be taken into use after the defect is remedied in a suitable c) is to be rejected and destroyed manner, or

because of the nature and extent of the damage. 2

IS:9200-1988
Unserviceable cylinders are those which fail to qualify for further use being rejected by the criteria laid down in IS : 58451984 `Code of practice for visual inspection of low pressure gas cylinders (first revision )`, IS : 8433-1984 `Code of practice for visual inspection of dissolved acetylene gas cylinders ( firstrevision )' or IS : 8451~XI84 Code af practice for visual inspection of high pressure gas cylinders (first revision )' and considered unsafe for further use. The proper and safe disposition of unserviceable compressed gas cylinders is important as a substantial potential hazard may exist that should be recognized and evaluated by those who attempt to dispose them of. If the contents of cylinder is unknown and there is no ready means for identifying Compressed gas cylinders may have a very high energy its properties, the hazard is specially great. Cylinders ~may be charged with flammable gases content, for some are charged to high pressures. which, when released to atmosphere, may form explosive mixtures with air or may form explosives Some~cylinders may contain toxic mixtures within the container if the disposal procedure is improper. or poisonous substances or materials that are highly corrosive or reactive. In preparing this standard, an attempt has been made to anticipate practical considerations that might arise. The standard does not cover all possible cricumstances, nor does it contain all remedies. However, it is expected that the standard shall serve a use~ful purpose and shall be of aid to those engaged in the compressed gas, industrial as well asothers who may have an interest, such as fire services, persons engaged in scrap metal industries, or individuals that may at some time or other be faced with the problem of safe disposition of unserviceable cylinders. It is not to be assured that every acceptable safety procedure is contained or that abnormal or unusal circumstances may not warrant or require further or additional procedures other than those recommended in this standard.

Printed at Arcee

Press, New Delhi, lndla

