**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  8533  (1977)  :  General  Purpose  Carabiners  for 
Mountaineering  [PGD  27:  Mountaineering  Equipment] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


■K^y  / 1  juaaaws^fea  rs^^TTF^ 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS:  8533 -1977 


G 


BODY 


>16     -I 

1   XJ= 


-2.5 
■18- 


\\ili  I     I 


i 4.8      4>11 

nrr  t 


Jtti 


■u- 


e  :: 


5.5 


38  - 


L-2 


22 


rjTT^m, 


..vgSST1 


50- 


56- 


HOLE  FOR 
PIVOT   PIN  4>3 


KEEPER 

Note—- Dimensions  of  spring  and  bit  to  suit  the  carabiner. 

All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
FIG.  2    DIMENSIONS  FOR  CARABINERS,  TYPE  A 


IS  .-8533-1977 


{a-jag— eg— a> 


HOLE  FOR 
PIVOT   PIN    4>3 


BODY 


—-15-*- 

—  16—- 

—10  — 

1 

■^P 

i 

♦      i 

f>5Tf 

Vt"  / 

1 

♦  11      5   - 

1 

-      5 

1  1 

1P^ 

, 

♦      it?:: 

■T  ^ 

1 

T — 

HOLE   FOR 
PIVOT   PIN  4>3 


KEEPER 
Note  — Dimensions  of  spring  and  bit  to  suit  the  carabiner. 

All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
FIG.  3    DIMENSIONS  FOR  CARABINER,  TYPE  B 


IS:  8533 -1977 
5.  Hardness 


6.  Mass 


Component 
Pin  ( if  made  from  steel ) 
Spring 

Hardness 
200  to  250  HV 
425  to  525  HV 

Type 

Mass, 
Max 

Carabiner,  Type  A 
Carabiner,  Type  B 

g 

82 
68 

7.  Design 

"7.1  Carabiners  shall  be  so  designed  as  to  provide  for  the  safe  retention  of,  and  to  permit  the  ready 
insertion  and  removal  of,  climbing  ropes  not  less  than  12  mm  in  diameter.  They  shall  accommodate 
not  less  than  two  such  ropes  at  each  end  without  restricting  the  freedom  of  the  keeper.  The 
opening  through  which  the  rope  passes  shall  preferably  be  18  mm,  but  not  less  than  15  mm  in  any 
case. 

7.2  Generally  the  carabiners  are  of  oval  or  '  D  '  shaped,  even  though  modified  designs  of  the  same 
are  also  used. 

7.3  Carabiners  should  always  have  a  spring  loaded  keeper.  On  some  designs,  the  keeper  may  be 
further  locked  by  threaded  bush. 

8.  Workmanship  and  Finish 

8.1  Carabiners  shall  be  free  from  sharp  edges  or  other  formations  likely  to  damage  a  climbing  rope 
or  injure  the  user.  The  radius  of  parts  of  the  carabiner  with  which  a  rope  under  load  is  in  contact 
shall  be  not  less  than  5  mm. 

8.2  Carabiners  shall  be  given  anodic  coating  to  Grade  AC15  of  IS:  1868-1968  'Specification  for 
anodic  coating  on  aluminium.1 

8.3  The  pivot-pin  shall  be  rivetted  flush  on  both  ends. 

8.4  The  spring  for  the  keeper  shall  have  both  ends  square  with  axes. 

8.5  The  carabiners  shall  be  free  from  cracks,  pits,  burrs,  etc,  likely  to  cause  damage  or  injury  to  the 
climbing  rope  or  user. 

8.6  The  keeper  shall  operate  smoothly  and  shall  not  stick  in  the  open  position  and  lock  properly 
when  released. 

9.  Tests 

9.1  Proof  Load  Test  —  Each  carabiner  shall  have  a  tensile  strength  in  the  direction  of  its  major  and 
minor  axis  sufficient  to  withstand  the  loads  which  may  be  encountered  in  use.  Static  strength  tests 
shall  be  made  with  the  keeper  open  and  closed  by  the  normal  methods  used  for  measuring  the  static 
strength  of  metals,  if  possible  with  a  machine  which  records  load-extension  diagrams.  Details  of  the 
test  procedure  are  given  in  Appendix  A. 

9.1.1  The  minimum  values  obtained  by  tests  shall  be  as  follows: 

a)  Load  In  Direction  of  Major  Axis 

1)  Keeper  open 

i )  11  kN  (  «1 100  kgf )  —  After  the  test,  the  keeper  shall  lock  properly  the  latch, 
ii)  12  kN  ( «1  200  kgf )  —  The  maximum  recorded  load  during  test. 


IS:  8533 -1977 

2)  Keeper  closed 

i )  14  kN  ( «1  400  kgf )  —  No  significant  permanent  deformation    ( safe  working  load  or 
design  load ). 

ii)  22*2  kN  (  «2  220  kgf )  —  The  maximum  recorded  load  during  test. 

b)  Load  in  Direction  of  Minor  Axis,  Keeper  Closed 

6  kN  (  «600  kgf )  —  The  keeper  should  not  open. 

9.1.2  The  proof-load  test  values  specified  above  shall  be  applicable  to  all  sizes  and  shapes  of  cara- 
biners  whether  provided  with  a  locking  arrangement  or  not.  While  conducting  the  test,  the  threaded 
bush  shall  be  in  the  unlocked  position. 

9.2  Impact  Strength  Test  —  The  purpose  of  this  test  is  to  define  an  adequate  degree  of  ductility  in 
the  carabiner  in  order  to  ensure  that  it  should  prove  satisfactory  in  all  mountaineering  conditions. 
When  three  specimens  are  tested  at  room  temperature  and  three  at  30°C  on  a  pendulum  impact  testing 
machine  similar  to  that  described  in  Appendix  B,  the  energy  absorption  of  the  test  specimens  shall  be 
not  less  than  the  following  in  any  case: 

a)  225  N.m  ( «22'5  kgf.m  )  for  all  carabiners  made  from  steel,  or 

b)  110  N.m  ( «1V0  kgf.m )  for  all  carabiners  made  from  aluminium  alloy. 

9.2.1  The  impact  strength  test  values  specified  above  shall  be  applicable  to  all  the  sizes  and  shapes 
of  carabiners  whether  provided  with  a  locking  arrangement  or  not. 

9.3  Test  for  Spring  —  The  keeper  of  the  carabiner  shall  be  fully  opened  and  released  200  times.  After 
completion  of  test,  the  spring  fitted  inside  the  keeper  shall  not  take  a  permanent  set  in  that  the  keeper 
shall  function  efficiently  and  spring  back  without  striking  or  jamming  as  soon  as  it  is  released  from 
the  open  position  at  the  conclusion  of  this  test. 

9.4  Crack  Test—  Each  carabiner  shall  be  subjected  to  crack  detection  test. 

10.  Marking  — Each  carabiner  shall  be  suitably  embossed  during  forging  or  marked  with  acid  etching 
with  the  manufacturer's  name  and  the  guaranteed  maximum  load  in  the  direction  of  the  major  axis 
with  keeper  closed  [which  in  all  cases  shall  be  not  less  than  22  kN  («2200  kgf)].  The  marking  shall 
be  applied  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  impair  the  performance  of  the  carabiner. 

10.1  ISI  Certification  Marking  —  Details  available  with  the  Indian  Standards  Institution. 

11.  Declaration  by  the  Supplier— The  supplier  shall  make  a  declaration  regarding  the  quality  of 
carabiners  being  quoted  or  supplied,  in  the  form  as  given  in  Appendix  C. 

APPENDIX    A 

( Clause  9.1 ) 

METHOD  OF  PROOF  LOAD  TEST 

A-1.  Load  in  Direction  of  Major  Axis  —  The  load  shall  be  applied  directly  to  the  carabiners  by 
means  of  two  vertical  links  which  are  arranged  to  be  perpendicular  to  the  major  axis.  These  vertical 
links  shall  be  of  such  hardness  that  they  are  not  significantly  deformed  during  the  test.  It  is  impor- 
tant that  the  carabiners  shall  be  free  to  locate  itself  on  the  vertical  links  as  the  load  is  applied; 
a  universal  joint  in  one  arm  of  the  testing  machine  is  useful  and  the  vertical  link  shall  be  well  coated 
with  a  molybdenum  based  grease.  In  all  'keeper  open*  tests  a  well  lubricated  contact  between  vertical 
links  and  carabiner  is  essential  in  order  to  avoid  false  load  readings  caused  by  stick-slip  action  bet- 
ween the  vertical  link  and  the  carabiner. 

A-2.  Load  in  Direction  of  Minor  Axis —  The  load  shall  be  applied  to  the  mid-point  of  the  keeper 
and  the  equivalent  point  on  the  spine  defined  by  the  minor  axis.  The  mid-point  of  the  keeper 
is  the  mid-point  between  the  axis  of  the  hinge  link  and  the  point  of  contact  between  keeper  and 
latch.  Any  convenient  diameter  of  loading  vertical  link  may  be  used  (as  this  does  not  influence  the 
results )  provided  the  location  is  maintained.  In  order  to  locate  the  loading  vertical  link  during  the  test, 
grooves  or  slots  may  have  to  be  made  in  the  keeper  and  on  the  spine.  Failures  from  such  a  groove  or 
slot  at  a  load  less  than  the  minimum  specified  will  be  taken  as  nullifying  the  test. 


IS :  8533-1977 

APPENDIX    B 

( Clause  9.2 ) 

METHOD  OF  IMPACT  STRENGTH  TEST 

B-1.  A  standard  charpy  pendulum  impact  machine  is  modified  for  this  work.  The  hammer  head  is 
modified  so  that  each  carabiner  under  test  is  located  by  two  links.  The  forward  link  is  rigidly  attached 
to  the  hammer.  The  rearward  link  is  adjustable  and  located  against  the  carabiner,  the  link  lying  at 
the  centre  of  the  percussion.  This  link  strikes  two  rigid  faces,  lying  in  the  same  plane.  In  order  to 
correct  for  the  varying  length  of  carabiner,  different  length  of  the  pad  carrying  and  impacting  faces  are 
used.  Each  carabiner  is  allowed  to  locate  itself  on  the  links  with  keeper  closed,  so  the  links  load  the 
points  where  the  rope  would  tie  in  normal  use  and  in  the  direction  of  the  major  axis.  The  machine 
is  initially  of  about  300  N.m  (  ^30  kgf.m  )  striking  energy  and  the  modifications  to  the  hammer  head 
will  normally  produce  a  total  mean  striking  energy  of  about  330  N.m  (  »33  kgf.m  )  ( including  an  allow- 
ance for  tne  mass  of  the  carabiner ). 


APPENDIX  C 

( Clause  11 ) 

FORM  OF  DECLARATION  BY  THE  SUPPLIER  TO  BE  GIVEN 
WITH  QUOTATION  OR  SUPPLY 

C-1.  The  following  information  shall  be  given  by  the  supplier  at  the  time  of  quotation  or  supply: 

a)  Dimensions  of  carabiner, 

b)  Mass  of  each  carabiner, 

c)  Meterial  of  manufacture  ( indicate  number  of  relevant  standard  ), 

d)  Details  of  heat  treatment, 

e)  Declared  value  of  tensile  strength  and  impact  strength   (when  tested  according  to    this 

standard  ), 

f )  Protective  treatment  against  corrosion,  and 

g)  Number  of  this  standard. 


EXPLANATORY    NOTE 

This  standard  is  based  on  *  UIAA  Agreement  on  approval  of  general  purpose  snap-links '  issued 
by  the  International  Des  Associations  d'  alpinisms,  Switzerland. 

Although  mass  of  the  two  types  of  carabiners  has  been  laid  down  in  the  standard,  every  effort 
should  be  made  to  reduce  the  mass  of  carabiners  as  much  as  possible  while  maintaining  the  strength. 


Printed  at  Ntw  India  Printing  Prats,  Khurja,  India 


