**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 13327 (1992) : Automotive vehicle - Anchorages for towing 
ropes cables or bars [TED 22: Transport Tractors and 
Trailers] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13327: 1992 

wr - fa fti r^ 

/Att//tfw Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES - ANCHORAGES 
FOR TOWING ROPES, CABLES OR BARS - 

SPECIFICATION 



UDC 62912»015 



© BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

NEW DELHI 110002 

January 1992 Mci Group 1 



Transport Tractors and Trailers Sectional Committee, TED 22 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Transport Tractor and Trailers Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport 
Engineering Division Council. 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from ISO 5422 : 1982 «Road 
vehicles — Anchorages for towing ropes, cable or bars* issued by the International Organization 
for Standardization ( ISO ). 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be 
rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)'. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of 
the specified value in this standard. 



IS 13317 : 1492 



Indian Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES - ANCHORAGES 
FOR TOWING ROPES, CABLES OR BARS - 

SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the requirements of 
the towing anchorages mounted on tractor 
vehicles, allowing them to be towed or to tow 
another vehicle by means of towing ropes, 
cables or bars at the vehicle manufacturer's 
option. 

1.2 This standard applies to the tractor vehi- 
cles which have a maximum authorized total 
weight not exceeding 3*5 tonnes. 

2 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Anchorages 

A device fixed to the tractor vehicle or capable 
of being easily hooked, allowing the temporary 
attachment of a rope, cable or bar provided for 
towing. 

2.2 Kerb Weight 

Weight of tractor vehicle with body, fitted with 
all electrical equipment and auxiliary equipment 
necessary for normal operation of the tractor 
vehicle plus the weight of the following 
elements: 

a) Coolant; 

b) Fuel ( tank filled to at least 90 percent of 
the capacity specified by the manu- 
facturer); 

c) Spare wheel(s); 

d) Fire extinguisher(s); 

e) Standard spare parts; 

f) Chocks; and 

g) Standard tool kit. 

2.3 Maximum Authorized Total Weight 

Weight calculated by the administrative autho- 
rity for operating conditions laid down by the 
authority. 



3 LOCATION 

3.1 Unless they are removable, the anchorages 
shall not project, in the horizontal plane, beyond 
the exterior contour of the tractor vehicle 
( body plus bumpers ). 

3.2 Each towing anchorage shall be located in 
such a way that the requirement as indicated 
in 7 are fulfilled when a displacement of ±8° 
vertically and ± 25° horizontally occurs at the 
other end of the connecting element recom- 
mended by the vehicle manufacturer. These 
angles are measured from a horizontal line 
parallel to the middle plane of the vehicle 
through the anchorage in question. 

4 SHAPE 

4.1 The shape of the anchorages is left to the 
manufacturer's option. It shall permit the 
attachment, without the aid of tools or auxiliary 
parts. 

4.2 The smallest dimensions of the working 
aperture shall not be less than 25 mm. 

4.3 The anchorages shall not damage the ropes 
or cables during towing. 

5 STRENGTH 

5.1 The anchorage shall withstand a static load 
of at least half the maximum authorized total 
weight according to 6. 

6 TESTING 

6.1 Test Conditions 

6.1.1 The vehicle shall be appropriately secured 
at kerb weight position as specified by the 
vehicle manufacturer, on a horizontal rigid 
surface. 

6.1.2 The vehicle manufacturer is allowed if he 
desires, to carry out the test on the structure 
of the vehicle, provided that equivalence is 
demonstrated with the complete vehicle. 

6.2 Test Procedure 

6.2.1 The anchorage shall be subjected to two 
tests, each consisting of a static tractive force 



1 



IS 13327: 1992 



equal to half the maximum authorized total 
weight. 

6.2.2 The static tractive load shall be applied 
in the forward direction for the anchorages 
mounted at the front of the vehicle and in the 
rearward direction for anchorages mounted at 
the rear. 

6.2.3 The first test shall be carried out hori- 
zontally in the longitudinal direction of the 
vehicle. The second test shall be made at one 
of the angles specified in 3.2. 

6.2.4 If the manufacturer of the vehicle agrees 
to the use of bars for towing the vehicle, all 
tests shall be repeated as compressive tests. 

7 REQUIREMENTS 

7.1 After each test carried out as specified in 6, 



the vehicle shall meet the following require- 
ments: 

a) The anchorages shall show no d eforma- 
tion liable to affect normal operation. 

b) The devices mounted in proximity of the 
anchorages ( for example, compulsory 
lighting or signalling devices, braking 
and steering systems ) shall show no 
damage preventing normal operation. 

8 MARKING 

8.1 Indication of source of manufacture or 
trade mark on the anchorages shall be marked 
by the vehicle manufacturer in a suitable 
manner. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bur&i of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standAwizatioii, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country* 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if 
any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be 
sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc t No. TED 22 ( 930 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 


Date of Issue 


Text Affected 




Aty- 


■'> 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi U0002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 



(311 01 31 
(331 13 75 



Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern t SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 235 02 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andherl ( East ) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches \ AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, 
PARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, 
PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printwett Printers, Alijerh. India 



