UDC

534.833.54

: 634.62

(

First Reprint OCTOBER 1997 )
Indian Standard

IS : 8225 - 1987 IS0 354 - 1985
( Reaffirmed 2002 )

MEASUREMENT

OF SOUND

ABSORPTION ROOM

IN

A REVERBERATION

( First Revision )
( IS0 Title : Acoustics - Measurement of Sound Absorption Reverberation Room ) in a

National

Foreword

This Indian Standard, which is identical with IS0 354-l 985 `Acoustics - Measurement of sound absorption in a reverberation room', issued by the International Organization for Standardiration ( IS0 ), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards~on the recommendation of the 4coustics Sectional Committee and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Zouncil. In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions n Indian Standards; attention is especially drawn to the following: Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker, while is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. Cross Reference International Standards: Standards are referred to. Please read in are not identical with those used

in Indian Standards

the current practice

In this Indian Standard, the following their respective place the following Indian International Standard

Indian Standard IS : 6964-l 973 Octave,~half-octave and third-octave band filters for analysis of sound and vibrations

IEC Pub 225 Octave, half-octave and third-octave band fitters intended for-the analysis of sounds and vibrations

The Technical Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the xovision of the following IS0 standard and has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunc:ion with this standard: IS0 5725-1981 reproducibility Precision of test methods by inter-laboratory tests. Determination of repeatability and

Adopted

26 October

1987

Q May 1988, BIS I I
OF BHAVAN, INOIAN 9 BAHAOUR NEW DEl_Hl 110002 STANDARDS SHAH ZAFAR MARG

&

6

BUREAU MANAK

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS : 8225 - 1987 IS0 354 - 1985

0

Introduction
a sound source operates reverberant sound in an enclosed builds up, space, the level are

wall or ceiling area of objects, in

treatments, room.

or the equivalent persons is not of It

sound absorption or space absorbers, for measurdamped weakly

such as furniture,

When

a reverberation

intended

to which governed

and the subsequent of the boun-

ing

the

absorption

characteristics

decay of reverberant

sound when

the source is stopped, characteristics

resonators. The results obtained for design calculation control. can be used for comparison purposes and with respect to room acoustics and noise

by the sound-absorbing

dary surfaces and objects within the space. In general, the fraction of the incident sound power absorbed at a surface depends upon the angle of incidence. time of an auditorium, reduction knowledge incidence, typical range dition. location sound In order to relate the reverberation workshop, etc. to the noise a by an absorbing characteristics treatment, office,

that would be effected of the sound-absorbing is required.

of the sur-

faces, usually in the form of a suitable average over all angles of Since the distribution a wide and for the of sound waves in unpredictable of stanbasic conof purposes as the enclosures of angles, to take includes largely

2
IS0

References
5725, Precision of test methods Determination tests. band of

it is convenient, a uniform the sound reaching

repeatability

and reproducibility 225, Octave,

by inter-laboratory

dardization,

distribution intensity

If, furthermore, within field, the room, incidence.

is independent

tEC Publication filters intended

half-octave

and third-octave

such a distribution

is called a diffuse are said to

for the analysis of sounds and vibrations.

and the sounds

a room surface

be at random Measurements because, ditions chairs, determine

3
under way, be included. the sound landscaping reverberant the effects absorption screens, conditions of practical of discrete etc. Standard conditions rooms, precision, by the and of is to prqmote mea: drement as is possible it may uniof at The it is the are necessary conway such to as 3.1 in this can office mounting only objects

Definitions
of this International Standard, the followmg

For the purpose definitions apply.

Furthermore,

reverberation pressure has stopped.

time:

The time that would

be required

for

The purpose formity sound mined present. necessary sound

of ,this International methods and in reverberation laboratories to data improve determined calculations. predicted may occur. that, sound

the sound source

level to decrease

by @J dl3 after the sound

in the absorption

so that values deterbecome described values of

by different In order

agree as closely

The quantity N(?TE -

is denoted

by jr and is expressed
is based on the assumption between the sound noise level is sufficiently

in seconds.
that, in the ideal level and

to limit further

the variability

of test conditions. method

This definition

absorption

case, there is a linear relationship time and that the background

pressure low.

may be used for design deviations reverberation It should jectives, other between time

In certain

cases, however, 3.2 equivalent which, give sound absorption absorbing area surface of a room: without element as the The in the room

measured

hypothetical be emphasized a more diffuse constraints, room, for in order to attain the above obtion effects room, under would field than the one which etc. is required, on the dimensions ordinarof the

area of a totally the same

diffrac-

if it were the only absorbing reverberation time

ily exists in most rooms, reverberation

auditoria, example

and certain

consideration. reverberation room, tnis quantity is denoted metres. by it is

are necessary.

For the empty A, denoted

; for the reverberation

room containing is expressed

a test specimen, in square

by ,-I,. The quantity

1 This

Scope

and field
Standard

of application
specifies a method of measuring used as 3.3 equivalent sound absorption between area of a test the equivalent sound ab-

International absorption

the sound

coefficient

of acoustical

materials

specimen:

The difference

3

IS : 8225 - 1987 IS0 354 - 1985

sorption

area of the reverberation

room with and without

the

5
The

Apparatus
apparatus shall be such that the requirements given in

test specimen. The quantity is denoted by A and is expressed in square clause 7 are met.

metres.

3.4 the

sound

absorption room,

coefficient: divided by

The the

change area of

in equiin test

valent sound absorption reverberation specimen. It is only defined by as.
NOTE When evaluating "S".

area after placing

a test specimen the

6

Test

arrangement room and diffusion of sound

6.1 Reverberation field
for a plane test specimen and is denoted 6.1.1
the sound absorption coefficient from with

Volume

of reverberation

room room shall be at least 150 m3.

measurements by the subscript to-incident ticular

in a reverberation coefficient

room, the results should be denoted avoids confusion defined as the ratio of non-reflectedsound absorption be expressed evaluated coefas a from

The volume For new 200 m3.

of the reverberation the

The use of this subscript

constructions,

volume

shall

be approximately

the sound absorption angle

sound energy if a plane wave strikes a plane wall at a parof incidence. The sound This "geometric" absorption effects, smaller than unity and may therefore coefficient

ficient is alway: percentage. reverberation for example expressed

6.1.2

Shape

of reverberation

room room should be such that the

time measurements due to diffraction

may have values larger than unity, and as shall not, therefore, be

The shape of the reverberation following I max < condition 1,9 V"3 is fulfilled:

as a percentage.

repeatability, r: The value below which the absolute dif3.5 ference between two single test results obtained using the same method on identical test material, under the same consame laboratory and a ditions (same operator, probability; is 95 same apparatus,

where

I max
within

short interval of times) may be expected in the absence

to lie with a specified the probability

is the length of the longest the boundary of the room room,

straight line which fits (for example, in a rec-

of other indications,

tangular V

it is the major diagonal); of the room. a uniform distribution or in the of natural ratio frequenwhole

%
is the volume reproducibility, between (different

3.6

R: The value belowwhich
test material, different times), under

the absolute using the condifferent to lie with a the different

difference ditions specified probability

two single test results obtained operators, apparatus,

In order to achieve cies, especially of the room numbers.
NOTE In the

in the low-frequency shall be equal

bands, no two dimensions of small

same method laboratories

on identical

and different is 95 %.

may be expected of other

probability;

in the absence

indications,

case

of

non-rectangular

rooms

where

the

test

specimen

is placed on the floor, the results will agree more closely with rooms if the non-vertical walls slant inwards.

results from rectangular

4

Principle
of reverberation sound times in a reverberation From these times, absorption room, calcu-

6.1.3

Diffusion

of sound

field difthe

Measurement

with and without specimen.

the test specimen.

The decaying fuse.

sound field in the room shall be sufficiently satisfactory diffusion, whatever the use of stationary, required suspended

lation of the equivalent

area A of the test

In order to achieve

shape of the room, or of rotating

diffusers

vanes is, in general,

(see annex A).

In the case of a plane coefficient When found is obtained

test specimen,

the sound

absorption 6.1.4 Sound absorption area area A, bands, of the empty room, the

by dividing A by its surface area S. comprises several identical objects, object is

the test specimen

The equivalent determined

sound absorption octave

the equivalent

sound absorption

area of an individual of objects.

in one-third

shall not exceed

by dividing A by the number

values given in table 1.

Table

1 -

Maximum

equivalent

sound

absorption

areas

for room

volume

V = 200 m3

I-

Equivalent absorption Frequency.

sound area, rri Hz

6.5

6.5

6.5

7.0

9.5

13.0

i

125t_2j~

/

560

i

1000

i 2000

i 4ooO 1

4

IS:822591987 IS0 354-1985
2 As an alternative,

If the volume

V of the room differs from 200 m3, the values by the factor absorption

in the case of test specimens can be mounted room. It is, however,

backed

by an

given in table 1 shall be multiplied The graph of the equivalent

( V/20012'3.
area of the

airgap, method

the test specimen

in a recess in one of the possible that this specified.

boundaries

of the reverberation

sound

will not give the same results as the method

empty the

room versus frequency of the values

should be a smooth adjacent

curve and 6.2.2 Discrete sound absorbers octave 6.2.2.1 absorbers, Discrete objects, in for example practice. chairs, persons, space or

should have no dips or peaks differing mean of both bands.

by more than 15 % from one-third

shall be installed for test in the same manner as they installed For example, Space chairs screens shall rest on the floor, but they shall not 1 m to any other boundary. absorbers at least 1 m from any boundary or room dif-

6.2
6.2.1

Test specimen
Plane absorbers

are

typically

freestanding

be closer than

shall be mounted 6.2.1.1 12 &. normal
(V/2!5oP3. NOTE - For the testing of materials with exceptionally small sound absorption coefficients, it is recommended that test specimens with an area larger than specified the be used in order to obtain measured reverberation times a significant r, and r, difference (see 8.1.2). between

fusers and at least 1 m from any microphone. The test specimen If the volume test specimen Vof shall have an area between 10 and 6.2.2.2 A test specimen objects change should comprise a sufficient number a area of the room is greater than 250 m3, the by the factor of individual measurable volume (in general, at least three) to provide

area shall be increased

in the equivalent

sound absorption

the room greater be increased Objects ranged specimen aged.

than 1 m*, but not more than 12 m*. If the 12

V of the room is greater than 250 m3, these values shall by the factor treated spaced

( V/25O)2'3.
objects 2 m apart. should If be artest in at

normally randomly,

as individual at least

the

6.2.1.2

The

test specimen

should

be of rectangular

shape

comprises

only one object,

it should be tested

with a ratio of width boundary preferably

to length between

0.7 and 1. It shall be should

least three locations,

at least 2 m apart,

and the results aver-

placed so that no part of it is closer than 1 m to any edge of the of the room. The edges of the test specimen not be parallel to the nearest edge of the room.

6.2.2.3

If the test specimen

comprises a given array of objects When testing groups of shall

(for example theatre chairs, noise absorber pads), they shall be 6.2.1.3 with The test specimen the relevant shall be mounted provided in accordance or installed for test in this configuration. seats with seated persons, be enclosed by reflecting should be adapted the edges of the arrangement

specifications

by the producer

with the application

details provided

by the user. on a room surcross-

material. This enclosure should have a

height of up to 1 m. In other cases, the height of the enclosure In the case of a test specimen constructed from reflective directly mounted material of to the height of the test specimen.

face, the edges shall be totally and tightly enclosed by a frame rectangular 6.2.3 Curtains section and, in general, of thickness not greater than 2 cm. The frame shall not protrude above the surface of the test specimen. It shall be tightly sealed to the room surface on which it is mounted. backed by an airgap, for instance The sidewalls edges, shall enclose and shall be 6.3 Temperature and relative humidity Curtains tested against walls can be treated as plane absorbers (6.2.1) if closed, or as discrete absorbers (6.2.2) if open. In the for former case, the edges shall be enclosed. a minimum In the case of a test specimen to simulate a suspended perpendicular both the airgap highly reflective. NOTES
1 The measurement of the reverberation time of the empty room

The requirements

distance of 1 m from the walls or from the edges do

not apply in the case of curtains.

ceiling, sidewalls shall be constructed

to the test surface.

and the test specimen

The relative humidity r2 (see 8.12). be as constant

in the room shall be greater than 40 %. of reverberation times T, and should given in

During a series of measurements

the relative humidity and the temperature as possible and at least the conditions

should be made in the absence of the frame or the sidewalls of the test specimen.

table 2 should be satisfied.

Table

2 -

Requirements

for temperature

and relative T,

humidity

during

measurements

of T, and Relative humidity range
L

Relative humidity during all measurements within
1

Temperature during all measurements within 3 "C 5 "C

( , I /

Lower temperature limit 10 `>C
10 oc I

up to 60 40 > 60 % %

3 % 5%

5

IS : 8225 - 1987 IS0 354 - 1985

The test specimen

should be allowed

to reach equilibrium

with

sound interest.

for

the

centre

frequency

of the

frequency

band

of

respect to temperature tests are carried out.

and relative humidity

in the room before

Only one microphone
NOTE Additional correction of the results for the equivalent allowing but the correction absorption area A in accordance 0,5 n? of the equivalent report. with 8.12, for the energy attenushall not exceed of correc-

shall be used at a time. The

microphoneS room

shall be at least 1 m from the test specimen, surfaces or diffusers

1 m from

and 2 m from the sound source(s).

ation in the air, may be applied,

sound absorption

area. The method

The recording quate

system shall be a level recorder or any other adefor determining the average slope time. evaluating) of the reverberation

tion and the origin of the correction

data should be given in the test

equipment

decay curve of the corresponding .The apparatus for recording

(and displaying level may use

and/or

7
7.1

Test procedure
Generation of sound field
room shall be generated pattern frequencies least 3 m below apart) the or by one 300 Hz,

the decay in sound pressure a) exponential averaging,

with a continuous

curve as out-

put; or b) exponential averaging, with successive average discrete sample or linear of con-

The sound in the reverberation or more loudspeakers directional two as measurements successive equivalent sounding ly related) possible. positions source For (at

the radiation

of which is as non-

points from the continuous cl linear averaging, as output, duration with

as output;

should be made with a sound source in at least with an not arrangement, sources

successive cases with determinations averaging

discrete pauses

averages siderable

in some

multiple

between

of averages. device (or apbut as

simultaneously noise sources.

unless driven by separate (incoherentThe averaging proximate of band-limited noise having a time of an exponential

equivalent;

see note 2) shall be less than,

The test signals continuous one-third octave.

shall consist

close as possible to, T/20. The averaging than T/7. time of a linear averaging device shall be less

frequency

spectrum

with a bandwidth

of at least

The level of the steady exciting signal before decay shall be sufficiently evaluation above the level of the background noise to permit in 7.2.2. off should be suflevel In all cases where the time
NOTES 1 !f a signal with a bandwidth part of the decay curve. greater than one-third If the reverberation reverberation octave is used, the NOTES 1 The averaging time of an exponential averaging device is equal to of the device. level is

For apparatus record

in which the decay record is formed 1,5 times the averaging

as a succespoints on the time of the

of the decay curves as specified signal before being switched

sion of discrete points, the time interval between shall be less than device.

The exciting ficiently in-the room.

long to produce

a time-constant

sound pressure

the decay record is to be evaluated should be adjusted as possible.

visually,

scale of the display

so that the

slope of the record is as close to 45'
times in adjacent frequency bands can influence

!ong reverberation lower

times in adjacent times for

bands differ by more than a factor those bands with the shortest individually 2 Use of using one-third wide-band subject

of 1.5, the reverberation

times should be measured

8.69 divided by the decay rate, in decibels 2 Commercial level recorders as a function averaging in which

per second, the sound

octave filtering of the sound source. and a computer-controlled mentioned real-time bands in in

pressure

noise

recorded

graphically

of time are approximately

equivalent

analyser to make simultaneous IS acceptable, measurements sound octaves. pressure with wide-band level

measurements

for all frequency

to exponential

devices.
averaging device is used, there is little advanWhen a in setting the intime apthis is not with be should

to the factors

in note 1. For these sound spectrum adjacent

3

When

an exponential

noise, the average pink or white 6 dB between

tage in setting the averaging linear averaging terval between measurement propriately feasible, reference and

time to very much less than T/20.

the room should approximate

noise with differences

device is used, there is no advantage points to very much less than T/7. procedures, an averaging band. time

less than

one-third

In some sequential

it is feasible to reset the averaging In other procedures, chosen time in any band or interval

for each frequency to the smallest

as above

7.2
7.2.1

Measurement
Receiving

of rever~beration
equipment shall consist

time

reverberation

used for measurements

in all bands.

One-third of one or more microfor reverberation 7.2.2 accordance

octave filters shall be included characteristics 225. with IEC Publication

in the receiving

equip-

ment. The discrimination The receiving amplifiers, time.
The recordings at shall least be made apart, with at least three microphone

of the filters shall be in

equipment and

phones which are as non-directional filters a measuring

as possible, the necessary system

Evaluation

of decay curves
time shall be evaluated from the averaged beginning

The reverberation of

positions

i./2,

where

E. is the wavelength

slope of the decay curve over a convenient

range,

6

IS : 8225 - 1987 IS0 354 - 1985

about 0.1 s after the sound source has been switched from a sound pressure the beginning not noise ment A of decay. The range used shall neither line. The bottom

off, or be less of this equip-

8.1.2 8.1.2.1

Calculation

of A,,

A,

and A absorption room, area A,, in square

level a few decibels lower than that at The equivalent sound decay canbackground 55.3 A1 straight if to do where =cT v metres, of the empty using the formula reverberation shall be calculated

than 20 dE3 nor shall it be so large that the observed be approximated by a straight room band. as of two approximately subsections than range shall be at least 15 dB above level of the reverberation for each one-third may be octave the combined

and the recording

1

decay

described slope

measurements (each covering a sound not differ

of the

of the curve the other)

a range of at least 10 dB, with level at least 10 dB lower than 10 %.

one extending

pressure by more

V
ation c T,

is the volume, room;

in cubic

metres,

of the empty

reverber~

For each combination and for procedure, citations curve from each one-third involving of the room, which

of microphone octave band, the superposition

and loudspeaker an ensemble of several time

position, averaging ex-

is the velocity is the

of sound

in air, in metres time, in seconds,

per second; of the empty

repeated

reverberation room.

may also be used to obtain

a single decav

reverberation

the reverberation

can be evaluated.

NOTE - For temperatures in the ranqe 15 to 30 OC, the velocltv of sound in air, c, in metres per second, can be calculated from the for
mula

7.3

Frequency

ranges

for measurements
out at the following octave centre

(` = 331 + 0.6 I
where 8.1.2.2

The measurements frequencies, 100 400 1600

shall be carried from

/

is the air temperature,

in degrees Celsius. absorption containing area A,, in square

in hertz, 125 500 2000

the one-third 200 800 3150

band series: The equivalent using sound 250

160 630 2 560

.315
1 250 5000

metres,

of the reverberation

room

a test specimen,

1000 4000

shall be calculated 55,3 = __
CT2

the formula

v

A,

7.4

Number

of measurements
number is: of -measurements required for each fre-

where c and T2

The minimum quency a) band twelve

V

have the same meanings time,

as in 8.1.2.1; of the reverber-

is the reverberation room

in seconds,

decays

from

100 to 250 Hz (for

example,

two

ation 8.1.2.3

after the test specimen sound

has been introduced. area A, in square

each of six sound b) nine decays

source/microphone from 315

combinations); The equivalent absorption example, three

to 800 Hz (for

metres, mula

of the test specimen,

shall be calculated

using the for-

each of three cl six decays

sound from sound

source/microphone

combinations); example, two

1 000 to 5 000 Hz (for source/microphone

each of three

combinations).

8 8.1
8.1.1

Expression Method

of results of calculation

c, V and Tl T, NOTE -

have the same meanings as in 8.1.2.2.
covered

as in 8.1.2.1;

has the same meaning
The area of room surface by thts formula

by the test specimen 6).

is not

Calculation

of reverberation time of the room

times

Tl and T2
band is of

taken

Into account

(see annex

The reverberation expressed reverberation The mean by the

in each frequency of the total

8.1.3

Calculation absorption using

of aS (see also annex BI coefficient the formula aa of a plane absorber shall

arithmetic

mean

number

time measurements reverberation times

made in that frequency T, and T2 in each

band.

The sound be calculated

frequency
us =

band shall be calculated places.

and expressed

to at least two decimal

A ~-

s

7

IS : 8225 - 1987 IS0 354 - 1985

where A is the equivalent sound absorption area, in square

The

equivalent

sound

absorption

area

of

a test

specimen coef-

should be rounded ficient to 0,Ol. metres, S calculated in accordance with 8.1.2.3; of the test specimen.

to 0.1 m* and the sound absorption

is the area, in square metres,

NOTE - This way of rounding results leads to the presentation of smooth curves in the graphs. It should, however, be borne in mind that the precision of the results may be less than the above decimal rounding limits might imply. In the graphical presentation, by straight the points of measurement showing distance the from

8.1.4

Calculation of equivalent discrete absorbers
For discrete absorbers, as equivalent

sound absorption

area of
should be connected lines, the abscissa giving the coeffi-

the result should generally area per object, by the number

be expressed

frequency equivalent cient

on a logarithmic sound absorption

scale and the ordinate

sound absorption

which is deter-

area or sound absorption as = 0 to es = to 5 octaves,

p

mined by dividing For a specified equivalent

A

of objects tested.

on a linear scale. The ratio of the ordinate to A

A = 0
array of objects, the result should be given as configuration. sound absorption area of the whole

= 10 m2, or from
corresponding

1, to the

abscissa distance

should be 2

: 3.

Results that display extreme

dips or peaks that cannot of the material as doubtful.

be ex-

8.2
The

Precision
precision 5725. of the test procedure can be defined by its

plained by physical characteristics its mounting should be indicated

under test or

repeatability in IS0

(see 3.5) and reproducibility

(see 3.61, as described

9
Comparison sorption tests involving a number of reverberation rooms have given a rough assessment coefficient of reproducibility as shown of sound ab-

Test report
to this International information Stan-

The test report shall make reference dard and shall include the following a) b) c) the name of the organization the date of test; the description

measurements

in the figure.

:
the test;

NOTE - If the sound absorption coefficient shows steep variations as a function of frequency, the reproducibility may significantly exceed the values shown in the figure. For the time being, available dard. insufficient information on repeatability within is a

that performed

of the test specimen,

its surface area S, room, preferably

to give an assessment an estimation C. Reliable

of it in this International the repeatability

Stan-

mounting

and position in the reverberation

For the purpose in annex

of checking

by means of drawings: d) the shape of the reverberation room, its diffusion treatof

single laboratory, described reproducibility

may be made using the method figures on repeatability in IS0 5725. and only by following the procedure

can be found

ment (the number microphonee)

and size of diffusers)

and the number

for an inter-laboratory

test, as specified

and sound source positions; of the reverberation area (walls, floor room, its volume and ceiling), S,; I/

8.3

Presentation of results
of measurement, the following results shall

the dimensions surface

and its total For all frequencies be reported, a) as; h) b) for single objects, the equivalent sound absorption area per object; j) c) for a specified array of objects, the equivalent sound k) absorption area of the whole configuration. presented in the form of a table and as a graph: the sound absorption coefficient f) g)

the type of noise used; the temperature the mean and relative humidity; times 7-, and T2 at each fre-

for plane absorbers,

reverberation

quency; the results, reported the repeatability, in accordance with 8.3; Cl.

if calculated

(see annex

IS : 8225 - 1987 IS0 354 - 1985

Ic
Frequency, Hz

Figure - Assessment of reproducibility R of as for a) sample 1 having a high absorption coefficient Ias = 1.00). and b) sample 2 having a low absorption coefficient (as = 0.05) in all one-third octave bands

9

IS : 8225 - 1987 IS0 354 - 1985

Annex Diffusivity

A room

of the sound field in the reverberation
(This annex forms an integral part of the standard.)

A.1

Diffusers
diffusivity rotating can be achieved Ideally, by using fixed difelements and with

Perform sound absorption as follows

measurements

on the test specimen

:

An acceptable fusers and/or

a) b)

with no diffusers; with a small number 5 m* in area); increasing and quantities of stationary diffusers, in of stationary diffusers fapproxi-

vanes.

these diffusing Diffusers

should be damped

sheets with low sound absorption

a mass per unit area of at least 5 kg/m*. sizes, ranging from approximately~0.8 side) are recommended. should room. If rotating be oriented at random

of different

mately c) with

to 3 m* in area (for one throughout the

The sheets may be slightly curved and and positioned

steps of approximately

5 m* in area. calculate the mean value of the in the range from 500 to

For each set of measurements, sound vanes are used, the decay repetition of rotation numbers. frequency and absorption coefficients,

4 000 Hz, and plot these values against the number of diffusers used in each case. It will be seen that the mean sound absorption proaches a maximum numbers diffusers of and thereafter diffusers. coefficient number apof

the frequency of small whole

of the vane should not be in the ratio

remains constant The optimum

with in-

A.2

Check

of diffusivity
i.e. a sample, 5 to 10 cm thick, which, under greater coefficient foams

creasing stationary attained.
NOTES 1

is that at which this constant

value is first

Select a suitable test specimen, of a homogeneous, optimum conditions, porous

absorbing

material

has a sound absorption or polyurethane

than 0,9 over the frequency tain glass-wools, criterion.) Mount a test specimen rockwools

range from 500 to 4~000 Hz. (Cermeet this

From experience,

it has been found that, in rectangular

rooms, the

area (both sides) of diffusers required to achieve satisfactory diffusion is approximately 15 to 25 % of the total surface area of the room. 2 If rotating vanes are used, the resulting diffusion should be proved to that achieved by the procedure described above.

in accordance

with 6.2.

to be equivalent

Annex Explanatory remarks

B in 8.1.2.3 and 8.1.3

on the formulae

(This annex does not form an integral part of the standard.)

For normal absorbing the test material, A greater

materials,

there is a small error in the calculated value being slightly too low. certainly

value due to neglecting

the absorption

of the area covered by

the calculated however,

error would,

result if the sound absorption light fittings),

coefficient

of the covered

area was calculated

from the

reverberation

time of the empty room, because this time depends not only on the absorption are not hindered if they are covered with absorbing material.

of the walls, but probably

more on that

of the other objects (such as doors, loudspeakers, and ceiling which

by dissipation of sound energy in the air and by vibrations of the walls

70

IS : 8225 - 1987 I-SO 354 - 1985

Annex Determination
(This annex does not form

C

of repeatability
an integral part of the standard.)

Repeatability specified the room,

is determined recordings

by repeated Standard, curves

tests made within as used within

a short

interval

of time on the same test specimen the same number times of microphone for each test).

following positions,

the procedure excitations of

in this International

the laboratory

(using

of decay

and the same evaluation conditions which

of the reverberation as oossible.

At least five tests Special mounting care should between

should

be made

under

are as stable

be taken tests.

to ensure

that the test specimen

does not change

due to the repeated

operations

of mounting

and dis-

The repeatability

r within

the laboratory

can be estimated

from

the formula

where

0,
G I

is the result

of measurement

i; crl..

is the arithmetic is the factor

mean of the set of n measurements: from Student's distribution for

rr,... CY,,;
level of 95 % and the appropriate number of degrees of

derived 3).

a probability

freedom

(see table

Table 1' = ,I -

3 -

Factor 8

"I" 9 2,26 10 2,23 20 2.09 coefficients 00 1,96 of different magnitude.

1

4
2.78

5 2.57

1

6
2,45

7
2.37

t

2.31

NOTE - Determmations of repeatability should preferably be carried out on materials with sound-absorbing minimum, two repeatability tests should be carried out, one of them using a highly absorbing material.

As a

11

Reprography

Unit, BIS; New Delhi, India

