( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 3451 ( Part II ) - 1975

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF BRUSHES
PART II BRUSHES
Rrllshware
Chairman SIWI
SVRHASH

OTHER
Sectional

THAN
Committee,

PAN-SET
CDC 31

BRUSHES

Representing
ROY

RANJ~N

Prima Brushware,

Calcutta

.\It4lers SIIRI K. c. AoARWAr. Association of State Road Transport Undertakings, New Delhi Indian Paints Association, Calcutta Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways )

Da P. K. BHANDARI CHI.:MIS~' & ME,I'AI.I.~:R~~IST-II, RI)SO, Lucrtsow \vOtrKS MANACF:~ ( FINISHIX,: :, C & W SHOPR, EASTERN l~~t,>wAV, I,II.tTAM ( /fhrWh.) Army Brnsh Factory, Delhi sIrI: I~HARAM BItt Sriirt Srnr R~nr ( Ahmate) Garware Synthetic Bristles Pvt Ltd, Bombay SITIU(:. B. GARWARE S~IRI B. hl. JEJURIRAR ( ,Iltpmate) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SI~RI U. 1~. K.ANCHAN Kewalraj & Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI Kr:n-.\I. K. MAI.I~OTRA Brushware Ltd, Kanpur SHRI 1). D. MEHRA SHRJ E. LEVIGNW ( Alternate) National Test House, Calcutta SIIRI S. P. M~JLLICK SHRt P. K. PYNt? ( &ternatG ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRl NlRiVAI, SINOH SHHI K. H. Ga~nrrr ( Allernnte) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, s11111 s. s. Ptvtr New Delhi Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Nagpur $11 iti N. K. MM~TR,\I.I~IT.%RA RAO irrm S. _fAYARAMAX ( Alternate ) Brushwell & Co, Calcutta SlIRI RHOG[L.kI> SHAH Sitttr JAICHAN~ MRHTA (Alternate) Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, $til<l (:. c,. SU'T ZONE New Delhi Stinr S. C. PaNneV ( llllrrnnte ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Member ) I),( G. AI. SAXENA, Director i Chem )
Secretary

SHRI P. S. ARoRA Assistant Director ( Chem ), ISI @ INDIAN
Copyright

1975 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This priblication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. _--I___

IS : 3451 ( Part II ) - 1975

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF BRUSHES
PART II BRUSHES OTHER THAN PAN-SET BRUSHES

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 September 1975, after the draft finalized by the Brushware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 The durability and the standard of performance of a brush greatly depend upon the care and maintenance of the same, both by the \`er)- often it is found that impxrper manufacturer and the consumer. handling and careless storing of bnlshes lead not only to uneconomical llse but also to lmsatisfactory performance. Thus the formulation of a standard code of practice for care and maintenance has been thought of for helping the manufactlwers as well as consumers of the brushes. (Iare and maintenance for pan-set brushes has already been dealt in This standard ( Part II ) covers the care and maintenance of Part I. bruslles other than pan-set brushes. 0.3 Care and maintenance of brushes composition, construction and uses. differ, depending on their

I. SCOPE

1.1 This standard

( Part II ) lays down the practice to be followed in the care and maintenance of brushes other than pan set, that is, either stapled set, or wire drawn set or twisted-in-wire set. 2. TERMINOLOGY

2.1 For the purpose of this IS : 5060-1969" shall apply. 3. CLASSIFICATION

standard,

definitions

of terms

given

in

3.1 The brushes may be classified into two groups filling materials used, and (b) the end use.
*Glossary of terms curd in brushware industry.

depending

on: (a) the

2

IS : 3451 ( Part II ) - 1975 3.1.1 The following filling material used: Group Group Group Group Group A B C D E Made shall be the classification of animal hair, namely, of brushes bristle, on the basis of hair, etc.

catte-tail fibres,

Made of vegetable fibre, Manila fibre, Admixture proportions. Synthetic Made etc. of animal fibre,

fibre, etc.

namely,

coca

Palmyra

hair and vegetable

fibre in different

namely, wire,

nylon monofilament. namely, steel wire, brass wire,

of metallic

3.1.2 The following cud use:

shall be the classification used for hygienic hair brush, etc.

of brushes purposes,

on the basis of namely, tooth

CiassjjYcn!iort I -Brushes l)rush, i,`lu~\ijicnlh J?brushes namely, carriage

used for sanitation and cleaning push sweeping brushes, banister \\.ashing brushes, etc. BEFORE USE to

purposes, brushes,

4. CARE

AND

MAINTENANCE

4.1 Damage Due to Insect or Belonging to Groups A, B and C

Micro-Organisms

Brushes

4.1.1 lnsett Damage - New and unused brushes belonging to Groups A ;Iud C, which are made with animal hair either entirely or partially as filliug materials, are more susceptible to attack of beetles, moths, etc, \vhich duectly eat the filling materials and thus damage the brush as a whole gradually. Other insects like pig lice and horse lice also do similar damage. 4.1.2 Damage DUP tc Bacteria and Moulds - Certain forms of bacteria and moulds, such as mildew attack, causes the filling materials discolouration and rottin<g. Fungi attack is verv common to the filling materials of vegetab!e origin, when kept in moist atmosphere. 4.1.3 To prevent insect attack, all costly brushes of Groups A, B ;Ind C excepting tooth brushes should be wrapped with tissue paper or polythene sheets and kept in a closed container together with naphthalene flakes or balls. The brushes may also be dusted with DDT powder. `Tooth brush should be hygienically packed individually in paper board or plastics container. 3

IS : 3451 ( Part II ) - 1975 4.1.4 The tip ends of animal hair are the most vulnerable points of attack. Soft hair brushes are susceptible to such attack. Brushes of Groups A and C should, therefore, be flitted periodically to dislodge the eggs if laid down in the interval, after exposing to sun for a while. 4.2 Sterilization - Brushes of Groups Al and Bl should be sterilized thoroughly by washing the same in a hot disinfecting solution of 1 percent antiseptic solution or in hot water before use. This process should be continued periodically during the whole span of utilization. 4.3 Prevention from Dust and Polluted Atmosphere - Brushes belonging to Groups Al and Dl and clothes brushes of any group should be kept in dust-proof packet to protect against polluted atmosphere. 4.4 Damage Due to Corrosion

4.4.1 Brushes belonging to Group E and brushes of other groups, t\rhich are twisted in wire generally get damaged by corrosion of the metallic portion especially when the metal is ferrous. 4.4.2 To protect from this type of damage, the metallic portion of the or twisted wires-should be covered brush - whether filling materials with a thin coat of drying oil and should then be stored in dry place ( if possible, having been wrapped in oil paper or tar paper ). 5. CARE 5.1 Choice OF BRUSHES DURING USE for a particular pttrpose is

of Brush

5.1.0 Care in the selection of brush necessary for economic performance.

5.1.1 A brush of correct size and type should be selected depending For instance, cIothes brush should be used for on the nature of work. dusting off clothing and hair brush for dressing hair and not oice versa. Similarly, nail cleaning brush should be used for cleaning nails only. Again in case of tooth brush, adult size should be used by adults and The requisite size and quality of tooth brush junior size by juniors. should be determined depending on the nature of the teeth and the condition of the gums. This holds good for all groups and types of brushes. 5.2 Correct Use - All types of brushes belonging to Groups A, B, G and D should be used with light pressure. A few examples citing the proper use of common types of brushes are given in 5.2.1 to 5.2.9. 5.2.1 `Tooth Brusfl - The brush with paste should be applied the teeth in circular movement, with mild pressure, to clean Unusual pressure will not only bring deformity in the filling earlier, but may harm the gums and teeth.
NoTE-C~~

slowly on the teeth. materials
A brush

once

should be taken not to use deformed Itsed by one shorlld not be used by others.

and worn

cut

brush.

4

IS : 3451 ( Part II ) - 1975 5.2.2 Nail Cleaning Brush-This brush should be used slowly with straight to-and-fro motion with mild pressure to clean the nails specially their tips. Unusual pressure may cause harmful effect on the finger tips.
5.2.3 Hair Brush - This is required for cleaning foreign matter from them and straie;ht stroke and mild pressure the brush hairljust over the head, otherwise the skin case also the brush used by one should not dressing hair, simultaneously massaging the head. With a should be driven through the may get damaged. In this be used by others.

5.2.4 Clothes Brush -This brush is used for dusting off or dry cleaning of clothing mainly. Sometimes it is used in conjunction with yome sort of cleaning solution. In all types of functions, straight stroke \vith mild pressure is advisable. Deep and hard stroke may spoil the textllre ofthe cloth cleaned. 5.2.5 Carriage Iliashing Brush - This brush is required for the removal of dirt and undesirable marks from painted surfaces of the carriage body acc~llllrllated during ser\vice by some sort of cleaning solution, generally ~)111ble iri water.

5.2.5.1 X circular movement with mild pressure throughout the including the application of cleaning solution is plYX.cSS of washing A hcavv pressure will cause deformity and unusual wearing advisable. of the filling materials, at the same time it may leave undesirable scratch Inarks on the surface cleaned.
5.2.6 Banister Brush -This brush is used for dry sweeping. This should be applied in straight stroke with light pressure. Heavy pressure may impart scratch marks, and deformity in the shape of filling material may tlevelop earlier. 5.2.7 Shoe Blacking and Shoe Polishing Brushes -- Both the brushes are filled in with cattle tail hair or coarse bristles. The first one is required for the application of shoe cream or shoe polish on the leather surface while the second one is required for glazing of mainl) shoes, In the first case a circular stroke will give better effect while the same. in the second cape straight stroke will give better effect. In both the cases, however. mild pressure should be advocated, as heavy pressure will only c`ar~ae deformity and unusual wearing of the filling materials. 5.2.8 Brushes zdth Metallic Filling Material - These types of brushes are $Ianerallv required for dislodging/removing foreign materials from hard In these cases also, the brushes are required to rub metallic surfaces. down against the surface with moderate pressure and in some cases Heavy pressure will only spoil the circlllar stroke gives better results. shape of the brush either by unusual wearing or by deformation of filling materials.

5

1s : 3451 ( Part

II ) - 1975

5.2.9 Boiler Tube Brush - This brush is made of steel wire set in by The size of the brush should be selected just to suit twisted wire. A size slightly bigger than the inner diameter of the tube the tube. is preferable. Too big a srze will spoil both the brush and the tube and a smaller size will fail to serve the purpose. 5.2.9.1 After
kerosene material use, this brush should be washed and stored in dry place in the vertical position does not get any deformity. thoroughly with so that the filling

6. CARE

AND

MAINTENANCE

AFTER

USE

6.1 Cleaning 6.1.1 All types of brushes belonging to Croups A, B, C and D should be cleaned thoroughly by flitting in case the brushes are used dry, and by washing with clean water when they are used wet in conjunction with It should then be dried preft=rnbly cleaning soltition soluble in Lvatrr. by hot blast of dry air and stored in a clean dry place.
6.1.2 In case of tooth brltsh, nail IXIIS~, clothing brush, hair brush, etr, thev should he kept in a dtli;t-proof packet after thoroughly cleaning ant1 dq;ng. and shoe polishirlg brushes, frequent 6.1.3 In case of shoe blacking Lvashing is not necessary, but they should be kept in dust-proof packet. Occasionally, these brushes ma)- be reclrtired to be cleaned by kerosene, then by soap solution ( preferably non-causticised one ), finally by thorough rinsing in water, dried and kept in dust-proof packet. 6.1.4 Typewriter brrrshes should be cleaned every lletrol and kept in dttst-proof packet when dried. time after use in

6.1.5 Metallic brushes ( Group E ) specially of ferrous type should never be washed in water. In case cleaniug is necessary, kerosene should be Itsed as cleaning medium. But after such cleaning the brush should oil bath, soluble in kerosene, to guard I,? dipped into a non-drying after which they should be wrapped in oil paper against corrosion, or tar paper and stored in dry place. This film of non-drying oil should, however, be lvashed before lose on the next occasion. 6.1.6 De-r&,/g - In case the filing material or the twisted wire (,l`iron, as the case may. be, in brushes belonging to Group E has already it 1s advisable to de-rust the aflected portion by htarted corroding, clipping into a solution rontaining prcferabl~~ de-rrrsting calm phosphating After this, the brush shortId be treated with a coat of varnish or agent. boiled linseed oil h!* dipping it in a bath containing varnish or oil as the case may be, for lnotecting against further corrosion. 6

IS : 3451 ( Part II) - 1975 6.2 Treatment to Wooden Handles -The wooden handles of brushes, which are used frequently in conjunction with water or some cleaning solution that affect the wooden handles, should occasionally be painted or varnished or at least treated with a coat of boiled linseed oil in order to protect them from rotting. 7. RECONDITIONING 7.1 When deformity of filling materials of brushes belonging to (;ro~rps A, B, C or D has developed due to long or improper use, or due to wrong process of storing, they may be reconditioned by trimming the obstinate filling materials, to the extent necessary, in case the same could IIOCbe brought to proper shape by any mechanical means. In case this deformity takes place in metallic brushes of Group E, in out of fillin g materials, the same may be set right t)y straightening them through some mechanical device. 7.2

the form of spreading

INDIAN ON BRUSHWARE

STANDARDS

IS: 384- 197 1 486-1973 487-1966 1103-1971 I 104-1968 1843-1963 1844-1962 2G16-1963 2621-1964 2622-1964 2701-1964 3008-1964 3009-1971 30 1% 1964 1387-1973 3451 ( Part 3451 Brushes, Brushes, paints and varnishes, for paints flat ( fhird reuision) and varnishes ferrule ( secondrevision ) bound, and (ii) round, copper (i) oval,

sash tool,

Brushes, paints and varnish wire bound ( miscd ) Brushes, Brushes, Nylon Bristles Brush, Brush, Brush, Brush, Brush, Brushes, Brush, Toothbrush (i) cleaning commode banister carriage tank, chutes ( hand-sweeping washing and artists' lettering monofilaments

( wand m~ision )

(first rcviszon )

(ii) commode ), single I~an~lle )

and lavatory

( without

shoe blacking shoe polishing scruhhing

(,l;r,t reui\ion)
of practice for care and maintenance maintenance of brushes: of brushes: Part Part II 1

I )-1966 Code Pan-set brushes Brushes

( Part II l-1975
Brush, Bruslles, Brushes, Brush, Brushes, Brushes, Glossary Brushes,

Gode of practice for care and other than pan-set brushes stencil boiler foundry, tube flat ( without shank j

42081967 4214-1967 4301-1967 4517-1967 4580-:968 4584-1968 5060-1969 50781969

welders' shaving hair of terms typewriter used in brushware industry

Brttshes, nail cleaning 5080-1969 Brushes, clothes 5207-1969 5565 ( Part I )-1969 Dental brushes, right-angle hand pieces :i,jtj,5

engine:

Part

I Brushes Part )

for use with for use

straight with

and porte

( Part II )-1969
polisher Brushes. Brushes, Brushes,

Dental

brushes,

engine: without

I1 Brrtshes

5683-1970 7457-1974 7477-1974

puslt-sweeping flue harness hard

handle

