**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8755 (1977) : Method for Testing for Biological 
Compatibility of Metals for Surgical Implants [MHD 2 : 
Orthopaedic Instruments, Implants and Accessories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



J "*\.\!, ttHrr-u^u 



•363' 



UOC 616-089 843-74 : 669 : 6201938 



IS: 8755 -1977 



ii 



m 



Indian Standard f <trrP?B T ^ £ ^ 

METHOD FOR TESTING **RE~AFFlRMM $9?' 
BIOLOGICAL COMPATIBILITY OF METALS FOR 

SURGICAL IMPLANTS (Reaffirmed 1992) 



1. Scope — Prescribes procedure for testing biological compatibility of metals used for surgical 
implants. 

2. Test Hosts 

2.1 Rats, rabbits and dogs are to be used for muscle implantation in accordance with the schedule 
shown in 3.5. 

2.2 Rabbits and dogs shall be used for bone implantation in accordance with the schedule shown 
in 3.6. 

3. Test Specimens 

3.1 Machining, finishing, and surface preparation of test coupons shall be accomplished in 
accordance with 3.5. The coupons shall be prepared as they would be for use as implants in human 
subjects. Each coupon shall be of high internal quality and shall be checked in accordance with 
IS : 5347-1969 ' General requirements for metal surgical implants '. 

3.2 Coupons for Insertion in Muscles 

3.2.1 For rats, use 1'6 mm diameter and 6'3 mm long cylindrical coupons. 

3.2.2 For rabbits, use 3*2 mm diameter and 12 mm long cylindrical coupons. 

3.2.3 For dogs, use 9'5 mm diameter and 25 mm long cylindrical coupons. 

3.3 Coupons for insertion in Bones 

3.3.1 For rabbits, use 1"6 mm diameter and 12 mm long cylindrical coupons. 

3.3.2 For dogs, use 3'2 mm diameter and 12 mm long cylindrical coupons. 

3.4 Prepare a set of control coupons from any of the alloys conforming to IS : 5347-1969. 

3.5 For muscle implantation there shall be a sufficient number of animals so that at the stage of 
retrieval, number of animals designated in 5.2.1 are available: 

Number of Specimens in 
* Each Animal 

One control coupon plus one test coupon on each side 
of spine ( maximum of six per animal ) 

One control coupon plus two test coupons on each side 
of spine ( maximum of six per animal ) 

Two control coupons plus four test coupons on each side 
of spine ( maximum of twelve per animal ) 

3.6 For bone implantation there shall be a sufficient number of animals so that at the stage of 
retrieval, number of animals designated in 5.2.2 are available for sacrifice: 



Animal 
Rat 


Minimum Number 
of Animals 

20 


Rabbit* 


12 


Dog* 


3 



Animal 

Rabbitt 

Dogt 



Minimum Number 
of Animals 

6 



Number of Specimens in 
Each Animal 

One control coupon plus two test coupons in each femur 
( maximum of six per animal ) 

Two control coupons plus four test coupons in each femur 
( maximum of twelve per animal ) 



♦One control for every two test coupons in rabbits and dogs. 
tOne control for every two test coupons. 



Adopted 9 November 1977 



July 1978, ISI 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 8755 -1977 

4. Conditioning 

4.1 After final preparation by the manufacturer, handle the coupons with great care so that the 
coupons do not get damaged or scratched in any way, prior to insertion in an animal. This 
especially applies to damage from contact with metal instruments. 

4.2 Prior to sterilization, carefully degrease the coupons and then wash them in strong detergent; 
thoroughly rinse in distilled water; and dry in a series of alcohol and other solutions. Sterilize the 
coupons in a manner that will not adversely affect the corrosion resistance of the alloy and then 
place them in a sterile nonabrasive package identified with the series number of the implant material 
and with the individual number of the coupon. Sterilization may be done in dry heat or by ethylene 
dioxide exposure methods. 

5. Procedure 

5.1 Implantation 

5.1.1 Place coupons in the back muscles of adult rats, rabbits, and dogs in such a manner so that 
they are directly in contact with muscle tissue. Under sterile conditions, make a bed in the muscle 
by using a hemostat to separate the muscle fibres and then insert the implant using plastic tipped 
forceps to avoid damage to the implant Having inserted one control and one experimental coupon 
on each side of each rat, close the wound. Follow an analogous muscle implantation procedure 
for rabbits and dogs, allowing for larger numbers of experimental coupons to be inserted and 
multiple insertions through a single incision as permitted by the size of the animal. No rabbit shall 
receive more than six implanted coupons, and no dog shall receive more than twelve. 

5.1.2 Expose the lateral cortex of each rabbit femur and drill three holes through the lateral cortex 
only on each side. For dogs, the holes shall be 3"2 mm in diameter. Six holes in each femur may 
be made. Insert one of the coupons by finger pressure into each one of these holes. Then 
close the wound. At least one control coupon for every two experimental coupons in rabbits and 
dogs shall be available. 

5.2 Retrieval 

5.2.1 For surgical retrieval of specimens implanted in muscles, incise the skin at the back using 
surgeon's scissors, and remove each coupon with its surrounding muscle, to the extent of at least 
9*5 mm, if possible, using a sharp scalpel or preferably a platinum-iridium knife blade or suitable 
glass knife. 

5.2.1.1 Sacrifice the animals at the following intervals after insertion: four rats at 2, 4, 8, 12 and 
26 weeks; two rabbits at 2, 4, 8, 12, 52 and 104 weeks. Retrieve specimens from dogs at 26, 52 and 
104 weeks, the total number of test coupons for each time interval to be not less than eight, and to 
be derived from at least two dogs. One control coupon shall be available for each rat coupon, one 
control coupon for every two rabbit coupons, and one control coupon for every two coupons in dogs. 
Specimens may be retrieved by surgical removal without sacrifice of the dogs. 

5.2.2 At sacrifice, remove the femora; clean, and take tissue specimens analogous to these 
described for muscle. Sacrifice the animals at the following intervals: 2, 4, 8, 12, 52 and 104 weeks 
for rabbits, and 26, 52 and 104 weeks for dogs. The number of specimens for each time interval will 
be three for rabbits and eight for dogs. 

5.2.3 Part of the samples from dogs or rabbits may be excised for spectrographic or electron 
probe analysis. Fix them in 10 percent formalin or other fixative, following which remove the 
coupon and submit the tissue specimen to elective special studies. 

5.3 Inspection 

5.3.1 Inspect implants and surrounding tissue for evidence of corrosion directly (after removal) 
by the naked eye, hand lens, and microscope with at least 20x magnification. 

5.3.2 For histological study, prepare and stain at least two sections of the tissue surrounding each 
coupon. Measure the thickness of the scar and ascertain the presence or absence of neoplastic 
change. 

5.3.3 If any animal in any group does not survive the schedule time interval, or if infection or 
fracture vitiates the histological specimens of any animal, replace that animal by an alternate so that 
the number of retrieved specimens will be at least that represented in 3.3. 



IS: 8755 -1977 

€. Interpretation of Results 

6.1 Note any evidence of discoloration, tarnish, or corrosion on any of the metal coupons after 
removal. Note any loss of metal to the tissues as judged by unmistable brown or black discoloration 
of the tissue enveloping the coupon compared to the control specimen even in the absence for the 
test metal will be defined as an equal or lesser effect on surrounding tissue or metal corrosion than 
shown by the control metal. 

6.2 For the histological studies, adequate tolerance is defined as an equal or lesser degree of 
cellular reaction or thickness of scar or both, and the absence of neoplastic change in the accumulated 
inter-comparisons between controls and experimental coupons from all the experimental intervals. 
In an exceptional situation, when a total of fewer than six experimental coupons from all the 
coupons of a given material have produced an increased cellular reaction or thickness of scar in the 
tissue surrounding them, repetition of these items of the test with double the numbers of animals 
involved may be allowed to be substituted for the exceptional histological specimens. If the repeated 
items in the test then demonstrate tolerance as defined, the completed test will then be concluded 
with the judgement that the material tested is as well tolerated as the control material. 

7. Report 

7.1 The report shall include the observations of each control and test coupon as well as the 
observation of the surrounding tissue to which the coupons were implanted. 

7.2 The report shall include the observations of each histological examination. 

7.3 A comparison between the control coupons and the test specimens together with a statement 
declaring the acceptability of the test material or the inferiority to the control material shall also be 
reported. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard provides method for testing the biological compatibility of metals so that new 
alloys may be approved for use in surgical implants designed for orthopaedic treatment or designed 
to be used in contact with body fluids. Currently accepted materials were standardized on the 
basis of acceptable experience of orthopaedic surgeons. The method prescribed for assaying new 
materials is based on a comparison with current standards, 



Printed at Neelkamal filnters .Delhi, India 



