**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 13408-1 (1992) : Code of Practice for the Selection, 
Installation and Maintenance of Electrical Apparatus for 
Use in Potentially Explosive Atmospheres (Other Than Mining 
Applictions or Explosives Processing and Manufacture) , Part 
1: General Recommendations [ETD 22: Electrical Apparatus 
for Explosive Atmosphere] 



aj^&vj iimmK-^i^^^ isi>&^nT¥seg 



s>ia<i H iT'55«>5es^>^»»i 



K^^i^i^Vii^^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13408 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 

(RMmrmwl 2003) 

f^^T^ f^rF??te^ M^TcKufi* (ftr^^jfe^ snfnm aftr 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE SELECTION, 

INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 

ELECTRICAL APPARATUS FOR USE IN 

POTENTIALLY EXPLOSIVE ATMOSPHERES 

(OTHER THAN MINING APPLICATIONS OR 

EXPLOSIVES PROCESSING AND 

MANUFACTURE) 

PART 1 GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 

(First Reprint JANUARY 2004) ;^ 7 

UDC62r31-213-34: 00676 ^ 



O BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAPAR MARO 

NEW DELHI 110002 

Oetob0rl992 PriM Gimp 12 



Electrical Apparatus for Explosive Atmospheres Sectional Committee, ET 22 



CONTENTS 



SectkHi 1 General 



Pagb 



1. Scope ... .. • - 1 

2. Reference Standards •• •• •• ... 1 

3. Definitions AND Explanation OF Terms ... ... ••• 1 

4. Statutory Requirements ... ... ... 2 

5. Classihcation OF Hazardous Areas ... ... ... 2 

6. Types OF Protection ... ••• ... ... 3 

7. Light Metals AS Constructional Materials ... ... 4 

Section 2 Selection of Apparatna 

8. Procedure for Selecting Electrical Apparatus ... ... 4 

9. Interconnection of Apparatus ... ... ... 6 

Section 3 General Installation Recommendations 

10. General .• ... ... ... 6 

11. Access for Inspection ... ... ... ... 6 

12. Plans AND Records ... ... ... ... 6 

13. Electrical Ratings ... ... ... ... 6 

14. Installation OF Apparatus ... ... ... 6 

15. Integrity of Insulation ... ... ... ... 7 

16. Automatic OvERCURRENT Protection ... ... 7 

17. Earthing AND Earth Fault Protection ... ... ... 7 

18. Isolation .. ..• ... ... 7 

19. Emergency Suppues ... ... ... ... 7 

20. Wiring Systems ... ... ... ... 7 

21. Portable AND Transportable Apparatus AND Its Connections ... 10 

Section 4 Inspection, Maintenance and Testing 

22. General ... ... ... ... 10 

23. Personnel ... ... ... ... 10 

24. Isolation OF Apparatus ... ... ... 10 

25. Precautions Concerning THE Use OF Igniting Agencies ... ... 10 

26. iNrriAL AND Periodic Inspections ... ... ... lo 

27. Inftial and Periodic Testing ... ... ... |2 

28. Maintenance Recommendations ... ... 12 

Section 5 Properties of Flammable Liquids, Vapours and Gases 

29. General ... ... ... ... 13 

30. Melting Point and Boiling Point . • ... ... 13 

31. Relative Vapour Density ... ... ... 13 

32. Flashpoint ... ... ... |3 

33. Limits OF Flammability ... ... ... ... 13 

34. FLAMMABILfFY RAN3E ... ... ... ... 13 

35. Effect of Environments with Other Than Normal Atmospheric Conditions 14 

36. Ignition Temperature ... ... ... ... 14 

37. General Consideration ... ... ... ... 14 

Section < Marking of Apparatus 

38. General ... ... ... ... 15 

39. Marking Requirements for Apparatus ... ... ... is 

40. Examples OF Marking OF Apparatus ... ... ... 16 

41. General Notes ON Marking ... ... ... 17 

Annex A List of Referred Indian Standards ... ... 18 

Annex B Relevant International, European and British Standards and 
Details of the National Certifying AuTHORrrv and Its 

CBRTinCATION STANDARDS ... ... ... 19 

Annex C Frictional Sparking Risks with Light Metals and Their Alloys 21 

Annex D Data for Flammable Materials ... ... ... 22 

Annex E Calculation of the Flambubility Limits for a Mixture of Gases ... 35 

( Contlmied on third coyer ) 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 OCTOBER 2003 

TO 

IS 13408 (PART 1) : 1992 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

THE SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND 
MAINTENANCE OF ELECTRICAL APPARATUS FOR 
USE IN POTENTIALLY EXPLOSIVE ATMOSPHERES 

(OTHER THAN MINING APPLICATIONS OR 
EXPLOSIVES PROCESSING AND MANUFACTURE) 

PART 1 GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 

( Page 2, clause 4 ) — Delete and renumber the subsequent clauses. 

( Page 20, clauses B>4, B-4.1, B-5 and B-S.1 ) — Etelete and renumber the 
subsequent clauses. 

(ET22) 



Printed it Pnbhat Offset Pieu. New Delhi-2 



IS I34M (Ptert 1) : 1992 



Indian Standard 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE SELECTION, 

INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 

ELECTRICAL APPARATUS FOR USE IN 

POTENTIALLY EXPLOSIVE ATMOSPHERES 

(OTHER THAN MINING APPLICATIONS OR 

EXPLOSIVES PROCESSING AND 

MANUFACTURE) 

PARTI GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
Section 1 General 



1 SCOPK 

t.l This code gives recommendations for selection, 
installation and maintenance of electrical apparatus 
for use in areas where potentially explosive materials 
are generated, processed, handled, stored or otherwise 
encountered. 

1.2 Flammable or potentially explosive materials in 
this standard include gases, vapours, mists and solids. 

1.3 This standard applies to the following: 

a) thermal effects where those give rise to danger 
in llammabie or potentially explosive atmos- 
phere; 

b) protection against overcurrcnt where rele- 
vant tocircuits in flammable or potentially ex- 
plosive atmospheres; 

c) methods for switching and isolation of elec- 
trical systems where relevant to circuits in 
flammable or potentially explosive atmos- 
pheres. 

1.4 This code does not cover the following: 

a) inherently explosive atmospheres, for example, 
explosives nvinufacturingand processing; 

b) underground mining application; 

c) dust atmospheres; 

d) areas where abnormal atmospheric conditions 
occur; 

c) the etTects of static electricity and high fre- 
quency electromagnetic radiation. 

NOTB ~ Detailed guidance on protection against risks due to 
sialic eleciriciiy may be found in IS 7689 : 1989. 

1.5 This standard is applicable to all new permanent 
installations and, where resonably practicable, to 



existing installations. The recommendations 
maintenance are applicable to all installations. 



for 



1.6 The recommendations of the standard are also 
applicable to those installations that are semi-perma- 
nent or temporary but alternative safety measures and 
procedures may need to be adopted to achieve the 
same level of safety as that recommended in this 
standard. 

NOTES 

1 This standard does not give guidance on methods of protec- 
tion against electric shock, the effects of lightning ( see IS 2809 : 
1969 ), ignitions sources other than those associated with electri- 
cal apparatus or toxic risks. The toxic risks associated with 
flammable materials apply to concentrations that are usually 
very much less than the lower flammable limit. 

2 Annex B contains, for information, a list of relevant interna- 
tional, European and British Standards, together with details of 
the national certifying authority and its certiflcation standards. 

2 REFERENCES 

The list of Indian Standards given in AAnex A is a 
necessary adjunct to this standard. 

3 DEFINITIONS AND EXPLANATION OF 
TERMS 

3.0 For the purpose of this part and of the other parts 
of the code generally, the following definitions shall 
apply. 

NOTE — Further deflnitions that are particulariy relevant to spe- 
cific types of protection are included in the appropriate parts of 
this code of practice. 



3.1 Explosive Atmospheres 

A mixture of flammable gas or vapour with air under 
atmospheric conditions in which, after ignitions, 
combustion rapidly spreads throughout the uncon- 
sumed mixture. 



IS 13408 (Part 1) : 1992 

3.2 Mist 

A free suspension in air of droplets of a liquid whose 
vapour is flammable in free suspension in air 

3.3 Haaeard 

The presence, or the risk of the presence, of an explo- 
sive atmosphere. 

3.4 Hazardous Area 

An area in which explosive atmospheres are, or may 
be expected to be, present in quantities such as to 
require special precautions for the construction and 
use of electrical apparatus. 

3.5 Non-Hazardous Area 

An area in which explosive atmospheres are not ex- 
pected to be present in such quantities that special 
precautions for the construction and use of electrical 
apparatus are necessary. 

3.6 Flash Point 

The lowest temperature at which sufficient vapour is 
given off from a flammable nuiterial to form an explo- 
sive atmosphere. 

3.7 Ignition Temperature 

The lowest temperature of a flanunable gas or va- 
pour at which ignition occurs when tested as described 
in IS 7820 : 1975. 

NOTE — Ignition temperatuie was formally known, as auio- 
ignition or spontaneous ignition temperature. 

3.8 Accessible Surface 

A surface to which an explosive atmosphere has ac- 
cess, and that is not explosion protected other than by 
temperature limitation. 

3.9 Maximum Surface Temperature 

The highest temperature attained under practical 
conditions of operation within the rating of the appa- 
ratus (and recognized overloads, and including de- 
fined fault conditions, if any, associated therewith) by 
an accessible surface the exposure of which to an 
explosive atmosphere may involve a risk. 

3.10 Temperature Class (T Class) 

One of six values of temperature allocated to electrical 
apparatus derived from a system of classification ac- 
cording to the maximum surface temperature of the 
apparatus. 

3.11 Apparatus Group and Sub-Group 

Group or sub-group assigned to apparatus depending 
on its suitability for use with specific gases. 

An apparatus group or sub-group may be used with 
flanunable materials of a lesser risk sub-group subject 
only to considerations of temperature and chemical 
compatibility. 



3.12 Protection 

3.12.1 Type of Protection 

The measures applied in the construction of apparatus 
or part of apparatus to prevent ignition of surrounding 
explosive atmosphere by such apparatus. 

NOTE — Formerly it was common for an individual item of 
apparatus lo employ one type of pioiection only; increasingly 
apparatus may now employ two or more types of piotection. 
Thus a routing machine may incorporale a aiotor carcase in type 
of protection 'd* (flameproof enclosure) and a terminal box in 
type of protection *e* (increased safety). It has become common 
usage 10 refer to 'explosion-prolecied' apparatus rather than to 
^ny one type of protection {see also Section 2 ). 

3.12.2 Enclosure Protection 

The measures applied to the enclosures of apparatus to 
provide degrees of protection for : 

a) persons against contact with live or moving 
parts inside the enclosure and protection for 
the apparatus against ingress of solid foreign 
bodies; 

b) the apparatus against the ingress 6i liquids. 

3.12 J Electrical Protection 

The measures applied to circuits to control the effects 
of overload and overcurrent. 

4 STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS 

All electrical installations in hazardous areas have to 
comply with all relevant statutory requirements. The 
statutory authorities for industrial installations in India 
are as follows: 

a) The Directorate General Factory Advice and 
Labour Institute, Bombay. 

b) The Controllerate of Explosives, Nagpur. 

5 CLASSIFICATION OF HAZARDOUS AREAS 

This code of practice is based on the concept of 
dealing with the risk of fire and explosion by area clas- 
sification. This concept recognizes the differing de- 
grees of probability with which concentrations of 
flanmiable gas or vapour may arise in installations in 
terms of both the frequency of occurrence and the 
probable duration of existence on each occasion. 

The detailed considerations that should be taken into 
account in area classification are described in IS 5572 
(Part 1) : 1978. For completeness, the definitions 
appropriate to area classification are repeated here. 

Zone Zone in which an explosive gas-air mix- 
ture is continuously present, or present for 
long periods. 

Zone 1 Zone in which an explosive gas-air mix- 
ture is likely to occur in normal operation. 

Zone 2 Zone in which an explosive gas-air mix- 
ture is not likely to occur in normal opera- 
tion, and if it occurs it will exist only for 
a short time. 



It should be noted that this area classincation deals 
only with risks due to flammable gases and vapours 
and, by implication, flammable mists. In a non-haz- 
ardous area nonnal electrical techniques apply. 

When the hazardous areas of a plant have been classi- 
fled, the remainder will be defined as non-hazardous. 



IS 13408 (Part 1) : 1992 

6 TYPES OF PROTECTION 

There are at present eight accepted types of protection 
for electrical apparatus for use in hazardous areas. A 
description of each type is given in Table 1. The 
relevant equipment specifications, where they exist, 
should be referred to for precise definitions of the type 
of protection. 



Table 1 Types of Protection 



Typtof 
Protcctkm 


Tttit 


DescripUoB 


Rcrcreace to 
ladUw SlJUKUnIs 


•d- 


Flameproof 


A metKod of protection where the enclosure for electrical 
apparatus will withsund an internal explosion of the flammable 
gas or vapour (for which it is designed) which may enter it, 
without suffering damage and without communicating the 
internal flammation to the external flamnuble gas or vapour for 
which it is designed, through any joints or structural openings in 
the enclosure. 


IS 2148 : 1981 


•i* 


Intrinsically 
safe apparatus 
or system 


A protection technique based upon the restriction of electrical 
energy within apparatus and in the interconnecting wiring, 
exposed to a potentially explosive atmosphere, to a level below 
that which can cause ignition by either sparking or heating 
effects. Because of the method by which intrinsic safety is 
achieved it is necessary that not only the electrical apparatus 
exposed to the potentially explosive atmosphere but also other 
(associated) electrical apparatus with which it is interconnected 
is suitably constructed. 


IS 5780 : 1980 


>• 


Pressurization 
continuous 
dilution and 
pressurised 
rooms 


A method of protection using the pressure of a protective gas to 
prevent the ingress of an external flammable atmosphere to a 
space which may contain a source of ignition and, where 
necessary, using continuous dilution of an atmosphere within a 
space which contains a source of emission of gas which may 
form an explosive atmosphere. 


IS7389(Partl):1976 


•e* 


Increased 
safety 


A method of protection by which additional measures are 
applied to an electrical apparatus to give increased security 
against the possibility of excessive temperatures and of the 
occurrence of arcs and sparks during the service life of the 
apparatus. It applies only to an electrical apparatus, no parts of 
which produce sparks or arcs or exceed the limiting temperature 
in normal service. 


IS 6381: 1972 


*n* 


Type of 
protection n 


A type of protection applied to an electrical apparatus such thai, 
in normal'operation, it is not capable of igniting a surrounding 
explosive atmosphere, and a fault capable of causing ignition is 
not likely to occur. 


IS 8289 : 1976 


•s* 


Special 
protection 


A concept for those types of electrical apparatus that, by their 

requirements specifled for apparatus with established types of 
protection, but which nevertheless can be shown, where 
necessary by test, to be suiuble for use in hazardous areas in 
prescribed zones. 




'0* 


Oil- 
immersed 


A method of protection where electrical apparatus is made safe 
by oil-immersion in the sense that flammable gases or vapours 
above the oil or outside the enclosure will not be ignited. 


IS 7693 : 1975 


•q' 


Sand-niled 


A method of protection where the enclosure of electrical 
apparatus is filled with a mass of powdery material such that, if 
an arc occurs, the arc will not be liable to ignite the outer 
flammable atmosphere. 


IS 7724 : 1975 


NOTE-Ot 
and type of | 


lier types of protection a 
>rotection *m' encapsuli 


re under consideration internationally. These may include type of pr 
ition. 


otection h' hermetically sealed 



IS 13408 (Part 1) : 1992 

7 LIGHT METALS AS CONSTRUCTIONAL 
MATERIALS 

7.1 Particular consideration should be given to the 
location of an apparatus that incorporates light metals 



in the construction of its enclosure. The propensity of 
such materials to give rise to sparking that is incentive 
under conditions of frictional contact has been well 
established. Reference should be made to Annex C for 
further detailed guidance. 



Section 2 Selection of Apparatus 



8 PROCEDURE FOR SELECTING 
ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

8.1 General 

Hazardous area apparatus should be selected for use in 
accordance with each of the following criteria as 
appropriate: 

a) classification of area; 

b) temperature classification; 

c) apparatus sub-grouping; 

d) environmental conditions. 

Selection procedures according to the above criteria 
are recommended in 8 J to 8.5. 



Special considerations may be required for a non- 
hazardous area apparatus that is associated with haz- 
ardous area apparatus ( see appropriate Indian Stan- 
dards for intrinsic safety and increased safety appara- 
tus, respectively ). 

8.2 Selection According to Classification of Area 

Reference should be to IS SS72 (Part 1) : 1978 for 
details of area classification which results in the divi- 
sion of the hazardous area into one or more zones. 

8.2.1 Having established the zones, the types of pro- 
tection to be applied to the electrical apparatus should 
be selected in accordance with Tables 2A and 2B. 



Table 2A Selection of Apparatus According to Zone ofRbk 



ZOBC 


TyptoTPlroltctkNi 


RefcraicetolS 





•ia* 


IS 5780 : 1980 


1 


Any explosion pioiectioo 
suitable for ZooeO and 

•ib- 

'0* (see Note 1) 

*p'(«€« Table 2B) 


IS 2148 : 1981 

IS 5780 : 1980 

IS 7693 : 1975 

IS 7389 (Parti): 1976 

IS 7724 : 1975 


2 


Any explosion protection 
suiuMe for Zones or 1 and 
V(je»Nole2) 
V(ie»Noie2) 
*p*(«c« Table 2B) 


IS 6381 : 1972 
IS 8289 : 1976 
IS 7389 (Parti): 1976 



NOTES 

1 Oil-immersed apparatus may be used only in case its security will not be impaired by tilting or vibration of the apparatus. 

2 For outdoor installations, the apparatus with type of piotection *e* and *a' should be used with enclosures providing at least the following 
degree of protection in accordance with IS 4691 : 1985: 

a) IP 55 where there are uninsulated conducting parts internally, and 

b) IP 44 for insulated parts. 

3 A substontial saving in cost may be achieved by using apparatus with type of protection *n* in Zone 2 areas. 



Table 2B Minimum Actions of Failure of Protective Gas for Type of Protection 'p' 

{Clause S.2.1) 



Aral 
CInssiflaitkMi 


Endoswrt Docs not Coalnte 
IgidlkMi-Cnpnblt Appnnitas 


EadoMire CoBtnlu 


Zonal 


Alarm 


Alarm and switch off 


Zone 2 


No action required 


Alarm 



••3 SfkctkHi According to Temperatore Clastifl- 
catioB 

When selecting appantus iccoiding to tempentuie 
classification, the maximum surface tempeiature of 
the Tclassofthe apparatus (or, where the appaiatus is 
marked with a particular maximum surface tempera- 
ture, thaf temperature) should not exceed the ignition 
temperature of the gases or vapouis involved. 

8.3.1 In ceitain cases, tempeiatures higher than that 
of the marked temperature class can be permitted, for 
example, for small components such as transistors or 
resistois, provided it is proved by tests or other experi- 
mental evidence that ther^ is no risk of direct or 
indirect fbnmuition, deterioration or deformation by 
such high temperatures. 

8.3.2 A T class is assigned to apparatus on the basis of 
temperature rise tests assuming that the apparatus may 
be used in an environment with an ambient tempera- 
ture not exceeding 400C. In special cases, apparatus 
may be designed on request to operate in an environ- 
ment with a temperature of more than 40^C. In this 
case the designed maximum permitted temperature of 
the environment will be cleariy marked on the appara- 
tus. The Tclass will have been assigned on the basis of 
temperature rise tests and the assumption that the 
apparatus may operate at temperatures up to the de- 
signed maximum permitted temperature of the envi- 
ronment. 

8.3.3 When apparatus, which has had a T class as- 
signed assuming a 4GPC maximum ambient tempera- 
ture, is to be used at a higher environmental tem- 
perature, for example, because it is mounted on a hot 
surface, the maximum surface temperature of the 
apparatus should not exceed the ignition temperature 
of the g^ses or vapours likely to be present. It is also 
important to check with the manufacturer on the 
suitability of the apparatus to operate at these higher 
temperatures. For example, when apparatus is to be 
mounted under pipe-lagging, it is virtually unaffected 
by the air temperature, but may fail due to heat from 
the pipe. 

8.3.4 The permitted maximum surface temperaUires 
classified according to IS 13346 : 1992 are given in 
Tables. 

Tabic 3 ReiatloBship Between T Class and 
Maximum Surface Temperature 



TCIftM 


MftilMiini 


Surface Ttmpcnitare 


Tl 




450 


T2 




300 


T3 




200 


T4 




135 


T5 




100 


T6 




85 



IS 13408 (Part 1) : 1992 

8.3.5 An example can be given of the relationship 
between Tclass and ignition temperature. Cyclohex- 
ane has an ignition temperature of 2S9^C anid, there- 
fore, assuming a maximum environmental tempera- 
ture of 400C, apparatus with a temperature class T2 
(that is, 30CPC) would not be suitable whereas appara- 
tus with a temperature class of T3 (that is 20CPC) 
would be suitable. 

NOTE - la special cases, apparatta can be marked with a 
particttlar temperatuie as weU as one of the six T cIssms. For 
example, in the case cited above if the apparatus were marked 
with a temperature of 259^, mb well u the temperature class of 
T2, it would still be suiuble for use io areas where a potentially 
explosive atmosphere of cyclohexane might form. 

8.4 Selection According to Apparatus Sub- 
Grouping 

In the new groupings, agreed internationally, Group I 
is reserved for apparatus for mines susceptible to 
methane (firedamp) and is therefore outside the 
scope of this standard. Group II is reserved for appara- 
tus for use in all other places where there nuiy be 
potentially explosive atmospheres and as appropriate 
is sub-grouped IIA, IIB and IIC. 

8.4.1 It should be noted that apparatus sub-grouping 
is applied to the technique of prevention of flame 
transmission and limitation of energy. Apparatus with 
type of protection 's* may be subject to sub-grouping 
where it used one or more of these techniques. The 
protective features of other types of protection apply 
equally to all industrial gases, subject only to tempera- 
ture classification; apparatus sub-grouping is not 
therefore necessary (see also Section 6). 

8.4.2 Apparatus may be protected by one or more 
types of protection which may require apparams sub- 
grouping. Such apparatus will be marked as described 
in 41.4. In these circumstances, the apparatus should 
be selected according to the apparatus sub-group to 
which the flammable materials that may be present are 
allocated. 

8.4.3 Apparatus should be used only with materials 
allocated to the appropriate apparatus sub-group, as 
indicated in Table 6 (see Annex D), whose ignition 
temperatures are not less than the maximum tempera- 
ture of the T class certifled for the apparatus. A|^ra- 
tus certified for a particular sub-group may also be 
used with materials allocated to a lower risk sub- 
group, subject again to considerations of temperature 
classification. 

8.4.4 It will sometimes be found necessary to use 
electrical apparatus in applications where materials 
may be present that have not yet been allocated to a 
sub-gioup. In these circumstances, expert advice should 
be obtained on the sub-group allocation of the materi- 
als in question. 

NOTE - la IS 2148 : 19SI and IS 9570 ; 1980 flammable gases 
ind vapours are grouped or classified, respectively, according to 
the experiflieiital data for limitiog safe gaps or igniting currents 
measured under precisely specified conditions. In the case of IS 
9570 : 1980 nnany materials are classified according to their 
chemical similarity with gase» and vapours that are already 



IS 13408 (Part 1) : 1992 

classified on the liasis of experimental data. Neither method of 
grouping takes into account the need for surface temperature 
classification, since ignition temperatures generally are not re- 
lated to other combustion characteristics. It is therefore inaccu- 
rate to assume that any particular apparatus complying with the 
design requirements for a group of gases could be used safely 
with all materials allocated to that group. For this reason, instead 
of grouping gases, an apparatus itself is now grouped according 
to design criteria specified in the appropriate Indian Standards 
such as IS 6381 : 1972 and IS 8289 : 1976. 

8.5 Selection According to Environmental 
Conditions 

Apparatus and its component parts should be con- 
structed so as to guard against electrical and mechani- 
cal failure in the intended conditions of use. The 
integrity of some electrical apparatus may be effected 
when required to operate under temperature or 



prcs.sure conditions outside tbase for which the appa- 
ratus has been constructed. In such conditions further 
advice should be sought. 

8.5.1 Particular attention should be given to the nerd 
for protection against the weather, the ingress of liq- 
uids and particulate matter, corrosion, the etTect of 
solvents and the effect of heat from adjacent plant ( sev 
also 283 to 28 J). 

9 INTERCONNECTION OF APPARATUS 

The safety of individual pieces of apparatus may be 
influenced by any other apparatus with which it is 
interconnected. For such system considerations, 
reference .should be made to appropriate standards 
covering individual protection concepts. 



Section 3 General installation Recommendations 



10 GENERAL 

10.1 In addition to any reconunendations there may 
be for installation in non-hazardous areas, further 
recommendations for installations in hazardous areas 
as a consequence of the nature of the environment and 
that are generally applicable to all types of protection 
are described in 11 to 21. 

10.2 The explosion protection of some installations, 
forexampic, those usingelcctric surface heating, pres- 
surization 'p\ etc, is dependent on the overall design 
of the fmished system. In such cases, the appropriate 
design codes or standards should be used for guidance 
to ca'rry out the installation (see B-3). 

10.3 Alterations to apparatus or systems may invali- 
date any certificate or other documentation relating to 
that apparatus or system. Such alterations should be 
made only with the agreement of the occupier in 
consultationwith the manufacturer where appropriate. 

10.4 There may be special requirements listed in the 
certification documents {see 41.2) that will affect the 
method of installation. Installers and occupiers should 
satisfy themselves that such conditions are properly 
met. 

11 ACCESS FOR INSPECTION 

Installations should be designed and the apparatus and 
materials installed with a view to providing ease of 
access for inspection and maintenance. 

12 PLANS AND RECORDS 

For each site a responsible person should maintain and 
make available plans or records of the following items: 

a) the classiflcation and extent of hazardous areas 
together with the other information as recom- 
mended in IS 5572 (Part 1) : 1978; 

b) records sufficient to enable the explosion pro- 



tected equipment to be maintained in accor- 
dance with its type of protection; and 

c) the type, route and details of underground 
cables. 

13 ELECTRICAL RATINGS 

13.1 Electrical apparatus and materials should be in- 
stalled, used and maintained within their electrical 
ratings for power, voltage, current, frequency, duty 
and such other characteristics where non-compliance 
might jeopardize the safety of the installation. 

13.2 In respect of electrical apparatus from overseas 
suppliers, because of the differing nature of the supply 
networks, special care should be taken that: 

a) the voltage and frequency rating are 
appropriate to the supply system on which the 
apparatus is to Ik used; and 

b) the temperature classification has been estab- 
lished for the correct voltage, frequency, etc. 

14 INSTALLATION OF APPARATUS 

14.1 All apparatus should be installed with due regard 
to the possibility of external mechanical damage af- 
fecting the type of protection of the apparatus. Where 
equipment is to be installed in areas of high mechani- 
cal risk, additional measures such as the provision of 
guards for light transmitting parts, may be necessary. 
However, additional measures should not impair the 
integrity of the type of protection. 

14.2 Special installation conditions apply to any type 
of certified explosion protected apparatus where the 
certificate number has a suffix marking of *B' or 'X* 
The certification documents should be studied to as- 
certain the conditions of installation. The manufactur- 
ers should also have provided clear installation 
instructions. 



15 INTEGRITY OF INSULATION 

Care should be Uken during installation to maintain 
the degree of electrical insulation provided by the con- 
struction of the apparatus so that the possibility of 
accidental sparking or arching is avoided. 

16 AUTOMATIC OVERCURRENT 
PROTECTION 

In general, all circuits and apparatus in hazardous 
areas should be provided with automatic means of dis- 
connection in the event of overcurrent (short circuit 
and overload) conditions. However, apparatus with 
particular typesofprotectioamay have additional and/ 
or alternative requirements, and reference should be 
made to the recommendations in the appropriate In- 
dian Standard. Suitable protection should be fitted 
where there is a danger that three-phase apparatus may 
be subjected to excess current during single-phase 
operation. 

17 EARTHING AND EARTH FAULT 
PROTECTION 

17.1 Earthing of Power Systems 

Generally earthing of power distribution systems 
should be in accordance with the reconmiendations of 
IS 3043 : 1987. 

In typical industrial systems, for example 41S V and 
440 V, earth fault protection may be afforded by the 
overcurrent protective devices. However, where 
the eaith loop impedance is too high for that method 
to be adopted, it will be necessary to provide eaith 
fault protection by other means such as residual cur- 
rent devices. Smaller rating systems do not require 
residual current devices. 

In higher voltage systems, for example, 3.3 kVand 6.6 
kV, apparatus should have eaith fault protection in 
addition to overcurrent protection. 

If environmental conditions could lead to accelerated 
degradation of earth loop paths, anti-corrosive pro- 
tection should be provided or the earth loop imped- 
ance values decreased accordingly. 

17^ Earthing of Intrinsically Safe Electrical 
Systems/Apparatus *V 

Detailed recommendations will be covered later in a 
separate standard. 

173 Lightning Protection 

Recommendations for lightning protection are given 
in IS 2309 : 1969. 

nA Electrostatic Phenomena 

Recommendations for the avoidance of ignition risks 
due to sUtic electricity are given in IS 7689 : 1989. 

17 J Cathodic ProtecUon 

Reconmiendations for cathodic protection systems are 
given in IS 8062 (Part 1) : 1976. 



IS 13408 (Part 1) : 1992 

174 PkxitectiveMuiUple Earthing (PME) 

Where the power supply is directly from a system that 
is protected by PME, special precautions may be 
required within the hazaidous area and specialist ad- 
vice should be sought. 

17.7 Interconnection of Earthing Systems 

The power, lightning, and static earthing systems, 
where they exist in the same area, should be effectively 
connected together to ensure as far as possible that all 
metal work in a particular area is at the same potential 
under all conditions. 

IS ISOLATION 

18.1 At a suitable point or points outside the hazard- 
ous area there shouki be single or multiple means of 
isolating mains supplies to the hazardous area. 

18 J A means of isolation of each circuit or group of 
circuits, to include isolation of the neutral, should be 
provided. Where the means of isolation is located 
inside the hazardous area it should be provided with an 
appropriate type of protection. 

18.3 Labelling should be provided inunediately adja- 
cent to each means of isolation to permit rapid identi- 
fication of the circuit or group of circuits thereby 
controlled. There should be effective measures to 
prevent the restoration of supply to the apparatus 
whilst the risk of exposing live conductors to an 
explosive atmosphere continues. 

19 EMERGENCY SUPPUES 

Special precautions should be taken in the provision of 
emergency supplies to electrical apparatus (for ex- 
ample emergency lighting, critical instiuments, valves) 
that may be required to operate during periods of 
power bilure. 

20 WIRING SYSTEMS 

20.1 General 

The types of wiring that in principle may be used for 
installations in hazardous areas are described in this 
clause. The detailed reconmiendations for permitted 
types of cable and their accessories are described in 
IS 5571 : 1979. 

For a Zone installation, cabling will be either part of 
an 'ia' systems or as recommended for type of protec- 
tion 's' for Zone 0. 

Types of wiring and systems that should be used in 
Zone 1 and 2 areas are: 

a) cables drawn into screwed, solid drawn or 
seam weMed steel conduit; and 

b) cables that are otherwise suitably protected 
agfiinst mechanical danuge. 

NOTE — Tlie theath of a meul sheilhed cable should not be 
ttsed at the neutral oondudor. 



IS 134M (Ptert 1) : 1992 

Examples of the types of cable which are in accor- 
dance with the recommendations of (b) are: 

1) thermoplastic or elastomer insulated screened 
or armoured cable without a load sheath and 
with polyvinylchloride (PVC) polychroprene 
(PCP) or similar sheath overall; 

2) cables enclosed in a seamless aluminium sheath 
with or without armour, with an outer protec- 
tive sheath (see also Annex C); 

3) mineral insulated metal sheathed cable (see 
also Annex C); 

4) thermoplastic or elastomer insulated flexible 
cable or cord with a flexible metallic screen or 
armour and a PVC, PCP or similar sheath 
overall; and 

5) thermoplastic insulated cable with semi-rigid 
sheath. 

For type of protection '1' (intrinsic safety) and for 
apparatus used in Zone 2 only, other cables may be 
used. 

20 J General Installation Recommendations for 
Wiring Systems 

202.1 The wiring entry to the apparatus should main- 
tain the integrity of the type of protection of the 
apparatus. 

20.2J! Unused cable entries in electrical apparatus 
should be closed with plugs suitable for the type of 
prdtection of the apparatus. 

20.2.3 Where accessories (for example, a junction 
box) are used for the interconnection of cable, only 
those* accessories that are suitable for the zone con- 
cerned should be used. 

20*2.4 Electrical continuity between metallic enclo- 
sures and conduit, armour or cable sheaths and armour, 
or across any joints in the coduit or armour, should be 
maintained by the integrity of the joint itself. If exter- 
nal bonding is in certain circumstances necessary, it 
should preferably be connected directly across the 
joint. 

20JJ Where circuits traverse a hazardous area in 
passing from one non-hazardous area to another, the 
wiring in the hazardous area should be in accordance 
with the recommendations of this code. 

202^ Except for trace heating, fortuitous contact 
between conduit or the meUllic armouringZ&heathing 
of cables and pipe work or equipment containing 
flammable gases, vapour or liquids should be avoided. 
The insulation provided by a non-metallic outer sheath 
on a cable will usually be sufficient to avoid this. 

20.2.7 Wiring should be installed, so far as is practi- 
cable, in positions that will prevent its being exposed 
to mechanical damages and (with the exception of 
trace heating cables) to the effects of heat and to 



corrosive or solvent agencies. Where exposure of this 
ruiture is unavoidable, appropriate protective meas- 
ures should be taken. 

20.2 J All apparatus coimections and wiring whose 
functions are not inunediately apparent stould be 
clearly marked to enable their relationship to any 
associated apparatus, connections and wiring to be 
clearly recognized. 

20.2.9 Where cables or conduit pass through a floor, 
wall, partition or ceiling that forms a gas or Are barrier, 
the hole provided for them should be made good with 
cement or similar incombustible material to the full 
thickness of the floor, wall, partition or ceiling. Alter- 
natively, cable glands or cable transits may be used for 
this purpose. 

20.2.10 Where trunking, ducts, pipes or trenches are 
used to acconrniodate cables, precautions should be 
taken to prevent the passage of flamnuible gases, 
vapours or liquids from one area to another and to 
prevent the collection of flammable gases, vapours or 
liquids in trenches. Such precautions may involve the 
sealing of trunking, ducts and pipes and the adequate 
ventilation or sand filling of trenches. 

20J.11 For terminal connections to flxed apparatus 
that may be required to be moved a small distance (for 
example, motors on slids rails), cables arranged to 
permit the necessary movement without detriment to 
the cable, or one of the types of cable suitable for 
transportable apparatus may be used. If flexible con- 
duit is used, it and its fittings should be so constructed 
and assembled that damage to the cable consequent 
upon its use is avoided. Adequate earthing or bonding 
should be maintained other than by means of the 
flexible conduit. 

20J.12 Where an overhead line provides power or 
teleconmiunication services to apparatus in a hazard'* 
ous area it should be terminated in a non-hazardous 
area and the service continued by cable. Suitable surge 
protection apparatus should be fitted at or near the 
terminal point. The armouring or metal sheathing of 
the cable should be electrically continuous, and the 
end adjacent to the point of connection with the over- 
head line should be bonded to the earth electrode of the 
surge protection apparatus. In addition the armouring 
or metal sheathing should be independently earthed as 
near as possible to the lighting protective system, if 
any, associated with the hazardous area (see IS 2309 : 
1969). 

20 J Environmental Facton AfTcctiiig Choice of 
Wiring System 

20J.1 Insulating materials may be attacked by certain 
chemicals, and where contact may be sufficiently long 
that deterioration could result from such exposure, 
then consideration shouM be given to the use of a 
protective sheath. 

20.3J Where cables may be subjected to excessive 
flexing, consideration should be given to the 



8 



avoidaiioe of fimctuit, for exampk, when using mineral 
insulated cable, by fonning the cable into a loop close 
to the point of tennination. 

20.3.3 Where electrolytic corrosion of metal sheath 
nuiy result from contact with walls or other surfaces to 
which the cable is attached, it should be kept clear of 
such surfaces or covered with a protective sheath. 

204 Conduit Systems 

Where used, screwed heavy gauge steel conduit, solid 
drawn or seam welded, should bt in accordance with 
the requirements of IS 9S37 (Part 2) : 1981. 

Such screwed steel conduit systems are satisfactory for 
many situations but should not be used where vibration 
may cause fracture or loosening of joints or where 
excessive stress may be imposed as a result of its 
rigidity of where corrosion or excessive internal con- 
densation of moisture is likely to occur. In such cir- 
cumstances, flexible conduit of very heavy mechani- 
cal strength should be used. 

Where a run of conduit, irrespective of size, passes 
from a hazardous area to a non-hazardous area, a 
stopper box or sealing device should be inserted at the 
hazardous area boundary or, failing this, on the side 
remote from the hazardous area. 

NOTE ~ The use of a sealing device is essential to the mainte- 
nance of certain types of protection. 

Elbows of the solid types may be used for the immedi- 
ate connection of conduit to apparatus. 

Surface mounted conduit should be supported by spac- 
ing saddles. 

Alljoints in anassemblyofconduitshould be prepared 
before or after assembly so that the development of 
rust is inhibited and earth continuity and bonding is 
maintained. 

All bends in conduit should be machine-made and 
rounded so as to facilitate drawing in of cables. 

For additional requirements for conduit systems that 
are relevant to particular types of protection, appropri- 
ate standards nuiy be referred to. 

20 J Cable Systems 

203.1 General 

Conductors may be copper or aluminium but plain 
aluminium should not be used for conductors with 
cross-sectioiial areas less than 16 mrn^ {see also C-7 
for precautions on the use of aluminium in Ex *d* 
flameproof enck>sures). 

Cable runs should, where practicable, be uninter- 
rupted. Where discontinuities cannot be avoided, the 
joint should be encapsulated or made in a compound- 
fllled joint box or be protected in accordance with the 
requirements of the zone. 

Certain types of protection require specific types of 
cable glands. Compression type gbnds would serve 
the purpose as the cables would be terminated in a 



IS 13408 (Part I) : 1992 

terminal box. Directentry without a terminal box shall 
be treated as a special case. 

Attention is drawn to the need to prevent traasmission 
of flammable liquids or gases from a hazardous to a 
non-hazardous area through the interstices of cables 
termiruting in apparatus (for example pressure switches 
or canned pumps) into which such fluids are intro- 
duced. Under fault conditions (for examplc,diaphragm 
or can failure) the fluid may be released inside the 
apparatus under considerable pressure against whose 
effects it may be difflcult to seal the cable interstices. 
Apparatus of this kind should be dclit)erately vented to 
atmosphere, but if this is not possible (for example, a 
type 'd* enclosure) a special sealing joint or length of 
mineral insulated metal sheathed cable should be in- 
troduced in the cable run. 

All cables should be provided with adequate mechani- 
cal protection. Cables should be adequately supported 
throughout their length, care being taken to avoid 
excessive pressure when cleats are used. Hori/ontal 
cables may be carried on support or cable trays or 
through protective troughs or tubes. Rising cables 
should t)e clipped, cleated or otherwise attached to 
suitable supports that provide adequate mechanical 
protection and support. 

Where single core metal sheathed or armoured cables 
are used, precautions should be taken to avoid danger- 
ous sheath voltages or currents. 

20.5«2 PVC Cowred and/or Insulated Cables 

Attention is drawn to the fact that as the temperature 
decreases, PVC becomes increasingly stiff and brittle 
with the result that, if PVC cables are bent too sharply 
or are struck at temperatures of about O^C or lower, 
there is a risk for most PVC cables of shattering the 
PVC. Therefore, it is advisable to store PVC cable at 
temperatures above (PC for at least 24 h prior to 
installation (see 20.3.1). 

20 J J Paper Insulated Cables 

Where paper insulated armoured cables arc used, and 
particularly where such cables may be exposed to high 
temperature, preference should be given tp non-drain- 
ing cable. In the case of other types of paper insulated 
armoured cables, vertical runs should be avoided. 

Cable lx)xes should, if necessary, be arranged for 
sealing the cable insulation and should be provided, as 
necessary, with adequate means for ensuring the earth 
continuity of metallic sheath and/or armour. 

Adequate arrangements should be made to ensure that 
cable boxes can be completely filled with the neces- 
sary compound or insulating oil according to their 
design. 

20 J.4 Mineral Insulated Metal Sheathed Cables 

Cable terminations should incorporate a seal for the 
cable insulation and, where necessary, means of ensur- 
ing adequate earth continuity. 

NOTE — Certain lypes of proicciion require specific lypes of 
seal. 



IS 13408 (Part 1) : 1992 

Seals in which compound is used should not be 
exposed to temperature that may, in the course of 
normal working, afTect the satisfactory functioning of 
such compound. 

Where there is a risk of mineral insulated cables t)eing 
exposed to excessive voltages such as inductive surges, 
surg^ suppression should be fitted. Where surg^ sup- 
pression devices are installed in hazardous areas, they 
should be suitably exposition protected. 

2033 Aluminium Sheaihed Cables 

Aluminium sheathed cables, unless sheath with a pro- 
tective covering, should not be installed in contact 
with walls or floors. Consideration should be given to 
the avoidance of frictional contact with such cables 
{see Annex C). 

21 PORTABLE AND TRANSPORTABLE 
APPARATUS AND ITS CONNECTIONS 

Apparatus other than fixed apparatus shouM have a 
type of protection appropriate to the zone(s) of use. 
During use such apparatus shouM not be transferred 
froma zone of lower risk toa zone of higher riskunless 
it is suitably protected for the higher risk. Additionally, 



the apparatus group and T class should be appropriate 
to all of the gpses and vapours in which the apparatus 
may be used. 

NOTE -* Ordinary industrial portatile or Innsportable apparatus, 
welding equipment, etc, should not be used in a hazardous area 
unless its use is undertalcen under a controlled procedure and the 
specific location has been assessed to ensure that potentially 
nammable gas or vspour is absent. 

Should plug3 and sockets be in a hazardous area, they 
should bt suitable for use in the particular zone of risk 
and shouM have mechanical and/or electrical inter- 
locking to prevent danger during insertion or removal 
of the plug. 

In nuiny cases the type of cable to be used will be stated 
on the apparatus certificate. In cases where this is not 
so, the cable should be suitable for rough usage and 
other adverse environmental conditions (for example, 
elevated temperatures, presence of solvents). It should 
also be suitable for the circuit protective arrangements 
(for example, where earth monitoring is used, the nec- 
essary number of conductors should be included). 
Where the apparatus needs to be earthed, the cable 
may include an angular earthed flexible metallic screen 
in addition to the earth conductor. 



Section 4 inspection, Maintenance and Testing 



22 GENERAL 

22.1 To minimize the risk of ignition of an explosive 
atmosphere by electrical apparatus, efficient inspec- 
tion, maintenance and testing of the apparatus, sys- 
tems and installations are essential. It should be 
noted that correct functional operation does not itself 
indicate conformity with the recommendations for 
the safe use of apparatus. The general recommenda- 
tions for inspection, maintenance and testing that 
are applicable to all types of protection are described 
in 23 to 28. 

23 PERSONNEL 

23.1 The inspection, testing, maintenance, replace- 
mentand repairofapparatus,systemsand installations 
should be carried out only by persons whose training 
includes instruction on the various types of protection 
involved. Appropriate refresher training should be 
given from time to time. 

24 ISOLATION OF APPARATUS 

24.1 No apparatus should be opened in a hazardous 
area other than apparatus with type of protection 'i' 
(intrinsic safety) and non-incendive apparatus until it 
has been disconnected from its source of supply {see 
18) and effective measures, such as the k>ckingof the 
disconnector in the open position or fuse removal, 
have been taken to prevent its being made alive before 
re-assembly. Particular attention should be paid in the 
case of an apparatus that nuiy be live even after it has 
been disconnected from a source of supply. Where 
heavy rotating nuichinery is involved, the back e.m.f. 



of such plant should be considered and precautions 
will usually need to be taken to ensure that the appara- 
tus, or any apparatus associated with it, is not opened 
until the rotating plant is stationary. Most power ca- 
pacitorsare fitted withdischarge resistors and itshould 
be noted that these take a finite time to bring the 
terminal voltage to a harmless value. 

142 Where for purpose cf electrical testing it is es- 
sential to restore the supply before the apparatus is re- 
assembled, then this work would be under a controlled 
procedure and the specific location assessed to ensure 
that potentially flammable gas or vapour is absent. For 
the testingof intrinsically safe electrical apparatus and 
systems see IS S780 : 1980. 

25 PRECAUTIONS CONCERNING THE USE OF 
IGNITING AGENCIES 

25.1 No operation involving the use of an open flame 
or other source of ignition should be attempted in a 
hazardous area until the conditions have been made 
safe by the control of the flammable material that may 
give rise to the risk. Such operations shouM be under- 
taken only on the issue of a gas free certificate, con- 
firming that adequate control measures have been 
taken and that tests have been made and will be re- 
peated at sufficiently frequent intervals to ensure that 
safe conditions are maintained. 

U INITIAL AND PERIODIC INSPECTIONS 

26.1 All electrical apparatus, systems and installa- 
tions shouM be inspected prior to commissioning to 
check that the selection and installation is appropnate 
and in accordance with IS 5571 : 1979. Examples of 



10 



some of the items which should be included in an 
initial inspection are given in Table 4. 

26.2 Following any replacement, repair, modifica- 
tion or adjustment, the items concerned should be in- 
spected, to check that the appropriate reconmienda- 
tions otxht code have been maintained. 

26 J If at any time there is a change in the area classi- 
fication or in the characteristic of the flammable mate- 
rial used in the area, or if any apparatus is moved from 
one location to another, a check should be made to 
ensure that the type of protection, apparatus group and 
T class, where afqpropriate, are suitable for the revised 
conditions. 

26.4 The extent, complexity and freuqe ncy of inspec- 
tion of apparatus, systems and installations when in 
use should be determined by those whose training and 
experience wiirenable them to recognize any potential 
hazards and who are familiar with the local environ- 
mental conditions and use. 

163 The frequency of inspection depends on the type 



IS 1340S (Part 1) : 1992 

of equipment, the factors governing its deterioration, 
and the flnding of previous inspections. Examples of 
factors which can affect the deterioration of apparatus 
or otherwise lead to an unsafe condition are given in 
Table S. 

26^ It is, therefore, reconmiended that once the ap- 
paratus has been taken into use, initial intervals be- 
tween inspections should be of a reasonably short 
duration and that a system be established to enable 
subsequent inspection intervals to be reviewed and 
modified in the light of operational experience. Where 
inspection intervals and methods are already estab- 
lished and are found by experience to be satisfactory 
for similar apparatus and environments, these may 
continue to be used. It is recommended that an inspec- 
tion record system be operated so that the review of 
inspection frequencies is effective. 

26.7 When large number of similar items such as 
luminaires, junction boxes, etc, are installed, it may be 
feasible to carry out inspections on a sample basis 
provided that the degree of sampling in addition to the 
inspection frequency is subjected to review. 



Table 4 Example of Schedule for Initial Inspection 

{Clause 26.1) 



IiUtlal iBspcctkm ItcMS 

Apparatus appropriate for the area classification 

Correct temperature classification 

Appropriate apparatus group or sub-group 

Correct circuit identification 

Maintenance of integrity of enclosure 

Cable entries and stoppers, etc, are complete 

Electrical connections are tight 

Satisfactory earthing 

Correct rating of apparatus and oomponenis 

Damage to installation 

Adequate environmental protection (e.g. against weather, mechanical damage) 

No unauthorized modifications 
NOTE -^ Items are not listed in any order of priority. Where integrity of type of protection is dependent on electrical protection, this should 
be checked initially. 

Table 5 Example of Schedule for Subsequent Inspections 

(Clause 265) 

Fadon Affcctlag lattfrtty of Appsratus, Syslcois aad InsUUnUoas 

Corrosion of enclosures, fixings, caWe entries, etc 

Undue accumulation of dust and dirt 

Loose electrical connections including those for earthing 

Loose fixings, glands, conduit, stoppers, etc 

Condition of endosuie gaskets and fastenings 

Leakage of oil or compound 

Condition of bearings 

Inadvertent contact between rotating and fixed parts 

Integrity of guards 

Incorrect lamp ratings or type 

Undue vibration 

Malfunction of relays and protective devices 

Unauthorized modifications or adjustments 

Inappropriate maintenance, e.g. not in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations 

NOTE — Items are not listed in any order of priority. Where integrity of type of protection is dependent on electrical protection, this should 
be checked initially. 



11 



IS 13408 (Part 1) : 1992 

27 INITIAL AND PERIODIC TESTING 

27J All electrical apparatus, systems and installa- 
tions should be tested prior to commissioning and 
these tests should include the following: 

a) insulation resistance measurement; 

b) earth electrode resistance measurement; 

c) earth loop impedance measurement; and 

NOTE - It may be advaoiageous lo make tlie earth loop im- 
pedance measurement with both a subauntial current and 
with an intrinsically safe tester to enable the measurement 
to be made with the intrinsically safe tester alone for 
subsequent tests and to allow those results to be oompaicd 
with the initial test results. It should be noted that tests made 
with an intrinsically safe tester may not necessarily identify 
certain bad connections because of the low test current. 

d) operation and setting of protective devices. 

The results of all tests should be recorded and included 
in the record of inspections described in 26. 

27*2 The testing of apparatus, systems and installa- 
tions when in use should be carried out by those 
whose experience will enable them to recognize the 
potential hazards and who are familiar with local 
environmental conditions and use. 

27.3 Test procedures should be designed to cause the 
minimum disturbance to the installation or system. 

27.4 Diagnostic testing and recording of results of 
such functions as time, operating voltage, circuit re- 
sistance, insulation resistance, etc, should be used 
where possible to show trends in electrical condition 
and' to aid the determination of both the nature and 
frequency of subsequent tests and inspections. 

27 J The frequency of testing depends on the type 
of equipment or system, the factors governing its 
deterioration and in particular the finds of previous 
tests. Factors which may affect the deterioration of 
apparatus are identified in Table 6 and as these 
should be taken into account in determining the fre- 
quency of inspection, the frequency of testing will 
not be greater than, and in fact may be less than, 
the frequency of inspection for the relevant apparatus 
or system, llie frequency of testing should be estab- 
lished and reviewed in a manner similar to that recom- 
mended for the inspection. 

27.6 Testing in continuously operating plant and on 
similar apparatus or systems may be undertaken on a 
sample t)asis subject to review similar to that recom- 
mended for inspections conducted on a sample basis. 

27.7 Tests should be made in such a way that the 
safety devices used in low energy or low voltage 
apparatus and circuits are not subject to danuige by 
excess voltage. For testing intrinsically safe electrical 
systems 'i* see IS 5780 : 1980. 

27J Test should be undertaken under a controlled 
procedure to ensure that the specific location has either 
been assessed for the absence of a flammable gas or 
vapour or tha't the test method is non-incendive. 



28 MAINTENANCE RECOMMENDATIONS 

28.1 AUerations to Apparatus 

The general condition of all apparatus should be 
noted periodically as reconmiended in 26 and ap- 
propriate remedial measures should be taken where 
necessary. Care should be taken, however, to main- 
tain the integrity of the type of protection provided 
for the apparatus; this may require consultation with 
the original manufacturer. Replacement parts should 
be in accordance with the coriditions of certification. 
No alteration that might invalidate the certificate or 
other document relating to the safety of apparatus 
should be made to any apparatus without appropriate 
approval. 

28 J Maintenance of Flexible Cables 

Flexible cables, flexible conduits and their termina- 
tions should be inspected at regular intervals and 
should be replaced if found to be damaged ordefective. 

28 J Precautions Against Corrosion 

Metallic enclosures of apparatus should where neces- 
sary, be treated with an appropriate protective coat- 
ing as a precaution against corrosion, the frequency 
and nature of such treatment being determined by the 
environmental conditions. 

NOTE — For special precjutions concerning the use of certain 
protective materials (e.g. on the flange faces of Ex 'd* flameproof 
apparatus) reference should be made to IS 2148 : 1981. 

284 Cleanliness 

All parts of installations should be kept clean and free 
fromaccumulationsofdustanddeleterioussubstanccs. 

28.5 Precautions Against Excessive Temperature 
Rise 

Apparatus should be kept of free from dust deposits of 
such a nature as could cause excessive rise in tem- 
perature. 

When replacing lamps in luminaires the correct rating 
and type should be used for excessive temperature rise 
may result. 

The etching, paintingorscreeningof light transmitting 
parts nuiy lead to excessive temperatures. 

28.6 Withdrawal from Service 

Should it be necessary for nuiintenance purposes to 
withdraw apparatus, etc, from service, the exposed 
conductors should be terminated in an appropriate 
certifled enclosure; altenuitively, the cable may be 
protected adequately by insulating the ends of the 
conductors and isolating the cable from all sources of 
power supply. Should the apparatus be permanently 
withdrawn from service, associated wiring should be 
removed or, alternatively, otherwise correctly termi- 
nated in an appropriate certified enclosure. 

28.7 Fastenings and Tools 

Where special bolts and other fastenings or special 
tools are required, these items should be available and 
should be used. 



12 



IS134M(nutl):1992 
Section 5 Prop^rtiM of FlamiMbto Liquids, Vapours snd Qssss 



29 GENERAL 



29.1 Available data applicable only to the use of 
electrical apparatus in hazafdous areas aie given in 
Table 6^5ee Annex D) for those flanunaUe gises and 
vapoufs that have been allocated to apparatus 
groups. The physical properties of these materials 
that have to be considered when the degree of risk 
appropriate to a particular application or installation 
is being assessed are defined and discussed in 30 to 36 
in the same order as that in which they are given in 
Table 6 [see also IS 5572 (Piit 1) : 1978]. 

29 J Properties of the materials given in Table 6 are 
generally for materials in the pure form and may be 
different if there are impurities or where there are 
mixtures of materials. In such cases expert advice 
should be sought. For descriptions of the concepts 
of temperature classification and apparatus grouping, 
see S.3andS.4. 

30 MELTING POINT AND BOILING POINT 

30.1 The melting and boiling points have their usual 
meanings, and the data listed in Table 6 apply at stan- 
dard atmospheric pressure. 

31 RELATIVE VAPOUR DENSITY 

31.1 The relative vapour density of a material is the 
mass of a given volume of the material in its gaseous 
or vapour form compared with the mass of an equal 
volume of dry air at the same temperature and pres- 
sure. It is often calculated as the ratio of the relative 
molecular mass of the material to the average relative 
molecular mass of air (the value of the latter being 
approximately 29). 

32 FLASH POINT 

32.1 General 

The flash point of a material is the minimum tempera- 
ture at which it gives off sufficient vapour to form a 
flammable mixture with air near the surface of the 
material or within the apparatus used for flash point de- 
termination. 

32.1.1 Flash point data are normally associated with 
materials in the liquid phase. There arc a few materi- 
als, however, that give off sufficient vapour in the solid 
phase to form flamniable mixtures with air. For those 
materials and those that sublimate (i.e. pass from solid 
to vapour without the nomial intemiediate liquid phase), 
flash point data will be associated with the materials in 
their solid fomi. 

32.1.2 The test apparatus used for the measurement of 
flash point is normally one of two types, of which there 
are several variants. These are called generally open 
cup and closed cup flash point testers. For most liquids 
the flash point determined by the closed cup method is 
slightly lower (in the region of 5 % to 10 % when 
measured in "C) than that determined by the open cup 



method. Flash points measured by the more sensitive 
closed cup method are, therefore, normally used and 
are given in Table 6. 

32.2 Mattriab having High Flash Pobits 

Some materials have such high flash points that they 
do not form flanunable mixtures with air at normal 
ambient temperatures, even when exposed to the sun 
in tropical locations. These should not t)e discounted 
as ignition hazards, however, since exposure to a 
suitably hot surface or use of the material at a tem- 
perature above its flash point may create a flamnuible 
mixture locally, which may be ignited by the same 
hot surface or an alternative ignition source. It is 
therefore necessary to consider the limitation of 
surface temperatures even when materials of high 
flash point are being processed. 

32.2.1 It should be noted also that materials having 
high flash points may be used in processes involv- 
ing high temperatures and possibly high pressures. 
The normal or accidental release to the atmosphere 
of compounds under such conditions may present 
local explosion risks that would not nonnally be asso- 
ciated with high flash point materials. Materials hav- 
ing high flash points can form flanmiable mixtures 
with air at subatmospheric pressure. 

32 J Classification of Flash Points 

In some industries, it has been found convenient to 
group materials into prescribed ranges of flammability 
according to their flash points to facilitate safe han- 
dling. In certain applications, legislation specifies the 
limits for these ranges. 

33 LIMITS OF FLAMMABILITY 

33.1 All combustible gases and vapours are character- 
ized by flammable limits between which the gas or 
vapour mixed with air is capable of sustaining the 
propagation of flame. 

33.2 The limits are called the lower flammable limit 
(LFL) and the upper or flammable limit (UFL) and are 
usually expressed as percentages of the material mixed 
with air by volume. They are also sometimes ex- 
pressed as milligrams of material per litre of air. 
Where appropriate, both sets of data are included in 
Table 6. 



34 FLAMMABILITY RANGE 

34.1 The range of gas or vapour mixtures with air 
between the flammable limits over which the gas/air 
mixture is continuously flammable is called the flam- 
mability range. Gas/air mixtures outside this range are, 
therefore, non-flammable under nomial atmospheric 
conditions. Concentrations above the UFL in free 
atmospheric conditions cannot be controlled and fur- 
ther dilution with air will produce mixtures within the 
flammability range. 



13 



IS 13408 (PmH 1) : 1992 

35 EniECT OF ENVmONMENTSWrra OTHER 
THAN NORMAL ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS 

35.1 It should be noted that the data given in Table 6 
apply only to mixtures of flammable gases and va- 
pours with air under normal conditions of atmospheric 
temperature and pressure or at suitably elevated 
temperatures if the flash point of the vapour is above 
the normal ambient temperature. Caution should be 
exercised therefore in assessing the explosivity of 
gas or vapour with air under environmental condi- 
tions that are other than normal. It is possible here to 
give only general guidance on the influence of 
changes in temperature, pressure and oxygen content 
of the mixture. 

35.2 Generally, the effect of increased temperature 
of pressure is to lower the LFL and to raise the UFL. 
Reduction in temperature or pressure has the opposite 
effect. 

35.3 An increase in oxygen content of a gas mixture, 
compared with a mixture of the flammable gas or 
vapour with air only, has little or no effect on the LFL 
but generally results in an increase UFL. The in- 
crease in the upper limit depends on the degree of 
oxygen enrichment and may be substantial. Thus, the 
effect generally of an increase in oxygen content is to 
broaden the flammability range. 

36 IGNITION TEMPERATURE 

36.1 The ignition temperature of a nuiterial is the 
minimum temperature under prescribed test condi- 
tions at which the material will ignite and sustain 
coifibustion when mixed with air at normal pressure, 
without initiation of ignition by spark or flame. 

36.2 The ignition temperature, formerly known as the 
auto-ignition or spontaneous ignition temperature, 
should be clearly distinguished from the flash point. In 
the latter case, ignition is initiated by a small flame 
simply to determine that a flanunable mixture exists. 
In the former, ignition is a consequence of chemical re- 
actioas initiated on account of the temperature of the 
local environment and may therefore in practice be a 
result of the temperature of hot surfaces adjacent to the 
flammable atmosphere. 

36 J The majority of ignition temperatures listed in 
Table 6 have been determined with the test apparatus 
and procedure described in IS 7820 : 1975 or with 
equivalent test apparatus. Where a determination by a 
method other than that in IS 7820 : 1975 provides the 
only data available, the classiflcation may be regarded 
as provisional only and has been, for guidance, en- 
closed in parentheses in Table 6. 

364 The direct result of established ignition tempera- 
tures is to limit the surface temperatures of electrical 
apparatus in hazardous areas so that these do not 
present an ignition risk. Formerly permitted surface 
temperatures were limited to a certain proportion of 
the measured ignition temperature (commonly 80%) 
to provide a factor of safety. It is now generally 



accepted, however, that the sensitivity of the recog- 
nized test methods is such that the temperatures of 
unprotected surfaces of electrical apparatus nuy safely 
be allowed to rise to the ignition temperature of the gas 
or vapour that presents tbe explosion risk. Where more 
than one flammable material may be present in a 
particular application, the surface temperature should 
be limited to the- lowest value of the ignition tempera- 
tures of the combustibles concerned or the ignition 
temperature of the particular mixture as determined 
by test. However where there is a possibility of cata- 
lytic interaction between the components or where 
mixtures of hydrogen, moisture or hydrocarbons 
with carbon monoxide occur, the surface temperature 
may need to be less than the lowest ignition tem- 
perature of the individual components. 

36J It should be noted that the value for ignition 
temperature is dependent on the method chosen for its 
measurement. In particular, factor such as the geome- 
try, dimensions and materials of the test apparatus 
influence the measured ignition temperature. Care 
should be exercised, therefore, if the ignition tem- 
perature data contained in this standard are applied to 
equipment other than electrical apparatus. 

37 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 

37.1 Relation Between Ignition Temperature and 
Maximum Surface Temperature 

The vapour given off from a flammable liquid will 
form a flammable mixture with air, provided the tem- 
perature of the liquid is at or above its flash point. The 
flammable mixture may then be ignited by one of sev- 
eral means: a flame, a suitable frictional spark, an 
electrical spark of sufficient energy or a hot surface. If, 
on the other hand, the local ambient temperature 
and that of the electrical apparatus, etc, are below the 
flashpoint, the vapour will eventually condense to a 
mist of liquid droplets and spread as such both 
through the atmosphere and over the surfaces of the 
apparatus. It is in the latter respect that adequate 
resistance to chemical attack may be particularly 
important. 

37.1.1 For ignition by a hot surface, the surface tem- 
perature has generally to be greater than the ignition 
temperature of the flammable material. Therefore, to 
ensure that ignition by hot surfaces does not occur, it 
is necessary that the temperature of all unprotected 
surfaces exposed to the gas or the vapour/air mixture 
should not be greater tbin the ignition temperature. 
This has led to the concept of temperature classiflca- 
tion described in 8.3. 

NOTE - Surfaces tlial are caialyticalty active can ignite vapours 
at lemperalurea lower Ihaa ilie nonnal ignition lemperalure. 

37.2 Mixtures or Materials 

Single-component flammable materials are not often 
encountered in practice. Most frequently, mixtures of 
two or more materials are present, in ratios that may 
vary between prescribed limits. Consideration has 
then to be given to the characteristics required for 
electrical apparatus in the light of the properties of 



14 



each individual component present. Often this will 
impose no difficulty since, by the nature of the process, 
the various materials will possess similar chemical 
properties and, often, similar combustion properties. 

37.2.1 There are occasions, however, when this is not 
the caserThe nuiterials may be of different gas classi- 
fications or have widely different ignition tempera- 
tures. In these cases, it is possible to give only the most 
general of rules for guidance. In general it should be 
assumed that, at some time during the process or the 
life of the plant, the component in the mixture having 
the most demanding of the characteristics being con- 
sidered (e.g. the gas classification, the flammable 
limits, the flash point or ignition temperature) will be 
present as the largest proportion of the mixture, and 
the electrical installation should be designed ac- 
cordingly. 

37.2.2 However, this can impose limitations that may 
be severe, and further consideration of the relative 
rates and quantities of the materials used in the proc- 
ess and the degree of control thereof may be re- 
quired. Some relaxation may then be possible, but 
expert advice should always be sought in these circum- 
stances. 

37.2.3 Particular consideration should be given to 
those materials whose behaviour may be anomalous. It 
is known, for example, that carbon monoxide, with 
which Group IIA apparatus may be safely used, may 
be added in considerable quantity to hydrogen with- 
out altering the group of apparatus, namely Group 



IS 134M (Part 1) : 1992 

lie, that has to be used with this latter compound. 
Carbon monoxide also exhibits unusual behaviour 
under other test conditions. For example, it has been 
shown that the addition of moisture to mixtures of 
carbon monoxide with air to the point of saturation 
serves to change the gas classification for this mate- 
rial from Group IIA to Group IIB. This change in 
gas classification is also observed if methane is added 
to carbon monoxide in the proportion 15 : 8S methane 
to carbon monoxide. 

37.24 When the individual components of mixtures 
and their proportions of the total mixture are pre- 
cisely known or can be sustained, it is often possible 
to calculate the resultant flammable limits for the 
mixture with air. Examples of this care described in 
Annex E. However, if the mixture is predominantly 
carbon monoxide, expert advice should be sought. 

37.3 Mists 

The characteristics described in this standard apply to 
mixtures of gases and vapours only with air. The dis- 
tinction to be drawn between a gas and a vapour in 
this context is simply that the latter may be in contact 
with its liquid phase at normal temperature and pres- 
sure, whereas a gas cannot be liquefied under nor- 
mal atmospheric conditions. In practice, mists consist- 
ing of clouds of condensed vapour can also occur. 
In general, the characteristics described in this stan- 
dard should be considered applicable to mists, since 
local ignition sources or hot surfaces generally may 
serve to restore the condensed material to its vapour 
phase. 



Section 6 Marking of Apparatus 



38 GENERAL 

38.1 It has been agreed internationally, that the letters 
'Ex' should be used to indicate explosion protection 
and that this symbol should be accompanied by a 
lower case better to indicate the type of protection 
used. The letter code is described in 6. 

38.2 The marking requirements for the various types 
of explosion protected apparatus shall be in accor- 
dance with IS 13346 : 1992. 

39 MARiUNG REQUIREMENTS FOR 
APPARATUS 

39.1 The general marking requirements described in 
this clause are intended to aid the user in identifying 
the type of protection and to assist identification of the 
particular explosion risk for which the apparatus is 
suitable. 

39.2 The marking requirements include the 
following : 

a) Identirication of the manufacturer. The manu- 
facturer may bt identified by name or trade- 
mark. 



b) The manufacturer's name or type designation 
for the apparatus. 

c) The certifying authority mark and the certifi- 
cate number. 

d) Identification of the type of protection (see 
40). 

e) The apparatus sub-group, if applicable. The 
system of marking for indicating apparatus 
sub-grouping is described in 40. 

f) The Tclass or maximum surface temperature. 
This requirement is described in 8.3. 

g) Any other, relevant information, will nor- 
mally include voltage and current ratings, 
under prescribed conditions where necessary, 
and such other information as may be neces- 
sary for the satisfactory operation of the appa- 
ratus. 



39.3 The marking includes, therefore, not only the 
manufacturer's name and rating data with which all 
electrical apparatus should normally be marked, but 
also sufficient additional information to indicate the 
suitability of the apparatus for use in particular tlam- 
mable atmospheres. This is explained in 40 and 41. 



15 



IS 134M (Ptort 1) : 1992 

40 EXAMFLESOFMARKINGOF APPARATUS 

40J General 

The following examples aie included to illustrate the 
application and inteipretation of the marking require- 
ments. They do not represent all the variations of 
marking that are possible, nor is it intended to 
include in these examples all the marking require- 
ments that are usually specified. More detailed 
marking requirements that are relevant to particular 
types of protection are described in the appropriate 
standard and in the relevant apparatus standards. 

40.2 Flameproof Enclosure *d* 

The marking on apparatus with type of protection 'd* 
will normally include the following: 

a) The symbol for the type of protection 'd'; 

b) The apparatus group and sub-group; and 

c) The temperature classification. 

For example, EEx'd IIB TS indicates that the enclosure 
complies with Group IIB requirements and that the 
apparatus has a temperature classification of TS. 

40.3 Increased Safety Apparatus *t* 

The marking on apparatus with type of protection 'e' 
will normally include the following to indicate com- 
pliance with the requirements of IS 6381 : 1972: 

a) The symbol for the type of protection 'e'; 

b) The apparatus group; and 

c) The temperature classiflcation. 

For example, EEx e II T3 indicates that the apparatus 
may be used safely with all flammable gases and va- 
pours allocated to apparatus Group II, subject to a 
temperature classification of T3. 

404 Intrinsic Safely T 

40.4.1 Intrinsically Safe Apparatus 

Intrinsically safe apparatus can be category *ia' or 'ib* 
and may be suitable for connection to external circuits 
subject to certain possible limitations on their charac- 
teristics. 

The marking on apparatus with type of protection 'i' 
will normally include the following to indicate com- 
pliance with the requirements of IS 5780 : 1990: 

a) The symbol for the type of protection *i* and 
the apparatus category; 

b) The apparatus group and sub-group; and 

c) The temperature classification. 

For example, EEx ia IIC TS indicates that the appara- 
tus group is IIC and that the appantus has a tempera- 
ture classification of T5. 



Additionally, there may be nuirking to indicate 
the limiting characteristics of external circuits, e.g. 
I,^«12|aH,C^« 1 200pF. l/^« 28 K 

The second mark indicates the limiting values of 
inductance, capacitance and voltage of the external 
circuits which may be connected to the apparatus to 
maintain its safe use under the conditions indicated by 
the first mark. 

40.4.2 Associated Electrical Apparatus 

Associated electrical apparatus installed in a non- 
hazardous area can be category *ia' or Mb'. This 
limitation in its use is denoted on the marking by 
enclosing the applicable symbols in square brackets. 

The marking on such apparatus includes the 
following: 

a) Hie symbols of the type of protection 'i* and 
the apparatus category; and 

b) The apparatus group and sub-group. 

For example, (EEx ib) IIC indicates compliance with 
IS 5780 : 1980. There is no requirement to mark an ap- 
paratus temperature classification since the apparatus 
is installed in a non-hazardous area. 

4043 Intrinsically Safe Electrical System 'i ' 

Certified intrinsically safe electrical systems *i* which 
comply with all the requirennents for IS 5780 : 1980 
will be marked as described in 41.4.1 and additionally 
will be marked in a strategic position with the letters 
SYST. 

For intrinsically safe electrical systems 'i' complying 
with the requirements of IS 5780 : 1980 which have not 
been certified, marking which permits positive identi- 
fication of the system and reference for the relevant 
system description will normally be applied. 

403 Type of Protection V 

The nuirking in accordance with IS 8289 : 1976 on this 
apparatus will normally include the following to indi- 
cate compliance with the requirements of that stan- 
dard: 

a) The symbol of the type of protection 'n' and 
the apparatus categoiy; 

b) The apparatus group; and 

c) The temperature classification. 

For exanq>le, Ex n II T3 indicates that the apparatus 
may be used safely in Zone 2 areas with all flanmiable 
gpses and vapours allocated to apparatus Group II, 
subject to a temperature classification of T3. 

40^ Other Types of ProlectioB 

The types of protection that have not been included in 
the examples in 403 to 403 will normally be marked 
in accordance with similar rules. 



16 



41 GENERAL NOTES ON MARiONG 

41.1 General 

In 41 J( to 414 some of the finer details of marking 
lequirements that have not been indicated in the ex- 
amples in 40.2 to 404 are explained. 

412 CertiHcate Number 

The certificate number may refer to a single design or 
to a range of apparatus of similar design. The same 
number may also be used for modifications to the 
original design. 

Where the certificate number is followed by 'X', it 
indicates that special conditions for safe use apply, and 
therefore particular attention should be paid to certifi- 
cation documents before apparatus is selected. 

The certificate number may also be followed by 'S*. 
This suffix indicates that the apparatus so marked is 
suitable for installation in a safe area only, but that it 
may form part of a certified system. 

413 Ex component Approval 

Conmonent parts or sub-assemblies forming part of 
certified apparatus may be the subject of separate 
component certificates. This procedure is called 
'component approval'. Approval Ex components will 
generally be marked in accordance with the rules 
described in 38 to 40, with the addition of the letter 'U' 



IS 13400 (null): 1992 

after the approval number, but will not normally carry 
the testing house certification mark. 

414 Multiple Types of ProCecUon 

414«1 Increasingly, electrical apparatus for hazard- 
ous areas may incorporate more than one type of pro- 
tection. The examples in 414J! and 4143 serve to 
illustrate the marking requirements that will normally 
be applied. 

414.2 A flameproof apparatus such as a motor may 
incorporate an increased safety termiruil box. In this 
case, where each type of protection is readily and 
separately identifiable, each enclosure will normally 
be marked accordingly. 

4143 An apparatus with type of protection 'e' (in- 
creased safety) overall nuiy incorporate sparking 
contacts protected by a flameproof enclosure (type 
of protection 'd*). In this case, the types of protection 
that are used internally cannot be identified by exter- 
nal examination other than by inspection of the 
marking plate. The extenuil marking will indicate the 
overall protection, which will determine the installa- 
tion requirements, and may indicate the additional 
protective features in a secondary manner. For ex- 
ample, an increased safety apparatus with internal 
flameproof enclosure having a T3 temperature classi- 
fication would normally be marked as follows: 

EExedIICT3. 



17 



IS 13408 (Part 1) : 1992 



IS No. 
2148: 1981 

2309 : 1969 

3043 : 1987 
5571 : 1979 



5572 
(Parti): 1978 



5780 : 1980 



6381 : 1972 



ANNEX A 

(Clause 2) 

LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 



Title 

Flameproof enclosures Tor electrical 
apparatus ( second revision ) 

Code of practice for the protection 
of buildines and allied structures 
against lighting (first revision ) 

Code of practice for earthing 

Guide for selection of electrical 
equipment 



hazardous areas 



for 
(first revision) 

Classification of hazardous areas 
(other than mines) for electrical 
installatioas: Part 1 Areas having 
flammable gases and vapours (first 
revision ) 

Specification for intrinsically safe 
electrical apparatus and circuit ( first 
revision ) 

Constructions and testing of 
electrical apparatus with type of 
protection *c' 



IS No. 



Title 



7689 : 1989 Guide for control of undesirable 
static electricity (first revision ) 

7820:1975 Method of test for ignition 
temperatures 

8062 Cbde of practice for cathodic 

(Part 1 ) : 1976 protection of steel structures: Part 1 
General principle 

8289 : 1976 Electrical equipment with type of 
protection *n* 

9570 : 1980 Classification of flanuiiable gases 
or vapours with air according lo 
their maximum experimental safe 
gaps and minimum ignition current 

9537) Conduits for electrical installations: 

(Part 2): 1981 Part 2 Rigid steel conduits 

13346 : 1992 General requirements for the 
electrical apparatus for use in 
explosive atmospheres 



18 



IS 134M (Pmtl 1) : 1992 



ANNEX B 
(Clause 1.6, Note 2) 



RELEVANT INTERNATIONAU EUROPEAN BRITISH STANDARDS AND 

INDIAN STANDARDS AND DETAILS OF THE NATIONAL CERTIFYING 

AUTHORITY AND ITS CERTDICATION STANDARDS 



B-l ENS0014toENS0020aiidEN50039havebeen 
preptied bv CENELEC Technical Committee 31. 
These standaids represent technical texts accepted by 
17 CENELEC Member National Committees (includ- 
ing the UK), in the three official CENELEC lan- 
guages, and which carry the strict obligation to be im- 
plemented as a national standard, unaltered in pres- 
entation or content. This has been done by publishing 
BS SSOl: Parts 1 to 7 and Part 9, which are identical to 
EN 50 014 to EN 50 020 and EN 50 039, lespectively 
(see B-3). 

B-2 STANDARDS PRODUCED BY THE 
INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL 
COMMISSION (lEC) 

As part of a continuing process towards international 
standardization, many countries including the UK 
participate in the International Electrotechnical Com- 
mission (lEC). This organization produces recommen- 
dations which are intended to form the basis for the 
national standards of each participating country. As 
speciflcations for each type of protection and ancillary 
subjects are developed, these are published in a se- 
quential series of standards each of which is a part of 
lEC Publication 79 (see also B-3). The following parts 
of Publication 79 have already been published: 

79 Electrical apparatus for explosive gis atmos- 
pheres 

79-0 Part General requirements 

79-1 Part 1 Construction and test of flameproof 
enclosures of electrical apparatus 

79-1 A Fiist supplement Appendix D: Method of test 
for ascertainment of maximum experimental 
safe g^p 

79-2 Part 2 Pressurized enclosures 

79-3 Part 3 Spark test apparatus for intrinsically- 
safe circuits 

79-4 Part 4 Method of test for ignition temperature 

79-4A Fiist supplement 

79-S Part S Sand-filled apparatus 

79-6 Part 6 Oil-immeised apparatus 

79-7 Part 7 Construction and test of electrical appa- 
ratus, type of protection 'e' 

79-8 Part 8 Classification of maximum surface 
temperatures 

79-9 Part 9 Marking 

79-10 Part 10 Classification of hazardous areas 



79-1 1 Part 1 1 Construction and test of intrinsically- 
safe and associated apparatus 

79-12 Part 12 Qassification of mixtures of gases or 
vapours with air according to their maximum 
experimental safe giips and minimum igniting 
currents 

79-13 Part 13 Construction and use of rooms or 
buildings protected by pressurization 

The following lEC Standards cover related topics: 

lEC 34 Rotating electrical machines 

Part S Classification of degrees of protec- 
tion provided by enclosures for rotating 
machines 

lEC 144 : Degrees of protection of enclosure for low- 
1963 voltage switchgear and controlgear (» BS 
5420:1977) 

lEC S29 : Classification of degrees of protection 
1976 provided by enclosures (s BS S490 : 1977) 

B-3 RELEVANT INDIAN STANDARDS 

Indian Standards relevant to the use of electrical appa- 
ratus in hazardous areas are as foltows: 

IS 692 : 1973 Paper insulated lead-sheathed 
cables for electricity supply 
( second revision) 

IS 694 : 1977 PVC insulated cables for working 
voltages up to and including 1 100 
volts ( second revision ) 

IS 1SS4 For working volUges from 3.3 kV 

(Part 2) : 1981 up to and including 1 1 kV ( first 
revision ) 

IS 2147 : 1962 Degrees of protection provided 
by enclosures for low-voltage 
switchgear and controlgear 

IS 2148 : 1981 Flamepioof enck>sures of electrical 
apparatus ( second revision ) 

IS 2206 Fhmepioof electric lighting fitting^: 

(Part 1) : 1984 Part 1 Well glassed and bulk-hood 
type 

IS 2667 : 1976 Fittings for rigid steel conduits for 
electrical wiring 

IS 2772 : 1982 Non-flameproof mining trans- 
formers for use below ground 
(first revision ) 



19 



IS 134M (Ptet 1) : 1992 



IS 4691: 1985 



IS 5571 : 1979 



IS 5572 : 1978 



IS 5780 : 1980 
IS 6381: 1972 



IS 7389 
(Part 1) : 1976 



IS 7689 : 1974 
IS 7693 : 1975 

IS 7724 : 1975 

IS 7820 : 1975 

IS 8062 
(Part 1) : 1976 

IS 8224 : 1976 

IS 8289: 1976 



Degrees of protection provided by 
enclosures for rotating electrical 
machinery (firsi revision ) 

Guide for selection of electrical 
equipment for hazardous areas 
(first revision) 

Qassification of hazardous areas 
(other than mines) for electrical 
installation : Part 1 Areas having 
flanunable gases and vapours (/fr5/ 
revision ) 

Intrinsically safe electrical apparatus 
and circuits (firsi revision ) 

Construction and testing of 
electrical apparatus with type of 
protection 'e* 

Pressurized enclosures of electrical 
apparatus for use in explosive 
atmospheres: Part 1 Pressurized 
enclosures with no internal source 
of flammable gas or vapour 

Guide for control of undesirable 
static electricity 

Oil immersed electrical apparatus 
for use in explosive gas 
atmospheres 

Sand-filled protection of electrical 
equipment for use in explosive 
atmospheres 

Method of test for ignition 
temperatures 

Code of practice for cathodic 
protection of steel structures : 
Part 1 General principles 

Electric lighting fitting for division 
2 areas 

Electrical equipment with type of 
protection 'n' 



IS 9537 

(Part 1) : 1980 
IS 9537 

(Part 2): 1981 

15 9628:1980 

IS 9968 
(Part 1) : 1981 

IS 12309 : 1989 



General requirements 
Rigid steel conduits 

Three-phase induction motors with 
type of protection 'n' 

For working voltages up to and 
including 1 100 volts 

Code of practice for the 
protection of buildings and allied 
structures against lightning 
(second revision) 



B-4 NATIONAL APPROVING AUTHORITY 
FOR ELECTRICAL APPARATUS FOR USE IN 
HAZARDOUS AREAS 

B-4.1 The national approving authorities in India for 
Electrical Equipment for use in Flammable Atmos- 
pheres are as follows: 

a) Chief Controllerate of Explosives, Nagpur 

b) Directorate General Factory Advice and Labour 
Institutes, Bombay 

B-S TESTING OF ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 
FOR USE IN HAZARDOUS AREAS 

B-5.1 The testing facilities for checking and testing 
the electrical apparatus for use in hazardous areas are 
available with the Central Mining Research Station 
(CSIR), Barwa Road, Dhanbad (Bihar). 

B-6 BIS CERTDICATION MARKING SCHEME 

B-6.1 The certification of electrical apparatus for use 
in hazardous areas is being done by the Bureau of 
Indian Standards, New Delhi (BIS) under well defined 
system of inspection, testing and quality control dur- 
ing preparation. This system, which is devised and 
supervised by BIS and operated by the producer, has 
the further safeguard that the apparatus carrying BIS 
certification mark are continuously checked by BIS for 
conformity to that Standard. 



20 



IS 13408 (Part 1) : 1992 



ANNEX C 
(Clause 7.1) 

FRICnONAL SPARiONG RISKS WITH UGHT METALS AND THEIR ALLOYS* 



C-1 The risk of ignition due to frictional sptrking, 
which though present with ferrous and certain other 
metals is sufficiently improbable to be discounted, 
nuiy be sufficiently severe when certain light metals 
and their alloys are involved that special considera- 
tion has to be given to their use, particularly in the 
more hazardous areas. It is generally recognized 
that the recommendations in C-2 to C-7 should be 
noted. 

€•2 It has been clearly established that incendive 
frictioiuil sparking can occur in circumstances where 
certain light metals or their alloys are brought into 
suitable contact with other materials, particularly when 
the other nuiterial is an oxygen carrier such as rust. 
Suitable safeguards have therefore to be taken to 
prevent the occurrence of such frictional contact in 
circumstances where a flammable atmosphere may be 
present, as the simultaneous occurrence of the two sets 
of circumstances, could lead to ignition. 

C-3 As with other ignition risks, the first safeguard is 
to avoid the occurrence of flanmiable atmospheres and 
to site the apparatus whenever practicable in locations 
where such atmospheres are not likely to occur. 

C-4 For rigidly mounted electrical apparatus with 
light metal enclosures and aluminium armoured or 
sheathed cable sited in Zone 2 areas, the frictional 
sparking risk may be disregirded except in those 
particular circumstances where heavy impact might 
also initiate the release of flanmiable material. Tbis 
applies also in Zone 1 areas, unless the impact risk is 
high, when the use of light metal enclosures or alu- 
minium protected cables should be avoided unless 
they are provided with a robust protective covering. 
Such apparatus and cables should not be used on 
Zone areas. 



C*5 Portable and transportable apparatus with lighr 
metal or light alloy enclosures that are otherwise 
unprotected against frictional contact should not be 
taken into hazardous areas unless special precautions 
are taken to ensure safety. Such precautions may 
include a special permit to work in the assured absence 
of a flammable atmosphere, though more satisfactory 
safeguards may be taken by, for example, coating the 
apparatus with a suitable abrasion resistant material. 
When such coatings are used they should be subject to 
regular and careful inspection. The continued use of 
the apparatus should not be permitted if inspection 
reveals that the protective nuiterial has become dam- 
aged to the extent that the underiying protected metal 
is visible, until such danmge has been satisfactorily 
repaired. 

These precautions should be adopted even for appara- 
tus intended for use in Zone 2 areas only, since it may 
be difficult in practice to prevent the transfer of unpro- 
tected portable apparatus to an area of greater risk. 

C-6 Provided that the protective cowls for light metal 
fans on motors are designed so that they are not readily 
deformed, such fans may be used in Zone 1 and Zone 
2 areas since other modes of failure (e.g. bearing 
failure) are more likely to create a source of ignition. 
If plastic fans or cowls are used as alternatives, they 
should be of anti-static materia*!. 

C-7 Until further information is available, the u.se of 
aluminium conductors in flameproof enclosures should 
be avoided in those cases where a fault leading to 
potentially severe arcing involving the conductors 
may occur in the vicinity of a plain flanged joint. 
Adequate protection may be afforded by suitable 
conductor and terminal insulation to prevent the oc- 
currence of faults or by using enclosures with spigot or 
threaded joints. 



nUe tenn 'Ught nelal' rafeit lo Mdi maieriab ai aluminiimi, 
divided lo rMd «KOliMraiiadly witk atawtplMric oxygea and, as a 
aUoy coatainiag at leait 50% of a Uglit oMlal by atonic pioportioQa. 



ium and titanium wliicli are cliaraclerized liy ilicir ability when rmcly 
to ignite a flammable atmoepbeie. The term 'liglit alloy' refers lo an 



21 



IS 134M (Part 1) : 1992 



ANNEX D 
(Clause SA.3) 

DATA FOR FLAMMABLE MATERIALS 



D-l INTRODUCTION 

D-1.1 The data for Table 6 has been obtained from a 
number of references which appear in the bibliography 
(see D-8). Some minor variations in the data appear 
when references are compared but usually the discrep- 
ancy is sufTiciently small to be ignored. The values 
contained in Table 6 are indicative only. For example, 
naptha and kerosine are general terms not precisely 
deflning the composition of the substance concerned. 
In addition, impurities can affect various properties. It 
is recommended therefore that further checks be made 
on the properties of the particular material involved in 
the application concerned. 

The notes in D-2 to D*9 relate to the description of the 
data in Table 6. 

D.2 CHEMICAL STRUCTURE. 

D-2.1 The work * mixture* in col 2 of Table 6 indicates 
Ihe material is a mixture of materials. 

0-3 FLASH POINTS 

D-3.1 The value given is the closed cup measurement. 
When this data is not available the open cup value is 
given. Open cup values are enclosed in brackets. The 
symbol < (less than) indicates that the flash point is 
below the value stated, this value probably being the 
limit of the apparatus used. 

D.4 FIAMMABLE LIMITS 

D-4.1 Where flammability data is presented materi- 
als with Hash points above 40^0, the determinations 
have been made at an elevated temperature sufficient 
to give the quoted concentration. 

D-5 IGNITION TEMPERATURE AND T CLASS 

D-5.1 The preferred data is that recorded in lEC Pub- 
lication 79-4 A (Indian Standard yet to be prepared). In 
the absence of such data, the values given are the 
lowest rc}X)rted from class apparatus tests. When the 
lowest reported is in other unspecified apparatus, the 
value is enclosed in brackets. Knowledge of the igni- 
tion temperature allows the choice of the apparatus T 
class suitable for the flammable material to be made. 
The T class is given in brackets when the lowest 
reported ignition temperature was determined in un- 
specified apparatus or apparatus other than glass appa- 
ratus. 

D-6 GROUP AND SUB-GROUP FOR APPARA- 
TUS WITH FlJ\MEPROOF ENCLOSURE 

D-6.1 The groups are Ihe result of maximum experi- 
mental safe gap (MESG) determinations, except for 



values in brackets. These values are estunites based on 
chemical similarity. There ia no lower limit to Group 
llCand, therefore, each compound in Group IlCshould 
be considered individually. 

D-7 NOTES ON SOME INDIVIDUAL 
MATERIALS 

Acetylene Type 'd' apparatus for use with 
acetylene is grouped IIC, but 
additional requirements for such 
apparatus for use with this gas are 
specified in BS SSOl: Fait S. 
(coiicsponding Indian Standard does 
not include recommendations for 
apparatus for acetylene gas). 

Carbon Group IIC apparatus should only be 

disulphide used with carbon disulphide when 
the free volume of the enclosure is 
less than 100 mJ. For large volumes, 
the apparatus should be subjected 
to special test. 

Coke oven gas This is a mixture of hydrogen, carbon 
monoxide, and methane. If the sum 
of the concentrations of hydrogen 
and carbon monoxide is less than 
75%, Group IIB flameproof 
apparatus is required, otherwise 
Group IIC. For all concentrations, 
intrinsically safe apparatus should 
be Group IIC. 

Ethyl nitrate It is reconunended that apparatus of 
type of protection *d* is not used in 
the presence of ethyl nitrate. 

Methane Industrial methane includes methane 

mixed with not more than 15% by 
volume of hydrogen. 

Xylene The ignition temperature of o-xylene 

is 4640C, and of p-xylene is 528^C. 

D-8 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Further data on the properties of flammable materials 
may be found in the following references, some of 
which were used in the compilation of the tables. 

Fire Protection Associated (London). Fire and related 
properties of industrial chemicals, reprinted 1974. 

National Fire Protection Association (Boston, Mass). 
Fire protection guide on hazardous nuiterials, seventh 
edition, 1978. 

Hilado, C.J. and Clark, S.W. Auto-ignition tempera- 
tures of organic chemicals. Chemical Engineering, 
September 4 1972, 75. 



22 



Publicitions of the Engineering Sciences Dita Unit 
(UK) (A list of properties is in pitparation). 

Whessoe Technical Computing Services, CHEMSTOR, 
Chemical and Hazard Enquiry Service. 

Mttllins* B.P. Spontaneous ignition of liquid fuels, 
AGARD 19SS. 

Lunn, G A. and Phillips, H.A. Sunmiary of experimen- 
tal data on the maximum experimental safe gap, SMRE 
Report T2, 1973. 

NaBert, K. and Schon, G. Safety characteristics of 



IS 134M Cfmri 1) : IfK 

combustible gases and vapours, Deutsches Eichver- 
lag, 1963 {revised 1980). 

Toxic and Hazardous Industrial Chemicals Safety 
Manual, 1975/76 (Japan). 

Coward, H.F. and Jones, G.W. Limits of flammability 
of gases and vapors. US Bureau of Mines Bulletin 503, 
1952. 

Zabetakis, M.G. Flanmiability characteristics of com- 
bustible gases and vapors. US Bureau of Mines Bulle- 
tin 627, 1965. 



23 



IS 134M (hurt 1) : 19n 



I! 



f 

3-: 






li" 

Q 5 

ll 

•"Si 



4mjo 



jsM^DX ^ 




e 



JModm\ aAiinni "^ 



i"iM*mPN S 



1 



I 



g^^^gl»ggglglllggllg 



i:HS§F:PF!F: i? iP 



-j I I I I I I S I I I I I 






iississiisisas 



# 5:2223 I8S 12 '8 



-^ ^^r»«o |0«r)<«t i<MC^«n 



p ? p p p p p 



I I I I I I s 



9 § I 



I I 



I S Si 



y> Jf ? s 2 - 



I 7 s a I I 8 P 2 = 






y> 82?«g-''^ 



^- '95JR|2SS 



y S^f^fa^sf '3§*f 'TJJ1 



i.d. 



5 Q, 



8 



^§:5 



^^Sl ^if § ^^if g*^ 



af 3; sf aC 
u u u u 



i , 






S I § 



1 


O 

to 


S 


§ § 


a 


1 


fO 




r4 




71 


V 


8 
i 


1 


P 

W 




6 

^4 



8 R T 



r4 o^ Ch 

•i4 «i4 O 

«N «N *4 

I i I 



?5!f 



3 • ■ « 

a U « * 



a -2 -2 S S £> fr ■£, 



■s ^ I I I 

1 z ii I I I I 

"^ * jt * 

;? 5 ? 



4 



fill 



^ J I S 

1 1 Hi 



I 

V) 



I I I I I 



a 



24 



IS 134M (Pftrt 1) : 1992 



■« 






dnojo «i|«J«ddy 



fii|w«4dV a|q«||iis ^ 



IMJJIIO 






I 
I 



1^ £ 



k 6 



i"iod vm e 






l"l<M 



laiQj 8m|»M S 



1 



i 



^ ^ ^ ^ i gg^^^ s ^sf^l 



fJ H P P I 



i' s § I i 



1 


o 


s 


1 


1 


s; 


8 


5 


^ 


*n 


«n 


O 




00 


^ 


<> 


^ 


«o 


00 


t*. 


^ 


^ 


»M 






ro 00 



i' 7 S 



^ s ^ ^ 



X 

I 



00 I 






8 5 R S 5? 

r4 ri ri '^ n 






P I 



g 



pppp £ pppbP 



I I I I I I S I I I 



I S S S g § I § I 2 



I I 



^ n 



if i 



poo 



112 2 



I I '•. X! 



^ is 7 I 

V V 



ri iri ri •^ 



fO ^ ir> ^ 
• jj r. T 



S S S: S I 
7 ' 7 

z 

I 



9 <^ 



o «o 



^ ^ c> 



-* o ^ 



fO 00 ^ 



I a I a ? I 



2 


s; 


s 


<s 


a 


pi 


6 


«o 


«n 


ri 


« 


•M 

2 


2 


S 


r* 


7 


^ 


5 


S 

7 


7 



1 



u u 



f if if 



I 



I 



I 'Hi 



8 8 5 

1 i 



?l 



g 






III 



I 



u o 



-I u 



25 



IS l34<Nt (Part 1) : 1992 



•B 



a 



>6 

e2 



fliiojQ snt^jvddv 2 



siiiKJiidcIv »M«lfns :^ 



»iin|H)t| iunMi|y||^ ^ 



ajn|«jjdNi»x ^ 
iio|||h3I| ^ 






I 

B 



l< 



"^ € 



^ € 



^ £ 



i"i««i M«»w e 



jnod«A »A|I»I»II ^ 



i«iod tflinoH 2 



|B|o«i Sanpi^ S 



1 

I 



• 

I 






H H 



n ^ 



^ O 



^ 2 



^ :2 



vO 'O 



«n f*» 



00 'O 



P I t H H I 



I t I 









5 ' 



I I 



- I 



V S R 8 S 



00 

7 



ri 



L) <> ^ !* Q ?^ 



n ^ ri >o »*> 



I I 



P I H § P 



I I 



I I I I I t I 1 t I 



ri 






I I 



i t I I t I I I I I 



I I 



119 1 



ri 



I I I I I S S ' ' 



I I -: n *^ * I 



Pi s f^ I I 5 s ;^ I ?: 






fO ^ fO yf^ ch 

r*' ^ "^ <^ ««^ 

I I ♦^ ri ^ «-4 fo 



o» >o I I •^ ^ M ff\ o^ 



n I 



9! 

I 



7 



I I 3 



P ^ ^ I 



& 












iTifUilil 






f 



f 



i! 11 4 i 



4 



n w d w- -^ 



26 



IS 134M (Put 1) : 1992 



"B 






dMJO 



•HUiddvaiqniiiS g^ 

JO MVIOX "^ 



I 



i s 



^ e 



t^Mmm e 






•^^^ •^^•i^ 



J 



J 



^t^ll^gl^sll^ ^ lls^ 



PPP§p|ppp?£p§ E 



H H 



"S I I I I 



I I I I I I I I II 



^^ ^a^ W W W W 






I I 



o 



3 



8 



O 



4t 90 \ ^, 



«» 1 <^ ^. 



I I ^ a ^ « M >0 a 

O ^' ¥S r.* OS ^ «rj 



«4 c4C>d«-iri«^^ 



V 






00 

7 



9S s ^ 

«o ^i <*i 



9 is o. 9 s ;; 

j ^ n ^ n ^ t^ 



00 lO ^> 

ri V '^ 



t^ ^ r* 

9^' «S -^ 



2 2 a g' 



V^ oj «o 



^4 *N *i^ I „< ^4 w^ w^ 



'777 



3 8 2 1 

I I 



^-1 



if, 



i 



Mm 









^ss 



.fi i| I 

o 5* ff o a fl 



11 






21 --^ 2 



I 



s 



27 



IS 134M (hart 1) : 1992 



1! 






dnojo 



foiUMMy aiqnins ^ 






•jii|«jmI«wx ^ 
■o|l|«tl ^ 



^ s 



S e 



i^Nvni e 



il|«HI g 



I 



J 



iilii?l§i|p§ Pi? P? 
I I I I I I I I I I I I I III II 



I I S I 



J I I S I 



* I I 5 I 



I I ^ I 



&> J« 






S R 



in v> 



^ S 






y ^ i? ? 



SI' i ' ' 



t i I s; ;{ S I ? I t 



I I 1-4 O ^ O M 

I I M ^* -: ^* .V 



I I ^ c^ 00 M ri 
' ,4 (fi ri ^ ri 






I I 



«5 t^ M Ok •r> 1^ ^ 
^ 00 V> V) «o ^ «o 
>b «*i <n «-< «-i ^ rl 



f* iO ^ "O i^ "^ <*• 



^ ^ O 
o r^ r^ 



I I 



§. 



ft s" §. o 



3" 



mii 



% 



It 



ifHff 



! 



I I 



I t 



I I 



I I 






fn 



S I 



f«i?5^"^2s^ gi 



a 8 Ij 



is is s s is a&z>32%e.aa>^ 



inHi 



28 



"8 






dtoftig) 



IVIPS 



X ^ 



iMUBo f;^ 



i 



^ £ 



^ e 






i«i«d 



i«i«d«"iiw« S 



I 



I 






^ O 00 



y ' n 









y s 



I 



IS 134M (PM1 1) : 19f2 



PP PlPPPPllPiSppPljSlI 
"S^l i^llllllllllllllll 



^2a 5'SI|g''52g||i|ii 



|iii|iiiiiii|igii 



itipii?;iiiSi$ii 






I I r^ r- V© r^ ¥-> I -^ I I 

>o t^ ^ <) ^o c5 






<^4 lO «0 1^ ^ iT^ 

^ 00 o ^ I 3 



«n •i^ ^ ^ O 
^ ri f*i •«t f*i 



00 r>i in >© r» O 
r* r* f*> v^ r* 00 



9^ *0 >C 

^ 7 

V 



!? :S o 

I rn »<S ri 



-* Q ^ 



. 8 



8 t*\ 



r4 fO r4 



-^ f<n n O 00 
«*i O »n '^ 



^ C4 

00 O 

r4 



5 5 2 11 



I I i^ 



I I I S I I :.' 






X 









31 



^5-^^ 



I 



it 

21 



I ill II I 



III 



X 

I 

3% 
O 



8 



I 



^ ^ 



r 



O-i O 



8 

S 






2L 

^ 



X X 






X 






5 1^ 5 - 



1 S 



lU lU C. U lU <s 



w 
29 






"6 



IS 134M (Pttt 1) : 1991 



H 



^ 

fi 






9 



I 



^ S 



^ e 



i"iMt»n!i e 



^iiw»a 



isioiii *mivu ^ 



mm a«ii|9H S 



I 



I 



g ss^^ g^g I g g| sl^ 



p p p p b p I p 



-g !$ I 9 I i I 11? 



i'SS I5|S 'S 






S I I I 



« 5 I I 11$ 



* 35 I 8 R I 2 



« <^ 






' 2 



I ". 



yiS 1188 8TS S^ 



-. - » ^' ^ '*! '^ ? ? 



y 3 2 



^ s 



vH ^ «>4 •-« 
^ .-• o « 



2 :; I I 
I I 



S iS 



. ^ s 



I 






5J 



P b b P P 



S 1 


1 


1 S 


233 
(530) 


1 


g 1 


§ ^ 


1 


§ 3 



^ 00 



' s s 



o <o « 

* 9 fj 



r* ri ^ (n p 






s; « S s & 



^ ^ 



« ^ S 



=? ? 



i 



1 1 if 



S-af 



il 



I II I 



i 



(JU («• 



«i 



I 






IlllHllilllll 



30 



IS 134M (Pkrt 1) : 1992 



•8 



J 



t2 



Amjo (hiumMv 2 



«m«MMv *|q*ll"S m 



wnwiaifv ^ 



ajnjuadnax 



2 

1^ 



i< 



i ? 



^ 6 



l«!«d "!«■« e 






i^iOfi •■moa s 



laiOd SanpH S 



8 

I 



I 



I ^1^1^ 1-^ <ai|gg|| 



1 • 



y i 



e 



e 






* 5 



o 



V s 



y 5; 



X 

u 

X 

u 



I ? p p I 






o r- 



I I I I I 



i I I 



18 1^2 



«-• O '^ 00 ri 
«o n n f*> -^r 
I I 



I i I 



I I I I |C 
I 









s 

ill 



X 

u 
C 
x' 

^ I 
11 



I H H 



I I I I I 



I I 1 



I ri I 



^ I 



;^ I I 



o «o 

<> d 



'^ 7 



:$ S 

r* 7 






00 






I 

I 



g 



i^ ^ k^ ^ 



I i I p 



I I I I I I 



«r> «o «n o 

9 a !; s 



I I I 



o 



I i 



I 1 



^ m \C 

^ >o *o p ^ 

•^ ri ri ^* -^ 



S 



I I 



III P S S i I S I 



S 2 2 I 



r- tn «-• j r* 00 I ^'^ 
^ ri ro ^ ri ^ 



o S 



•n ^ r* o tn o I -^ 
NO n «o r* n 00 ' o 



X 
X 

u 



X 

q 

X* 



8 1^ 

X X 

u u 



X 

u 

II 

o 






X 

u 



p fi 



It 

si 



6 S" 



S 2- -5. 



8 ^ 



5- 






2 r. 



^ ^ ^ ^ ^ £ 

V «! 4^ <> «! iS 

Z Z Z Z S Z 



31 



IS 134M (PMt 1) : 1992 



"8 



^ 



I 



dMJOMiuaMv S 



j»fra|3X ^ 



IMUO g- 



I 



^ S 



^ S 



i«!Od vni e 






l«|Od[««!l|oa s 



l«lod SaiH^W S 



1 



I 



llsas Isa allsssellal 



j I 



v s 



I I 



« I 



y s 



I 






s 



§ bPb §PPPPPPP 



I III I I I I I I I I I 



I IRI llgllllfi 

M «n M 



I 131 ii!9Siiis;i 









r» «n ^ 

d ^ 



a 



V ^ 



' * 5 ' ' ' ' ;s 3 



• S S 2 • ' '232 



f'YPSriiii^s;? 



«o t »r» 

9« 9^ O «0 

«^ ri ri I r* 









V S! I 8 I 8 ' S! 1^ 



7 



I I 



« * ? ^ s ^ I ^ 



? 

3 

- ^1 

if 

5if 



f ^ ?r, 



s. 



H ^11 §■] 



s s 



O if 



<f if if 






niiii! 

iniiifl 



I 



I 



Z 2 2 



32 



IS 134M (Ptot 1) : 1991 



fi 



*MJO 



a 



f ii i 



i< 



^ e 



^ 



I 



i 



asslsa S3 Hal sas aal 



I ' 






# 2 



P P P P P P 



I I P I II 



§ S S I § S 



' ' I • s § 



I ? ? I 4 3 



' 2 ' 



I «n ^ r*. 



2 "! 
o r* 



yss?::^;;; i^s 



? V, 31 5 V, 25 2 

<n ^ I ^ r« ««) «n ^ 






^9{sis9ia ^le t7Si §!?8 

II - I I I 7 T • 7 



1 p 


P 1 


1 1 


g 1 


» i 


I' 


1 1 


1 ' 


1 t 


S 1 


1 1 


"0 1 




o; ' 


1 1 


9 1 




pi ' 


^ '^ 


1 1 


V 




, 3 


*^ 1 


' « 


f ' 


1 *^ 


8 1 



If 



P P b I £ P 



III III 



§ 3 ^ ' 



I ' I ' I i 



SIS I 



«o n r^ I ^ o 

m -^ ^ ' d ri 



v> o o I 

"^ ri ri ' 



2 2 I 



S S ^ 
f4 ri ^ 



2 8 E: 

I 

V 



' ri ri 



^ 



I O ^ 
I ' I I 



i€i€ i 



Ill Iff if? 



Hill 



11 iM .1 M 



II 



I 



33 



IS 1340S (Ftet 1) : 19f2 



5 



f2 



daMO 






iwuo ?? 



M fj »d«»x S" 



I 



^ S 



^ e 



i«i<vi vni s 






l«|oj 



i"i<M»«nin^ S 



I 



I 



^Issgg^ glll^ slsl^^^ 



p p 



1 • ' 



y 5 I 



I ' « 



I I 5 



^ « o 



^ ^ -^ 

# o -^ 



y !; S5 






a^ t^ S 



1 p 

1 1 


P 1 

1 1 


1 1 


1 1 

1 ' 


' 1 


O 1 


1 « 


3 1 


1 ^ 


r^ 1 


' «M 


ot 


9m 




1 9 


«o 1 


' ri 


wi 


1 «** 


O 1 


1 


r^ • 


^ 


s 


1 <^ 


m 1 


1 2 


S 1 


1 8 


1 1 



llA 



X 



I I f I 



'SI' 



i S 



I # I S 



I •- I 



I «^ I 



I P P P 



I I I I 



1113 



a ' - ' 












p{ I 00 ^ I I «^ m 



8 a f. 

ri *n «*i 



^ 9 



S 12 S 



*n I I 



oo*-40ooo ^ ^ n * 



I 8 2 S I 



= '? 



S t I 



t 



fr I i -'if 
* I I t IP 

^ I. I I I I 5?| 



III!" 



I 

HI 



5i u o-i 



I 



« 

m 



I 



^€^ 



f 



? .= 



t I I I S i H 



34 



IS 13408 (Part 1) : 1992 



ANNEX E 
(Clause 31.2 A) 

CALCULATION OF THE FLAMMABLE LIMITS FOR A MIXTURE OF GASES 

NOTE - This anoexure may be helpful for use with IS 5572 (Part 1) : 1978. 



E-l LIMITS FOR SAMPLE MIXTURES 

E-1.1 General 

Frequently, explosion risks arise from mixtures of 
flammable materials with air. Though only the most 
general of rules can be indicated for ensuring the 
safe use of electrical apparatus with mixtures of gases, 
it is often desirable to be able to establish with some 
degree of confidence the flanmiablc limits for such 
mixtures in order that local explosion risk can be 
avoided. A method that may be used to calculate the 
flanmiable limits of most nuxtures of flammable g9ses 
is described in E-1.2. Though this method achieves a 
satisfactory degree of accuracy for most applications, 
it is always advisable to apply caution where the 
expected total concentration of combustible is near to 
the calculated value for the appropriate flammable 
limit. Particular care should also be taken in circum- 
stances where catalytic effects between individual 
components of a mixture are suspected. General pur- 
pose calculations cannot take such effects into ac- 
count. 

E-IJ Method of Calculation 

The method of calculation is based on a simple rela- 
tionship due to Le Chatelier connecting the lower 
flammable limits for any two gases in air with the 
lower limit for any mixture of them. The relationship 
is expressed by the following equation: 






N. N. 



where 



N^^ndN^Bft the lower flanrniable limits in air 
for each combustible gas separately (in %); 
and 

It, and itj are the percentages of each gas 
present in any mixture of them that is itself a 
lower limit mixture. 

The formula indicates, for example, that a mixture of 
air, carbon monoxide and hydrogen that contains 
one-quarter of the amount of carbon monoxide and 
three-quarters of the amount of hydrogen necessary 
to form lower limit mixtures with air independently 
(i.e. one-quaiter of 14% approximately and three- 
quarters of 4% respectively) will itself be a lower limit 
mixture. 

The formula may be generalized to apply to any 
number of gases. Thus: 



«, n. /I, 

N. N^ N^ 



«1 



The formula may be applied also to upper limit mix- 
tures with suitable redeflnition of the terms /t,, etc, and 
iV,,etc. 

The equation nuiy be rendered more useful as follows. 
(It is assumed that the terms used are consistent, i.e. 
they are all lower limit mixtures or they are all upper 
limit mixtures). 

Let P^, Py Py etc, represent the proportions of each 
combustible as present, ignoring air and inert gases. 



so that : 

P,^P,^P,^. 



100 



and let L represent the flammable limit (upper or 
lower, as appropriate) so that: 

I » »j •♦• Hj -f Wj + ... 

since n^/L s Pl/100, then substituting in 
equation (2) 

L/lOO (P/AT, ^ PJN, + P3W3 ...) = 1 

and therefore 

100 



^. ^2 ^j 

^ f^2 ^3 

E-IJ Example 

As an example of the use of this equation, consider the 
determination of the lower limit for a gas mixture 
representative of natural gas. 

The natural gas might comprise 

methane in the proportion of 80% (P) 

(lower limit 5.32%) 

ethane in the proportion of 15% (P^) 

(lower limit 3.22%) 

propane in the proportion of 4% (P3) 

(lower limit 2.37%) 

butane in the proportion of 1% (PJ 

(lower limit 1.85%) 

The lower flanmiable limit of this mixture with air 
would be: 



1 = 



100 



80 15 
5.32 ^ 3.22 2.37 1.85 



4 1 



= 4.55% 



35 



IS 13408 (IVirtl): 1992 

£-2 LIMrFSfX>R COMPLEX INDUSTRIAL GAS 
MIXTURES 

E-2.1 Method of Cakulatton 

A flammable gas mixture encountered in many 
industrial processes comprises hydrogen, carbon 
monoxide, methane, nitrogen, carbon dioxide and 
oxygen. The procedure to be used for calculating the 
flammable limits for mixture of these gases is as 
follows: 

a) The composition of the mixture is flrst recal- 
culated on an air-free basis. The amount of 
each gas is expressed therefore as a percentage 
of the total air-free mixture. 

b) A somewhat arbitrary dissection of the air- 
free mixture developed from step (a) is made 
into simpler mixtures, each of which contains 
only one flanmuible gas and part or all of the 
nitrogen and carbon dioxide. 

c) The appropriate limits for each of the mixtures 
obtained from step (b) are obtained from 
available data (see Fig. 1 and 2, which give 
available data for the flammable limits of 
hydrogen, carbon monoxide, methane, ethane 
and benzene with various amounts of carbon 
dioxide and nitrogen as inert diluent 
components). 

d) The limits of the air-free mixture are than cal- 
culated from the data for the dissected mix- 
tures obtained in step (c) using equation (6), 
were Pj, P^, P,, etc, are the proportions of the 

dissected mixtures, inpercentag^s, and A^j,A^2» 
N^ etc, are their respective limits. 

e) From the limits of the air-free complex mix- 
ture thus obtained, the limits of the original 
complex mixture which included air can be 
deduced. 



E-2J Example 

The following is an example of the step-by step calcu- 
lation outlined in E-2J. 

a) The constituent components of the gas mix- 
ture are indicated in Table 7. The composition 
of the air-free mixture, indicated in the third 
col of the table, nuiy be calculated as follows: 

The amount of air in the mixture is 2.8 x idO/ 
20.9 or 13.4%. The air-free mixture is there- 
fore 86.6% of the whole. When the original 
proportions of carbon dioxide, carbon monox- 
ide, methane and hydrogen are divided by 
86.6 and multiplied by 100, the air-free per- 
centages are obtained. The nitrogen percent- 
age is the difference between 100 and the sum 
of these percentages. 

Tabic 7 Components of the Industrial Gas Mixture 



CoBftHoeBt CompoacBU 

oriBdmlrialGat 

MIxtvre 


% 


CakulaUdoB 
Atr^Fm Basis 

% 


Carbon dioxide 


13.8 


15.9 


Oxygen 

Carbon monoxide 


2.8 
4.3 


0.0 
5.0 


Methane 


3.3 


3.8 


Hydrogen 
Nitrogen 


4.9 
70.9 


5.7 
69.6 



b) The flammable gases are paired with the inert 
gases to form separate mixtures, as shown in 
Table 8. 

c) The flammable limits for the separate or dis- 
sected mixtures, taken from Fig. 1, are indi- 
cated in col 7 and 8 of Table 8. 

d) The values for the flammable limits of these 
simpler mixtures and for the percentages of 
the air-free mixture that each of these simpler 



Table 8 FlammabUity Limits of Simpler Mixtures 









[Clause 


E-2.2(b)l 








llaniniaMt 
Material 


AnomtoT 
Material 


Carbon 
Dioxide 


Nltrotea 


Total 


Ratio of 

lacrtlo 

Conbustfble 

Gaa 


LtailUfhNB 
Flt.1 




Lower 


Higlier 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(3) 


(« 


(7) 


W 




% 


% 


% 


% 




% 


% 


Carbon monoxide 


5.0 


- 


17.5 


22.5 


3.5 


61.0 


73.0 


Methane 


3.8 


- 


20.9 


24.7 


5.5 


36.0 


41.5 


Hydrogen 


^3.0 
5.7 *v 2.7 


V3 9 


<- 


/34.2 
\ 18.6 


/10.4 
^5.9 


/50.0 
^32.0 


(16.0 
^64.0 


TottI 


14.5 


15.9 


69.6 


100.0 


- 


- 


- 



36 



IS 134M (Put 1) : 1992 



t 



- 1 1 1 1 1 1 M.I 1 1 1 1 1 1 - 




.^* 


^^ ^-^ r II 


^ ^'^ " 


^ i-i^'^Sai*/— M,*CO, 


^'^ 


>> y •'--' 


:--» ^'^ - • 




.Jl ^^ 




7 ^^ - 10 


J J ^- 


- ;^^ 


vKt ^ - 




hI^/ ^^s y L^ 


3 - 12 


*" lu •^^ 7.^y^^^~- 


- IS 


„ /# ^H^j.** 7^?^^^ _ 


- 14 


// jS'^'\i-l> >X 




,. aj^^/:/^^ 




" Ji^v2^^^ I 


- 16 


,. i^^i^S-^ 


- 17 


L ^?^ 


- IS 


. i^^'^ 


- »• 


2^ 


20 


±1 IE 





s 



) 2 S 4 S 6 7 S • 10 11 12 IS 14 15 16 t7 

RATIO. ruuHMABLE GAS 

no. 1 Umtis of FkAMMABiLmr OP Hydrooen, Carbon Monoxide, and Methane Containino Various 

Amounts of Carbon Dioxide and Nitrogen 



UJ 



48 



i/t 




3 


40 


Q. 




in 




^ 


32 


y 




CD 




< 


24 


2 




2 




1 




u! 


16 


^- 




z 




UJ 






8 



in 
I 





3^1^X7. J/ 








'~o^ii^/<iQ'v '•^'^j^'*''^^" Z 


^>^5^1^^^ ?^'^^ ^^ " ;^^ 




- ^^ ^V^^^^^^i / .^«p, 1, .>'^ - . 


:z^:^^iiE:;>::jb^^>-:::::-r:=:::""^''-:":~~": 


t_ ,i^/^^>^^^nii^3'' ? -^ 


\;- /^^^;^!^ 22l;'^ -.^_ ,^'^ 


- jyid^^.Ay -.'i- ^^^ 


v2^>^^'v**^ ^i^t^-*? 


i^' ^V*^ rP>'/ ^ >'Tr^i^*\> 


/^^^L >r*^___ ^o^ ^' 0*t< - 


^? 4^ ^^*>4^J_ ^^^ *i: Ji^ 


t-^ G'v^^_rt>*V ^<^ 


\' _Z<C ^i«: ,-!^ - 


7- ^^ ■'*£:^-'^ 




^ mM*^^ e^'^^ 


^ ^ ^^ ^^^ 




^ 



12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1112 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 2021 
RATIO: INERT GAS 



FLAMMABLE GAS 

Ho. 2 Lnins op FLAMMABtury of Eihane, Eihylene and Benzene Containino Various Amounts of 

Carbon Dioxide and NmtooEN 



37 



IS 134M (Put 1) : 1992 

mixtutes repiesents (see col 5 of Tabk 8) 
permit calculation of the flammable limits for 
the complex air-free mixture. Thus, the lower 
flammable limit (LF) (in %) is given by the 
following equation: 



LFL = 



100 



22.5 24.7 
61 * 36 



34.2 
50 



18.6 
32 



>43% 



The upper flanunable limit (UFL) (in %) is given by 
the following equation: 

100 
UFL« »61% 



22.5 24.7 
73 *41.5 



34.2 
76 



18.6 
64 



e) As the air-free mixture is 86.6% of the 
conoplete sanqtie mixtuie, the flammaUe 
limits in air for the sample mixture are 43 x 
100/86.6 and 61 x lOQ/86.6. or 50% and 70% 
lespectivelv. Thus, the original san^e will 
be flammable within the limits of 50% and 
70% in air. 



£•2 J Fw^rlBfomatloB 

Further notes of the limitations of these calculatioas 
and die precautions that should be taken with such 
calculations are available (seeCoward, H.F. and Jones, 
G.W. Limits of flammability of gases and vapors. US 
Bureau of Mines Bulletin 503, 1952). 



38 



( Continued from second cover ) Page 

Tablb 1 Types OF Protbction ... ... ... 3 

Table 2 A Sbubction of Apparatus, According to Zone of Risk ... 4 
Tablb 2B Minimum Actions on Failure of Protective Gas for Type of Protection *p* 

Table 3 Relationship Betw]^n T Class and Maximum Surface Temperature S 

Tablb . 4 Example of Schedule for Initial Inspection ... ... 11 

Table 5 Example of Schedule for Subsequent Inspections ... ... 1 1 

Table 6 Data for Flammable Materials for Use with Electrical Equipment 24 

Table 7 Components of the Industrial Gas Mixture ... ... 36 

Table 8 Flammability Limits of Simpler Mixtures ... ... 36 

Figure 1 Limits of Flammability of Hydrogen, Carbon Monoxide and Methane 

Containing Various Amounts of Carbon Dioxide and Nitrogen ... 37 

Figure 2 Limits of Flammability of Ethane, Ethylene and Benzene Containing 

Various Amounts of Carbon Dioxide and Nitrogen ... 37 

FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Electrical Apparatus for Explosive Atmospheres Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

Many industrial processes involve the generation, processing, handling and storage of flammable and 
potentially explosive gases, vapours and mists. Where such materials may be present appropriate 
precautions have to be taken to design or locate electrical apparatus so that electrical arcs, sparks, 
hot surfaces or frictional sparks produced by such apparatus do not cause ignition. 

Several techniques are available for the protection of electrical apparatus situated in hazardous areas. 
These techniques are described in this code which takes into account the developments that have 
taken place in area classification and the design, manufacture and use of electrical apparatus for 
hazardous areas. 

The following standards on the selection, installation and maintenance recommendations 
appropriate to the types of protection that may be used to achieve safe operation of equipment in 
potentially explosive atmospheres shall be prepared in due course. This would provide basic 
recommendations applicable to all other stanards: 

a) Installation and maintenance requirements for electrical apparatus with type of protection 
'd' Flameproof enclosure. 

b) Installation and maintenance requirements for electrical apparatus with type of protection V 
Intrinsically safe electrical apparatus and systems. 

c) Installation and maintenance requirements for electrical apparatus protected by pressurization 
*p' and by continuous dilution, and for pressurized rooms. 

d) Installation and maintenance requirements for electrical apparatus with type of protection 
V. Increased safety. 

e) Installation and maintenance requirements for electrical apparatus with type of protection 'n\ 

This code of practice is prepared from Doc : 85/21906 DC Code of practice for electrical apparatus 
for explosive atmospheres (of Technical Committee GEL/ 114 Electrical Apparatus for Explosive 
Atmosphers ) issued for comments by British Standards Institution, U.K. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. ET 22 (3045). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 33 75, 2323 9402 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA700 054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34.A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 13 



Western 



Branches 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

r2323 7617 
\ 2323 3841 

r2337 8499, 2337 8561 
L2337 8626, 2337 9120 



{ 



60 3843 
609285 



/2254 1216, 2254 1442 
\2254 25I9,2254 2315 

r2832 9295, 2832 7858 
\2832 7891, 2832 7892 

AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Phnted « Ptabhat Offset fteu. New DeU)i-2 



