IS 9180 : 2011 


(Reaffirmed 2016) 
(Reaffirmed 2021) 


IRMA HAF 
Se —safed eA oh aipa 
rato & fer sent 
( ZAT FART ) 


Indian Standard 


RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PERFORMANCE 
RATING OF FUEL — FIRED FURNACES 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 25.180 


© BIS 2011 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


May 2011 Price Group 2 


Industrial Fuel-Fired Furnaces Sectional Committee, MTD 26 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Industrial Fuel-Fired Furnaces Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical 
Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1979 and later revised in 1991. As a result of experience gained in 
implementation of this standard, it has been decided to revise this standard. 


In an industrial fuel-fired furnace there are many performance parameters. Depending on the type, design and 
functional requirements of the furnace, some of the parameters are more relevant for assessing the suitability 
of the furnace for a particular use. Therefore, in assessing the performance rating, the aim should be to fix up 
technically correct and functionally appropriate performance parameters and to control their correctness by 
suitable tests. In this revision, supplementary information has been provided, for properly assessing the 
performance rating of furnaces. 


This standard gives guidance for conducting ‘Acceptance Tests’ on a newly installed furnace for 
demonstrating satisfactory performance according to the agreement between the supplier and the user, and 
for conducting “Performance Tests’ by a furnace user to check its capability. 


For the purpose of decided whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 9180 : 2011 


Indian Standard 


RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PERFORMANCE 
RATING OF FUEL — FIRED FURNACES 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down the methods of describing 
and measuring the performance characteristics of 
fuel-fired industrial furnaces, using solid, liquid, 
gaseous or a combination of these fuels. This 
standard does not apply to electrical furnaces. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Acceptance Tests — Tests carried out on a 
newly installed furnace for demonstrating 
satisfactory performance, according to the agreement 
between the user and the supplier of furnace. 


Acceptance tests are generally aimed at checking or 
verifying the warranties or guaranteed performance 
parameters agreed upon in the contract and are to be 
carried out by the furnace supplier in presence of 
the user for the purpose of acceptance of the furnace 
by the user. 


2.2 Performance Tests — Tests carried out by a 
furnace user to check its capability on the basis of 
performance data to be expected when the furnace is 
in operation. 


3 SCHEDULE OF TEST 
3.1 Acceptance Tests 


In keeping with the purpose of the furnace, both the 
user and the supplier should agree to include, those 
primary performance parameters of the furnace as 
watranties/guarantees which have more technical and 
economic function. Acceptance tests should be 
conducted to establish or prove such primary 
performance parameters as warranted or guaranteed. 


For the above, the following parameters are 
recommended. 


3.1.1 Throughput or Rated Output Capacity 


The quantity or effective product heated or treated 
per unit time, for which the following primary 
performance parameters should be specified in the 
contract: 


a) Size, section or thickness of material and 
material specification; often a reference size/ 


section and grade is agreed upon; 


b) Percentage hearth coverage wherever 
applicable; 


c) Temperature of material charged and 
discharged with acceptable tolerance limits 
for variation between the coldest and the 
hottest portion of the charge; 


d) Heating conditions as well as heating cycles, 
if any; and 


e) Any other item specific to the furnace. 


3.1.1.1 Based on the specified and reference charge 
size ( to be specified in the contract), the tests for 
acceptance of satisfactory performance with respect 
to throughput or rated output capacity of a furnace 
should fulfil or exceed the warranted or guaranteed 
values. 


3.1.2 Heat/Fuel Consumption 


The heat consumption is defined with respect to the 
specified throughput or rated output capacity 
(considered to be continuous output for a specified 
reference charge and for a given heating cycle or 
period). The heat/fuel consumption of a furnace 
should be indicated in terms of kcal/kg or Gcal/tonne 
of material charged into the furnace for a given 
throughput or rated output capacity. Fuel 
consumption for liquid fuels may also be specified 
in kg/tonne, for solid fuel in kg/tonne and for 
gaseous fuels in Nm?/ tonne of material charged in 
the furnace at throughput or rated output capacity. 


3.1.2.1 The consumption of auxiliary energy such 
as electric power, compressed air, steam used for 
atomising or heating of fuel and inert gases, etc, 
does not form a part of the heat consumption of a 
furnace. 


3.1.2.2 The heat/fuel consumption is to be fixed for 
the exclusive process time of the charge in the 
furnace. This excludes secondary process time such 
as for heating up or keeping the furnace warm, 
charging and discharging time of batch furnaces, 
flushing or purging with inert gases before and after 
heat treatment etc. In case of hot charge, the heat/ 
fuel consumption can be indicated as a guide and 


IS 9180 : 2011 


not as a guaranteed where charge temperature varies 
at the inlet of the furnace. 


3.1.2.3 The following parameters should be mutually 
agreed and specified in the contract: 


a) Reference dimensions. 


b) Characteristics of fuel to be used (for 
example its calorific value, impurities, flash 
point, fire point, percentage moisture 
viscosity and other characteristics as 
appropriate). 

c) Temperature of the material charged, 
important especially in case of hot charging 
of material in reheating furnaces. 


d) Discharge temperature of material and the 
maximum operating temperature of the 
furnace with tolerance limits. 


e) Heating conditions as well as heating cycle 
(time-temperature), if any. 


f) Recommended furnace pressure with 
tolerance limits, including the points for 
pressure sensing inside the furnace. 


g) Oxygen content of the furnace atmosphere 
at a defined location. 


h) Scale losses wherever applicable. 


j) Any other item particular to the furnace. 
3.1.3 Idling/No Load Consumption 


If due to any specific application problem or any 
other procedural difficulty the heat/fuel consumption 
of a furnace cannot be fixed accurately, then the 
idling/no load consumption in a furnace charged in 
batches can be guaranteed for a specific working 
temperature as the base load of heat/fuel 
consumption. 


3.1.3.1 Idling/no load consumption covers the 
furnace’s inherent losses at a given working 
temperature in a state of thermal balance. The 
following should be specified: 


a) Rated working temperature of the furnace; 


b) Climatic conditions external to the furnace 
(ambient air temperature, wind velocity, 
radiation from the neighbouring furnace, 
etc); and 


c) Maximum permissible temperature on the 
smooth outer casing of the furnace away 
from burners, any other opening and flue 
ports, etc, located close by. [During 
acceptance test if the maximum permissible 
temperature on the smooth outer casing of 
the furnace atleast 1 m away from burner, 
any other opening and flue ports, etc. 
located close by (skin temperature) exceeds 
than the agreed value but the guranteed fuel 
consumption is maintained within the 


accepted limit, then this deviation may be 
accepted]. 


3.1.4 Unless otherwise agreed, the temperature 
variation (AT) inside the furnace shall be normally 
within +10°C of the normal temperature to be 
achieved. [During acceptance test if the agreed AT 
(temperature uniformity) inside the furnace at the 
rated temperature exceeds the agreed value but the 
product (reference charge) is found conforming to 
the laid down specifications, then this deviation may 
be accepted by the customer]. However, for specific 
cases, the customer and the supplier may agree at a 
different value of the AT, inside the furnace. 


3.1.5 For materials where the surface quality is of 
prime importance, the composition of the furnace 
atmosphere is to be specified and agreed upon. Mode 
of checking variation, etc, is to be mutually agreed. 


3.2 Performance Tests 


Tests carried out on the basis of secondary 
performance parameters should include the 
following: 


3.2.1 Normal and maximum operating temperature of 
the furnace. 


3.2.2 Flue gas temperature range leaving the furnace 
at the chimney base or at the entry of the recuperator 
if any. 


3.2.3 Peak production rate and maximum fuel input 
in terms of kcal/h which the furnace is capable of 
giving. 


3.2.4 In case any waste heat recovery equipment 
namely, regenerator/ recuperator/ waste heat boiler, 
is supplied with the furnace, the following 
information should be supplied: 


a) Maximum and normal air/fuel gas flow, in 
Nm’/h; 

b) Flue gas temperature entering and leaving 
the equipment; 


c) Momentary maximum permissible flue gas 
and air /fuel gas temperature; 


d) Pressure drop on combustion air/fuel gas 
side and flue gas side, across the equipment; 
and 


e) Steam evaporation, normal and peak, if 
waste heat boiler is involved, in kg/h. 


3.2.5 Furnace working under externally prepared 
atmosphere gas (protective, reactive, inert) to be 
introduced into the furnace, the following information 
should be furnished: 


a) Type of atmosphere (gas specification); 


b) Maximum requirement of atmosphere gas, 
in Nm?/h; 


c) Allowable limits or concentration of 
undesirable components, if any;. 


d) Capacity or output of the generator or 
facility in terms of basic (process) fuel 
requirement; 


e) Method of heating, electricity/ fuel, etc; and 


f) Utility requirements like fuel, power, water, 
etc. 


3.2.6 Draught conditions on normal and peak 
operating conditions for furnace and chimney and/ 
or induced draft fan, if installed. Furnace should 
normally be designed for balanced draught, unless 
otherwise mentioned. The location of pressure 
tappings should be determined from case to case 
during testing of furnaces. 


3.2.7 Outside surface or skin temperature of the 
furnace-casing or shell measured away from burners 
or any other openings and flue ports under steady 
normal operation should generally be within 60°C 
above ambient for furnaces operating above 1 000°C. 


3.2.8 Rate of consumption of utility services, namely 
power, water, compressed air, steam, etc. 


3.2.9 Safety Devices 


All safety devices provided should be checked for 
reliability and fail-safe performance, by the supplier 
to the satisfaction of the customer. 


4 MODE OF CONDUCTING THE TESTS 
4.1 Responsibility for Conducting the Tests 


Tests should be performed in the presence of 
accredited representatives of both the supplier and 
the user. 


4.1.1 The test programme should be jointly drawn 
up and signed which should include the purpose 
and the scope of the experiments to be conducted, 
measurements to be taken and the measuring and 
regulating instruments/equipment to be used. As far 
as possible, the same instruments/equipment should 
be used in continuous operation and for conducting 
the tests. 


4.1.2 It is recommended that an appropriate clause 
covering the cost of the agreed tests to be carried 
out is included in the contract. 


4.2 Duration of Tests 


Since acceptance tests are predominantly an exercise 
in continuous operation, the following points should 
be considered while fixing the programme or schedule 
for the tests. 


4.2.1 Acceptance tests should generally be 
conducted within an agreed specified period of the 
furnace attaining normal operating temperature. 


IS 9180 : 2011 


Acceptance tests should not be carried out on the 
first day, following a full rest day or holiday. The 
date should be fixed according to the design and 
operating procedure of the furnace as recommended 
by the manufacturers. 


4.2.2 The period of test in a batch operating furnace 
must be distinctly longer than the time of stay of the 
product in a furnace. 


4.2.2.1 In a continuously operating furnace, the 
duration of tests should not be less than the time of 
stay of the product in the furnace. Test is to be 
conducted after the furnace has attained a steady 
stabilized condition.The duration of the test shall be 
minimum 8 h. 


4.2.2.2 In an intermittently operating plant the test 
duration should not be less than 8 h. Results should 
be based on an average of at least three cycles. 


4.2.2.3 In batch type heat treatment furnaces the 
test may be limited to one complete cycle of heat 
treatment. For batch furnaces, the same thermal state 
should be maintained at the start and end of the tests. 


4.2.3 Depending upon the type of furnace and its 
nature of operation, a pre-test stabilisation period 
should be allowed and agreed upon which should 
however, not form part of the test. The pre-test phase 
should as far as possible maintain the conditions 
identical to those required for actual test period or 
phase. 


4.2.3.1 This procedure is more important for 
intermittently operating furnaces. 


4.2.4 Post-test shall also be held under the 
conditions identical to those required for actual test 
period or phase. Post-test period shall be mutually 
agreed upon by user and supplier. Post-test, though 
not forming a part of the test, will demonstrate the 
consistency of the furnace performance. But there 
will be no contractual obligation. 


4.3 Test Procedure 


4.3.1 Proper records should be kept during the entire 
test period entering various readings taken at brief 
intervals, for example at every 15 min on indicating 
instruments and at longer interval, say at 30 min. 
using recording instrument. All charts/curves plotted 
from the measurement should be attached to the test 
report. All such readings and documents should be 
approved by the contracting parties. 


4.4 Measuring Methods 
4.4.1 Time and Date 


The charging and discharging time and date for 
continuously operating furnaces to ascertain the 


IS 9180 : 2011 


period of stay of the product in the furnace are to be 
recorded. 


For heat treatment furnaces, separate note should 
be kept of heating, soaking and cooling, if any, 
indicating the time temperature relation during the 
entire cycle. 


4.4.2 Materials Charged in the Furnace 


Number of pieces, full particulars or specification of 
the material and weight charged should be recorded 
in order to determine the throughput capacity which 
is the effective amount of charge heated or treated 
per unit time. 


4.4.3 Temperature Measurement 


It is generally called for when proper assessment of 
the heating condition of the charge/product is 
considered important and agreed upon in the 
contract. Recommendations for measuring 
instruments are given below: 


Temperature Measurement Measuring 
Method 

a) On surface of the product 

(with or without scale/film): 

1) Inside furnace Optical or 

2) Outside furnace Thermoelectric 
b) Inside the product within Thermoelectric 

the furnace (for drilled work 

piece with inserted 

thermocouple ) 
c) Inside the furnace Thermoelectric 


chamber at representative 
locations 


4.4.4 Fuel Properties: Calorific Value 
4.4.4.1 Liquid fuels 


It should be determined by a bomb calorimeter by a 
competent authority to be mutually agreed upon. 
Representative samples should be collected. 


4.4.4.2 Gaseous fuels 


It should be determined preferably by Junker’s 
calorimeter at a representative spot or by calculation 
from the analysis of the gas to be obtained from a 
competent authority. The. average of a number of 
values/readings spread over the duration should be 
taken. 


4.4.5 Fuel/Heat Input/Consumption 
4.4.5.1 For liquid and gas fuels 


a) By calibrated flow meters as per the standard 
laid down, and 


b) Meter with integrator should be calibrated 
before and after the test. If recording chart 
is provided in place of integrator, it should 
be measured by a plan meter to obtain the 
total consumption over the specified period. 


5 ANALYSIS OF TESTS 


5.1 Correctness of all the measured values should 
be checked and mutually approved. 


5.2 Allowable errors in the measured values should 
also be agreed upon and approved mutually. 


6 TEST REPORT 


A test report should be submitted by the 
representative/representatives responsible for 
conducting the test. This should generally include 
the following: 


a) Object of the test; 
b) Mode of conducting the test; 


c) Specification of the furnace with 
guaranteed/indicated performance; 


d) Test results; 

e) Conclusion; 

f) Satisfactory functioning of safety devices; 
and 

g) Annexes — Log sheets, details of materials 
charged, fuel analysis and test reports, etc. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, 
of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be 
addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No. : MTD 26 (4729). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg { 23237617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14, C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 23379120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 { 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 { 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 22542315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRU VANATHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


