(Reaffirmed 2004)

IS : 3674 - 1966

Indian

Standard

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF MICRONAIRE VALUE OF COTTON FIBRES
Textile
Chairman Cotton Technological Research Laboratory ( Indian Council of .\gricultural Research ), Bombay DB 1'. SL-XDARAM ( .4llcrnntc to Dr R. L. S. Iycngar )
SHRIT. S. CHANDRASEPEABIAH SHBI 11. B. CHEVLI

Standards

Sectional

Committee,

TDC

1

'DR D.D. DAS SIHU I.B. DCTT SHBI R. G. %ALASI ( dikma!~ j Xlinistry of Defcncc ( DC1 ) SERl<:. L. GUPTA SARI G. S. CHATTERJI : .-litonorr Govrrnmcnr of \\`cst Bengal DR S. 11. MOKEERJEE Sational Test House. Calcutta SHRI S. P. \~~LLICIL Govcrnmfnt of\Ivsorr Sun1 Al.\`. IVATARAJA~ RAXASLAL The Fctlr-ration of Gujarat Mills & Industricc. SHBI STRESUBIIAI Ilar5ds I'~atrn Insprction \\*ing. Directorate General of Suppii<,c SC SHRI I. L. PATEL Disposals ( Department of Supply & Technical Dr\clopmcnt, llinistry of Industry 8: Supply ) SHRI .4.IL Pn.4xAIIcE < .4itrrnalc ) The Ahmrdabad Tcxtilc Indurtry's Rcscarch A\sociaDB T. RADUAKBISHXAX tion, Ahmcdabad Snsr 13. R. SHELAT (Allenrare) Dcpartmcnt of Agriculture (Ministry of Food, SHRIK.S. RAYACEASDE~AX Agriculture, Communitv Dcvclopmcnt 8: Cooocration i SERI H. SAHASBANAYAX The <lil!owncrs' Association,, Bomba! DE Xl. K. SEX Indian Jute Mills Associatton Research Institute, Calcutta ' DR S. I.'~ARAPOBEWALA The National Rayon Corporation Ltd, Bombay SHRI D. S. KADKARSI ( .4llrrnnfe SHBI P.R. YERX Govcrnmcnt of Xlaharashtra SHRIT. BALAICRXSHNAS. Director General. I SI ( Ex-njicio Member ) Deputy Director ( Tcx j .Srrrf!arlC-.> SHRI D.R.KoBLI .issistant Director Tcx :: ISI SERI .\~.RAGHUPATBY Deputy Director : Tcx `, ISI

Government of X4ysorc The Silk 6r Art Silk Mlls' Research .4ssociation, Bombay Indian jute Mills Association, Calcutta Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay

INDIAN STANDARDS MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR
NEWDELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR MAilG

IS:367401966 (ConlinwdJram
pace 1 )

Textile Standards Subcommittee for Physical Methods of Tests for Cotton, TDC 1 : 1
Conwnrr DR R. L. Ii. ITENOAB
Refiresmting

Cotton Technological Research Laboratory ( Indian Council of Agricultural Research ), Bombay

DR V. SUNDARAY ( Altcmafc to Dr R. L. N. Iycngar ) The Millowners' Association, Bombay SHRI_T. 1'. ANANTHAN Directorate of Industries, Government of SERI S. S. GILL Punjab SHR~ S.P. KI~MARIA (Alfemale) Victoria Jubilee Technical Institute, Bombay PBOF R. K. MODY SHBI V'. S. RISBUD ( Altcraa~e ) Ministry of Dcfcncc ( DGI ) SBRI P. T. PAXDYA The Abmcdabad Textile Industry's Research AssociaDR T. RADEA~RL~E~A~ tion, Ahmcdabad SEBI B. R. SHELAT (Akrnatz) Textile Research Association, The Bombay SHRI R. N. RAO Bombay SHRI Ii. S. SRASKARAJABAYAXA The South India Textile Research Association, Coimbatorc Institute of Textiles, Technological SERI S. D. VASHIIT The Bhiwani

2

IS : 3674 - 1966

Indian

Standard

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF MICRONAIRE VALUE OF COTTON F1BRE.S
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 20 July 1966, after the draft finalized by the Textile Standards Sectiohal Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 0.2 Fineness is one of the important characteristics of cotton fibre. The determination of fineness of cotton fibre by the gravimetric method as prescribed in IS : 234-1952* is time consuming. Therefore, several instruments using airflow method have been designed in US, UK and India, to determine the fineness values of cotton fibre indirectly. 0.3 The airflow instruments, generally prescribed for this method, operate on the principle that the rate of airflow, through a plug of cotton fibre of fixed lveight contained in a container of definite dimensions and subjected to a constant pressure head is related to the fineness of the cotton fibre. 0.4 Much work on an international basis has been done to develop and make available a range of cottons for the calibration of airflow instruments. Bv use of these calibration cottons and application of the procedures prescribed in this standard, it is possible to achieve agreement between two laboratories v+vithin f 0.2 micronaire units in the fineness measurement of the usual commercial sample of cotton. 0.5 \Vhen formulating this standard, the Committee concerned did not feel called upon to lay down a sampling procedure for drawing a bulk sample from material collected from the field, at the gin, the mill, the warehouse or the market. The bulk sample, it is expected, will be so as to be representative of the lot under investigation. 0.6 While formulating this standard considerable assistance has been derii.ed from Dot: ISO/TC 38 ( Secretariat - 270 ) 409 First draft proposal for an IS0 Recommendation : Determination of micronaire value of cotton fibres issued by the International Organisation for Standardization. 0.7 In this standard generally metric units have been specified. Hol\.ever, \vhere found necessary, to familiarize the industry >cith the metric values e'quivalent fps values hav-e also been given.
`Method for determination of mean fibrc weight per unit length ( cotton ),

3

IS : 3674 - 1966 0.8 In reporting the result of-a test made in accordance \vith this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes a method for the determination of micronaire value of loose disorientated cotton fibres by means of airflow instruments. This standard is applicable to cotton taken from bales, laps, slivers or other sources of lint cotton. 2. PRINCIPLE

2.1 Air, under a specified pressure, is passed through a specimen of cotton The mass and of knov\n weight confined to a space of known volume. volume of the specimen may be either constant or varied in relation to each other according to the type of instrument used. The resistance of the specimen to the flou- of arr is related to the average fineness of the fibres in the specimen. The rate of flow of air through the specimen, or the pressure difference across the specimen ( according to the instrument used ), is indicated on a scale graduated in either arbitrary units of micronaire value or appropriate absolute units. 3. TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definition shall apply.

of a mass of 3.1 Micronaire Value - A measure of the air permeability cotton fibres under specified conditions expressed in terms of an arbitrary The micronaire scale is based on a range scale, called micronaire scale. of cottons to which micronaire values have been assigned by international agreement. 4. SAMPLING 4.1 Gross Sample - Take samples at random from different portions of the bulk sample to make up a gross sample weighing from 250 to 1 000 g.
NOTE

grow3

- If thr hulk sampl? weighs sample.

less than

230 g, the v..hole of it shall constitute

the

Spread the gross sample evenly on a level surface in 4.2 Test Samplethe form of about 1 X 1 m square. Over this, place a metallic frame Icork of 1 x 1 m ( inside dimensions) divided into 25 equal sub-squares. From each of these sub-squares, pull out at random approximately equal
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( w&d

).

4

xs:3674bunches of fibres so as to get a sample weighing about 100 g. constitute the test sa~@e. 5. CONDITIONING OF TEST SAMPLE

1966

This shall

5.1 The test sample shall be conditioned in standard atmosphere at 65 f 2 percent relative humidity and 27" f 2�C temperature for 4 hours ( see IS : 196-1966* ).
NOTE- Pre-conditioning of the test sample is not required.

6. ATMOSPHERIC

CONDITIONS

FOR TESTING (see 5.1).

6.1 The test shall be carried out in standard atmosphere 7. APPARATUS

7.1 Balance-The balance shall be of sufficient capacity to weigh the specimen required for the airflow instrument used: and capable of weighing the specimen to an accuracy of 10 mg. 7.2 AirfIow parts: Instrument It shall consist of the following principal

a) Compression cylinder with perforated ends for the admission and discharge of air. The cylinder may be either of a known fixed volume or of variable volume but adjustable to known volume, and in either case, it shall have such dimensions that, with the prescribed weight of the specimen, each cubic centimetre of cylinder shall contain between O-16 to 0.30 g of cotton when compressed. b) One or more valves or other means for regulating and controlling the flow of air through, or the air pressure difference across the specimen. A gauge or other means for measuring the resistance of the c) specimen to the airflow, or of the air pressure difference across For example, a combination of a manometer for the specimen. maintaining the air pressure applied to the specimen and a flowmeter for indicating the rate of airflow through the specimen may be used. d) An air pump or other means for producing the required air pressure applied to the specimen, or the required pressure difference across the specimen. 8. ADJUS TMENTS

AND CALIBRATION
appropriate ). 5

OF THE

INSTRUMENT in use

8.1 Make preliminary adjustments (see Appendices B, C, D and E ).

to the instrument

*Atmospheric conditions for testing( mid

ss:3674-1966 8.2Calibrate ( see Appendix A ) the instrdment by testing at least three
specimens from at least three calibration cottons. 8.2.1 The instrument shall be considered to be in calibration, if it reads the calibration cottons within 4.0-l micronaire value of the established values for the tiorresponding calibration cotton. If the instrument does not read within these limits, either (a) re-adjust the instruments and repeat the calibration procedure, or (b) use an appropriate correction factor based on the ratio established during the calibration of the instrument. 9. PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMENS

9.1 Open the test sample with the fingers, breaking up lumps if any, and eliminating as much of the extraneous matter as possible. Condition the test sample as prescribed in 5.1. . 9.2 Spread the opened, cleaned, and conditioned test sample and divide it into 25 approximately equal groups. Extract small bunches of loose fibres from each group. Remove the pieces of non-fibrous material from fibres so collected and weigh at least two test specimens as in 9.3. 9.3 The test specimens shall be of the size prescribed for the instrument being used. In instruments having compression cylinders of fixed volume, the weight of the specimen shall be within f O-5 percent of specimen weight appropriate for the instrument. In instruments having compression cylinders with adjustably varied volume, the weight of the test specimen used shall be known with an accuracy of rf: O-5 percent.

10.PROCEDURE
10.0 Make the necessary preliminary adjustments appropriate to the instrument used. 10.1 Place the test specimen in the fibre compression cylinder, portion at a time, taking care that all the fibres are placed inside. 10.2 Insert the compression cylinder and lock it. a small

plunger in position in the fibre compresSion

10.3 Cause the air to flow through the specimen and read the airflow or the difference in pressure on the scale to an accuracy or half a division of the scale. 10.4 Remove the test specimen from the fibre compression cylinder. Open out the specimen and re-pack it into the fibre compression cylinder, taking care that all the fibres are placed inside. Determine one more test value of the specimen in the manner prescribed in 10.2 and 10.3.

6

I!3:3674-1966 10.5 Take the other test specimen manner set out in 10.1 to 10.4. and determine the test values in the

NOTE - If the deviation of any.individual reading value, prepare two more test specimens as prescribed bp the procedure prescribed in 10.1 to 105.

is more than 0.2 from the mean in 9 and find cut the trst values

11. CALCULATION

AND EXPRESSION

OF RESULTS

11.1 In instruments in which the scale is graduated in micronaire units, find the average of the test values to the nearest 0.1 micronaire unit and report it as the micronaire value of the cotton fibre in the lot. 11.2 For instruments in which the scale is graduated in units other than micronaire, convert the direct reading to micronaire units either from a Find previously prepared graph or by previously fitted curve (see A-3.1 ). the average of the values thus obtained to the nearest O-1 micronaire unit and report it as the micronaire value of the cotton fibre in the lot.
NOTE -A conversion curve or a conversion equation will have to be prepared for all instruments not having a micronaire scale in order to make full use bf the calibration cottons referred to in .ilppendix A.

12. REPORT 12.1 The test report shall include the following: a) the average value calculated as the micronaire value of the lot; b) the type, make and model of instrument used; and c) the number of specimens tested.

APPENDIX
METHOD A-l. OF CALIBRATING COTTONS AIRFLOW

A
INSTRUMENTS

( Clause 8.2 and Note inder 11.2 )

CALIBRATION

A-l.1 Secure calibration samples of the International Calibration Cottons series from the Cotton Division, Agricultural llarketing Service, United States Department of Agriculture, Washington 25, D. C.. USA. These are furnished with micronaire values established by the Internati,onal Calibration Cotton Standards Committee. Currentb-, there are nine such cottons. They approximately cover the range of micronaire values of the 7

Isr3674-1966
world's commercial cottons. ponding to the International prepard in India. A-2. CALIBRATION GRADUATED Secondary Calibration calibration cottons ieries, corresCottons series, are proposed to be SCALE

OF INSTRUMENTS WITH IN MICRONAIRE UNITS

A-2.1 For an airflow instrument equipped with a micronaire scale, use a minimum of two specimens from each of three of the calibration cottons Make two test determinations on each when calibrating the instrument. the second determination serving to check the first. The differspecimen, ence between the first and second readings on a test specimen shall not exceed 0- 1 micronaire unit. A-2.2 In instances whgre the O-l micronaire unit, prepare make two readings on it. from calibration cotton have difference between the two readings exceeds a new specimen of the calibration cotton and Continue such readings until two specimens each been read within the tolerance specified.

A-2.3 Find the average of the first readings of the three specimen and compare with the established value printed on the label of the calibration If none of the differences between the averages and the correspondcotton. ing established values exceed 0.10 micronaire unit, the instrument is If greater differences occur, make considered to be in calibration. necessary adjustments in the instrument to bring it into compliance with established valu-s of the calibration cottons. Alternatively, calculate a series of corrections to be applied to the readings of the cottons to be tested. A-3. CALIBRATION GRADUATED OF INSTRUMENTS WITH SCALE IN OTHER THAN MICRONAIRE UNITS

A-3.1 For an airflow instrument equipped with scale graduated in other than micronaire units, establish the relation between the instrument read- , ings and the established micronaire values for the calibration cottons by plotting a graph or fitting a curve. It is recommended to use as many calibration cottons as available preferably more than three.

APPENDIX ( Clause 8.1 )
OPERATION B-O. GENERAL

B
AIRFLOW

OF THE MICRONAXRE INSTRUMENTS*

B-O.1There
only

are several models of the micronaire instrument which vary in details of construction and operation intended to increase safety,
of a specific (or proprietary) to the use of that instrument. instrument is not intended to

+~Mcntion of the name promote or give preference

8

IS : 3674 - 1966 For any other operational ease and speed of operation. details not given here, the manufacturer's instructions instrument shall be consulted. B-l. B-l.1 MICRONAIRE Adjust 60600 MODEL the instrument mechanically as follo\cs. or constructional supplied with the

and calibrate

B-1.1.1 Set the primary air regulator to a pressure of I.75 kg/cm" ( 25 lb/in2 ) and open the shut-off valve that admits air to the instrument. cylinder, ahow B-1.1.2 Insert the manometer plu, 0 in the compression the air to enter and adjust the secondary air regulator so as to obtain a pressure of 0.42 kg/cm* ( 6 lb/in* ) in compression cylinder. Again, if necessary, after the air flows through the instrument, re-adjust the regulating valve. B-1.1.3 Insert one of the master orifice plugs, allow the air to enter, and if necessaq-, turn the calibration screlv to bring the float to the position on the curvilinear scale corresponding IO the designation of the orifice plug. Kepeat these operations, using the other orifice plug or disc ( .xe Notes 1 and3).
NOTE 1 --Instead of two calibration discs, each with its bore. one disc with two difTerent bores may be used. If the latter is used, close one of the bores with a finger at the lower scale value of 2.8, the bore to be closed being especially markpd. NOTE ? - Thr scale readings 2.8 and 6.2 respectivelv correspond to flow rates of 21.1 f 0.8 litre!min ,, 0.55 f 0.03 fts,`min ) and 49-3 f l-4 jitrc/min ' 1.74&0.05 ftsjmin ).

B-2. MICRONAIRE B-2.1 Adjust

80400 MODEL the instrument mechanically as follows. the

and calibrate

B-2.1.1 Operate the foot valve and see that the air pressure behind filter is bet\\.een 4.2 kg/cm2 ( 60 lb/inz ) and 8.8 kg/cm" ( 123 lb/in2 ). B-2.1.2 Open the pressure valves, as far as posiible. regulator and the upper and lolver

adjusting

B-2.1.3 Insert the control disc in the test chamber, open the foot valve. Operate the pressure regulator so that the mercury column rises to 0.31 kg,/cm2 ( 4.4 lb,in* 11,that is. to three scale units below the red line. The air shall pass through both bores of the control disc lvithout hindrance.
SITE -Operate

the valve several

times and see that

the mercury

always

rises to :he

same hcighl.

9

IS: 367411966 B-2.1.4 Adjust the upper edge of the float against micronaire 4-6 by reguiating the lower adjusting valve. value of

B-2.1.5 Adjust the upper edge of the float approximately to micronaire value of 6.0 ( upper check mark ) by regulating the upper adjusting valve. B-2.1.6 Tightly close the upper opening of the control disc with one finger. The float will then fall to about the level of lower check mark. B-2.1.7 In order to make an exact adjustment, while alternately opening and closing the upper opening of the control disc, alternately change the Do this until the upper edge of the lower and upper adjusting valves. float corresponds with the two check marks located at about micronaire values of 2.9 and 6.0. B-2.1.8 Turn the pressure O-33 kg/cm2 ( 4.7 lb/in" ). regulator until the mercury column stands at

B-2.1.9 By opening and closing the upper opening of the control disc, check whether the upper and lower positions of the float still correspond with the two adjustment marks even after the change of the mercur) column from 0.31 kg/cm* ( 4.4 lb/ins) to 0.33 kgjcm2 ( 4.7 lb/in2 ). If this does not occur, repeat the procedure as given in B-2.1.7. Open and close the upper opening of the control disc, several times. If were corrc,:tly made, the float position shall correspond to both marks without further changes of the adjusting valves.
NOTE-

the adjustments

B-3. CALIBRATION

AND TESTING

B-3.1 After adjusting the instrument mechanically (B-1.1.1 to B-1.1.3 or B-2.1.1 to B-2.1.9, depending upon the instrument used ), check the instrument with at least three International Calibration Cottons (see cottons at frequent Appendix A 1, Repeat the check xi-it11 the calibration intervals. B-3.2 Follow the instructions given in 4, 5 and 9 for sampling, ing of samples and preparation ofspecimens to be tested.
NOTE -

condition*0*5 per-

Thr

test specimen

shall

weigh

3.24 g 10.5

percent

(50

grains

cent j.

B-3.3 Follow the instructions given in 10.1 to 10.5 for loading clo-ing the compression cylinder, aud reading the gauge. B-3.4 Follow the instructions reporting the test result. given in 11.1 and

the specimen,

11.2 for calculating

and

IS': 3674 - 1966

APPENDIX ( Clause 8.1 )
OPERATION

C
METER

OF THE W.I.R.A. FINENESS ( COTTON MODEL )*

C-O. GENERAL C-O.1 There are two models of the W.I.R.A. Fineness Meter (Cotton h4odel) described as the (old model ' and ` new model ' respectively. They differ primarily in the scale units and size of test specimen used. The old model is graduated in litres per minute and measures a specimen weighing 6.0 g. The new model is equipped with a scale graduated in micronaire units and measures a specimen weighing 5.0 g. For any other constructional or operational details not given here, the manufacturer's instructions supplied with the instrument shall be consulted. C-l. ADJUSTMENT OF THE INSTRUMENT

C-l.1 For preliminary calibration, adjust the instrument until the level of the liquid in the manometer tube coincides with the upper ` zero ' mark.
NOTE -The

liquid

column.

lower edge of the meniscus

is observed

when

noting

the length

of the

C-2. CALIBRATION C-2.1 After preliminary least three International C-2.2 Follow instructions samples and preparation

AND

TESTING calibrate the instrument by using at Cottons (see Appendix A ). conditioning of

adjustment, Calibration

given in 4, 5 and 9 for sampling, of specimens to be tested.

SOTE -The test specimen for the old model 1V.I.R.A. shall weigh 6.0 g fO.5 percent; and for the new model, it shall weigh 5-O g f 0.5 percent.

C-2.3 Follow instructions given in 10.1 to 10.5 for loading closing the compression cylinder, and reading the gauge. C-2.4 Follow instructions porting results.
promote or give preference

the specimen, and re-

given

in 11.1 and

11.2 for calculating

*luImtion of the name of a specific (or proprietary!
to the use of that instrument.

instrument is not intended to

11

xS:3674-1966

APPENDIX ( Clause 8.1 )
OPERATION D-O. GENERAL OF THE ATIRA FIBRE

D
FINENESS TESTER*

D-0.1 The instrument developed by the Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Association ( ATIRA ) measures the ` Micronaire value ' hlc and ` Maturity fineness ' MH of cottons on two separate scales. Cotton having hit values in the range of 2.5 to 6.5 or MH values from l-5 to 7.0 MC value is the microuaire value and may be tested on this instrument. 1lH value is the product of the maturity ratio and the fineness in micrograms per inch as obtained by weighing \vhole fibres. For any other constructional or operational details not given here, the manufacturer's instructions supplied with the instrument shall be consulted. D-l. D-l.1 ADJUSTMENT OF THE INbTRUMENT accurately with the levelling screl1.s provided. The level shall portion of the and top up \\.ith

Level the instrument

D-l.2 Check the level of the liquid in the manometer. coincide with the reference mark on the initial vertical manometric scale. If the level is lower, open the reservoir tlw provided manometric liquid.

D-l.3 Squeeze the aspirator bulb, so that the float in the air tank rises to the top. As the float descends, gently close the fibre compression cylinder . with the rubber stopper. See that the level of the manometer liquid stays betiveen the limits marked on the final vertical section of the scale. D-2. CALIBRATION AND TESTING by using the

D-2.1 After preliminary International Calibration

adjustment calibrate the instrument Cottons (set Appendix A ).

D-2.2 Follow the instructions given in 4,s and 9 for sampling, conditioning of samples and preparation of specimens to be tested. NOTE -The test specimen shall weigh 5.0 g i 0.5 percent. D-2.3 Follow the instructions given in 10.1 to 10.5 for loading the specimen, closing the compression cylinder and reading the gauge. D-2.4 Follow the instructions reporting the test result. given in 11.1 and 11.2 for calculating and

*The ATIRA Fibre Fineness Tester is available at .i\hmedabad Texkilc Industr\`s Research Association, Navrangpur?, .4hmcdabad-9. Mention of the name of a spccik (&p;~r~;t;; ) instrument is not intended to promote or give preference to the use of

.

12

IS : 3674 - 1966

APPENDIX ( CZuuse 8.1 )
OPERATION E-O. GENERAL OF PORT-AR FIBRE

E

FINENESS

TESTER*

E-O.1 It is a portable Arealometer meant for use at places where the cotton It is graduated in Lequivalent fibre thickness ' in is traded or recessed. The two scales are graduated from 3 to 7 units. microns an 1 micronaire microns and 2.5 to 7 micronaire units respectively. It measures a specimen unit. For of 8.0 g. It can be read to an accuracy of & O-05 micronaire any other constructional or operational details, not given here, the manufacturer's instructions supplied with the instrument shall be consulted. E-l. ADJUSTMENT OF THE INSTRUMENT a level surface and indicating meter. remove the cover.

E-l.1 Place the instrument on Check the zero of the permeability

E-l.2 Place a weight of 8 g on the weighing scale and with the compression lever in the top position, adjust the zero screw until the permeability indicating meter reads near the red mark on the scale. E-l.3 Take approximately 8-O g of cotton and place on the weighing scale. Give one stroke to the pump of the atomizer bulb and see whether the specimen is heavier or lighter than 8.0 g. If the indicator goes above the red mark, the specimen is heavier and if it goes belolv, the specimen is lighter. By taking off or adding bit by bit, adjust the specimen weight to 8.0 g. E-2. CALIBRATION AND TESTING adjustment calibrate the instrument Cottons ( seeAppendix A ). by using the

E-2.1 After preliminary International Calibration

E-2.2 Follow the instructions given in 4, 5 and 9 for sampIing, ing of samples and preparation of specimens to be tested.
SOTE

condition-

-The

test specimen

shall weigh

8.0 f 0.5 percent.

E-2.3 Follow the instructions given in specimen, closing the compression cylinder E-2.4 Follow the instructions reporting the test result.
promote

10.1 to 10.5 for loading and reading the gauge. and 11.2 for calculating
instrument is not intended

the and
to

given

in II.1

*Mention of the name of a specific ( or proprietary) or give preference to the use of that instrument. 13

