NAT HIAF IS 17456 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


mi nA gR — Wet À 
urn taAa A andea ch feu ETS 
ukaga w antes 


Smart Community 
Infrastructure — Guidance on Smart 
Transportation for Allocation of 
Parking Lots in Cities 


ICS 13.020.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH APT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2020 Price Group 5 


Smart Cities Sectional Committee, CED 59 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Smart Cities 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Every city has similar experiences or city issues, especially cities having a large area and those rapidly developed 
or being developed in a short time, such as difficulty in easily finding vacant parking lots when trying to park a 
car in a city. Although spaces for parking are limited in a city, the more popular and common it is for people to 
buy, own and drive a car, the larger the number of cars is. One of the reasons must be the reduction of car prices 
in recent years. Furthermore, people basically want to move by themselves at their convenience to anywhere they 
need or like to go. This background allows people to use a car more casually to commute to work places, visit 
places when it is necessary to go and enjoy driving. 


The limited number of parking lots in a city should be shared by more vehicles. Actually, as concerned, the low 
availability ratio of parking lots has caused unexpected city issues besides the direct issue of difficulty in finding 
vacant parking lots in cities. It has resulted in taking drivers longer time to find vacant parking lots. This fact 
means that they consume more fuel. To successfully find such parking lots, drivers’ attention is caught up while 
looking causing collision accidents to happen more often. Such incidents and slow driving while looking for 
vacant parking lots bring about traffic congestion. In addition, staying inside a city by driving a car at a low speed 
results in the vehicle emitting more pollutants, particulate matters (PMs) and greenhouse gases into the air with 
the atmosphere becoming much more polluted. In any event, there is nothing good about shortage of parking lots 
and the low availability ratio thereof in a city. Citizens, including drivers and public road neighbours, are justly 
irritated with such a situation. 


Requirements and functional aspects for smart parking lots in cities, suggests ideal parking lot facilities and 
outlines technical aspects regarding unoccupied parking space, parking space reservation, vehicle automatic 
access control, self-service parking fee payment and vehicle reverse search, based on how to enhance conventional 
parking lot services. 


Normally, a city has its own area available for living and business. However, the area of parking lots is limited, 
especially in the case with matured cities. Easy measures to overcome this city issue will be to increase the 
availability ratio of parking lots by effectively allocating and reallocating parking lots to more vehicles. With the 
use of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), data sharing systems have also been organized and 
practically used which help in parking management. By using information exchange networks, information on 
which parking lots are vacant or occupied, until what time they are available or occupied, where they are located 
and so on, is easily collected and shared. This enables effective allocation of parking lots to drivers, who want to 
park their vehicles, resulting in solving such city issues. 


From the viewpoint of investments in city development, construction should be planned, designed, arranged and 
performed with limited scale budget. To dig up and activate unrecognized or unused/unoffered parking lots is 
still a realistic and easy way to increase the total capacity of parking lots in a city without additional construction 
thereof. This strategy leads to avoiding unnecessary parking lot construction that calls for capital costs. 


This standard describes the concept of smart transportation to efficiently allocate parking lots to drivers in cities 
and outlines the services, which is supported by the data exchange and sharing platforms. This standard also 
aims at satisfying some Sustainable Development Goals by United Nations, especially Goal 3 ‘Good health and 
well-being’, Goal 7 ‘Affordable and clean energy’, Goal 8 ‘Decent work and economic growth’, Goal 9 ‘Industry, 
innovation and infrastructure’, Goal 11 ‘Sustainable cities and communities’, Goal 12 ‘Responsible consumption 
and production’, Goal 13 ‘Climate action’ and Goal 15 ‘Life on land’. 


In the preparation of this standard, the assistance has been derived from ISO/DIS 37163 ‘Smart community 
infrastructures — Guidance on smart transportation for parking lot allocation in cities’. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 17456 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


SMART COMMUNITY 
INFRASTRUCTURE — GUIDANCE ON 
SMART TRANSPORTATION FOR ALLOCATION 
OF PARKING LOTS IN CITIES 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard describes how to organize smart 
transportation to allocate parking lots to drivers in 
cities. It is intended to apply to cities, especially 
those having shortage or low availability of parking 
lots. 


1.2 This smart transportation still aims at creating 
solution to the city issue of difficulty for drivers in 
finding vacant parking lots in a short time, by which 
other solutions to traffic accidents and congestion, 
energy consumption, air pollution as well as noise and 
vibration can be mitigated. 


1.3 This standard describes concept, goals and 
procedures of smart transportation for parking lots 
allocation in smart cities. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute the provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
these standards. 


Title 


Sustainable development of 
habitats — Indicators 


IS No. 
17000 : 2019 


IS 17457 : 2020 Sustainable development of 
habitats — Vocabulary 
IS 17451 : 2020 Smart community 
infrastructures = Best 
practices for transportation — 
Guidelines 
3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given in IS 17457, IS 17451 and the 
following shall apply. 


3.1 Parking Lot — The area to park all kinds of 

vehicles allowed to run on public roads. 
NOTE — Normally, the vehicles listed in IS 17451, namely, 
buses, trucks, motorcycles, automobiles, IPT including 
three-wheelers and e-rickshaws and non-motorized transports 
including manual rickshaws and bicycles as well as vehicles 
or systems and their additional instruments assisting 
mobility-impaired persons (for example, scooters, segways). 


3.2 Parking Lot Owner — A person or an organization 
which possesses and offers parking lots. 


3.3 Driver — A person who operates a vehicle when 
parking in a parking lot. 


3.4 Parking Lot Allocation — An action to suggest 
vacant parking lots to drivers by finding the best match 
of drivers’ requests or preference on parking with 
availability of parking lot vacancy currently existing or 
expected in the immediate future. 
NOTE — Drivers’ requests include access routes from current 
places, preferable places to park, preferable time to start 
parking, parking duration, the number of vehicles to be parked 
and vehicle’s characteristics, limits of parking fees payable and 
payment manners. 


3.5 Parking Lot Allocation System — An 
arrangement for parking lot allocation by using data 
bases to exchange and share information including 
parking lot allocation, parking time recording, 
navigation to parking lots and suggestions on parking 
fee payment procedures and necessary services. 


4 CONCEPT OF SMART TRANSPORTATION 
FOR PARKING LOT ALLOCATION 


4.1 General 


4.1.1 This section describes the general criteria 
required for smart transportation to allocate parking 
lots in cities. To solve the city issue of difficulties for 
drivers in finding vacant parking lots, the allocation 
should be organized and performed to provide them 
more opportunities to find vacant parking lots and 
choices to meet their requests and preference to park. 
This procedure increases parking lot availability ratios 
in a city. Parking lot availability ratios in a city should 
be increased for following reasons: 


IS 17456 : 2020 


a) To provide greater absolute number of parking 
lots to citizens; and 


b) To offer parking lots to citizens more frequently. 


4.1.2 To ensure the performance of smart transportation, 
smart transportation has, 


a) high security for drivers’ and parking lot 
owners’ identification and privacy, parking fee 
payment, data transfer, avoidance of illegal smart 
transportation users’ violence; and 


b) terminal-to-terminal communication that is, 
decentralized to achieve fast procedures and 
reduce organization, operation and maintenance 
costs while still securing high security. 


4.1.3 The additional effects by smart transportation will 
be expected by facilitating the parking lot allocation as 
listed below: 


a) Invitation of more visitors to a city from outside 
thereof; 


b) Activation and introduction of business into a city 
by receiving more vehicles in a city; 


c) Reduction of the number of vehicle collisions and 
traffic accidents; 


d) Reduction of traffic congestion; 


e) Improvement of the atmospheric environment 
(for example, depression of greenhouse gas, 
carbon monoxide, NOx/SOx, hydrocarbon, lead 
compound and PM emissions); 


f) Provision of a good environment to public road 
neighbours (for example, noise and vibration 
reduction); and 


g) Offer of ease to citizens (for example, relief of 
irritation to drivers and public road neighbours). 


These advantages would also be additionally brought 
about besides solution to the target city issue of 
difficulties for drivers in finding vacant parking lots. 
Thus, this smart transportation has possibility to 
comprehensively relieve such city issues. 


4.1.4 There is a variety in the kinds of vehicles that 
are headed for their individual destinations at different 
locations in a city. The establishment of safe and 
steady data exchange and sharing platforms is a key 
to successfully organize parking lot allocation services. 
Through communication based on the network, 
information required to immediately allocate parking 
lots appropriately to drivers is processed and shared 
among drivers and parking lot owners joining a parking 
lot allocation system. Drivers’ requests should best 
match the conditions of parking lots that are currently 
vacant or will be available in the time frame requested 
or preferred by drivers. 


4.1.5 To support the communication and data sharing, 
instruments and equipment should also steadily work, 


which are detectors or sensors, telecommunication 
devices, signboards, displays and so on. To ensure 
the communication, data sharing and convenience for 
drivers, the services for parking lot allocation should 
satisfy the conditions below: 


a) Communication directly from terminal to terminal; 
NOTE — ‘Terminal’ means an end equipment or instrument 
used by holders for communication (for example, mobile 
phones, interphones, tablets, PCs, POS). 

b) Communication without time lag (for example, 
less number of processing steps for users’ 
identification); 


c) Traceable communication; 
d) Offers of large selections on parking lots; and 
e) Easy management of the services. 


4.2 Applicable City Issues and Expected Advantages 


The criteria for smart transportation described in this 
standard are appropriate to address the city issue of 
difficulties for drivers in finding vacant parking lots 
in a city. As expected in 4.1, by introducing smart 
transportation, other advantages would also be brought 
besides solution of the difficulty. The advantages can be 
the targets that smart transportation aims at but should 
not be the top priorities or intention to introduce smart 
transportation, because they are not directly solved 
thereby. 


5 PLANNING TO IMPLEMENT SMART 
TRANSPORTATION 


To properly implement smart transportation for 
allocation of parking lots in a city and have it perform 
successfully as planned, the parameters listed below 
should be confirmed in advance: 


a) Traffic patterns in the target city/region; 

b) Traffic volume in the target city/region; 

c) Traffic capacity on the public road in the target 
city/region; 

d) Number of currently existing parking lots 
available; 


e) Location of currently existing parking lots 
available; 


f) Area or capacity of currently existing parking lots 
available; 


g) Number of parking lots planned; 
h) Location of parking lots planned; 
j) Capacity of parking lots planned; 
k) Mass limits of parking lots allowed; 


m) Dimension limits of parking lots allowed 


(for example, clearance); and 


n) Payment methods for parking lots available. 


6 ADOPTION OF SMART TRANSPORTATION 
FOR PARKING LOT ALLOCATION 


6.1 Objectives 


As mentioned in 4.2, smart transportation described 
in this standard can help directly address the issue of 
difficulties for drivers in finding vacant parking lots in 
a city. The adoption and implementation of this smart 
transportation should be performed by following 6.3. 


6.2 Target Vehicles 


All vehicles that can be parked in parking lots in cities. 
6.3 Procedure to Adopt Smart Transportation 


6.3.1 General 


Smart transportation for allocation of parking lots 
can be adopted into a city by following the procedure 
designated in 6.3.2 to 6.3.8. 


6.3.2 Data to be Collected 


To allocate parking lots to drivers, basic information 
is needed for the arrangement. The contents of the 
information to be collected are listed below: 


a) Parking Lots 
1) Parking lot location; 


2) Parking lot formation or structures 
(for example, on the ground, underground, 
inside a building, on a bridge, on a public 
road); 


3 


a 


Parking lot sizes or capacity (that is, sizes or 
capacities large enough for common private 
cars, buses and trucks); 


4 


a 


Allowable parking time (for example, 15 min, 
30 min, | h, half a day, one full day, one week, 
one month, half a year, one year); 


5) Parking service time frame (for example, only 
during day time, even at night, overnight); 


6 


WN 


Parking frequency (for example, just one 
time, temporally for a limited period, regular 
interval use); 


7 


Sa 


Parking lot ownership (for example, public, 
exemption, private, shared); 


8 


wa 


Parking lot facilities (for example, roofed, 
power-rechargeable, refuelable, car washing 
services-availability); 
9) Map of the area 
transportation; and 


serviced with smart 


10) Parking fees (for example, amounts, discount/ 


cooperative programs). 
b) Drivers 
1) Driver’s gender; 
2) Driver’s age; 
3) Driver’s specific conditions (for example, 
disabilities, with babies or small children); 


IS 17456 : 2020 


4) Driver’s current location; 
5) Driver’s destinations; 


6) Driver’s vehicle characteristics (for example, 
common private cars, buses, trucks); 


7 


wa 


Requested or expected parking time duration 
(for example, 15 min, 30 min, | h, half a day, 
one full day, one week, one month, half a year, 
one year); and 


8 


wa 


Driver-preferable payment procedures 
(for example, in cash, credit card, through 
bank transfer). 


Others — Current weather conditions on the 
way to the parking lot and at the place thereof 
(for example, sunny/cloudy/rainy/snowy, wind 
speed, wind directions, humidity, visibility, and 
specific weather condition). 


6.3.3 Data Collection 


To collect data designated in 6.3.2, the instruments 
and equipment listed below should be installed and 
operated: 


Cc 


wa 


a) Car sensors in parking lots (for example, car 
existing/absence, parking lot vacancy/occupancy); 


b) Monitors for security in parking lots; 


c) Traffic congestion monitors (for example, on the 
way to the parking lot, areas around the parking 
lot); 

d) Air pollution sensors (for example, SOx/NOx, 
carbon monoxide, PMs); 


e) Atmospheric condition sensors (for example, 
ambient temperature, humidity); 


f) Weather monitors (for example, rain/snow fall, 
wind speed and direction, illumination); 


g) Software to collect the data and process 
(for example, data collection, data transfer, 
data processing, parking charge, parking fee 
collection); 


h) Apps (for example, for drivers, for parking lot 
owners, for traffic departments, for related and 
additional services); and 


j) User survey. 


6.3.4 Data Transfer 


To transfer to parking lot allocation system databases, 
drivers and parking lot owners the data of information 
collected in accordance with 6.3.2 and 6.3.3, the 
communication shall be organized by securing 
requirements and functions listed below: 


a) Between parking lot owners and parking lot 
allocation databases 


1) Mobile or smart phones; 
2) Apps applicable to mobile and smart phones; 


3) Security gateways (for example, identified 
authentication, data encryption, access control 
and restriction); 


IS 17456 : 2020 


4) Internet; and 


5) Offline communication (for example, local 
area networks, ad-hoc networks, near-field 


communication). 
b) Between drivers and parking lot allocation 
databases 

1) Mobile or smart phones; 

2) Apps applicable to mobile and smart phones; 

3) Security gateways (for example, identified 
authentication, data encryption, access 
control and restriction); 

4) Internet; 

5) Offline communication (for example, local 
area networks, ad-hoc networks, near-field 
communication); and 

6) Identification and tracking using tags 


(for example, radio-frequency identification, 
ultra high frequency). 


6.3.5 Information Provided to Drivers 


In order to help drivers choose a parking lots from 
options best matching their requests or preference by 
considering where, what time and how long to park 
their vehicles, the information listed below should be 
provided to drivers: 


a) Location of the parking lot; 


b) Available time frame of the parking lot 
(for example, from what time to what time or to 
which day); 


c) Allowable parking time in the parking lot 
(for example, 30 min, 1 h, half a day, one day, 
one week, one month, half a year, one year); 


d) Access routes to the parking lot; 


e) Time taken to drive to the parking lot from the 
driver’s current location; 


f) Parking fees of the parking lot (for example, per 
hour, day, week, month or year); 


g) Available day and time in the parking lot 
(for example, workdays, weekend/holidays, 
daytime or night); 

h) Road conditions on the way to/around the 
parking lot (for example, congestion degrees, 
weather condition, accident occurrences, road 
work implemented); 


j) Additional information helpful to 
(for example, shops, restaurants, 
bathrooms, gas stations); 


drivers 
public 


k) Parking fee payment manners (for example, in 
cash only at a site, credit cards acceptable, bank 
transfer applicable, on-/off-line payment). 


6.3.6 Allocation of Parking Lots 


To successfully allocate parking lots to drivers, the 
conditions to compare their requests or preference and 


4 


parking lot availability are listed below. The option 
suggested to drivers on the best matched parking lot 
will be kept until the confirmation of the parking lot 
reservation. 
a) Drivers’ requests or preference 
1) 
2) 
3) 
4) 


Current place; 
Preferable places to park; 
Preferable time to start parking; 


Parking duration (for example, for how many 
minutes, hours or days); 

5) The number of vehicles to be parked 
(for example, only one vehicle, more than one 


vehicle); 

Vehicle’s characteristics (for example, 
common personal-use cars, common-size 
cars but for business, bus, truck); and 


6 


wm 


7) Parking fee payment manners (for example, 
in cash only at a site, credit cards acceptable, 
bank transfer applicable,  on-/off-line 
payment). 
b) Parking-lot-offered services 

1) Location; 

2) Number of parking lots available; 


3) Available parking time frames (for example, 
from what time to what time); 

4) Available parking duration (for example, 
less than 30 min, 1 h, couple of hours, half a 
day, one full day, a few days, one week, two 
weeks, one month, half a year, one year); 
Additional services in parking lots 
(for example, power rechargers, gas stations, 
bathrooms, convenience stores); 


5 


wa 


6 


wm 


Available facilities around the parking lots 
(for example, shops, restaurants, banks/ 
ATMs, hospitals/clinics, stations, bus stops, 
ferry terminals, airports, hotels, post offices, 
police departments); 


7 


Wad 


Parking lot security (for example, guards 
watching, no guards working, TV monitors 
enforced); 


8 
9 


wa 


Parking costs; and 


< 


Parking fee payment manners (for example, 
in cash only at a site, credit cards acceptable, 
bank transfer, on-/off-line payment). 


c) Designated uses 


1) dedicated space and lane markers identified 
as “no parking/no stopping? to allow for 
access by emergency vehicles (for example, 
fire apparatus, rescue vehicles, police cars, 
ambulances); and 


2) dedicated spaces and related signage to identify 
dedicated parking space for disabled drivers. 


6.3.7 Collection of Parking Fees 
To collect parking fees, the instruments and equipment 
listed below should be installed and operated: 
a) Barrier gates; 
b) Signboards/displays to notify drivers of the 
parking fee amount estimated or determined; 
c) Signboards/displays to notify drivers of remaining 
time allowed for parking; 
d) Signboards/displays to instruct the manner to pay 
parking fees; and 
e) Instruments to collect parking fees (for example, 
for cash, for e- or digital money, receipt printers, 
automated payment system). 


6.3.8 Provision of Information Helpful to Parking Lot 
Allocation Management 


To properly manage a system for parking lot allocation 
and organize it, the information listed below should be 
provided: 
a) Illegally parked vehicles (for example, over-time 
parking, over-size parking, parking fee evasion); 
b) Vehicles not registered with parking lot allocation 
services; 
c) Parking fee arrearages; 
d) Frequent users (for example, discount, priorities 
for the next reservation); 
e) Current instruments and equipment conditions; 
and 


f) Instrument and equipment maintenance states and 
records. 


7 DATA EXCHANGE AND 
MANAGEMENT 


SHARING 


To properly manage and operate parking allocation 
systems with data exchange and sharing platforms 
and networks, all the data collected as per 5, 6.3.2 and 
6.3.8 should be safely stored and fairly and exactly 
processed. The data to be transferred as per 6.3.3, 6.3.4 
and 6.3.5 should be safely and steadily carried out. 


8 DATA SECURITY CONTROL WITH SMART 
TRANSPORTATION 


8.1 To organize smart transportation for allocation of 
parking lots in cities and protect private or personal 
information from use for other purposes besides 
parking lot allocation system management, all 
information collected, used, exchanged and shared 
shall be protected from illegal or unauthorized access, 
especially by or for actions listed below. 


a) Information duplication; 
b) Pretention; 
c) Taming; 


IS 17456 : 2020 


d) Information repudiation; and 
e) Privacy protection. 


In contrast, drivers legally registered with parking lot 
allocation systems by using an app are accessible to 
authenticated information on parking lots. 


8.2 Based on the security, drivers’ personal information 
identified can be combined/related to an authenticated 
vehicle information through registration with an app. 
The information shall be encrypted and authenticated 
to protect from illegal access that includes intention and 
action to disclose privacy. Access to the information 
shall also be limited. 


8.3 Smart transportation should work for citizens 
who keenly request their privacy protection in any 
transportation services. In smart transportation, data 
security control should be performed to achieve the 
requirements below: 


a) High security (for example, privacy protection); 


b) Fast procedures and processing (for example, 
effective allocation of parking lots, quick parking 
lot fee payment to avoid congestion at the exit); 


and 

c) Low cost for organization, operation and 
maintenance (for example, durability 
performance). 


To meet the requirements for smart transportation, 
decentralized or terminal-to-terminal communication 
should be adopted therein. 


8.4 Privacy and Data Protection 


In order to prevent personal privacy disclosure, only 
authorized security organizations can access databases 
according to measures established to protect users’ 
privacy. 


9 MAINTENANCE OF THE QUALITY OF 
SMART TRANSPORTATION FOR PARKING 
LOT ALLOCATION 


9.1 General 


To assure the performance of smart transportation for 
allocation of parking lots and confirm the effectiveness 
thereof, the parameters given in 9.2 shall be observed 
periodically. If the effectiveness of smart transportation 
is not confirmed or not clear, modify the current services 
by smart transportation by changing the parameters 
described in 5 and 6, where possible and reasonable. 


As described above, the conditions where any smart 
transportation has been installed or adopted and is 
being operated would be changed. Thus, to successfully 
organize and operate smart transportation to solve 
target city issues and to keep the effectiveness for a long 
time, the quality maintenance of smart transportation is 
indispensable. 


IS 17456 : 2020 


9.2 Parameters to be Observed 


To ensure that the performance of smart transportation 
is effectively organized, observe any changes in the 
following parameters: 


a) Time in average taken to park a car in the target 
city/area after starting looking for vacant parking 
lots; 

b) Absolute number of parking lots available in the 
target city/area; 

c) Number of parking lots available per unit time in 
the target city/area (for example, hour, day, week, 
month, year); 

d) Parking lot availability ratio in the target city/area; 
NOTE — For reference, parameters listed below can be 
monitored which would indicate advantages obtainable 
indirectly through smart transportation, as expected in 4.1. 

e) Number of visitors from outside of the target city/ 
area; 

f) Indicators on economy in the target city/area; 


g) Number of vehicle collisions and traffic accidents 
occurring in the target city/area; 


h) Indicators on traffic congestion in the target city/ 
area; 


j) Indicators on atmospheric pollution in the 
target city/area (for example, greenhouse gases, 
carbon monoxide, nox/sox, hydrocarbons, lead 
compounds and pms); 


k) Indicators on the environment, except atmospheric 
pollution, which are designated in IS 17000; 
and 


m) Indicators on ease for citizens, which are 


designated in IS 17000. 


9.3 Modification of Smart Transportation 


When identifying unwanted changes in the value of the 
parameters designated in 9.2, modify the conditions 
of smart transportation given in 6.3, where possible. 
To correct transportation conditions, analyze any 
unexpected or irregular occurrences in operation and 
services of smart transportation. Modify the irregular 
conditions of the smart transportation system in case 
the irregular conditions are not acceptable. 


Mapping the parameters observed by following 
9.2 would give information on changes in parking 
lot utilization in the target city/area that is helpful in 
planning and improving further traffic management. 


IS 17456 : 2020 


ANNEXA 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Smart Cities Sectional Committee, CED 59 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (G -1602, Pioneer Park, 
Sector — 61, Gurugram-122001) 


AECOM India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


AFCONS Infrastructure Limited, New Delhi 
Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, Ahmedabad 

All India Institute of Local Self Government, Mumbai 
Bhubaneshwar Smart City Limited, Bhubaneshwar 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, 


New Delhi 


Builders Association of India, New Delhi 


Central Statistics Office, Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation, New Delhi 


Cochin Smart City Limited, Kochi 
Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Confederation of Real Estate Developers’ Association 
of India, New Delhi 


Corporation of Chennai, Chennai 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor Development 
Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Department of Telecommunication, Ministry of 
Communications, New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & 
Industry, New Delhi 


Greater Vishakhapatnam Smart City Corporation 
Limited, Vishakhapatnam 


Gujarat International Finance Tec-City Company Ltd, 
Ghandinagar 


Guwahati Municipal Corporation, Guwahati 

Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 

Indian Green Building Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehradun 

Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 


Institute of Town Planners, India, New Delhi 


Jabalpur Smart City Limited, Jabalpur 


Jammu Municipal Corporation, Jammu 


Representative(s) 


Dr SUDHIR KRISHNA (Chairman) 


SHRI PAWAN KUMAR JAIPURIAR 
SHRI ARVIND AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 
Suri ADVAIT AUNDHKAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI J. K. PRASAD 


SHRI DHARMESH AWASTHI 
SHRI ARUN SAHAI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI VIRENDER SINGH 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI B. V. BABU 
SHRI S. SUDHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI LEENU SEHGAL 
SHRIMATI MANJU PAUL (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI DIRECTOR (NT-IID (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYANT KOHALE 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI LOVELEEN GARG 


REPRESENTATIVE 

Suri K. P. ABRAHAM 

Ms SHEETAL RAKHEJA 
REPRESENTATIVE 

PROF UTTAM K. BANERJEE 


Suri B. C. DATTA 
PROF KULSHRESHTHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


IS 17456 : 2020 


Organization 
Karki Associates, New Delhi 
Ministry of Commerce & Industry, New Delhi 


Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution, New Delhi 


Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation, New Delhi 
Ministry of Earth Sciences, New Delhi 


Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, New Delhi 
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, New Delhi 


Ministry of Panchayati Raj, New Delhi 
Ministry of Power, New Delhi 
Ministry of Rural Development, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Tourism, New Delhi 
Ministry of Transport, New Delhi 


Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation, New Delhi 


Narnix Technolabs Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


National Association of Software & Services 
Companies, Noida 


National Real Estate Development Council, 
New Delhi 


National Remote Sensing Centre, Hyderabad 


North East Space Application Centre, Umiam, 
Shillong 


Office of the Registrar General & Census 
Commissioner, New Delhi 


Ranchi Municipal Corporation, Ranchi 
Saviram Engineering Consultants Pvt Ltd, Noida 
School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 


Shillong Smart City Limited, Shillong 
Smart Cities Next, New Delhi 


Sulabh International Social Service Organization, 
New Delhi 


Surat Smart City Development Limited, Surat 
Survey of India, Dehradun 


Svayam National Centre for Inclusive Environment, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
SHRI RAJNISH KARKI 
SHRI SUDHANSHU PANDEY 


Ms Kavita BHATIA 
SHRI MAYANK (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (BIS) 
UNDER SECRETARY (BIS) (Alternate) 


SHRI D. RAJSHEKHAR 
SHRI G. BALASUBRAMANIYAM (Alternate) 


DR M. MOHAPATRA 
Dr O. P. MisHrRa (Alternate) 


SHRI KUNAL KUMAR 


DR A. K. TRIPATHI 
Dr G. PRASAD (Alternate) 


JOINT SECRETARY 
SECRETARY 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI K. S. REJIMON 


Dr Ravi KANT BHATNAGAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI R. K. JAIN 
SHRI G. C. Pati (Alternate) 


SHRI N. KISHORE NARANG 


SHRI MANOJIT BOSE 
Ms RAMA VEDASHREE (Alternate) 


SHRI NAVIN RAHEJA 
BRIG R. R. SINGH (Alternate) 


DR K. VENUGOPAL 
DR MURALIKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI GIRISH MISHRA 


DR Vinay MAITRI 
DR SANJUKKTA S. BHADURI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI DEBASHISH ROY 


ProF K. J. NATH 
DR N. B. MAZUMDAR (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI SUBHASH CHANDRA VASHISHTH 
Suet J. M. SYA (Alternate) 


Organization 


Town and Country Planning Organization, 
New Delhi 


Jdaipur Smart City Limited, Udaipur 


G Q 


nified Traffic & Transportation Infrastructure 
(P. & Engg.) Centre, New Delhi 


niversity of Delhi, New Delhi 


Urban Development Department, Town & Country 
Planning Branch, Kolkata 


G 


Urban Governance, Administrative Staff College of 
India, Hyderabad 


V. V. Giri National Labour Institute, Noida 
WRI India, New Delhi 


In personal capacity (B-399, 2nd Floor, Meera Bagh, 
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi 110063) 


In personal capacity (Apartment No. 3203, Verona Cliff 


Avenue, Hiranandani Gardens, Powai Mumbai 
400076) 


In personal capacity (1/5 Shabd Pratap Asharam, 
Lashkar, Gwalior 474012) 


In personal capacity (374, Sector 28, Noida) 


In personal capacity (L/109, Sarita Vihar, 
New Delhi 110076) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 17456 : 2020 


Representative(s) 


SHRI R. SRINIVAS 
SHRI NITIN KUMAR AZAD (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRIMATI MANJU PAUL 
SHRI MANISH VERMA (Alternate) 


Dr C. R. BABU 


SHRI SATANU PRASAD KAR 
Ms SANDHYATRA SAHA (Alternate) 


PROF SRINIVAS CHARY VEDALA 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Ms PRERNA V. MEHTA 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR 


SHRI V. SURESH 


SHRI S. P. BANSAL 


Dr SANDEEP GARG 


SHRI ASHOK KHURANA 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Smart Cities Working Group, CED 59/WG 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (G-/602, Pioneer Park, Sector 61, 


Gurugram-122 001) 


Gujarat International Finance Tec-City Limited, 
Gandhinagar 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, New Delhi 
School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi 
Smart Cities Next, New Delhi 


Town and Country Planning Organization, New Delhi 


WRI India, New Delhi 
In personal capacity (374, Sector 28, Noida) 


Representative(s) 
Dr SUDHIR KRISHNA (Convener) 


SHRI LOVLEEN K. GARG 


Dr SOMNATH MITRA 

SHRI SAMPATH KUMAR S. 
PROF SANJUKKTA BHADURI 
SHRI DEBASHISH ROY 


SHRI R. SRINIVAS 
SHRI SUDEEP Roy (Alternate) 


Ms PRERNA V. MEHTA 
SHRI SANDEEP GARG 


(Continued from second cover) 


This standard is a part of the series of Indian Standards being formulated on sustainable development of habitats 
including on smart cities. In fact, smartness acts as an accelerator to the sustainable development which is the 
ultimate objective, hence the various concepts and standards relating to smart cities being evolved including this 
standard should be understood from the same consideration. 


An Indian Standard IS 17000 : 2019 ‘Sustainable development of habitats — Indicators’ has since been published. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 59 (15246). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


