Is : 12148 - 1987 ( ReaffIrmed 1993 ) (Reaffirmed 2003)

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR REQUIREMENTS OF NON-DESTRUCTIVE TESTING AGENCIES
( First Reprint JULY 1998 )

UDC

620.179.1

: 061.62

(026)

0 Copyright BUREAU
MANAK

1988 STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

OF

INDIAN

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 5

January 1988

IS: 12148- 1987

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR REQUIREMENTS OF NON-DESTRUCTliE TESTING AGENCIES
Non-Destructive
Chairman SHRI K. BALARAMAMOORTHY Nuclear

Testing Sectional Committee,

SMDC 25

Representing Fuel Complex, Hyderabad

Members Walchandnagar Industries Ltd, Walchandnagar SHRI E. B. ARDHANAR~ SHRI D. R. KOLHATKAR ( Alternate ) Air India, Bombay SHRI K. G. BAKRE SHRI A. V. KULKARNI ( Alternate ) ~Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co Ltd, SHRI M. K. BANERJEE Jamshedpur SHRI A. R. HORE ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Durgapur Steel SHRI S. K. BANERJEE Plant ), Durgapur SHRI S. K. DUTTA ( Alternate ) ACC Babcock Ltd, Durgapur SHP.I CHINMAY BASU Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchchirappalli SHKI S. BHASKARAN SHRI D. LAKSHMINARAYAN (, Alternate I ) SHRI P. V. SASTRY( Alternate II ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. C. BHAWAL SHRI S. C. SHARMA( Alternate ) Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre, Trivandrum SHR~B. C. BHOUMIK SHRI THOMASC. KOSHY ( Alternate ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DR V. N. BINDAL DR ASHOK KUMAR ( dlternate ) Nuclear Fuel Complex, Hyderabad SHR~ V. A. CHANDRAMOULI Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bhilai Steel Plant ), SHRI K. P. CHOPRA Bhilai SHRI R. S. DUBEY ( Afternote ) Ministry of Railways DEPUTY DIRECTOR( MET - III ), RDSO, LUCKNOW CHEMISTAND METALLURGIST, SR, A~MER( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Rourkela Steel SHRI V. EASWARN Plant ), Rourkela SHRI M. C. JOSHI ( Aiternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) 0 Copyright 1988 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Acr ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole are in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

I!3:121481987
( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Members SHRI V. X. GOEL Representing
Central Boilers Board, New Delhi Foundry Forge, Ranchi

SHRI K. K. JHA SHRI A. K. SAHANA ( Alternate ) SHRI N. KOSHI Ministry of Shipping and Transport DR M. D. MAHESHWARI Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd (Tubes Division), ~Jamshedpur SHRI K. V. DEORAS( AIternate ) DR S. R. MEDIRATTA Steel Authority of India Ltd ( R & D Centre for Iron & Steel ), New Delhi SHRI R. N. MUKHERIEE ( Alternate ) Burn Standard & Co Ltd, Howrah SHRI S. S. MIJKHERJEE . SHRI P. DASGUPTA( Alternate ) SHRI PRAKASHD. NIRGUDKAR The Institute of Indian Foundrymen, Bombay SHRI S. K. AHUJA ( Alternate ) SHRI S. RAMASWAMY Mukand Iron & Steel Works Ltd, Bombay SHRI T. RANGACHARY Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI D. S. P. RAO Bharat Heavy Plates & Vessels Ltd, VisakhaSHRI S. ADIMCORTY ( Alternate ) K. C. P. Ltd, Madras SHRI K. V. NARASIMHARAO Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI B. N. RAY SHRI S. R. MAZUMDAR ( Alternate ) SHRI SANJOYROY Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur SHRI S. S. ALI ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bokaro Steel Ltd ), SHRI S. R. SAHU Bokaro Steel City SHRI G. C. PRASAD( Alternate ) Central Mining Research Station, Dhanbad SHRI N. L. SAO SHRI S. SEETHARAMAN Ministry of Surface Transport ( Roads Wing ) SHRI N. M. WALECHA Directorate General of Civil Avia!ion, New Delhi SHRI N. S. CHELLAPPA ( Alternate ) SHRI R. R. WAMORKAR Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay SHRI P. G. KULKARNI ( Alternate ) Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) SHRI B. MUKHERJI,

patnam

Director

( Strut & Met ) Secretary
SHRI B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY Deputy Director ( Metals ), BIS

IS : 12148- 1987

Indian S-tandaud
GUIDELINES FOR REQUIREMENTS OF NON - DESTRUCTIVE TESTING AGENCIES
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 20 June 1987, after the draft finalized by the Non-Destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the~Structura1 and Metals Division Council.

0.2 It is intended that the requirements specified in this standard apply to independent, public or inhouse agencies to the extent required by the This standard does not apply to inhouse purchase order or_ specification. equipment, methods and examinations used for the exclusive purpose of internal process control. It is intended that this standard apply to all NDT examinations used for the final acceptance of a product or material if such examinations are required by the purchase order or ,specification. The agency and the authority may be the same in some cases. 0.3 tice The and The intent of 4 is to comply fully with the recommended pracfor non-destructive testing personnel qualification and certification. additional words used in this clause are intended to be educational informative.

0.4 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from ASTM E 543 - 1983 `Standard practice for determining the qualification of non-destructive testing agencies', issued by the American Society for Testing and Materials. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2 - 1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.
*Rules for rounding off numericak values ( revised ).

3

IS : 12148- 1987
1. SCOPE

1.1 This standard gives minimum non-destructive testing. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the apply. 2.1 Authority chasing agent or designated purpose

requirements

for agencies performing

of this standard,

the following

definitions

shall

- The owner, prime contractor, engineer, architect, or purresponsible for or incharge of the work, or duly recognized representative.

2.2 Agency - The public, independent or inhouse non-destructive testing organization selected by the authority to perform the examination(s) required by the purchase order or specification. 3. RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES but

3.1 A non-destructive testing agency's capabilities should include, not be limited to one or more of the following methods: a) Magnetic particle, b) Penetrant, c) Radiographic/fluoroscopic,

d) Ultrasonic, e) Eddy current, and f) Leak testing. of the agency to ensure that: for which it is adequately equipped only examinations 3.2 It is the responsibility it performs a> and staffed,

b) its em~ployees perform only examinations for which they are adequately qualified, its equipment is calibrated and personnel c>ance with applicable specifications, are certified in accord-

4 its equipment is properly maintained, ana e) it informs the authority of any discrepancy or limitations imposed
4

on testing accuracy by such factors as surface finish, form, shape, metallurgical condition or procedure.

IS: 12148- 1987 3.3 The following a) duties are those usually performed by the agency:

Performance of all examinations in accordance with the specified standards or quality control criteria or both (necessary documents shall be furnished by the authority, the agency or both, as specified in the applicable purchase agreements). The agency should bring to the attention of the authority any irregularity or deficiency noted in the documents; and Prompt submission to the authority of formal reports of all examior non-compliance of the nations that indicate compliance The agency should be material with the applicable specifications. prepared to substantiate examination results, when required.

b)

3.4 The agency may, in accordance with an agreement with the authority, report only compliance or non-compliance with the applicable specifications or control documents. The authority reserves the right of disposition on all non-compliances. 3.5 The euthority may, at its discretion, inspect and personnel qualifications of the agency. 4. PERSONNEL QUALMCATION the procedures, equipment

4.1 Agencies and personnel are certified by the competent authority or national certifying body. In the field of industrial radiography agencies, site and personnel should hold valid authorization certificates issued by the competent authority enforcing radiation safety. 4.2 The following terms relate only to the technical personnel and do not necessarily relate to the actual to its personnel by the agency. capabilities designation of the assigned in

4.2.1 Examiner - The examiner shall have Level III qualification non-destructive testing in the fields of NDT in which he is engaged.

4.2.2 Level II T'erhniciun - An individual capable of conducting the examination with sufficient training and experience to evaluate the results. He should be technically responsible to a person certified to Level III and be certified to Leve! II himself for the proper performance of the examination in the applicable method. 4.2.3 Level I Technicicn -- An individual capable of properly performing specific calibrations, examinations and evaluation in accordance with written instructions and of recording the results. He shall receive the necessary technical guidance orsupervision from a certified NDT Level II or Level III individual and be trained and certified as Level I in the applicable method. 5

IS:12148

-1987

4.2.4 Trainee - Prior to qualification as a Level I technician, a trainee should work under direct supervision/guidance of a certified technician ( at least NDT Level I ). The trainee shall not be permitted to conduct or evaluate examinations independently.

4.3 The personnel records of the certified individuals following:

should

contain

the

a) b) 4 4 4 f) g) h) j)

Name of certified individual; Level of certification; Educational background and experience; Statement indicating satisfactory completion of training in accordance with lndian Standard Guidelines for certification of personnel for non-destructive testing ( under preparbtion ); Results of the most recent vision test; Actual grades obtained in each examination; Weightage factor assigned to each examination; Composite grade of all examinations; Site incharge/radiographer rity enforcing radiation sonnel only ); certificate issued by competent authosafety ( for industrial radiography per-

k) Date of certification or recertification or both and validity; and 4 Signature of NDT examiner.
5. EQUIPMENT 5.0 General 5.1 The agency responsible for non-destructive examination of material should be equipped with, or have access to, at least the equipment listed below for the applicable processes. 9.2 Non-destructive testing systems can include multiple stations with extensive supporting mechanisms and controls. be utilizing only manual application of a basic instrument. 6. MAGNETIC PARTICLE EQUIPMENT examination Others may FOR NON-DESTRUCTIVE TESTING

6.1 Equipment for magnetization

of parts shall be capable of inducing a flux density of sufficient intensity and direction to perform the required 6

IS : 12148- 1987

examination. Either ac or dc ( full-wave or half-wave rectified ) equipment or permanent magnets shall be used as specified by the contract, purchase order or specification to produce the required magnetization. 6.1.1 The part or a section of the part may be magnetized by induction or by passing current through the part or section by permanent conductors, contact plates, clamps or prods. After proper cleaning of the part, the magnetic particles may be applied either wet or dry. 6.1.2 The magnetic field is induced in the part by the use of any of the f&owing: a) Yoke, b) Coil, c) Prods, d) Clamps, and e) Pads. to magnetize sections of parts. It is a U6.1.2.1 Yoke -Used shaped iron core with a coil around the cross bar of a U-shaped or flexible permanent magnet. The magnetic field across the open ends is used to induce a magnetic field in the section of the part. The yoke's fixed or movable legs are used with the open ends in contact with the part. 6.1.2.2 Coil - Used to magnetize parts or sections. It is a currentcarrying conductor formed into a coil of several turns. The magnetic field inside the coil is used to induce a magnetic field into ihe part or section. 6.1.2.3 Prods - `Used to magnetize sections of parts. They are rods, normally 12.7 to 25.4 mm ( l/2 to 1 inch ) in diameter and 203 to 254 mm ( 8 to 10 inch ) in length, made of copper with a handle on one end. The ends of a pair of prods are placed on the part and current passed from one prod to the other through the part. The magnetic field is produced in the area between the prods. 6.1.2.4 Clamps - Used to magnetize sections of parts. They are spring-loaded clamps with braided copper pads on the inside of the jaws. The clamps~are clamped on to the part and a current is passed from one clamp to the other through the part. 6.1.2.5 Pads - Used in stationary equipment to magnetize parts. They are braided copper or lead pads placed at each end of the part. Current is passed from one pad to the other through the part. Pads are 7

IS : 12148 - 1987

normally used with stationary equipment and rigged so that the pads are in contact with the part under pressure. 6.1.3 The coils, prods, clamps and pads are energized with- highamperage low-voltage current. Therefore, equipment must be available to transform line voltage and, when required, tc rectify it. The equipment should contain an ammeter to indicate the magnetizing amperage, suitable switches and, when required, timers to control the length of time that the current is applied. If different amperages are required, the equipment shall produce the maximum required amperage with a suitable control for reducing the amperage to the required lower levels. Cables should be of adequate but not excessive length and large enough to carry the required amperage. 6.1.4 Magnetic particles may be applied either wet or dry. Dry particles should be applied uniformly with a dusting or light blowing action. Wet particles should be applied by aerosol cans or by hosing. Provisions should be available to ensure that the required amount of particles are in suspension when the spray is applied and to periodically check the concentration of the solution. 6.1.5 Adequate and proper lighting shall be available when the parts are viewed for indications. When fluorescent particles are used, ultra violet light 320 to 380 nm ( 3 200 to 2 800 A ) must be available. Adequate white light must be available, when viewing colour contrast particles. When viewing fluorescent particles, minimum ambient light should be available. 6.2 Equipment for demagnetization should be capable of demagnetizing all part configurations, to the minimum residual field specified in the specification or purchase document, regardless of size and configuration. Demagnetization is normally accomplished by stepping down ac or dc voltage while the direction of dc is changed between each step or by withdrawing the part from an ac field. Demagnetization can be accomplished by induced fields or by passing a current through the part. Induced fields using coils are generally the most effective methods. Facilities should include a coil, cables ( when required ) and equipment to produce adequate voltages and amperages, reversing and step-down switches and a meter to indicate residual external magnetic fields,
7. RADIOGRAPHIC 7_l Radiation

EQUIPMENT

Source - The radiation source shall be capable of producing sufficient energy and intensity to examine materials in accordance with the required specifications. Either X-rays or gamma rays may be used. unless otherwise specified by the contract, specification or purchase order. The gamma radiation source shall be housed in an exposure device with

8

IS :1214?3 -1987

adequate shielding as certified and approved for use by.competent rity enforcing radiation safety.

autho-

7.1.1 X-ray equipment should contain voltage and amperage controls ( when applicable ) and meters, a timer to control the duration of the exposure, or other approved controls, and provisions for Positioning the tube head and the part being X-rayed ( when applicable ). The voltage and amperage range of the equipment must be adequate to Penetrate the thickness of the material to be evaluated and produce acceptable film densities. 7.1.2 Gamma rays are emitted by radioactive materials, such as cobalt 60 and iridium 192. Different isotopes emit gamma rays in specific energy ranges. The isotope ( size, energy level and strength ) should be selected keeping in view the application ( material, its thickness, required penetrameter sensitivity ) and a reasonable exposure time. 7.2 Safety and monitoring equipment consistent with good practice and current regulations should be available and normally should include safety switches, survey meters, film badges, dosimeters, signs, ropes, lead-lined room, etc, as applicable. Also, lead sheet, shot or leaded rubber should be available to control or reduce scattered radiation. Penetrameters ( image quality indicators ) are used to evaluate the sensitivity of both the set up and process techniques. They must be made from material that is radiographically similar to and representing the specified percentage thickness of the material to be evaluated. The penetrameters must be clean and properly identified. Blocks shall be available on which the penetrameter can be placed during the exposure, if required. The thickness of the blocks should'be approximately equal to the thickness of the sections being radiographed -and radiographically similar. When exposing nonhomogeneous specimens such' as electronic components or other complex structured devices, the penetrameters shall be used only as image-quality indicators ( IQIs ) and shall be selected to produce image densities similar to that of the area of interest of the device being radiographed. Lead numbers and letters of adequate size and thickness should be available for film identification purposes. There should be a sufficient numbers of each letter and number to put all the required identification on the film. However, alternative methods of permanent film identification are permitted. Examples are light box exposures and permanent white ink. 7.3 Recording Medium - The recording medium, such as film and fluroscope, shall be capable of recording or displaying an image to the sensitivity and contrast required by the applicable specification, purchase order or contract. Film or paper, if permitted, should be stored in a cool, dry place and completely protected from direct/or scattered radiation ( background radiation excluded ). Various types of intensifying screens are used 9

Is : 12148- 1987

in industrial applications, with the most common being lead oxide ( or lead compound ) and fluorescent screen. When intensifying screens are employed, they should be clean and free of scratches, wrinkles, surface contamination, and any other conditions that may interfere with the production of a quality radiograph. 7.4 Processing Equipment - Processing equipment, such as darkroom facilities and densitometers, shall be adequate to ensure that the quality intent of the applicable specifications is maintained. 7.4.1 A darkroom or other suitable facility must be available to handle film when loading exposure holders, cutting preloaded strip film, and when The darkroom should removing the film from the holder for processing. be equipped with both safe and white lights and a work area to handle the film. 7.4.2 When hand-processing equipment is used, facilities must be available to process the film, in developer solution, stop bath or fresh water rinse, fixer, and a final fresh water rinse ( preferably not the rinse used between develop and fix ), and should include the use of a film dryer and a timer with an alarm. A time/temperature relationship, for film processing must be maintained. 7.4.3 When automatic processing equipment is used, it must be clean, and time/temperature relationships and replenishment rates must be maintained. 7.4.4 Facilities for viewing the radiograph and for measuring photographic or optical density must be available. The viewing equipment should include both high and normal intensity lights or separate viewers. A light transmission-type densitometer should be available along with the calibrated density strips/step wedge to measure film density. A reflection-type densitometer should be available to measure the density of X-ray paper. 7.5 Reference Standard - Reference standard must Abein accordance with authority furnished standards or specifications or both, and when possible, should be established by the use of the applicable set of Indian Standard reference radiographs. 8. LIQUID PENETRANTEQUIPMENT 8.1 Liquid penetrant inspection equipment consists of necessary apparatus to apply the penetrant, wash the surface of the part, dry the part, and apply a developer, and a properly lighted area in which the part can be inspected. There are two basic liquid penetrant methods and three types of penetrant systems. Each system requires slightly different facilities and apparatus for proper processing of parts. The two liquid penetrant 10

IS:12148-1987

methods are fluorescent and colour contrast ( visible ). The three types of peoetrant systems are water washable, post-emulsified, and solvent rerrovable ( see IS : 365%1981* ). 8.2 Equipment generally consists of immersion dip tanks or spray apparatus ( spray_guns, aerosol cans, etc ) or brushing arranged in a logical order to allow for smooth flow of parts when the applicable sequence of operations ( penetrant application, dwell, penetrant removal, dryjng, developing examination ) are followed as specified in IS : 3658 - 1981* or other contract documents. 8.3 Adequate lighting shall be available when the parts are viewed for indications. When fluorescent colour contrast particles are used, ultra-violet ,light 320 to 380 nm ( 3 200 to 3 800 A ) must be available. Adequate white light must be available when viewing colour contrast particles. When viewing flourescent particles, the minimum ambient light should be available. 9. ULTRASONIC EQUIPMENT

9.1 Ultrasonic Instrumentation - The ultrasonic instrumentation shall be capable of generating and detecting pulsed ultrasonic energy over an adequate frequency and power range to ensure proper examination in accordance with the applicable governing specifications. The instrumentation and accessories should include, when applicable, ultrasonic unit, probe, tank, bridge. recorder, couplant and reference blocks. 9.1.1 Ultrasonic Unit - This unit should include a pulser circuit, receiver circuit, CRT display or acceptable equivalent signal display. 9.1.2 Search Unit - The cable, probe and search tube ( when immersion scanning is required ). 9.1.3 The ultrasonic unit and probe as a system should meet the performance requirements of the authority as determined by IS : 3664.19817. 9.1.4 When immersion testing is required, a tank or bubbler system is necessary to furnish a water path between the search unit and the part. The tank should be equipped with a bridge and manipulating system to hold the search unit. The bridge should be of sufficient strength to provide rigid support for the manipulator. 9.2 Reference Standards
9.2.1 When reference blocks using flat-bottom

holes, side bottom holes

*Code of practice for liquid penetrant flaw detection (first revision ). t%ode of'practice for ultrasonic pulse echo testing by contact and immersion methods ( first revision ).

11

IS : 12148 - 1987

or notches are required, the same should be processed accordance with the relevant applicable documents.

and monitored

in

9.2.2 M'hen contoured surfaces are to be examined, reference standards conforming to the general geometry of the part or section should be used. 9.2.3 Reference standards must be in accordance with.authority-furnished standards or specifications or both, and when possible, should be established by the use of the applicable Indian Standards.
10. LEAK TESTING 10.1 Equipment 10.1.1 Helium leak testing requires a mass spectrometer that is peaked for helium and that has a sensitivity of at least one decade better than the minimum leakage rate being tested. Pressure chambers capable of withstanding positive and vacuum pressure may be required for some methods.

10.1.2 Radioisotope leak testing requires a tracer gas pressurization system that has been approved and licensed by competent authority enforcing radiation safety Also, scintillation crystal detectors and Geiger Muller counters are required which are capable of detecting emissions of the racer being used. 10.1.3 Halogen leak detector. leak testing requires a standard probe-type halogen

10.1.4 Bubble leak testing requires baths of appropriate sizes that are capable of heating the detector fluid to the specified temperature. Also, pressure vessels may be necessary for pressurization of the test specimens prior to immersion in the detector fluid. 10.1.5 Leak testing by pressure change method rquires sure gauges, pressurization and evacuation systems.
10.2 Reference Standards 10.2.1 The helium leak standard shall have a leak rate at least as low as the limit being tested..

accurate

pres-

10.2.2 Krypton 85 standard shall be encapsulated in the same type glass, wall thickness and geometrical shape as the sample vials used to determine specific activity. 10.2.3 The halogen standard, with the response correction factor, shall be so contoured that the maximum leak will be read on the upper ~/IO of the scale. 12

IS:12148 11. ELECTROMAGNETIC ( EDDY-CURRENT ) EQUIPMENT

- 1987

11.1 Electronic Apparatus - The electronic apparatus shall be capable of energizing the test coils or probes with alternating currents of suitable frequencies and power levels and shall be capable of sensing the change in the electromagnetic response of the sensors. Equipment may include a detector, phase discriminator, filter circuits, modulation circuit, magnetic saturation devices, display ( recorder, scope or meter, or both ) and signalling devices, as required by a particular application.

11.2 Test Coils - Test coils may be of the encircling or probe-coil type and shall be capable of inducting an electromagnetic field .in the test specimen and standard and sensing changes in the electric and magnetic characteristics of the specimen.
11.3 Standards 11.3.1 Sorting Standards -

In sorting,

known

reference

standard(s)

are required.
11.3.2 Coating Thickness Measurement Standards - Calibration standards, of uniform thickness available should be in either of two types: foil or coated substrate.

11.3.3 Conductivity Standards
11.3.3.1 Primary standards - Those standards which have a value assigned through direct comparison with a standard calibrated by National Bureau of Standards or have been ca!ibrated by an agency which has access to such standards. The primary standards are usually kept in a laboratory environment and are vsed only to calibrate secondary standards.

11.3.3.2 Secondary standards - Those standards supplied with the instrumentation or standards constructed by the user for a speafic test. Those standards are used to calibrate the instrumentation during examination of materials. 11.3.4 Discontinuity Standards
11.3.4.1 The standard used toadjust the sensitivity of the apparatus shall be free of interfering discontinuities and shall be of the same nominal alloy, heat treatment, and dimensions as the products to be examined. It shall be of sufficient length to permit the spacing of artificial discontinuities to provide good signal resolution and be mechanically stable while in Artificial discontinuities placed the examining position in the apparatus.

13

Is : 12148- 1987 in the product

to be examined

shall be one or more of the following

types: a) Notches - Notches may be produced by electric discharge machining ( EDM ), milling, or other means. Longitudinal or transverse notches, or both may be used. Orientation. dimensions, -configuration, and position of the notches affect the response of the eddy-current system; b) Holes - Drilled holes may be used. Care should be taken ing drilling to avoid distortion of the piece and hole. 12. LABORATORY PROCEDURE MANUAL dur-

12.1 Minimum Requirments 12.1.1 Each agency shall have prepared a written laboratory procedure manual for the type of work for which the agency is contracted. The manual shall contain, as a minimum requirement, sections in accordance with 12.1.2 JO 12.1.6. The sections shall be of sufficient detail to provide complete guidance for their use by the agency's personnel. 12.1.2 Process Control ( Operation Procedures ) - This section shall contain the information necessary to control the various activities required Items covered shall include receiving for the examination of materials. the preparing material, identification and marking, test procedures and specifications to be followed, reports, and return of material.
12.1.3 Personnel QualijGation The requirements, procedures for training, certification and recertification for each level of qualification, and the maintenance of personnel records shall be covered in this section. 12.1.4 Equipment Maintenance and Calibration -

This section shall conshall be listed

tain all of the following. 12.1.4.1 Inventory listing - All available with the following information noted: equipment

a) Name of the manufacturer;
b) Equipment model and serial number;

Cl Characteristics subject to calibration; 4 Range of operation and range of calibration; e) Reference to recognized standardization procedures acceptable
the authority, if applicable; 14

to

Is : 12148- 1987

f)

Frequency

of calibration;

89 Allowable tolerances or maximum sensitivity; and

h) Source of verification.
12.1.4.2 Each instrument or machine, when calibration is required, shall have either a calibration sticker affixed or record of certification on file, containing the following:

a) Instrument calibrated; W Serial no.; Cl Calibration date;

4

Date of next calibration;

and

e) Name of individual who performed last calibration.
12.1.4.3 The equipment

Ef calibration is not required, a sticker stating `no calibration is necessary' shall be affixed, or a record shall be on file to this effect. shall be calibrated against standards currenby accepted government or industrial agencies ( or shall indiis calibrated as used, or that no calibration is necessary ) at following specific intervals inaccordance with a written proceshall also specify the agency to calibrate each equipment

tly certified cate that it least at the dure which We.

4

Magnetic pnrticle

1. Timer and ammeter - Timer and ammeter shall be checked every 90 days, unless subjected to electrical repair or inadvertently damaged, at which time cahbration is required prior to use; 2. Black lights - A minimum level of intensity as specified by the agency; and shall be maintained

test 3. Suspension concentration test - Suspension concentration shah be done prior to use or daily, whichever is less restrictive. b) Penetrant 1. Penetrant and emulsi$er - Penetrant and emulsifier shall be checked monthly for contamination; for thermostat 2. Dryers - Dryers shall be checked monthly accuracy; and 3. Black lights - A minimum level of intensity as specified by the agency. 15 shall be maintained,

IS:12148 - 1987 c) Radiographic - Calibration of densitometers shall be done prior to each use, utilizing calibrated film strips. Calibration of radiation survey meters shall also be done by users, periodically as required.

d) Ultrasonic intervals.
e) Leak testing

The authority

shall ~approve the required

calibration

1. The equipment

shall be calibrated at the beginning at 6-month

of each shift; intervals by

and 2. The standards used should be calibrated using a reference standard leak.

f ) Eddy-current - Calibration of the system at the start and end of each run and at the beginning of each shift ( or turn ) using the reference This or other required calistandard ( seconday ) is normally required. bration intervals shall be approved by the authority.

g) Written records of the results of the check and calibrations are to be maintained at a central location. The above checks are minimum and do not relieve the responsibility of co;lstantly checking and immediately repairing any item which may affect test results. A history of the repairs, modifications or substitutions shall be maintained. 12.1.5 Equipnlent Operation and Technique File
12.1.5.1 Each type of equipment in use shall have a complete manual which contains all information necessary to operate and maintain the equipment in accordance with applicable codes and specifications. The manual shall include the maintenance procedures and schedules for each type of equipment.

12.1.5.2 A technique file should be maintained for each type ofequipment. It should be available for the guidance of the technician. The manual should include:

a) Summary of test procedure; b) Step-by-step preparation of material for examination; Cl Defect calibration standard, if applicable; d) Control of essential variables, such as the time required
test step ( if applicable ); for each

e) What indications should appear at each step;
16

IS:12148 - 1987

f )"Indications

and their evaluation; and

g) Recording of test results. 12.1.6 Records and Documentation
12.1.6.1 Records - All applicable records pertaining to 12.1.2 to 12.1.5 shall be maintained in a central file and in other accessible files as necessary, and should be available for examination by the authority. The records shall be signed by the persons authorised to do SO. 12.1.6.2The internal process forms or job record forms shah be fiIed with the written report to the authority and shall become a part of the permanent record, They should include the following minimum information :

a) Order and reference number; b) Specificatton; c) Type of test and procedure identification; lot numbers, as d) Serial or part numbers, alloy numbers, heat and applicable; c) Special instructions from the authority; f) Authority's name; and g) Results of the examination. 12.1.6.3 All applicable internal reports should be signed by the technician performing the work and by Level II or Level III personnel. A procedure for auditing of reports by Level III personnel must be included. 12.1.6.4 Personnel qualification records should be developed in accordance with 4.2 and be available in an active file as long as employment continues. When personnel leave the agency, the records may be transferred to an inactive file but should not be discarded for a period of 5 years or as otherwise specified. 12.1.6.5 Specifjcation File - The agency should maintain an orderly file containing all relevant codes, specifications and amendments under which the tests are carried out.

17

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 3375,323 9402 Fax : 91 11 3234062, 91 11 3239399, 91 11 3239382 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Telephone 8-77 00 32

Central Laboratory:

Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010 Regional Central Offices:

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 *Eastern : 1114 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

32376 17 337 86 62 60 38 43 23523 15 832 92 95

Northern : SC0 335336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern twestern : Manakalaya, E9, Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East), MUMBAI 400093 Branch Offices: `Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001

,

550 13 48 839 49 55 554021 40 36 27 21 01 41 8-28 88 01 8-71 1996 541137 20 10 83 37 29 25 21 68 76 23 89 23 52 51 71 26 23 05 32 36 35 621 17 27 IO 85 309 65 28 222 39 71

$ Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road,
BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751001 Kalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 .53/5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-B-560, L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD 5OOOO1 E-52, Chitaranjarr Marg, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 117/418 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, LUCKNOW 226001 NIT Building, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 Institution of Engineers (Indra) Buildrng 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 TC. No. 14/1421, Universrty P.O. Palayam. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM `Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, CALCUTTA 700072 TSales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 *Sales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja Square, BANGALORE 560002
Printed at Simco Prmting

695034

Press,

Delhi

