NAA Ah IS 4721 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


ada co Art + 
erraten UR RIA at 
wet Mari Sir fasicitencot 
ea día fe 
(AUT FRITT ) 


Code of Practice for Drainage 
and Dewatering of Surface/ 
Underground Hydroelectric 

Power Stations 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 17.120.20 


© BIS 2014 


anda AMA A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM YA, 9 ERRE WHC Hm, we feeei-110002 
ark am MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2014 Price Group 3 


Hydroelectric Power House Structures Sectional Committee, WRD 15 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Hydroelectric Power House Structures Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources 
Division Council. 


Drainage of hydroelectric power stations requires special considerations. General drainage provisions as stipulated 
in IS 1742 : 1983 ‘Code of practice for building drainage (second revision)’ and IS 1172 : 1993 ‘Code of basic 
requirements for water supply, drainage and sanitation (fourth revision)’ shall also apply for hydroelectric power 
stations. However, there are some features peculiar to hydroelectric power stations only which are dealt with in 
this standard. 


This standard was first published in 1968 and revised in 2000. The current revision is undertaken to reflect the 
experiences gained in the field since its last revision. In this revision apart from updating provisions in general, 
additional provisions relating to drainage sumps and pumps have been incorporated. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4721 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DRAINAGE AND 
DEWATERING OF SURFACE/UNDERGROUND 
HYDROELECTRIC POWER STATIONS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard stipulates requirements for drainage 
and dewatering arrangements for water discharges for 
surface/underground hydroelectric power station. 


1.1.1 The general drainage of the power house building 
shall, however, be done in accordance with IS 1742 
and IS 1172 except that some special features peculiar 
to a power house building have been dealt in this 
standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 


554 : 1999 Pipe threads where pressure-tight 
joints are made on the threads — 
Dimensions, tolerances and 


designation (fourth revision) 


778 : 1984 Specification for copper alloy gate, 
globe and check valves for water 
works purposes (fourth revision) 

1172 : 1993 Code of basic requirements for water 


supply, drainage and sanitation 
(fourth revision) 

Steel tubes, tubulars and other 
wrought steel fittings — 
Specification : Part 1 Steel tubes 
(sixth revision) 

Code of practice for building 
drainage (second revision) 

Steel pipes for water and sewage 
(168.3 to 2 540 mm outside diameter) 
— Specification (third revision) 
Sluice valves for water works 
purposes (50 to 1 200 mm size) — 
Specification 


1239 (Part 1): 
2004 


1742 : 1983 


3589 : 2001 


14846 : 2000 


3 DRAINAGE AND DEWATERING SYSTEMS 


3.1 The various systems suitable for power house 
building may be classified as: 


a) gravity drainage system, 
b) pressure drainage system, and 
c) dewatering system. 


4 GRAVITY DRAINAGE SYSTEM 


4.1 General 


This system includes floor drains, leakage water from 
penstock coupling, generator coolers, water mist fire 
extinguishing system for generator (if provided), scroll 
case liner, turbine cover, transformer coolers, drainage 
from formed drains at expansion/contraction joints, 
compressor cooling water, air conditioning cooling 
water, ventilation cooling water (for underground 
power house), hydrant firefighting systems and for 
other discharges intermittent in character. The drained 
water is led into either of the following: 


a) Tailrace or a drainage pipe laid outside the 
power house building as may be convenient, 
or 

b) Asump within the power house building from 
which the water is pumped either to the 
tailrace or to a drainage pipe as given in (a) 
above. 


4.1.1 It may, at times, be desirable to adopt both the 
alternatives given in 4.1 in any power house building 
to keep the amount of pumping from the sump, at 
minimum. 


4.2 General Principles of Design 


4.2.1 All walls in contact with water shall have drainage 
trenches along their interior faces with a suitable floor 
drain. These include outside walls with backfill against 
them and which are below annual high tail water level. 


In case of underground power station these also include 
seepage water from side rocks and roof. 


4.2.1.1 Drains shall also be provided to take care of 


IS 4721 : 2014 


surface condensation, where likely, on pipe lines. 
Drainage trenches shall, preferably avoid crossing 
expansion joints, wherever it is unavoidable, proper 
seals, around the drainage trench, shall be embedded 
to prevent entry of drainage water into the expansion 
joint. 

4.2.2 Oil storage and purifier rooms shall have drains, 
with gravel pockets, of sufficient capacity to carry the 
flow from the sprinkler system. 


4.2.3 Drainage from the battery room floor and sink 
shall have a minimum slope 1 in 50, shall have no 
pockets or traps and shall discharge directly into the 
tailrace or the collection gallery (in case of 
underground power station). The battery room shall 
preferably be located above the highest water level of 
tailrace or collection gallery. 


Suitable measures shall be taken to dilute the acid 
sufficiently in case it is discharged into drainage sump. 


4.2.4 Drainage from formed drains of expansion or 
contraction joints shall discharge into the gravity 
drainage system. 


4.2.5 Drainage line to a main drainage header or sump 
shall be provided with suitable traps to prevent escape 
of odours. The discharge into the sumps shall be below 
the low water level to reduce noise. The vertical 
downspout in the sump shall have a 20 mm vent hole 
above maximum sump water level to prevent air lock. 
Vertical drains discharging into floor drains on lower 
floors need not be provided with traps. 


4.2.6 All embedded pipes in the drainage system may 
be of mild steel or welded steel or any other suitable 
material. Horizontal lines shall have a slope | in 50 if 
practicable, with a minimum 1 in 100. No drain line 
shall be less than 100 mm in diameter except for short, 
sharply sloped runs with few bends from sinks or small 
pits and battery room, which may be 50 mm in 
diameter. 


NOTE — Slopes mentioned in 4.2.6 do not apply to the main 
drainage header, if provided. 


4.2.7 Whenever embedded pipes cross expansion or 
contraction joints, a socket/collar caulked with 
OAKUM, but not lead, shall be provided in the plane 
of the joint to permit minor movements without 
damage. 


4.2.7.1 Pipes crossing construction joints between first 
and second stage concrete shall be long enough to 
prevent their choking during second stage concreting. 
Open end of pipes shall be closed with blank flange. 


4.2.8 Floor drains projecting above the sub-floor shall 
be installed when the floor finish is laid. 


4.2.9 For surface and underground power stations 


transformers shall have a suitable pit below it filled 
with gravel for the purpose of drainage of the hot, 
burning oil of the transformer to the oil sump. Suitable 
fire trap shall be provided to quench the fire of the 
burning oil (see Fig. 1 for typical diagram on fire trap). 


4.3 Drainage Sumps and Pumps 


4.3.1 Drainage sump shall have sufficient volume to 
handle seepage through walls, roof, structural cracks, 
and contraction joints as well and wastewater from 
equipment as indicated in 4.1. It shall also include rain 
and snow water from roofs and decks if not led directly 
to tail water by gravity. Estimating seepage through 
contraction joints and walls is usually the major 
uncertainty in estimating total drainage facility 
requirements and shall be estimated carefully. 


4.3.2 In surface type powerhouse generally 1 litre/ 
min seepage may be assumed for every 6 m? of 
submerged wall. In case of underground powerhouses 
this seepage is the function of water table in the hill 
mass, permeability of the rock-mass and extent of 
grouting. The estimation of the seepage in underground 
powerhouse should be backed by analytical methods. 
One of the simplified methods to estimate the same is 
by considering the powerhouse as equivalent circular 
drain/relief well in surcharged medium. 


4.3.3 Drainage sump shall have sufficient volume to 
permit a minimum 3 min running of the sump pump 
during each cycle of the operation. Minimum two deep 
well type sump pumps in working order are preferred, 
each having a capacity of at least 150 percent of the 
expected seepage discharge plus 100 percent of the 
continuous discharge from other sources. Float control 
or electrical pickup arrangement causes the respective 
pumps to operate as required with the second pump 
coming in operation when the first pump fails to handle 
the inflow. The control panel of the above devices 
alongwith their signal indicators shall be provided 
either in the control room or on the turbine generator 
panel in the machine hall at a level higher than the 
highest flood level. An alarm indicator may also be 
provided to function when the maximum allowable 
high water level in the pump reached. 


4.3.4 Provision of diesel generator (DG) sets should 
also be made to operate the pumps in exigency of power 
failure. This shall be located outside the power plant 
building. Operation of pumps by DG sets shall be 
checked at fortnightly. 


5 PRESSURE DRAINAGE SYSTEM 


5.1 The pressure drainage system is independent for 
each unit of the powerhouse. It conducts cooling water 
from the bearings, generator, transformer and ventilation 
cooler of each unit to various outlets above maximum 


a 
A 


IA A| 
À 


> 


. AMM (AMA ALA 
PS o] LL 
1 RR RR RS 
RR RL 
DR, RL 


¡9.0 
5 

00, 
e... 
EL 


PS ORO KKK. 
PRR RRND i 
LORI BS 


4 
2 A a 


Ba 
A 
LIN 


— ee 
— et mee eet m 


SECTIONAL ELEVATIO 


IS 4721 : 2014 


y% 
À 


— 


m mn mn aa m mee 


a 
4 


\ FIRE WALL < 


PLAN 


COMMON DRAIN —=| | 
O DN | 


l 
| 
l 
l 
| 
j 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL TRANSFORMER OIL DRAINAGE SYSTEM TO PREVENT FIRE AND BURNING OF OIL 


tail water level. This system is subject to the losses in 
pipes and is designed to run full at all times. 


In case of underground power houses, cooling water 
shall be discharged into draft tube directly. 


NOTE — The detailed layout of the system is provided by the 
designer of the power station in consultation/coordination with 
the supplier of the equipment. 


5.2 The pipes for pressure drainage system may be 
mild steel or welded steel pipes. These alongwith other 
fittings shall be capable of withstanding the expected 
pressure, including water hammer where applicable. 
The steel pipes and fittings shall conform to IS 554, 
IS 1239 (Part 1). The welded steel pipe shall conform 
to IS 3589. The valves shall conform to IS 778, 
IS 14846. 


5.2.1 At the time of installation of embedded pipes 
and fittings, it shall be ensured by testing or otherwise 
that the joints in the pipes and fittings are leak-proof 
against maximum expected pressure (1.5 times design 


pressure). Pipes of maximum length shall be used to 
minimize the number of joints. 


6 DEWATERING SYSTEM 


6.1 The general principles of design for dewatering 
the penstock, scroll case, draft tube and discharges into 
a tailrace or collection gallery through embedded pipes 
are given in 6.2 and 6.3. 


6.2 Penstock and Scroll Case Drain Pipe 


6.2.1 The penstock head gate shall be fully lowered 
and then the penstock and scroll case shall first be 
dewatered to tail water elevation. This may be achieved 
in two ways: 


a) by opening the turbine gate and allowing the 
water to flow into draft tube, or 

b) by keeping the turbine gates closed, water 
may be allowed to flow into draft tube through 
a separate dewatering line. 


IS 4721 : 2014 


NOTE — Where turbine inlet valve is provided and it is not 
considered necessary to dewater the penstock the turbine inlet 
valve may be closed instead of lowering the penstock head 
gate. 


6.2.1.1 The balance water in the penstock and scroll 
case is then drained below tail water level and draft 
tubes emptied of water to its bottommost level, after 
ensuring that the draft tube gates are fully lowered and 
seals working, by any of the following methods: 


a) By providing independent dewatering line 
into the dewatering sump for each individual 
unit; or 

b) By providing a common header carrying 
discharge from each unit to the dewatering 
sump; or 

c) By closed circuit dewatering system having 
dry type dewatering sump (see Fig. 2 for 
typical diagram). 

NOTE — System mentioned at (c) has the advantage over the 


(a) and (b) system that there is absolutely no possibility of 
flooding during dewatering. 


6.2.2 The penstock or scroll case drain pipe shall be 
designed to dewater the scroll case and penstock into 
draft tube below tail water level including head gates 
leakage. The likely leakage would be evaluated 
considering the leakage from gates and other sources 
in water conductor system. 


A gate valve for drainage of penstock and scroll case 
shall be provided in a vertical line, if possible and line 


SUMP. 


TO TAIL RACE 


VALVE WITH 
EXTENDED 
SPINDLE 


from the case to the valve shall be as short and as direct 
as possible to prevent clogging by silt. It may also be 
desirable to provide connections for an air hose to be 
used to break up the silt, or to provide drain valves in 
the valve bonnet and at the bottom of the slot. Drains 
shall take off at the lowest point of the invert. 


6.2.3 Spiral cases which are preceded by a penstock 
valve, such as butterfly valve, require an air and vacuum 
relief valve to permit dewatering and filling. This valve 
shall be of a size that will pass sufficient air to prevent 
pressure falling below one half of the atmospheric 
pressure inside the casing during dewatering and will 
open and release air when under maximum forebay 
pressure. Air relief vents shall take off at the top of the 
casing. 


6.2.4 The dewatering take off from scroll case or 
penstocks shall have cast steel cut off valves placed 
as close as possible to the casing to provide a safe 
positive means of shutting off the water in case of 
emergency. 


6.3 Draft Tube Drain Pipes 


Each draft tube drain pipe under normal tail water shall 
discharge not less than one-half of one percent of the 
rated turbine discharge to aid in sealing the draft tube 
bulkhead gates. The pipe shall be capable of removing 
one-tenth of one percent of the rated turbine discharge 
for leakage through the draft tube bulk head gates after 
sealing with the water level at the floor of the draft 


TO TAIL RACE 


DEWATERING 
SUMP 


DRAINAGE 
HEADER 
PIPE 


| DRAINAGE AND 
| DEWATERING 
| GALLERY 


DEWATERING / 
HEADER PIPE / 


Fic. 2 TYPICAL DIAGRAM OF CLOSED CIRCUIT DEWATERING SYSTEM 


tube. Silting of the pipe from the draft tube to the valve 
shall be guarded against by providing compressed air 
connection. The discharge from the draft tube drain 
pipes is carried into the dewatering sump either through 
independent headers, or through a common header. 


6.4 Dewatering Sump and Pumps 


It is desirable to provide minimum of two dewatering 
pumps in working condition. The sump size and float 
control shall be designed for a minimum of 3 min 
running time per cycle. The inflow is determined by 
the size of the dewatering line from the draft tube. The 
dewatering header may be connected to the drainage 
sump through a gate valve to dewater excessive 
drainage (see Fig. 2). 


IS 4721 : 2014 


6.5 Dewatering Pipes 


6.5.1 The dewatering pipes, for the penstocks or scroll 
case as well as the draft tube and the header, for 
dewatering the sump are low pressure lines and may 
be of mild steel, welded steel or any other suitable 
material. Welded steel duly painted with antirust paints 
(inside and outside) shall be preferred. 


6.5.1.1 Socket/collar similar to that mentioned in 4.2.7 
shall be provided wherever the pipe crosses expansion 
or contraction joints. 


6.5.2 The pipes and fittings from upstream and 
including the shut off valve shall be suitable for the 
maximum expected pressure including water hammer 
as in the case of pipes for the pressure system. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD15 (0603). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


