( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard METALLIC FOIL - TENSION TESTING

UDC

669-416 : 620'178'322'2

0 BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG .

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

December 1991

Price Group 2

Mechanical

Testing of Metals Sectional Committee,

MTD 3

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Mechanical Testing of Metals Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. The increasing use of metallic foils in various areas has made it desirable to publish a standard for tension testing of metallic foils which can give guidelines regarding apparatus, test specimen, and procedures, meesurement of specimen. Tension tests provide information on the strength acd ductility of materials under uciaxial tensile stresses. This information may be useful in compariscn of materials, quality content and design. In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from ASTM E 34587 `Method tension testing of metallic foils', issued by American Society for Testing and Materials, USA. of

In reporting the results of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 13237 :1991'

Indian Standard METALLIC FOIL 1 SCOPE
This standard covers the method of tension testing of metallic foils at room temperature.

TENSION TESTING
tighten, an undesirable bending stress may be introduced. When liners are. used behind the wedges, they must be of the same thickness and their faces shall be flat and parallel. For proper gripping, it is desirable that the entire length of the serrated face of each wedge be in contact with the specimen. 4.2.2 Smooth Face Grips

2 REFERENCES
The following Indian Standards adjuncts to this standard:
IS No. 1828

are necessary
Title

( Part 1 ) : 1991

Metallic materials fication of static machines testing Tensile testing ( second revision )

- VeriUniaxial : Part 1 machines

For foils less than 0'076 mm thickness'it may be desirable that the grips have smooth faces and that the gripping pressure be about 0'7 MPa for each 0'025 mm of specimen thickness. 5 TEST SPECIMEN
5.0 General

5069 : 1982

Glossary of terms relating to methods of mechanical metals (first testing of
revision )

3 DEFINITIONS

Test specimens shall be prescribed in the product specification for the material being tested. 5.1 Type A Specimen Type A specimens shall be in accordance with the 12'5 mm sheet type specimen shown in Fig. 1. To avoid lateral buckling in tests of some materials, the minimum radius of the fillet should be 19 mm, or the width of the grip ends should be only slightly larger than the width of the reduced section, or both and the reduced section should be at least 20 percent longer than the gauge length. 5.2 Type B Specimen Type B specimens shall be in accordance with the 12.5 mm side parallel sided specimen shown in Fig. 1. 6 PROCEDURES

The definitions of terms relating to tension testing appearing in IS 5069 : 1982 shall apply to the terms used in this standard. -4 APPARATUS

4.1 Testing Machines
Machines used for tension testing shall to the requirements of IS 1828 ( Part `The loads used in determining tensile yield strength and yield point shall the verified loading range of the testing -4.2 Gripping Devices -4.2.0 General Various types of gripping devices may be used to transmit the measured load applied by the testing machine to the test specimen. To ensure axial tensile stress within the gauge length, the axis of the test specimen shall coincide with the .centre line of the heads of the testing machine. Any deparature from this centre line may introduce bending stresses that are not included in the usual stress computation ( load divided by cross-sectional area ). 4.2.1
Wedge Grips

conform 1 ) : 1991. strength, be within machine.

6.1Type A Specimen Preparation
The specimen shall be machined in packs and shall be examined under about 20 X magnification to determine that the edges are smooth and that there are no surface scratches, or creases edge discontinuities shall be rejected. The milling cutter shall be sharpened or renewed when necessary. When machining some thicknesses and tempers of material it may be necessary to interleave the samples with hard aluminium sheet, a plastic, or other suitable material. For some materials it may be desirable to polish the edges of the specimens either mechanically or by electro-polishing.
I

Testing machines usually are equipped with -wedge grips. These wedge grips generally furnish a satisfactory means of gripping long specimens of ductile materials in the thicker foil gauges. If, for any reason one grip of a pair -advances farther than the other as the grips

IS13233:1991

rG WTR LA B c -

Gauge length Width Thickness Radius of fillet, Min Over all length, Min Length of reduced section, Min Length of grip section, Min Width of grip section approx.

Specimen -~----`) Type A Type B mm mm 125 SO.0 f 0.1 129 12.50 f 0.25 Thickness of foil Thickness of foil 19 230 200 60 50 20 125

NOTE - For Type A specimens, the ends of the reduced section shall not differ in width by more than Also there may be a gradual decrease in width from the ends to the centre, but the width at 0.05 mm. either end shall not be more than O-10 mm larger than the width at the centre.

FIG. 1 FOIL TENSION TEST SPECIMEN 6.2 Type B Specimen Preparation The specimens, particularly of soft and thin hard metals, may be prepared individually by use of a double bladed cutter. The cutting edges should be lubricated, if necessary with a material such as steric acid in alcohol or another The finished specimens shall suitable material. be examined under about 20 X magnification to determine that the edges are smooth and there are no surface scratches or creases. Specimens showing discernible surface scratches, creases, or edge discontinuities shall be rejected. 6.3 Specimen Measurement 6.3.1 Thickness 6.3.1.1 Thickness of specimens taken from soft foils 0'025 mm and thinner shall be determined to an accuracy of 2 percent of the thickness by weighing or by measuring devices. 6.3.1.2 The thickness of specimens taken from hard materials or materials 0'025 mm and greater in thickness may be determined by use of an optimeter, an electrical-type measuring device, or vernier micrometer, provided that the thickness is measured to at least the nearest 2 percent.
NOTE -When specimens or samples are weighed, the thickness shall be computed to the nearest 0.005 mm and preferably to the nearest 0.0005 mm by use of the formula: T = W/AD where T = thickness of specimen of samples, in mm, W = mass of specimen or sample in mg, A = area of specimen or sample in mm*, and D = density of material, in g/cc,

speed of testing may be used up to one half the specified yield strength or yield point, or up to one quarter the specified tensile strength, whichever is smaller. The speed above this point shall be within the limits specified. If different speed limitations are required in determining yield strength, yield point, tensile strength, and elongation, they should be stated in the product specification. In the absence of any specified limitations on the speed of testing the following general rules shall apply. 6.4.1 The speed of testing shall be such that the loads and strains used in obtaining the test results are accurately indicated. 6.4.2 When yield strength or yield point is to be determined, the rate of stress application shall not exceed 12 MPa/s but shall be greater than 1'2 MPa/s. The speed may be increased after removal of the extensometer, but it shall not exceed 0'5 mm/mm of reduced section ( or distance between grips for specimens not having reduced section ) per minute. 6.4.3 The rate of strain shall be 0'06 to 0'5 per minutes, when the yield strength is not being determined, except when the product specification requires a different speed. 6.4.4 When yield strength is to be determined, the strain rate shall be 0'002 to 0'010 per minute, until the stress is above the yield strength. 6.5 Yielding Strength Determine yield strength by the offset extension-under-load method, as follows. 6.5.1 Offset Method
.

or

6.3.2 Widr h Measure and record the specimen dimension to the nearest 0'05 mm. 6.4 Speed of Testing 6.4.0 Unless otherwise specified, any convenient width

To determine yield strength by the `offset method' it is necessary to secure data (autographic or numerical) from which a stress strain diagram may be drawn. Then on the stressstrain diagram ( Fig. 2 ) lay off om equal to the specified value of the `offset', draw mn parallel 2

IS 13237 : 199i

A

x -ti
5,

--JomSPECIFIED OFFSET

0

i
om=SPECIFIED EXTENSION UNDER-LOAD -

FIG. 2 STRESS-STRAIN DIAGRAM FOR DETERMINATION OF YIELD STRENGTH BY THE OFFSETMETHOD to oA and thus locater, the intersection of the mn with the stress strain diagram ( Note 2 of 6.5.2 ). In reporting values of yield strength obtained by this method, the specified values of offset used should be stated in parentheses after the term yield strength. Thus : yield strength (offset 0'2 y! ) = 360 MPa. 6.5.2 Extension-UnderLoad Method

FIG. 3 STRESS-STRAIN DIAGRAM FOR DETERMINATION OF YIELD STRENGTH BY THE EXTENSION-UNDER-LOAD METHOD

may be lightly marked on the specimen by scribing fine lines with a 0'05 mm radius scriber and a precision ground template. The scriber lines should be about 3 mm long and should not be placed near the specimen edge or in the fillet radii. 6.7.2 When elongation is to be determined and Type B specimens are used, the minimum and preferred distance between grips should be.125 mm, and the elongation may be determined from the differences in the distance between the grips before testing and at fracture. When a Type B specimen is tested using a positive head-speed type testing machine, the elongation may be taken from the load elongation graphs computed by the equation: Head speed X mm of chart Elongation, percent = head speed x mm of chart chart speed X gauge length X loo

For test to determine the acceptance or rejection of material whose stress-strain characteristics are well known from previous tests of similar material in which stress-strain diagrams were plotted, the total strain corresponding to the stress at which the specified offset occurs will be known within satisfactory limits : therefore in such tests a specified total strain may be used, and the stress on the specimen, when the total strain is reached, is the value of the yield strength (see Fig. 3 ). NOTES
1 Automatic devices are avaiIabIe that determine offset yield strength without plotting stress-strain curve. Such devices may be used if their accuracy has been demonstrated to be acceptable. 2 If the load drops before the specified offset is reached, technically the material does not have a yield strength ( for that offset ) but the stress at maximum load before the specified offset is reached may be reported as the yield strength.

6.7.3 When elongation is reported, the value shall be shown to the nearest 0'5 percent. 7 REPLACEMENT OF SPECIMENS

A test specimen may be discarded and a replacement specimen taken from the same sample, if possible, in the following cases: original specimen a) The scratches or creases; b) The original specimen machined surface; c) The original dimensions; specimen had had had a surface poorly

6.6 Tensile Strength Calculate the tensile strength by dividing the maximum load carried by the specimen by the original cross-sectional area of the specimen. 6.7 Elongation 6.7.1 When elongation is to be determined and Type A specimens are used, the 50 mm length

the wrong

d) The specimen's properties were changed because of poor machining practices;

IS 13237 : 1991 e) The test procedure f) The fracture length; were incorrect; the gauge 8 TEST REPORT The test report information: shall include the following

was outside

elongation determinations, the g) For fracture was outsidet he middle half of the gauge length when using Type A specimens; and h) There was a malfunction equipment. of the testing

a) Metal or alloy, temper, lot or heat number; b) Test specimen orientation and type; c) Methods of determining elongation; and d) Mechanical properties. yield strength and

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
I

Bnreao of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau qfZn&m Siundardr Act, 1986 to promoto marking and quality certification of harmonious development of the activities of standardization, goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and siaes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are issued from possession of the to BIS giving the are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent latest amendments or edition. following reference :

Dot : No. MTD 03 ( 3447 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU `OF INDIAN Headquarters
:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/l4 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Telegrams II Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75

37 86 62 53 38 43 23502 16

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

6 32 92 95

Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi. India

