( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard

STRUCTURALSAFETYOFBUILDINGSON SHALLOWFOUNDATIONSONROCKSCODEOFPRACTICE
UDC 624'151'5 : 624'121 : 006'76

0

BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK -hfuy 1991

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG Price Group 9

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee,

CED 48

.

FOREWORD This lrdian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. Shallow foundations cover such type of foundations in which the load transfer bearmg strata and whose width is greater than its depth. Depth of foundation 3 m from natural ground level. is directly on the is normally up to

Since most unweathered intact rocks are stronger and less compressible than concrete, the However, Intact determination of allowable bearing pressure on such rocks may be unnecessary. rock masses without weathered zones, joints or other discontinuities are encountered rarely in nature. The existence or location of specific discontinuities of foundation rocks often remain unknown until the rock mass is exposed by excavation. Thus, design engineers should be aware This of dangers associated with the hetrogeneity, anisotropy and unfavourable rock conditions. is because overstressing a rock foundation may result in large differential settlements tilts or perhaps sudden failure. In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to the prevailing in different countries and that in our country. standards and practices

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in The number of accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)`. significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 13063:1991

Indian Standard

STRUCTURALSAFETYOFBUILDINGSON SHALLOWFOUNDATIONSONROCKSCODEOFPRACTICE
1 SCOPE 1.1This standard lays down the general requirements for stuctural safety of buildings having shallow foundations on rock mass.
1.2 The provisions of this code does not cover the special requirements/conditions for foundations under tensile loads. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed in Annex A are necessary adjuncts to this standard. 3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS 2809 : 1972 and IS 1904 : 1986 shall apply. 4 SITE INVESTIGATIONS GENERAL CONDITIONS AND OTHER sequence and dip of the strata and of the ground water conditions. 4.3.2 The site reconnaissance would help in deciding the future programme of field investigations, that is, to assess the need for preliminary or detailed investigations. This would also help in determining the scope of work, method of exploration to be adopted, field tests to be conducted and administrative arrangement required for the investigation. Where detailed published information on the geotechnical condition is not available, an inspection of site and study of topographical features are helpful in getting information about soil, rock and ground water conditions. Site reconnaissance includes a study of local topography, excavations, revines, quarries, escarpments, evidence of erosion or land slides, beaviour of existing structures at or near the site, water marks, natural vegetation, drainage pattern, location of seeps, springs and swamps. Information on some of these may be obtained from topographical maps, geological maps, pedological and soil survey maps and aerial photographs. 4.4 Preliminary Exploration

4.1 Objective of Site Investigation The objective of any site investigation shall be for the determination of the followings: a) The character of ground, identification of rock types together with their discontinuities which tend to influence the behaviour of rock mass [ see IS 11315 ( Parts 1 to 11 )I; b) Character of ground water, measurement of piezometric pressures and location of the more permissible zones. c) Engineering properties of the rocks as determined by laboratory and field testing. 4.2 Existing Information In areas which have already been developed, advantage should be taken of existing local knowledge, records of trial pits and bore holes, etc, in the vicinity and behaviour of existing structures, particularly those of a nature similar to that of the proposed structures. In such cases, exploration may be limited to checking that the existing ground conditions are similar as in neighbourhood. 4.3 Site Reconnaissance 4.3.1 If the cient or is explored in the of type, existing information is inconclusive, the site detail so as to obtain a uniformity, consistence, not suffishould be knowledge thickness, 1

The scope of preliminary exploration is restricted to the determination of depth, thickness, extent and composition of overlying soil strata, location of rock and ground water and also to obtain approximate information regarding strength and compressibility of various strata. During preliminary investigation, geophysical methods are useful guides. 4.4.1 Geophysical Investigations Geophysical surveys make use of difference in, physical properties like elastic modulus, electrical conductivity, density and magnetic SUSceptibility of geological formations in the area to investigate the subsurface. Out of the four methods of geophysical surveys, namely, seismic, electrical, magnetic and gravity surveys, only seismic refractive surveys are widely used in geotechnical investigations. 4.4.1.1 Seismic Survey The seismic survey method makes use of the variation of elastic properties of the strata which affect the velocity of the shock waves travelling through them, thus providing the useful information about the subsurface formations. This method has the outstanding advantages of being relatively cheap and rapid to apply

Is 13063:1991 and influencing large volume of rock-mass. The following information in respect of the rock mass is obtained from these tests:

a)

Percussion

drilling

a) Location b)

gnd configuration of bed rock and geological structures in the subsurface; The efiect of discontinuities in rock mass can be estimated by comparing the in situ compressional wave velocity with laboratory sonic velocity of intect core obtained from the same rock mass. RQD percent 1 Velocity Ratio = ( VF/VL )" x 100 where wave velocity VF = compressional in rock mass, and = compressional wave velocity in VL intact rock core. B to

This method is more suitable in boulderous and gravelly strata. As percussion drilling does not provide us even the they are not samples, representative suitable for careful investigation.

b)

Core-drilling

An object of the drilling is to obtain rock cores for interpretation and testing. It is necessary to obtain cent percent core recovery as far as possible. To ensure a successful drilling operation, the following aspects should be remembered:

9 The drilling facilities permitting

cores of at least NX size ( 54 mm diameter ) and featuring split double tube core barrels to minimize drilling vibrations.

4.4.1.2 For seismic method, Appendix IS 1892 : 1979 may be referred. 4.5 Detailed Exploration

ii) lt should also include for performing water pressure tests. iii) Examination of bore hole walls by bore hole cameras should also be considered. iv) Cores should be photographed as soon as possible and should be carefully marked, placed in protective wrappings in the core boxes and properly stored. v) A systematic method should be used for geotechnical logging of cores which should include the history of drilling, for example, type of bit, rate of drilling and water test data, core recovery, RQD, weathering and description of rock. vi) Each bore hole shall contain one piezometer set at the bottom of the bore hole so that once installed piezometers can be observed over an extended period. vii) If ground water contain harmful chemicals, its sulphate content and pH value shall be measured by chemical analysis of ground water.

Detailed investigations follow preliminary investigation and should be planned on the basis of data obtained during reconnaissance and preliminary investigations. Detailed investigation includes the following: a) Open pit trials, b) Exploratory drilling, c) Sampling, d) Laboratory testing, and e) Field testing. 4.5.1 Open Pit Trials The method of exploring by open pit consists of excavating trial pits at site and thereby exposing the rock surface for visual inspection, geological mapping, in situ field testing and for obtaining rock samples for laboratory testing. This method is generally used for small depths fissures and zones of weak rocks which would breakup in core barrel. 4.5.2 Exploratory
Drilling

'

4

Shot drilling

The purpose of a drilling investigation is to: a) Confirm the geological interpretations,

\

b) Examine 4 4

the cores and bore holes to determine the quality and characteristics of the rock mass, Study the ground water condition, and Provide cores for laboratory testing and petrographic analysis.

The system is used on large diameter holes, that is, over 150 mm. Due to necessity of maintaining the shots in adequate contact with the cutting bit and the formation, holes inclined over 5" to 6" can not be drilled satisfactorily. The system is different from other types of core drillings because the coarser cuttings do not return to the surface but are accumulated in a chip cup immediately above the bit and here the chilled shot is used as an abrasive in place of the drill head.

4.5.2.1 Various methods of exploratory drilling have been described in IS 1892 : 1979. Following methods are recommended for exploration in rock mass: 2

4.6 Sampling

4.6.1 Rock samples commonly used in laboratory testing are lumped samples, block samples

IS 13063 : 1991 and core samples. IS 9179 : 1979 should be referred to for methods of sample preparation. 4.6.2 Rock lumps are obtained from exposed rock formations or pieces of block samples. However, core Samples may be used as lumped samples. 4.6.3 Block Samples Such samples taken away from the rock formation shall be dressed to a size convenient for packing to about 100 mm x 75 mm x 75 mm. Many times a large blocks of size 300 mm X 300 mm X 300 mm are ob tamed from site and specimens of required sizes are prepared in the laboratory. 4.6.4 Core Samples Core obtained from core drilling or shot drilling process are used as core samples. 4.7 Laboratory Testing The strength of the rock material may be estimated by means of laboratory tests on intact Most frequently used laborock specimens. ratory tests are described in 4.7.1 to 4.7.6. 4.7.1 Point Load Strength Index Test This test is very fast and cheap for estimating the point load strength index ( Is ). The test may be conducted on core pieces of length more than 1`5 times the diameter. Provisions of IS 8764 : 1978 shall be complied with for this test. 4.7.2 Point Load Lumped Strength Index Test This test is conducted on lump pieces of rock The depth of the specimen ( D ) material. between the points should be less than the width of the specimen but should be more than one third width of the specimen. Point load lump strength index ( IL ) is calculated by the following formula:
P It = ( DW)0'75 x 2/570

For universal compression testing machine. carrying out this test and analysis of the test data provisions of IS 9143 : 1979 shall b: complied with. 4.7.4 Brazilian Test
It is an indirect method of estimating

the tensile strength of rock material. In this, a cylindrical rock specimen lying on its sides is loaded diametrically with compression load so as to bring about a uniformly distributed tensile stress over the vertical, central and diametrical plane. This test should be conducted according to the provisions of IS 10082 : 1981. 4.7.5 Direct Shear Strength Tests These tests may be conducted without normal stress or with normal stress on shear planes. These tests are conducted for shearing through intact rock specimen as well as along the weak planes, for example, joints surfaces, bedding planes, etc. 4.7.6 UItra Sonic Interferometry
Tests

These tests are conducted on core sample to measure the time of travel of p-wave in rock material and then the p-wave velocity and elastic modulus of rock material is calculated. It is a quick and cheap test for determining the elastic modulus of intact rock material. 4.8 In Situ Tests Rock strength tests are performed because rock mass may contain various discontinuities and plane of slippages which reduces its strength to a fraction. Following in situ tests on Rock masses are recommended. 4.8.1 Plate Load Test Plate load test shall be performed on the foundation rocks according to IS 1888 : 1981 and a curve between pressure on plate versus its settlement is obtained. Using pressure-settlement curve the allowable bearing capacity corresponding to the permissible maximum settlement of foundation can be evaluated as per 8 of IS 12070 : 1987. Tbis curve is also used to calculate the settlement of the footing for the actual bearing pressure on them.
NOTE - Horizontal plate load test may be cooducted where vertical plate load test is not feasible. 4.8.2 Block Shear Test

where IL = point load lump strength index, in kg/cm2; P = the peak load, in kg, at failure; and the cross-sectional area of fractured (DW)= surface, in cmz; Uniaxial compressive strength qc is related to point load lump strength index by: qc 5 15 x IL 4.7.3 Uniaxial Compressive Strength Test This test is conducted on the core samples or block samples having length about 2'0 and 3'0 times the diameter/breadth of the sample on the

Block shear test shall be conducted on the foundation rocks in situ as per IS 7746 : 1975 to evaluate the shear characteristics of the rock mass. These tests shall be carried out along the surface parallel to the base of the footing. In case of laminated/jointed rock mass, these tests shall also be conducted along the lamination planes or joint planes to assess the shearing characteristics along the planes. Concrete block 3

IS 13063 : 1991 shear test shall also be carried out on the in situ foundation rocks to assess the shear characteristics of joint between the rock mass and the concrete.
. 4.9.3.2 Depth of holes:

a) The depth of drill hole below the foun-

4.8.3 Pressure Meter Test Pressure meter test allows for a direct determination of the strength of rock mass including discontinuities and weathering for design of foundation on weak rocks. 4.8.4 Uniaxial Jacking Test as per IS 7317 : 1974 may be conducted on the two opposite walls of a drift or gallery to determine the modulus of deformation of rock mass. 4.8.5 Seismic refractive surveys are conducted to delineate the rock profile and to measure the velocity of p-waves in rock mass. 4.9 Choice of Method 4.9.1 The choice of method of exploration and the tests depends upon the nature of ground, topography, importance and size of building and cost. 4.9.2 In case of lightly loaded foundation ( wall footings up to three storey actual bearing pressure on foundation up to 20 t per square metre ) may be less than safe allowable pressure for weakest rock and size of foundation in such cases would be decided by other considerations. In such cases, it would be adequate to ensure that any type of rock other than boulder exists at foundation level. 4.9.3 Where rock is exposed over large area of building prior to construction or will be exposed after excavation, visual inspection of the rock surface provides a very reliable estimate of the type and quality of rock and the discontinuities of rock mass can be mapped from the exposed surface. The number of drill holes and tests to be conducted will depend upon the nature and type of rocks exposed and the size and importance of the building. 4.9.3.1 Number of drill holes a) In massive crystalline rocks, drilling may be omitted altogether, except in case of very large/important buildings in which case one hole for every 1 000 m2 of area with a minimum of 3 holes shall be drilled. b) In moderately jointed and foliated rocks, one drill hole for every 300-500 ma of area shall be drilled. A minimum of 5 drill holes shall be drilled in case of foundations for very large, heavy and important buildings. c) In heavily jointed, sheared and weathered rock mass, one drill hole for every 200300 m2 area shall be drilled.
4

dation level should be equal to half of effective width of the foundation system in case of massive and sound rocks. the depth of drill holes below the foundation level should be equal to the effective width of the foundation system. and weathered rocks the depth of drill holes below the foundation level should be equal to twice the effective width of the foundation system.

b) In moderately jointed and foliated rocks,

4 In heavily jointed

4 Drill holes shall extend inside the rock

mass to a minimum depth of 3 m. e) In the case of solid rock below jointed rock the drill hole shall extend below the foundations as per (b) and (c) above as appropriate or half the effective width into solid rock whichever is shorter.

4.9.4 Where

the rock is not exposed on the surface, one hole shall be drilled for every 300500 m2 of the area to know about the subsurface formations. If the depth of rock is irregularly varying with the adjacent holes, more holes shall be drilled to fairly estimate the rock profile. The criteria for depth of hole shall be same as 4.9.3.2. 4.9.5 If the foundation rock happens to be lime stone and dolomite associated with ground water flow, there is a likely chance of solution cavities underneath. In such cases, drill holes shall be drilled up to depth of at least one and half time the effective width of the foundation below the foundation level.

4.9.6 If the foundation rock happens to be consolidated sand rock; silt stone or clay shale with likely chance of getting saturated, necessary exploration and testing shall be conducted assuming it to be the soil. 4.9.1 Selection of Tests 4.9.7.1 For foundations on massive rocks, subjected to mainly vertical loads, only the tests for point load strength index or uniaxial compressive strength may be required. 4.9.7.2 For foundations on massive rocks subjected to heavy horizontal loads, concrete block shear tests and in situ shear test shall be conducted to check stability against sliding. 4.9.7.3 For foundations on moderately jointed rocks, the tests for points load strength index or uniaxial compression strength and in situ shear test shall be carried out. 4.9.7.4 For foundations on very weak and weathered rocks, plate load test or pressure meter test and in situ sheer test shall be carried out.

IS 13063 : 1991 4.10 Presentation of Geological Data 4.10.1 In summary, the following geotechnical and geological *informations are considered important in the stability of the building foundations on rock mass: a) Rock type and origin; b) Orientation of discontinuities in the rock mass; in the rock d Spacing of discontinuities mass; including 4 Condition of discontinuities roughness separation, continuity, weathering and infilling ( gauge ); e) Ground water conditions; f) Major faults; g) Properties of the rock material that is uniaxial compressive strength, point load lump strength index; and h) Drill Core Quality ( RQD ). For evaluation and presentation of the above data, IS 11315 ( Parts 1 to 11 ) shall be referred. 4.10.2 Communication between the engineering geologist and the design engineer will be greatly enhanced, if the data is presented in standard The followings are recommended: format. a) Bore hole should be presented in well executed geotechnical logs. b) Mapping data should be presented as prospherical projection or surface jections. c) Longitudinal and cross-sections of structural geology at the site should form an integral part of a geological report. d) For every important structures consideration should be given to constructing a geological model of the site. e) A summary of all the geotechnical and geological data including the ground water conditions should be entered in the input data sheet for rock mass classification purpose. 4.11 General Stability of Area 4.11.1 When slopes develop instability, there is little that can be done to protect an existing building in the affected areas. Area subject to land slips, mass movements and unstable slopes, shall, therefore, be avoided. 4.11.2 Ifthere happen to be an cld slip zone near the site of the buildings, detailed stability analysis of the area shall be carried out and worst probable slip zone shall be demarcated. No buildings shall be constructed in the area which is 200 m or less away from the boundary of the maximum probable slip zone. 4.11.3 If the area happen to be hilly terrain, before planning and approving a building complex on the slopes, detailed stability analysis of 5 the slopes shall be carried out and maximum amount of the load that can be placed by way of buildings construction and their occupants on particular area shall be worked out and notified. Regulations shall be promulgated to effectively control construction in sensitive areas. 4.11.4 While carrying out the stability analysis of the zone where building complex is proposed, change in the subsurface water conditions due to development of township shall be accounted for. 4.11.5 Mass movements of the ground are liable to occur from causes independent of the presence of the building. These include excavation, mining subsidence, land slips on saturation, unstable slopes and creep on slopes. These factors shall be taken into account in the design and expert advice shall be sought, wherever required. 4.11.6 On uphill side of a building on a sloping site, drainage requires special considerations. The natural flow of water shall be diverted away from the foundation. 4.11.7 No trees which grow to a large size shall be planted within 8 m of the foundations of buildings. 5 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS DESIGN ( SAFETY ) 5.1 Loads on Foundation 5.1.1 Foundations shall be proportioned following combination of loads: for the FOR

a) Dead load, live load, earth pressure, water pressures/snow load in areas where it is encountered. b) Dead load, live load, earth pressure, water pressures/snow load where it is encountered with wind or seismic load. 5.1.2 Dead load also includes the mass of column/wall, footings, foundations, the overlying fill including frost, if encountered, ignoring the mass of soil displaced by foundation system.
NOTE - There are a number of states in India where snow will be encountered during winter or perenially over underlying bed rock on which the foundation system is intended to be constructed.

5.1.3 Live loads from the floors above, as specified in IS 875 : 1964 shall be taken into account. 5.2 Allowable Bearing Pressures 5.2.1 Pressures coming on the rock due to building foundation shall not be more than the safe bearing capacity of rock-foundation system taking into account the effect of eccentricity. The effect of interference of different foundations should also be taken into account.

Is 13063: 1991 5.2.2 The total settlement of the foundation(s) shall rot be more than permissible ( recommended/allowable/tolerable ) settlement ( Sper ) value that is
l

S < Sper where Calculated maximum average settlement due to imposed load under the footing; and Sper = Permissible value of total settlement. s= 5.2.3 Differential settlement ( AS ) and/or tilt of the building ( T ) or/and part of a building &all be not more than the recommended values ASper and Tper respectively. AS < A Sper and T < Tper where AS = Calculated maximum differential settlement; ASper = Permissible settlement; value of value of

When wind loads or seismic loads are considered, the safe bearing pressure may be increased The by 25 percent and 33 percent respectively. safe bearing pressure shall not exceed the allowable pressures for the grade of concretelmasonry of foundation slab or grade of concrete laid over the rock surface, whichever is lower. 5.2.7 The allowable bearing pressure should, then, be determined by the following steps: a) Proportion footing making use of the safe bearing pressures value determined as per 5.2.5; b) Calculate differential settlements of footings; c) Calculate angular distortions; d) Compare the above values with those given in Table 1, and e) If the comparison is not satisfactory, revise the allowable bearing pressure and repeat the steps (b), (c) and (d) until the comparison is satisfactory. 5.2.0 Causes of Settlements For safety of building foundations, the engineerin-charge should be well familiar with all causes of settlements. Foundations on rocks may settle due to combination of the following reasons: a) Elastic compression of the foundation and the underlying bearing strata; b) Ground movement on slopes due to erosion, creep or land slides; c) Increase in ground water may soften the joint fill material, causing slippage along the joints; d) Other causes such as adjacent excavation, underground subsidence and mining, erosion; and e) Rock like schist, soft shale, etc, weather rather quickly and may cause post construction settlements within its life time. Settlements
Differential Isolated Footing mm (4) `003 3L' -001 5L'

differential

T = Estimated value of maximum Tilt; and Tper = Permissible value of Tilt. 5.2.4 The recommended values of permissible settlements, differential settlements and angular distortion ( tilt) are tabulated in Table 1. Higher values of maximum settlement can be adopted in case of highly weathered and disintegrated rock masses. 5.2.5 For satisfying the conditions of 5.2.1, 5.2.2 and 5.2.3, load combinations as described in 5.1.1 shall be considered. 5.2.6 For satisfying the conditions laid down in 5.2.1 and 5.2.2, safe bearing pressures shall be estimated in accordance with IS 12070 : 1987. Table 1 Maximum and Differential
Maximum Settlement mm (3) 12 12

of Buildings on Rock Mass
Settlement Raft Foundation mm (5) :003 3L *OOZL Angular Isolated Footing (6) l/300 l/666 Distortion Raft Foundation (7) l/300 l/500

( Clause 5.2.4 )
Type of Structure lz. (1) i) ii) iii) (2) For steel structure For reinforced concrete structures For plain bricks block walls in multistoreyed buildings a) For Lx/Ha < 3 For Ll/Ha z 3 For water towers and silos

iv)

:1 12

-000 25L *OOo33L -

0.002 SL

l/400 l/300 -

l/400 settlement and depending upon

NOTE - The values given in the table may be taken only as a guide and the permissible differential settlement in each ease should be decided as per requiremets of the designer importance of structure. `L - denotes the length of deflected part of wall/raft or centre 2H - denotes the height of wall from foundation footing. to centre distance between

columns.

6

IS 13063 : l!Bf 5.2.9 Causes of Differential Settlements Some of the causes of differential settlembnt are as follow: a) Non-uniform pressure distribution from foundation to rock mass; b) Overlap of stress distribution in rock mass due to loads of adjacent structures; c) Geological and physical non-uniformity of rock mass under the foundation; d) Slippage along the weaker planes of rock mass; e) Water table fluctuations at construction site; f) Non-uniform structural disruptions or disturbances of foundation rocks due to freezing and thawing; g) Movement of the rock mass due to instability of general slopes; h) In soluble rocks, solution cavities may become larger with time and may lead to differential settlements; and j) Seepage of water in foundation of a part of a building. 5.2.10 The foundations shall normally proportioned that no tension is created foundation plane. be SO at the be calculated along the rock surface. The factor of safety against sliding may be improved by anchoring the foundation to the deeper strata of rock. 5.3.1.3 The adhesion and th: coefficient of friction between the concrete and the rock mass under dry and submerged conditions and also of foundation rocks along weak shear zones and bedding planes shall be determined by in situ block shear tests at site. For preliminary design the value given in Table 2 may be used. Table 2 Values of Adhesion and Cosfacient of Friction ( Clause 5.3.1.3 ) Sl Material
No. i) Massive and sound rock ii) Fractured, jointed rock Adhesion kg/cm2 5-10 l-3 Coefficient of Friction 0.80-l-O 0.80

5.3.2 Overturning The factor of safety against overturning shall b= not less than 1'5 when dead loads, live loads, earth pressures and unlift are considered together with wind load or seismic forces. When only dead load, live load, earth pressures and uplift pressures are considered, the factor of safety shall be not less than 2. 5.4 Depth of Foundation 5.4.1 The minimum depth of foundation b:low the natural ground surface shall be 0'5 m. 5.4.2 In case of massive intact and unweathered rocks, the foundation can be laid over the rock surface after chipping off the top surface for preparation of a proper seat for the foundation. 5.4.3 In case of jointed, sheared and partially weathered rocks, the base of the foundation shall be kept at least 50 cm inside the rock surface, so that the upper portion of highly weathered rock miss is avoided. This would also take care of the error in judgem:nt about the depth of rock surface. 5.4.4 In case of rock of very low strength, highly weathered rocks ( for example: clay shales, sand rock and soft silt stone in SHlVALZKS ), the depth of foundation shall be decided in accordance with provisions of IS 1904 : 1986,considering the foundation material to be as soil. 5.4.5 A foundation on any type of rock mass shall be below the zone significsotly weakened by root holes or cavities produced by barrowing animals or worms. The depth shall also be enough to prevent the rain water scouring below the footing. 5.4.6 Where there is excavation, ditch or sloping ground adjacent to the foundation which is likely to impair the stability of a building, either the foundation of such building shall be carried 7

5.2.11 If tension is created under the foundation, the maximum tensile stress shall be less than three fourth of the 7 day modulus of rupture of foundation concrete or of concrete laid between the foundation and rock surface whichever is less. For this purpose, tensile strength of rock or cable anchors, if any, shall not be considered. 5.2.12 If tension is created under the base, the maximum bearing pressure shall be calculated on the modified base area which remain in compression only. 5.3 Stability Against Overturning and Sliding Stability of foundation against overturning and sliding shall be checked and factors of safety shall conform to the requirements specified in 5.3.1 and 5.3.2. 5.3.1 Sliding 5.3.1.1 The factor of safety against sliding of structures shall not be less than 1'5 when dead loads, live loads, earth pressures, water pressures and uplift pressures are considered together with wind load or seismic force. When only dead load, live load, earth pressure, water pressure and uplift are considered; the factor of safety against sliding shall be not less than 1'75. 5.3.1.2 For buildings founded on sloping rock surface, the factor of safety against sliding shall

down to depth beyond the deterimental influence of such conditions or retaining walls or similar works shall be constructed for the purpose of shielding from their effects. 5.4.7 It is usdally accepted that if the foundation is bearing on sound and massive rock, it may be founded above the limit of frost penetration in areas where it is encountered. Any large or extensive seams, cracks, areas of disintegration in the rock should be cleaned and grouted up to the depth of maximum frost penetration by ( 1:l ) cement sand mortar. For other type of rocks, the base of foundation shall lie below the depth of maximum frost penetration. 6 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

6.3 Foundation on Soluble Rocks If the foundation rocks are dolomite on lime stone and there is a possibility of g .tting its joints charged with water, the joints shall be grouted with ( 1:l ) cement sand motar up to the depth equal to effective width of the foundation. For grouting of foundation rocks, IS 6066 : 1984 may be referred. 6.4 Settlement Joints

6.1 Concerning of Foondation 6.1.1 Wherever a foundation is embedded partially or fully in rock mass, the foundation concrete shall be laid from surface to surface of rock mass on sides. This will prevent any chance of rock mass movement due to loosening effect on the sides of foundation ( see Fig. 1 ).

It is recommended that settlement joints shall be provided on the buildings at places of abrupt change in the nature of foundation rock, superstructure or its layout in plan, for example, at the junction of the parts of a building with appreciably different number of storeys ( see Fig. 2A ) or where the outline of building in plan is sharply changed ( see Fig. 2B ) or where the compressibility of foundation strata abruptly changes ( see Fig. 2C ).
EXPANSION JOINT , 01-2 Dl

f -f02 1 //N// SETTLEMENT JOINT

I
FIG. 1 EMBEDDEDFOUNDATION

//NJ

FIG.

2A

6.1.2 In case of presence of gypsum salt in the foundations, care be exercised to use sulphate resistant cement in the foundation. 6.2 Found,ation Drainage 6.2.1 The surface drains in the building and around the building shall be so planned that water is draired away from the building. 6.2.2 All the surface drains, traversing jointed and weathered rocks in the built up area, shall be lined so as to prevent the entry of water to the foundation rocks. 6.2.3 If the springs/seepage of water is noticed on down slopes of a building complex, a suitable arrangement for free exist of water, provided with well designed filter, shall be made so as to prevent the flow material along with water. 6.2.4 If the foundations are laid on the water bearing rock mass either the well designed ground water drainage arrangement shall be provided so as to keep the ground water pressure below the foundations or the foundation shall be designed for the water pressures and uplift pressures which will be exerted on the foundations. 6.2.5 If'the bearing rocks are overlain by water bearing strata, suitable drainage arrangement shall be provided around the building foundations and the water pressures and uplift pressures shall be accounted for in design of foundations. 8

ABRUPT CHANGE IN SUPERSTRUCTURE HEIGHT

rSETT

LEMENT

JOINTS

I
FIG.

I
rEXPANSlON JOINT

2B

ABRUPT CHANGE IN PLAN

FIG.

2C FOUNDATION ON ROCK MASS

OF

Two

DIFFERENT COMPRBSSIBILITIES

IS 13063:1991

6.5 Foundations

Adjacent

to Sloping Ground

Where a foundation is to be constructed adjacent to the sloping ground, the following conditions shall be satisfied. 6.5.1 The frust;m of bearing rock under the footing with sides, which make 60" with horizontal, shall remain within the sloping surface of rock ( see Fig. 3A ). 6.5.2 The minimum horizontal distance of lower edge of the footing shall be at least 60 cm away from the sloping surface ( see Fig. 3A ). -`~0<60~ \ \ \ \ \
\ \ i

s< APPARENT D,p oF WEAKPLANES

.4

/

FIG. 4

FOUNDATIONAT DIFFERENT LEVELS shall not

crossing the base of higher foundation cross the lower foundation.

THIS LINE SHOULD REMAIN WITHIN THE ROCK MASS _/2-,\

6.6.2 If condition of 6.6.1 can not be complied with, the lower foundations shall be designed for the additional loads ( horizontal and vertical > transferred from higher foundation and the construction of the lower foundation shall be done prior to construction of higher foundation. NOTE-In
hills, there is bad practice to construct the walls of a building directly over the retaining walls which are constructed in drv RandomRubble Masonry. Since the deformability of dry Random Rubble Masonry is very high in comparison to that of the wall masonry as well as the foundation rock mass, they normally give way leading to cracking of the houses and sometimes results in total collapse of the building. Such practice should be discontinued.

3A 6.5.3 If the bedding planes/weak shear planes of the rock mass are dipping towards the slope, the footing should be so located that any weak plane through the base or the footing is not exposed on the sloping rock surface. To achieve this. either the foundation mav be shifted awav from the slopes or the depth of foundation may be increased ( see Fig. 3B ).

6.7 Detailing

of Reinforcement

6.7.1 The requirement complied with.

of IS 456 : 1978 shall be

6.7.2 In case of strip footings, the main reinforcement is provided along the width of footings. Some longitudinal reinforcement in the footing is desirable to assist in bridging over soft spots associated with heterogeneous conditions in rock masses. The longitudinal reinforcement in strip footing shall be not less than: a) 0'15 percent ( in case of mild steel ) or 0'12 percent ( when high steel deformed bars or welded wire fabric are used ) of the total cross-sectional area on each face ( top and bottom ) of the RCC footing. b) 25 percent of the main reinforcement.
7 TREATMENT OF ROCK DEFECTS

FIG. 3

3B FOUNDATIONADJACENT TO SLOPING GROUND

6.6 Foundation at Different Levels Where foundations of the adjacent buildings are to be located at different levels, the following conditions shall be satisfied ( see Fig. 4 ). 6.6.1 The minimum horizontal distance between the adjacent foundations shall be such that the loads from foundation at higher level are not transferred to the other foundation at lower level for which the lower foundation shall be outside the bearing frustum ( making an angle of 60 with horizontal ) and also the weak planes 9

7.1 Open Vertical Joints 7.1.1 More or less vertical joints from one to several centimetres are sometimes encountered even in unweathered rocks. These joints may either be open or clay filled. Such joints shall be cleaned out to a depth of four to five times their width und filled with cement grout, a mixture of one part of cement and one part of sand with enough water to permit pouring of

IS13063r1991
grout into the joints ( see Fig. SA ). Large spaces, wider at top are commonly filled with dental concrete. 7.1.2 If the foundation rocks comprises of nearly vertical joints so wide that they constitute . . . ,. . an appreciable rraction of area ( more than 20 percent ), the excavation is usually deepened until the joints: are no longer within the base or they narrow down to acceptable limits ( within 20 percent of base area j. thsn 20 percent of the total area, the joint be washed and cleaned for depth equal to 3 times the width of the joint and shall be up with the ( I:1 ) cement sand grout Fig. 6 ). shall

2 to
filled ( see

8.1.2 If the area of weak seams under the foundation is more than 20 percent of the total base area, treatment as per 8.2shall be done ( see Fig. 7 ).

OENTAL

CONCRETE L-1: 1 CEMENT-SAND SLURRY FIG.

5A

STEEPLY DIPPING OPEN JOINTS 8.2 Fooodation Rocks of Different Comoressibilities L When foundation spans rock material of different compressibility, the following conditions should be complied with. 8.2.1 The design of the foundation shall be carried out for bearing pressures inversely proportional to the compressibility of the strata. The foundation section shall be designed for

7.2 Open Horizontal

Joints

Many rocks contain nearly horizontal joints which gets opened up due to relief in vertical stress. If such open joints are located beneath the foundations as shown in ( Fig. 5B), the rock mass above the open joints shall be removed, if economically feasible; otherwise, the open space of the joints shall be filled with cement sand grout.

I

I

I

I

I

FIG. 5B

OPEN HORIZONTAL JOINTS

7.3 Solotion Cavities In Solution cavities require detailed attention. bedded lime stone, cavities are more likely to occur in some horizons than in others. Exploration shall be carried out to locate the horizon where unfavourable conditions exist. If the area of cavities is less than 20 percent of the base area of foundation, the safe bearing pressure shall be reduced as prescribed. in IS 12070 : 1987. 8 SPECIAL TREATMENTS
FIG.

6

WEAK SEAMS UNDER FOUNDATION LESS THAN 20 PERCENTOF AREA

8.1Weak Seams Under the Foundation
8.1.1 When inclined seams filled with soft material are located on the excavated rock surface under the foundation base covering less 10

one and half times the moments and shear forces so calculated. Alternatively, the design of foundation can be carried out considering no bearing on weaker strata.

IS 13063 : 1991

.

WEAK

SEAM

FIG. 7

WEAK SEAMSUNDER FOUNDATION MORE THAN 20 PERCENT OF BASE ARIIA size and number and depth of the anchors shall be worked out considering the required shearing strength of anchors, foundation size and the foundation rock; c) Depth (d) shall not be less than any case; 60 cm in

8.2.2 The maximum bearing pressure under the foundation shall also not exceed the allowable bearing pressure for the weaker strata. 8.2.3 The minimum reinforcement spanning the the weaker strata shall be not less than 0'5 percent of the cross section of foundation. 8.3 Foundation on Steeply Dipping Rock Surface

The foundations on steeply sloping ( more than 15" with horizontal ) rock surface shall normally be avoided. If it is obligatory to do so, the following safety measures shall be adopted in their design: a) The foundation shall be embedded to a certain depth (d) inside the rock such that the prescribed factor of safety in sliding along the foundation plane are obtained. In these calculation, the support provided by the rock on down slope face of footing is accounted for ( see Fig. 8 ). Shear strength of rock/cable anchors, even if provided, is not considered in these calculations;

d) Foundation level benches may be provided if possible at site. In such cases also the sliding stability shall be checked as if no benching was there; and e) Wherever provisions of anchors is necessitated for increasing the stability of the structure, caution may be exercised to ensure that the sufficient length of anchors are embedded in the massive and fresh rock to mobilies rock action, and anchors extend well beyond slumpmass and computations for the ma& of slumpmass be also taken into consideration. 8.4 Foundation on Moderate Slopes At locations, where the Frock surface is gently dipping ( less than 15" with horizontal ), the rock footing shall be taken deep enough ( not less than 30 cm > inside the rock such that desired factor of safety in sliding along the rock surface is achieved having considered the bearing resistance on down slope face. It should also be checked that even without the bearing support on down slope face of foundation, the factor of safety against sliding in worst loading condition is not less than 1'10 ( see Fig. 9 ).

ANCHORS

d360cm

FOUNDATIONON STEEPLY DIPPING SLOPES b) The stability of foundation without bearing resistance on the down slope face shall also be checked. To ensure the desired factor of safety against sliding, rock/cable anchors may be provided. The 11

FIG. 8

FIG. 9

FOUNDATIONSON MODERATE SLOPES

IS 13063:1991 8.5 Foundation on a Bench
If a foundation is provided over a bench whose bedding planes, or weaker planes are steeply dipping and getting exposed on the slope face, the stability of the rock mass alongwith the superimposed loads by the foundation, shall be checked along the deepest exposed weak plane and it shall be ensured that: a) Desired factor of safeties are achieved. If not, rock anchors may be provided to achieve it ( see Fig. 10 ). shall be removed up to a distance and filled up with concrete so that the soft material is not encountered up to the thickness equal to half the width or twice the thickness of the footing whichever is larger. 8.6.2 If removal of soft material, as required in 8.6.1, loosen or dislocate the top rock mass or the thickness of top hard rock is less than the thickness of footing, the top rock shall be removed and the foundation shall be laid on the lower hard strata ( see Fig. 11B ). In such case, the side support from top hard strata shall be ignored in calculations.

1

A
**
Y-ROCK/CABLE ANCHORS

FIN. 10 FOUNDATION OF STEEPLYDIPPING STRATA ON A BENCH

FIG. 11B FOUNDATION ON MODERATELY DIPPING CLEAR SEAM

to make the wedge stable, factor of safety against sliding shall also be checked ignoring the shearing strength of rock anchors and it shall be not less than 1'10 in worst probable condition. 8.6 Foundation on Rock Shelf 8.6.1 If a ing strata minimum of footing ( see Fig. foundation is so located that the bearis underlain by soft material and the depth of the hard rock under the base is more than the thickness of footing 11A ). In such cases, the soft material
x 3 B/2 20

b) If rock anchors are required

8.7 Undulating Rock Surface If the rock surface profile is highly undulating due to solution cavities or any other reason ( see Fig. 12 > the loose material from the undulations shall be removed up to the depth that remaining surface area of loose material be not more than 20 percent of total area and shall be backfilled with lean concrete having allowable bearing stress more than maximum bearing pressure under the footing. 8.8 Foundation on Soft Rock Over Laid on Steeply Dipping Hard Rock The footing shall be SO located that the minimum thickness of bearing strata over the hard rock shall be more than one third of the base width of foundation and also more than one metre. Otherwise piles, bearing on hard strata, shall be provided ( see Figi 13 ). 8.9 Foundation on Different Rock Masses

_-L__A

xz,

FIG. 11A FOUNDATION ON STEEPLY DIPPING CLAY SEAM

If a building is so located that part of it rests on hard rock and remaining part on soft rock

DESIGN LEVEL OF FOUNDATION

LEAN

CONCRETE

LINE OF 80 PERCENT AREA OF ROCK

SURFACE

FIG. 12

FOUNDATION ON UNDULATING ROCK SURFACE 12

IS 13063

:

1991

MINIMUM CUSHION

X>lm
. x ' B/3

the minimum depth of soft rock under the base of one footing is not less than one third of the width of the footing and the other footing rest solely on the hard rock. 8.10 Stepped Foondation for Moltistorey Frames In case a multistorey building is to be constructed on hill slope ( see Fig. 15 ) the following criteria shall be adopted: a) The stability of the rock slopes alongwith the load on it due to the building shall be ensured; b) The building frame shall be so planned that column points are located on inner side of the rock benches; .b c) The columns shall be well anchored into the foundation rocks to provide complete fixity at base. The minimum depth of

SOIL OR VERY SOFT ROCK

HARO

ROCK

FIG. 13 STEEPLYDIPPING JOINT PLANE ( see Fig. 14 ), then a settlement joint shall be provided in the foundation at such location that

SOIL OR
VERY SOFT ROCK / HARD ROCK

Xalrn
x3 B/3

FIG. 14

FOUNDATIONON DIFFERENT ROCK MASSES

TIE

BEAM

(CIRCULAR

OR

ACE PLA SNAP

/

MAY

ROCK ANCHORS BE REQUIRED

FIG. 15

MULTISTOREY BUILDING ON ROCK SLOPE 13

IS 13063 : 1991 column foundation shall be at least one metre below the excavated terrace level; d) The beams shall be provided between columns at plinth level as to increase stiffnels of the RCC frame of building; the the the

HEAVY WEIGHT ON HILL SIDE 7

e) The frame may be anchored to rock mass

with the help of horizontal anchors at each beam level, if required, to stabilize the terraces or the frame itself; and

f) The building frame shall be designed

for the probable differential settlement due to non-uniformity of foundation rock. The common practice in such cases is to provide stiff column with slender beams so that the beam column joints behaves as hinge joints. FIG.16 RAFTFOUNDATION ADJACENT TO HILL SLOPES will not be possible. At such sites, flexible structure which can withstand small ground movements is best suited. Still type foundation shown in Fig. 17 is one of that type. These consist of wooden or steel framed structures with fibre glass, aluminium or G.C. steel roofing and walls clad with PVC sheets. The roofs are constructed of wooden planks. The depth of foundation in loose tallus deposit shall be at least 2 m.

8.11 Raft Foundations Adjacent to Hill Slope If a raft foundation is to be constructed adjacent to hill slope, if possible, the building shall be so planned that heavier part of the building are located on the up hill side part of the raft to provide better stability ( see Fig. 16 1. 8.12 Foundations on Slopes of Tallos Deposits In case of buildings up to two storeys are required to be built on steep hill slopes dipping more than 15, wall and column construction

S CLADDED PVC SHEETS FLOOR BEAMS WITH FLOOR 200 mm WOODEN OR 100mm STEEL PIPE

WOODEN

FIG. 17

STILL FOUNDATION

.

14

IS13063:1991

ANNEX A ( mm 2 ) .
IS No.
456 : 1978 LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS IS No.

Title Code of practice for plain concrete and reinforced ( third revision ) Code of practice for design loads ( other than earthquake ) for building and structures: Part 2 Imposed loads ( second revision ) Method of load test on soils ( second revision ) Code of practice for subinvestigation for surface foundations ( first revision ) Code of practice for design and construction of foundations in soils: general requirements ( thtrd revision ) Glossary of terms and symbols relating to soil enginnering ( first revision ) Recommendations for pressure grouting of rock foundations in river valley projects ( jirst revision ) Code of practice for uniaxial jacking test for deformation moulds of rock Code of practice for in situ shear test on rock Method of determination of point load strength index of rocks Method for the determination of unconfined compressive strength of rock materials

Title Method of preparation of rock specimen for laboratory testing Method of test for determination of tensile strength by indirect tests on rock specimens Methods for the quantitative description of discontinuities in rock mass

9179 : 1979

875 : 1964

10082 : 1981

1888 : 1982 1892 : 1979

11315

11315 Orientation ( Part 1 > : 1987 11315 Spacing ( Part 2 > : 1987 11315 Persistence ( Part 3 > : 1987 11315 ( Part 4 ) : 1987 11315 ( Part 11315 ( Part 11315 ( Part 11315 ( Part 11315 ( Part 11315 ( Part 11315 ( Part 12070: 5 ) : 1987 Aperture 6 ) : 1987 Filling 7 ) : 1987 Seepage 8 ) : 1987 Number of sets 9 ) : 1987 Block size 10 > : 1987 Core recovery and rock 11 > : 1985 quality designation 1987 Code of practice for design and construction of shallow foundation on rocks Roughness Wall strength

1904 : 1986

2809 : 1972

6066 : 1984

7317 : 1974

7746 : 1975 8764 : 1978

9143 : 1979

15

Standard Mark
I

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright
.

No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent passession of the latest amendments or edition. to BIS giving the following reference : i Dot : No. CED 48 ( 4463 ) Amendments Issaed Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 600113

Telegrams : Mahaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 7s

37 86 62 53 38 43 235021 6

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS
.

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

6 32 92 95

Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi. India

