IS 13392 : 1992 IS0 6593 : 1985

( Reaffirmed 2004 )

PROGRAMME FLOW FOR PROCESSING SEQUENTIAL FILES IN TERMS OF RECORD GROUPS FOR INFORMATION PROCESSING

U DC

681'3'066

QBIS

1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG . Price Group 4

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

April 1992

IS 13392 : 1992 IS0 6593 : 1985

Indian Standard
PROGRAMME FLOW FOR PROCESSING SEQUENTIAL FILES IN TERMS OF RECORD GROUPS FOR INFORMATION PROCESSING
NATIONAL FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is `identical with IS0 6593 : 1985 `Information processing Program flow for processing sequential files in terms of record groups' issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Information Systems and Software Sectional Committee ( LTD 33 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: Wherever the words `International should be read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they

1

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS 13392 : 1992 IS0 6593 : 1985

1 1.1

Scope
This

and field
International

of application
Standard describes two alternative

4)

the actions to be taken when a control break at any

level does, or does not exist; general procedures which logically organized (method A and method B) for any program have been 6) after the complete procedure termination. 5) normal processing, if any;

is required to process sequential

files which

in terms of groups of records.

Method A - Checks the control head condition termination of the appropriate level Method initiation B Checks the control head condition level.

2
before the

Definitions
of this International Standard the following

For the purpose definitions apply.

of the appropriate

Both are based upon the recognition is to be processed a change,

that for each record which in the value of

or lack of change,

2.1 complete procedyre : All those activities described within this International Standard which commence with entry to the procedure and conclude with exit from the procedure.

an item in that record may affect the flow of control.

1.2

The procedures any program

described in which

may be used as the basis for

designing a) b)

2.2 main procedure : All those activities, subsequent to the general initiation routine and prior to the general termination routine within the complete logical record procedure.

one or more input files are to be processed sequentially;

2.3
each input file is accessed in a defined order of logical groups of records: c) the records held in each input file contain specified or se2.4

: The set of data which is processed in a

single iteration of the main procedure. NOTE - It may be pan or the whole of a single physical record or of a number of records.

items of data which not a change quence.

may be used to determine is required

whether

of control

in the processing

first

input

routine

: Those activities required to obtain

the logical record,

if any, to be processed first.

1.3

The procedures

described

in this International

Standard

2.5

input

routine

: Those activities required to obtain the
next.

are subject to the following a) The items of data

constraints which

:
determine control

logical record to be processed

may

changes are organized trol at subordinate b)

into a logical sequence of levels such

NOTE - If there are no more logical records to be processed, the end of-input condition becomes true.

that a change of control at one level implies changes of con levels. are described in 2.6 control field

: The field comprising one or more input
in value, or lack of change,. between

variables whose change Only input files processed sequentially Standard. described do not detail the routines especially: this International c) The main procedure. level

successive logical records affect the flow of control through the

procedures

2.7

: Where a logical record contains more than one
they are assumed to have a hierarchical a logical grouping. with one another, indicating

that depend

on user problem or installation,

control field element relationship

1) comolete procedure initiation; /
2) the sequence in which input files are to be accessed, if more than one; 3) the means of assembling a logical record for pro-

The position in the hierarchy by means of a level number.

is termed a level and is indicated

cessing;

NOTE - For the purpose of this International Standard only the level number is assigned such that the most subordinab control field element is assigned level 1, the next is level 2 etc. Where there are n levels the most superior control field element will be at level n.

3

IS 73392 : 1992
IS0 6593 : 1985

2.8

level 1 control

break

: A situation which occurs when
in the current previously logical

the unchanged mal processing etc. If there

level 2 (when routines.

used),

level 1 initiation

and nor--

the values

in the control

field elements

Otherwise,

the level 2 termination

record (and at the level specified) are not the same as the values in the same elements logical record. of the immediately processed

routine is entered and a test made for a control break at level 3,

is a control

break at the most superior,

or nth level, levels and

NOTE - The values of the control field elements will be obtained from the current logical record in the intiation routines of the appropriate level. The action of examining the control field should ensure that if
there is a change in value at a level above 1, a control break is registeied at all levels subordinate to the level at which the change actuallv occurs.

then control breaks are registered level termination and including, input and, mination complete action

at all subordinate

taken for each of those levels up to, is true, performs the general ter-

the nth level. The program then tests for end-ofand leaves the complete termination procedure via the

if that condition routine procedure

routine; otherwise

the level inroutine.

itiation routines are entered in turn from that for the nth level to 2.9 level 1 record group

: Level 1 record group is a set of
are equal for all levels

that for level 1, before entering the normal processing

records

whose

control

field elements level 1.

superior to and including

2.10
when

level

1 termination

routine

: Those activities required
processing all

4

Description

of method

I3
with figure 2. undertakes

level 1 control

break occurs to conclude

records belonging

to level 1 record group.

This description

should be read in conjunction procedure

2.11

level

i

initiation

routine

: Those activities

Upon entry to the complete required all any necessary initiation

the program

activities

(for example

: obtain and
there is in fact exits terprocedure

when level 1 control break occurs to commence records belonging to level 1 record group.

processing

open input files, if not previously assigned). some input data to be processed, if none,

The program then the program

enters the first input routine and checks whether from the complete mination Where routine. procedure via the complete

2.12

unchanged

level

: Those activities required when the

level 1 did not.

1 control break did occur but the level 1 control break

there is input data to be processed routines in turn,

the program

enters

the level initiation

commencing

at the most The program

3

Description

of method

A
with figure 1,

superior level and finishing with level 1 initiation. then enters the normal processing record. On subsequent iterations the program,

routine for the first logical

This description should where "n" is "3".

be read in conjunction

for each logical record, at level 1. As defined in to

Upon entry to the complete any necessary initiation

procedure

the program example:

undertakes obtain and then perthe

tests for control

breaks, commencing

activities

(for

2.8, a control break is also registered at all levels subordinate no control break at level 1 there is no change the program continues

open input files, if not previously assigned). some input data to be processed. forms routine. Where there is input data to be processed the empty files processing complete procedure If none, routine

The program the program and exits from

that at which there is an actual change in value. Thus if there is in value for any control field element; to the normal pro-

enters the first input routine and checks whether

there is in fact

cessing routine for the current logical record. If a control break does occur at level 1 the program enters the level 1 termination routine and then tests for a control break at level 2; if there is no control break at level 2, the flow of control passes in turn routines.

via the complete

procedure

termination

the program

per-

through

the level 1 initiation

and normal

processing

forms the general initiation and finishing wi&h the

routine and then enters the level inat the most superior level The program then 1 initiation.

Otherwise,

the level 2 termination

routine is entered and a test

itiation routines in turn, commencing level enters the normal processing On subsequent tests for control iterations breaks,

made for a control break at level 3, etc.' If there is a control break at the most superior, or nth level, then control breaks are registered at all subordinate levels and level termination cluding, the action taken for each of those levels up to, and inthen tests for end-of-input procedure otherwise via the routine; is true, leaves the complete termination are entered in turn from

routine for the first logical record. for each logical record, at level 1. As defined in to

the program, commencing

the nth level. The program procedure routines

2.8, a control break is also registered at all levels subordinate no control routine break at level 1 there is no change used) and continues

and, if that condition complete level initiation ing routine. If there propriate and/or is any need

that at which there is an actual change in value. Thus if there is in value for any level 1 processing routine control field element; (when the program enters the unchanged to the normal

that for the

nrh lev,el to that for level 1, before entering the normal process-

routine for the current logical record. If a control break does occur at level 1 the program enters the level 1 termination for unchanged Jevel routines in the the apand then tests for a control break at level 2; if there is no control break at level 2, the flow of control passes in turn through activities should routines. be incorporated initiation

termination

IS 13392 : 1992 IS0 6593 : 1985

SW faxntie 11 I--_--___:

--I

I I 1 I

Figure

1 -

Method

A flowchart

1)

If an unchanged

level routine is required,

insert here.

5

IS 13392
IS0 6593

: 1992
: 1985

no

-_-.

L

Led2 irtitidm rchne

t

Figure 2 -

Method

B flowchart

6

IS 13392 : 1992 IS0 6593 : 1985

Annex Implementation

A

recommendations

(This annex forms part of the standard.)

A.1

Organization

of control
field may,

field
or may not, be con-

A.2
When

General

termination
level termination activities condition

The element(s) tiguous.

in a control

all input has been processed, becomes apparent within

There are advantages If practicable

in arranging for such contiguity outlined in figure 3

shall be carried out for all levels.. The end-of-input normally recommended tained through mation when that, in such a situation,

but the layout of the logical record may be subject to other considerations. the arrangement should be obtained; otherwise the logic of the input routine

the `input routine and it is the input routine sets on the input. In inforfor example unless such values are obto finalize by-product

the control field to higher values, many applications it is customary

should place the control field elements in some area of working storage for access in control break testing. Control fields are arranged with the most superior control field element (level n) being the most significant control field element (level followed the by, in least order of significance, subordinate significant. When testing for a control level 1 to for tfie current break at level 1, the control level n in ascending order logical record are compared field of other control field elements with the most 1) being

a high values record appearing

the end of actual input is reached,

pass check sums to an output file or print totals on an analysis.

elements, significance,

from

A.3

Level termination
be noted that

routines
a control break may be

with It should registered elements although as a consequence of examining the control field

those of the previously Table be

processed logical record. the levels at which control breaks would of successive logical records,

1 demonstrates
for

in the current logical record, the information

content

registered

a number

assuming four levels of control.

of that record does not contribute towards processed in level termination routines.

that which may be

CONTROL

FIELD LEVEL n

I I
I
I

CONTROL ELEMENT

FIELD LEVEL 2

CONTROL ELEMENT

FIELD LEVEL 1

I

ELEMENT

I

level n level 2

Figure

3 -

Parts

of control

field

used in control

field

testing

Table

1 -

Examples

of control

field

breaks

-___.-.___
-___ level 4 RIO

Value of control Contents of control field elements
level 3 78 level 2 11 level 1 30 Control breaks registered at

(first pass1 level 1 and 2 level 1 level 1, 2, 3, 4 level 1, 2, 3

RIO RIO TYO TYO

78 78 78 79

12 12 12 01

15 16 16 02

7

IS 13392 : 1992 IS0 6593 : 1985

Annex Example of application

B
:

Budget

analysis

(This annex does not form part of the Standard.)

A maintained each grouping

file contains details of expenditure, level.

organized

in groups of budget centres within departments

in operating

divisions. of costs for

There may be more than one record for the same budget centre. An analysis is to be produced

which shows a summary

For the benefit of this example the logic concerned cussed here. The complete procedure initiation

with such errors as input file out of sequence

or invalid control field is not dis-

routine opens the input file and a print stream. with the

The input routine (first input routine) obtains the next (first) record from the input file and provides the control field elements value of level 3 = operating division;

level 2 = department; level 1 = budget centre. The general initiation routine clears final totals. When upon a separate page. the control field of the current input record with that of the previously level routines used in this example. processed record. all input has been processed, the general termination routine prints final totals

Control breaks are registered by comparing Action is than as summarized

in table 2. Note that there are no unchanged

Table Control break level land significance) 1: Budget centre

2 -

Control

break

actions

in budget

analysis

Level termination

routine

Level initiation

routine

Print centre totals. Add budget centre totals to deoartment totals. Print department totals. Add department totals to operating division. Print operating division totals. Add opertiting division totals to final totals.

Clear budget centre totals. Set up control field elements at ali levels from old record. Clear department totals. Start new page if less thar 1 10 lines remain on page. Clear operating division. Start new page.

I I

2 : Department 3 : Operating division

The normal processing The complete procedure

routine will add the detailed termination

costs to the budget

centre totals.

routine prints error messages,

if any, and closes the input file and the print stream.

Reprography

Unit,

BIS, New Delhi, India

8

Bureau of Indian Standard established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to BIS is a statutory institution promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writting of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Drrector or grade designation. ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in Comments on this Indian Standard may be possession of the latest amendments or edition. sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. LTD 33 ( 1540 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Offices :
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur

Shah Zafar Marg 37 84 99, 37 85 26, I 53 38 43, 53 23 84 j 41 24 42, 41 23 15, I

NEW DELHI

110002

331 01 31 331 13 75 ( 37 85 61, 37 85 62 53 16 40, 41 25 19, 41 29 16

Eastern : l/l4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, ManiktoIa CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western Branches : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS
: Manakalaya,

160036 600113

632 92 95, 63 27 80, 632 78 92 : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. .
Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

