Is 14979:2001 ISO 9996:1996

mmiwn-?mm-m'limi
c

l~mll<dr

n

+

mm�

fwk Ci'lkl'x"(

Indian Standard MECHANICAL VIBRATION AND SHOCKS -- DISTURBANCE TO HUMAN ACTIVITY AND PERFORMANCE -- CLASSIFICATION

ICS 13.160

(Q BIS 2001

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

IN DI AN

STAN

DARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

September

2001

Price Group 4

Mechanical

Vibration and Shock

Sectional Committee,

ME 28

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 9996 : 1996 `Mechanical vibration and shock -- -- Classification' issued by the International Disturbance to human activity and performance Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee and approval of the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The text of ISO Standard has been app'roved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviation. In the adopted standard certain conventions are not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is especially drawn to the following: a) b) Wherever the words `International Standard' appear, they should be read as `Indian Standard'. in Indian Standards, the current

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker, while practice is to use a full point (.) as the decimal marker.

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist, The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence -- Identical

ISO 2041:1990

IS 11717:2000 Vocabulary on Vibration and shock (first revision)

ISO 5805:1997

IS 13281:1999 Mechanical vibration and shock affecting man -- Vocabulary (first revision)

do

IS 14979:2001 ISO 9996:1996

Indian Standard MECHANICAL VIBRATION AND SHOCKS -- DISTURBANCE TO HUMAN ACTIVITY AND PERFORMANCE -- CLASSIFICATION

1 Scope
This International Standard lays down a simple classification of motion- and vibration-sensitive human activity and task performance. The classification includes, and is intentionally limited to, volitional human activity and task performance known or presumed to be disturbed, degraded or disrupted by continuous, intermittent, transient, or repetitive oscillatory motion or vibration (including shock rr?otion) of human beings, components of their task, or their surroundings. This classification applies only to volitional human activities and tasks, interference with which by motion or vibration is presumed to be mediated by direct mechanical intrusion, physiological (non-injurious) changes in the person affected, or reversible sensory impairment, distortion, or conflict caused by the motion or vibration. It does not extend to activity or performance reduction associated with disability due to motion- or vibration-related injury. This International Standard is intended specifically to be an aid in the formulation of standard guidelines for the evaluation of human whole-body exposure to mechanical vibration and shock in the frequency range 0,1 Hz to 80 Hz, when optimization of human activity and task performance in the mechanical environment is the main criterion of evaluation. NOTE 1 This International Standard also provides definitions of specialized terms, not defined in other standard vibration and shock vocabularies, that find a particular use in human biodynamics relating to task performance. It therefore supplements the biodynamical vocabulary in ISO 5805.

2 Normative
The following

references
standards contain provisions which, through reference indicated in this text, were valid. constitute provisions of this

All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below. Members of IEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid International Standards.
International Standard. At the time of publication, the editions

ISO 2041:1990, ISO 5805:--1),

Vibration and shock -- Vocabulary. Mechanical vibration and shock -- Human exposure -- Vocabulary.

3 Definitions
For the purposes definitions apply. of this International Standard, the definitions given in ISO 2041 and ISO 5805 and the following

3.1 human

volitional
directed

activity:
human action that is performed electively, i.e. for a purpose or in a manner that is not

Any consciously

immediately essential to the performance of a specific task in hand, or that is not required of the person by virtue of his essential presence in a situation or function in a system as a human operator.

1) To be published. (Revision of ISO 5805:1981)

1

Is 14979:2001
ISO 9996:1996
NOTE 2 Examples of human activity in this sense are walking, eating, reading, writing or trying to sleep in a train, ship or other vehicle, and trying to sleep, rest, enjoy general amenities or carry out some fine task of choice in a buildingthat may be shaken by internally or externally generated vibration or impact. The distinctionfrom task performance may be rather fine in many operational contexts. For example, a seaman who, because of violent ship motion, has difficulty traversing a deck or climbinga ship's ladder to get to or from his quartera in heavy weather experiences interference with activity. Interference with task performance would begin when he is at his workstation, engaged in his assigned duty. However, a shipmate whose assigned task it was to traverse the same rolling deck while hauling on a rope or transporting ship's equipment or materials would be experiencing interference with task performance. (In either case, an occupational hazard may arise when the effects of the ship's motion on the seaman's locomotion and ability to concentrate on what he is doing become severe enough to undermine safety.)

3.2 task performance:
Any learned or skilled activity that is carried out of necessity or by direction as part of an assigned duty. In such a situation, the receiver of motion or vibration exposure is acting in his capacity as a human operator, monitor; inspector, crew member, supervisor or controller in a mechanical environment, where adverse effects of motion or vibration may prejudice efficiency, productivity, safety, or some other attribute of the work, process or mission. NOTE 3 Examples of task performance in this sense include driving a vehicle, piloting an aircraft or navigating, standing watch or carrying out any assigned duty aboard ship, operating or monitoring an industrial plant, process or machine, or carryingout some specialized task (for example instrumentassembly, quality inspection, microsurgery,fine craftsmanship such as making or repairingjewellery) in a buildingor other structuresubject to disturbance by vibrationor impact.

3.3 afferent:
Pertaining to nervous pathways or neural signals conveying information about the body or the external world from the peripheral receptors to the central nervous system and the brain.

3.4 arousal:
State or degree of activation and alertness of the central nervous system, NOTE 4 Specific parts of the brain and central nervous system maintain and regulate this state, in response to both external and internal factors. According to prevailing theory, there is an optimal level of arousal for task performance. The optimum is not necessarily the maximum. both under- and over-arousal may diminishskilled periorrnarrce[see 4.3.2.2 c)].

3.5 (human) operator:
Person engaged in task performance, considered as a monitoring, controlling or directing element in a system or process capable of a dynamic response to system inputs and disturbances. NOTE 5 For many purposes in human factors engineering, sufficient data exist to enable the human operator to be considered (and modelled mathematically) as a quantifiable element or processor in a "man-machine" system (for example pilot and aircraft).

3.6

low-frequency motion:
human behgs at

Continuous or transient oscillatory motion of components of the vibration spectrum affedng frequencies below 1 Hz.

NOTE 6 The conventional frequency of 1 Hz separating low-frequency oscillatory motion from what is popularfy known as "vibration"(although no such distinctionexists in physics) is not entirely arbitrary and haa some practicaf signifiince when dealing with human exposure to vibration. For instance, mechanical resonance phenomena in humans occur mainly at frequencies above 1 Hz, while motion sickness is provoked only be oscillatory motions at frequerrr%e befow about 1 Hz. As another practical matter, specialized inertial instrumentationand analytical techniques may be called for when recording and evaluating motion of very low frequency and large displacement amplitude. Moreover vibration isolation and conventional vibrationcontrolengineering techniques may not be readily appfiiable at very low frequencies.

3.7

motor (performance or activity):

Descriptive of the function or output of the musculoskeletal system of the body, by which man regulates his own posture and exerts physical action upon the external world, for example when using a tool, operating a computer keyboard, controlling a vehicle, or communicating with others by speech or gesture.

3.8

neuromuscular:

Pertaining to the muscles (specifically, in the context of human performance, the skeletal or "voluntary" muscles that subserve conscious, volitional action) and to the motor nerves and higher centres of the nervous system that control them.

2

Is 14979:2001

1s0 999s :1996
3.9 oculomotor:
Pertaining to the voluntary and reflex movements of the eyeballs with respect to the skull, and to the generation and neuromuscular regulation of eye movements. 3.10 reference posture: In biodynamics, a notional orientation and posture of the human body considered as a receiver of mechanical vibration and shock.

3.11 sensory: Pertaining to the organs and physiological mechanisms by which the human brain acquires information ("input") about the world, enabling human beings to know, relate to, and influence the external world by volitional action. Sensory organs and neural mechanisms also subserve an internal function, which may be conscious or unconscious, namely, permitting the living body to monitor and respond to its own physiological state and to changes in that state arising from internal or external causes.
NOTE 7 Low-frequency motion and vibration are perceived by means of a variety of sensory organs and receptors. These include the eye, the vestibular (balance) organs of the inner ear, and a range of microscopic organs (mechanoreceptors) distributedin the tissues throughoutthe livingbody that variously signal changing pressure, tension, position, vibratory motion, etc. The organs of special sense, particularlyof hearing and sight, also provide motion and vibration cues to the brain in many circumstances.

3.12 sensorimotor:
In the context of biodynamics, pertaining to the sensory input of information human operator functioning in a dynamic environment. to, and the motor action (output) of, the

3.13 sopite syndrome:
A state of sleepiness, lassitude, or drowsy inattention induced by motion or vibration.

3.14 vestibular:
Pertaining to the organs of balance (pari of the labyrinth, whence the term, Iabyrinthine) in the inner ear, and to their functional ccmnections with the brain and central nervous system.

3.15 volitional:
By the exercise or direction of the will. Used of human motor activity (including task performance), result of exercise of the conscious will, i.e., not automatically or as an unconscious reflex action. carried out as the

4 Classification 4.1 Categories of activity and task pedormance
The taxonomy is entered for either of the categories of [earned or skilled human action, defined under 3.1 and 3.2, volitional activity or task performance. 4.2

Classes and varieties of action that maybe affected by motion or vibration

4.2.1 Acquisition of information 4.2.1.1 Visual system
a) b) c) d) Visual stimulus (signal) detection Visual motion detection Visual resolution (acuity) Other visual functions (for example colour discrimination)

3

IS 14979:2001 ISO 9996:1996 4.2.1.2 Other sensory systems
a) b) Hearing Vestibular system
1) Sense of balance and orientation

2) c)

Low-frequency motion sense

Distributed mechanoreceptors 1) 2)
3) 4)

Vibrotactile sense Sense of gravity and incident mass
Sense Sense Central of position of body members of forcelstrength processing of information (cognitive function)

4.2.2

4.2.2.1 4.2.2.2 4.2.2.3 4.2.2.4 4.2.2.5 4.2.2.6 4.2.2.7 4.2.2.8 4.2.2.9 4.2.3

Visual pattern recognition Visual search Spatial perception Recognition Vigilance and orientation of speech and other auditory signals

and processing

(visual and auditory) and concentration and estimation

Time perception

Mental computation Reasoning Other cognitive functions External activity and task execution (motor function)

4.2.3.1 Static postural function
a) b) Stability of stance/whole-body Maintenance Kinetic (or head) orientation

of fixed postures of limbs/extremities (moving) postural function load-carrying and -handling, coarse manual and pedal control operations,

4.2.3.2 a)

Locomotor skills (human locomotion, including continuous tracking) Fine manipulative Speech

b)

skills (manual dexterity)

c)

4

Is 14979:2001 ISO 9996:1996

4.3 Mechanisms
low-frequency
4.3.1 4.3.1.1 a)

of impairment of disruption motion and vibration
interference

of human activity and task performance

by

Direct mechanical Disruption

or degradation

of sensory input from taak or activity structures

By vibratory displacement

of head, eye or intraocular

NOTE 8 Such effects (for example blurring of vision) are associated particularly with resonance phenomena in major body structures up to 30 Hz. Accordingly, the effect is apt to be of immediate onset, markedly frequency-dependent, and closely correlated with the time-course of the mechanical stimulus.

b)

By osci!latoty relative displacement of visuai surroundings or point of regard (indirect vibration) vibration of pointers on scales, making them difficult to read) Disruption or impairment of human motor output (i.e. the input to the activity or task)

(for example

4.3.1.2

EXAMPLES a) By mechanical interference with the smooth course of locomotion point of contact ~ith the task (for example hand/control, foot/pedal, By dislodgement of objects of human activity or task performance is intended to handle or pick up) By instantaneously confusing subjective estimations moved (for example aboard a rolling ship) Vibratory distortion of articulation (speech) mediated) effects or by oscillatory finger/keypad) displacement of the human

b)

(for example loose or mobile objects which it

c)

of the position,

weight or inertia of loads to be lifted or

d) 4.3.2

Indirect or central (physiologically
9

NOTE

Physiologically mediated effects of motion and vibration may persist for variable periods (minutes to days) after the

provocative mechanical disturbance has ceased. 4.3.2.1 a) Impairment of sensory input and perception of visual function destabilization of oculomotor control (for example nystagmus)

By disturbance 1) 2)

By motion-induced

By changes in visual function (for example colour or contrast sensitivity) at the receptor level of auditory function vibration-induced noise

b)

By impairment 1) 2)

By auditory masking of speech or other auditory signals by iower-frequency By temporary

elevation of the threshold of hearing (temporary threshold shift) of the vibrotactile sense receptors

c)

By masking or impairment 1) 2) By threshold elevation,

distortion or masking of afferent signals from vibrotactile

By sensory fatigue at the receptor level or disturbance of vestibular function (leading to postural instability or to disorientation)

d)

By impairment

,

5

Is 14979:2001

ISO 9996:1996
e)

By

impairment,

disturbance

or

pre-emption neural (including

of

the reflex)

function pathways stressors

of

deep

(muscle, postural

tendon activity

and

joint)

mechanoreceptors

and associated impairments

subserving

f)

By enhancing

sensory

associated

with other

sirnultaneously

present

in the combined

motion or vibration

environment

(for example

noise, heat, glare)

4.3.2.2 a)

Impairment

of cognitive

function

(central processing of information by the brain) and attention

Disorders

due to perceptual

conflict and distraction

1) 2)

Perceptual

distraction by vibration and noise

Motion-induced perceptual conflict disorders:
i) Spatial disorientation

ii)

Motion sickness

NOTE 10 Motion sickness (popularly named airsickness, seasickness and so on, according to context) is a commonly experienced and sometimes severe but reversible (i.e. physiological) disorder specifically associated with exposure to actual or perceived oscillatory motion in the frequency range 0,1 Hz to 1 Hz. One or more of a constellation of symptoms (with or without frank vomiting) may afflict the sufferer. In severe cases it is immediately and profoundly disruptive of motivation, concentration, activity and task performance in botfhindividuals and groups, but in the less severe case with premonitory manifestations it remains an open question whether individual task performance is degraded until activities are interrupted or abandoned. Group performance (for example the work of a ship's department) may be delayed or impaired by attrition in the crew. The malady afflicts sufferers in a highly idiosyncratic manner. Most sufferers can benefit from diminishing effect of continued or repeated exposure to the provocative stimulus (habituation).

b) c)

Sopite syndrome Alteration of the Ievei of arousal

NOTE 11 According to a current, widely-held theory, the human operator performs best (particularly at essentially "mental" tasks, such as vigilance) at an optimal (not necessarily maximal) level of arousal for the task in hand and the individual's physiological state. The state of arousal or "alertness", of the organism is maintained and regulated by the ascending reticular activating system of the brainstern. it is a function crucial to the wakeful activity of the forebrain. Excessive arousal, however, may fead to erratic and error-prone performance in certain kinds of task. Profound lowering of arousal, on the other hand, may also result in decreased performance, (for example increased errors of omission in vigilance tasks), in this case due to lassitude, drowsy inattention or actual sleeping on the job. Profound lassitude and drowsiness have been specifically identified as the sopite syndrome when associated with low-frequency (below 1 Hz) motion such as is commonly experienced aboard ships. The neurological basis of the sopite syndrome, and its relationship to classical sickness, remain open questions in physiological science.

d)

Effects of fatigue 1) Sporadic interruption or reasoning
Inattention

or blocking of thought, resulting in mental processing

delays or errors in computation

2)

and errors of omission

3)
4)

Loss of motivation and increase in apathy or tendency to withdraw from the task in hand
Loss of clarity or precision in speech and perception

(affecting reliability of verbal communication)

NOTE 12 The term "fatigue" as used here is a human condition that has defied exact definition by physiologists, psychologists and human engineering specialists since scientific attempls to define it began in the earty year of this century. As a subjective entity affecting motivation to perform a task or continue volitional activity, it encompasses both "mental" fatigue (tiredness, desire to abandon activity for sleep or rest) and the feeling of physical exhaustion (which can be experienced while wide awake and without feelings of tiredness). Objectively, fatigue has been defined as that combination of time-related physiological (i.e. reversible) impairments which degrades human petiormance.

6

IS 14979:2001 ISO 9996:1996
4.3.2.3 a) Degradation of task execution (motor output) or other motor (muscular) effort,

Intention tremor, postural instability, loss of smoothness of gait, manual "ove'rshooting", and other manifest signs of impaired neuromuscular control
Loss of clarity, precision

b) c)

and power in speech generation

(affecting reliability of verbal communication)

Impairment or loss of transfer of acquisition

(learning) of motor skills

NOTE 13 As a general rule, the direct mechanical effects of low-frequency motion or vibration upon human aclivily and performance are strongly force (acceleration) and frequency dependent, and not strongly dependent upon exposure time. That is because of the mechanical (i.e. not physiologically mediated) nature of such effects, and the fact that they are generally related to the dynamic characteristics of the body behaving as a lumped parameter damped mass-spring system (at least for frequencies below about 50 Hz). Hence, the direct mechanical effects (for example blurring of vision) typically begin immediately with the onset of the disturbing motion or vibration, persist fairly constantly with continuation of the motion, very monotonically with changes in vibration intensity, and cease when the mechanical disturbance ceases. On the other hand, the "central" or physiologically mediated effects of oscillatory motion on performance are often not clearly related to vibration frequency, being more dependent upon a composite function of exposure time and severity of exposure.

4.4 Duration of impairment
With the notable exception of motion sickness (a response limited to provocative motions in the decade 0,1 Hz to 1 Hz), impairments of cognitive activity and "central" task performance can potentially occur at high enough intensity over a broad range (at least 10 octaves) of vibration frequency. Moreover, such effects (for example impairment of vigilance or thinking) do not usually manifest themselves (and indeed are difficult to evaluate) until the motion which is of high enough magnitude and performance of the task in it have been going on for some time (hours), and, once manifest, impairment is apt to worsen with the passage of time, unless some habituation or accommodation to the motion takes place, or some alerting, uplifting or alleviating event or factor intrudes upon performance of the task. Furthermore, certain physiological effects of oscillatory motion (for example, fatigue, postural instability, motion sickness and consequent loss of motivation) do not disappear abruptly with cessation of the provocative motion but are apt to persist for some time (minutes to hours, even days in severe cases) after it has stopped. For this reason, an affected person's performance may remain impaired even after a ship has docked or an aircraft has landed following a rough passage.

7

IS 14979:2001 ISO 9996:1996

Annex A (informative) Bibliography

[1]

lS02631-l:-zJ, Mechanica/ vibration andshock Part 1: General requirements.

-Evacuation

ofhuman

exposure

towhole-body

vibration-

[2]

ISO 6897:1984, Guidelines for the evacuation of the response of occupants of fixed structures, buildings and off-shore structures, to low-frequency horizontal motion (0,063 to 1 Hz). ISO 7962:1987, z direction.
ISO 8727:--3),

especially

[3]

Mechanica{

vibration

and shock -- Mechanical

transmissibility

of the human

body in the

[4] [5]

Mechanical

vibration and shock -- Human exposure -- Biodynamics coordinate Press, London and New York, 1990.

systems,

Griffin, M. ~. Handbook

of Human Vibration. Academic

2) 3)

To be published. (Revision of ISO 2631-1:1985) To be published.

8

Bureau of Indian Standards
under the Bureau of hdian Standards Act, 1986 to promote BIS is a statutory institution established harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. MED 28 (550 publications may be reproduced in any not preclude the free use, in the course as symbols and sizes, type or grade the Director (Publications), BIS.

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 3233841

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/1 4 C.I.T. Scheme WI M, V. 1. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

{

Eastern Northern

3378499,3378561 { 3378626,3379120 603843 602025

{ Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315 { 8329295,8327858 8327891,8327892

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPU RAM. Printedat Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2

