Wd UTE IS 16391 : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


APRA — weary rama T 
HAIE Sena Y Ya gaere — 
tagte 


Geosynthetics — Geotextiles Used 
in Sub-Grade Separation in 
Pavement Structures — 
Specification 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2015 


ARA AMA AN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WS, 9 ERRE pi Art, we feeei-110002 
mw MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2015 Price Group 6 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


A large variety of detrimental factors such as environmental conditions, sub-grade conditions, traffic loading, 
utility cuts, road widening, ageing, etc, contribute to distress in pavements which need to be addressed in the 
maintenance or rehabilitation of the pavements. Pavement maintenance treatments are often ineffective and 
short lived due to their inability to both, treat the cause of the problem and renew the existing pavement condition. 
The main cause of distress in pavements is the permeability of precipitated surface water infiltrating through the 
pavement, leading to softening and weakening of pavement sub-grade and base thus accelerating pavement 
degradation. Further, existing pavement distress such as surface cracks, rocking joints and sub-grade failures 
cause the rapid reflection of cracking up through the maintenance treatment. 


The preferred strategy for long term road and pavement performance shall, therefore, be to build in safeguards 
during initial construction. These performance safeguards include stabilizing the sub-grade against moisture 
intrusion and associated weakening; strengthening road based aggregate with efficient drainage of infiltrated 
water; and, as a last resort, enhancing the stress absorption and moisture proofing capabilities of selected 
maintenance treatments. 


The geogrids and the geotextiles are the most cost effective tools for safeguarding roads and pavements. Geotextiles 
extend the service life of roads, increase their load-carrying capacity, and reduce rutting. The most common 
method for quantifying the geosynthetic benefits is the determination of Traffic Benefit Ratio (TBR) which is 
defined as the ratio of reinforced load cycles to failure (excessive rutting) to the number of cycles that cause 
failure of an unreinforced road section. In general, geosynthetics have been found to provide a TBR in the range 
of 1.5 to70, depending on the type of geosynthetic, its location in the road, and the testing scenario. The researchers 
have found that for weak sub-grades (CBR = 2 percent) the geotextile extends the service life of a flexible 
pavement section by a factor of 2.5 to 3.0 compared to a non-stabilized section. Further, a geotextile effectively 
increased the pavement section”s total AASHTO structural number by approximately 19 percent. Similarly, for 
pavement sections with moderate strengths (CBR = 4.2 to 4.5 percent), the geotextile increased the service life of 
the pavement section by a factor of 2.0 to 3.3 and the AASHTO structural number increased by 13 to 22 percent. 
Both geotextiles and geogrids thus can play an important role in extending the life of a roadway system 


The four main applications of geosynthetics (geogrids and geotextiles) in roads are sub-grade separation, sub- 
grade stabilization, base reinforcement and overlay stress absorption and reinforcement. Sub-grade stabilization 
and base reinforcement involve improving the road structure as it is constructed by inserting an appropriate 
geosynthetic layer. Base reinforcement is the use of geosynthetics to improve the structure of a paved road. 


Sub-grade separation and stabilization applies geosynthetics to both unpaved and paved roads. When serving as 
a separator, the geotextile prevents fines from migrating into the base course and/or prevents base course aggregate 
from penetrating into the sub-grade. The soil retaining properties of the geotextile are basically the same as those 
required for drainage and filtration. Therefore, the retention and permeability criteria required for drainage shall 
be met. In addition, the geotextile shall withstand the stresses resulting from the load applied to the pavement. 
The nature of these stresses depend on the condition of the sub-grade, type of construction equipment and the 
cover over the sub-grade. Since the geotextile serves to prevent aggregate from penetrating the sub-grade, it shall 
meet puncture, burst, grab and tear strengths required. At small rut depth, the strain in the geosynthetic is also 
small. In this case, the geosynthetic acts primarily as a separator between the soft sub-grade and the aggregate. 
Any geosynthetic that survives construction shall work as a separator. This application is limited to soils which 
either in initially or seasonably have a CBR > 3 but < 8. In this application the geotextile is a substitute for the 
choked subbase stone commonly used over plastic sub-grades. It is important to understand that this function 
may be required when geogrids are used to provide base reinforcement or confinement. 


(i) 


IS 16391 : 2015 


For larger rut depths, more strain is induced in the geosynthetic where the stiffness properties of geosynthetic are 
essential. A considerable reduction in aggregate thickness is possible by the use of geosynthetic having a high 
modulus in the direction perpendicular to the road centerline; however, the benefits of the geosynthetics are 
dependent on the membrane action achieved with a stiff geosynthetic as well as the lateral movement. For very 
weak sub-grades, it is often beneficial to combine the benefits of both separation and stabilization. The following 
general conclusion can be drawn relating to a typical road base: 


a) A geosynthetic element that functions primarily as a separator (typically when the sub-grade CBR > 3) 
will increase the allowable bearing capacity of the sub-grade by 40 to 50 percent (separation geotextiles) 

b) A geosynthetic element that functions primarily to provide confinement of the aggregate and lateral 
restraint to the sub-grade (typically when the sub-grade CBR < 3) will both increase the allowable 
bearing capacity of the sub-grade and provide an improved load distribution ratio in the aggregate. The 
combined benefits can enhance load carrying capacity of the road by well over 50 percent (stabilization 
geogrids and geotextiles). 


The general rules for use of geogrids and geotextiles in roadway system are as follows: 


a) Temporary roads — Used for hauling and access roads that are subject to low volume of traffic including 
working platform for permanent road construction: 

1) Clayey or silty sub-grade with California Bearing Ratio (CBR) < 4 — If a clean base aggregate is 
used, then a non-woven separator geotextile shall be used. If a “choked aggregate” like general 
crusher run is used, then use either a geotextile or a biaxial geogrid that has good aperture stability 
and appropriate size for a design ESAL (Equivalent Single Axle Loading) less than 1 000, a woven 
geotextile designed for both separation and membrane roles may be used; that is, consider the 
geotextile’s modulus. For larger ESAL, use a woven or non woven geotextile designed simply for 
separation. The reinforcement role of the geogrid seems safe for approximately 10 000 ESAL. 


2) Sandy sub-grade with CBR < 3 — Select a biaxial geogrid with good aperture stability and appropriate 
size or, a woven geotextile that has a reasonable interface friction with the sand and the aggregate. 
If a woven geotextile is considered, care shall be taken to ensure that it does not actually create a 
slick slip-plane beneath the aggregate, that is, look at the interface friction by using geotextiles with 
high surface roughness which leads to enhanced interface friction. 


b) Permanent roads (ESAL > 200 000): 


1) Clayey or silty sub-grade with CBR < 3 — Consider building a working platform using the temporary 
road methods upon which conventional road can be constructed. 


2) Clayey or silty sub-grade with 3 < CBR < 8 — If there is any potential for degradation due to water 
intrusion, frost heave, etc. then include a separator geotextile to protect the base aggregate during 
these periods. 


3) Sandy sub-grades with CBR < 3 — Use a biaxial geogrid that has good aperture stability and appropriate 
size to reinforce the base aggregate. This is particularly helpful when poor quality stone and small 
aggregate thickness is used, less than 25 cm. 


Geosynthetics can also be used as inter layers by placing them below or within the overlay (asphalt concrete) and 
are thus helpful in rehabilitating distressed road surfaces. These may also provide a moisture barrier. 


Survivability is very important from the viewpoint of its long term durability and is defined as resistance to 
mechanical damage during road construction and initial operation. The ability of a geosynthetic to survive 
installation and reasonable service loads shall be assured, if it is to perform as designed. Installation damage to a 
geotextile is a function of the following: 


a) Geotextile thickness, 

b) Compactive effort and lift thickness, 

c) Type and weight of construction equipment used for fill spreading, 
d) Grain size distribution of backfill, 

e) Angularity of backfill, 

f) Polymer used in the manufacture of geotextile, and 

g) Geotextile manufacturing process. 


Geotexiles are mainly made from polyester (PET) or polypropylene (PP). Polypropylene is lighter than water, 


ü) 


IS 16391 : 2015 


strong and very durable. PET is heavier than water, has excellent strength and creep properties, and is compatible 
with most common soil environments. Geotextiles are mainly of two types, namely, woven and non-woven 
geotextiles. Knitted and stitch bonded geotextiles are occasionally used in the manufacture of specialty products. 
Non-woven geotextiles are highly desirable for subsurface in planer drainage, and erosion control applications 
as well as, for road stabilization over wet moisture sensitive soils. Out of woven geotextiles, slit film fabrics 
geotextiles are commonly used for sediment control, that is silt fence and road stabilization applications but are 
poor choices for subsurface drainage and erosion control applications. Monofilament woven geotextiles have 
better permeability making them suitable for certain drainage and erosion control applications. High strength 
multifilament woven geotextiles are primarily used in reinforcement applications. 


The Committee has reviewed the provisions of the following International Standard referred in this standard and 
has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: 


International Standard Title 
ISO 10722 : 2007 Geosynthetics — Index test procedure for the evaluation of mechanical damage under 
repeated loading — Damage caused by granular material 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


(iii) 


IS 16391 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — GEOTEXTILES USED IN SUB- 
GRADE SEPARATION IN PAVEMENT STRUCTURES — 
SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers general and performance 
requirements for geotextiles used to prevent mixing 
of a sub-grade soil and an aggregate cover material 
(subbase, base, select embankment, etc) in pavement 
structures. This specification is also applicable to 
situations other than beneath pavements where 
separation of two dissimilar materials is required but 
where water seepage through the geotextile is not a 
critical function. 


1.2 The separation application is appropriate for 
pavement structures constructed over soils with 
California Bearing Ratio greater than or equal to three 
(CBR>3) and shear strength greater than 
approximately 90 kPa. It is appropriate for unsaturated 
sub-grade soils. The primary function of a geotextile 
in this application is separation. 


NOTES 


1 The function of separation in this application refers to 
including a tensile member in the form of a geotextile between 
the aggregate cover material and the soft sub-grade soil with 
the intent of either increasing the structural support capacity of 
that component of the pavement structure and hence its life or 
reduce the initial cost. The geotextile separator may provide 
one or more of the following functions: 


a) A filter to allow water but not soil to pass through it; 


b) A separator to prevent the mixing of the soft soil and the 
granular material; and 


c)  Areinforcement layer to resist the development of rutting. 


2 This is a material purchasing specification and design review 
of its use for intended applications is recommended. This is not 
a construction or design specification. Separation of the 
pavement section is a site specific design issue which shall be 
addressed by the engineers responsible for the pavement and 
embankment design. This specification is not appropriate for 
embankment reinforcement where stress conditions may cause 
global sub-grade foundation or embankment failure. Design 
details for geotextile separator, such as geotextile type, cover 
material thickness, pavement cross-section and associated 
details, shall be as shown on the contract drawings. 


3 This specification is based on the minimum requirements of 
the geotextile to provide tensile reinforcement and survivability 
from installation stress. The physical properties listed in Table 
1 are applicable for a minimum backfill thickness of 150 mm. 
However, in general, the geotextile shall be placed at the proper 
elevation, location and orientation as detailed on the plans and 
specification. Unless otherwise specified in the project 
specification, the contractor shall follow the construction/ 
installation guidelines in relevant Indian standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given 
in 1813321 (Part 1) and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Minimum Average Roll Value (MARV) — The 
average value of roll minus two times the standard 
deviation. Statistically, it yields a 97.7 percent degree 
of confidence that any sample taken during quality 
assurance testing shall exceed value reported. 


3.2 Sub-grade Improvement — It is defined as the 
improvement of the bearing capacity and mitigation 
of deformation of the sub-grade soil by placing a 
geotextile immediately over a soft sub-grade soil. The 
goal of this application may be to reduce undercut 
requirements, improve construction efficiency, reduce 
the amount of aggregate subbase/base material 
required, provide a stiff working platform for pavement 
construction, or combination of these. 


3.3 Traffic Benefit Ratio (TBR) — It is also known 
as Traffic Improvement Factor or TIF and is defined 
as the ratio of reinforced load cycles to failure 
(excessive rutting) to the number of cycles that cause 
failure of an unreinforced road section. Thus it 
compares the performance of a pavement cross-section 
with a geotextile-reinforced base course to a similar 
cross-section without geotextile reinforcement, based 
on the number of cycles to failure. The failure is defined 
as a selected depth of rut through repetitive loading 
applied by a passing wheel load of at least 2 041.2 kg 
(4 500 lbs) per single wheel or 4 082.4 kg (9 000 lbs) 
per dual wheel. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Geosynthetic materials shall be inert to commonly 


IS 16391 : 2015 


encountered chemicals, resistant to rot and mildew, 
and shall have no tears or defects which adversely 
affect or alter its physical properties. Materials required 
for complete and proper installation of geosynthetic 
materials that are not specifically described herein 
(such as pins, nails, washers, etc) shall conform to the 
manufacturer's recommendations and be as selected 
and supplied by the contractor subject to final approval 
by the engineer. 


4.2 Polymers used in the manufacture of geotextiles, 
and the mechanical fasteners or threads used to join 
adjacent rolls, shall consist of long chain synthetic 
polymers, composed of at least 95 percent by weight 
of polyolefins(polyethylene or polypropylene) or 
polyesters when tested as per dissolution method in 
respective solvents as specified in IS 667. They shall 
be formed into a stable network such that the ribs, 
filaments or yarns retain their dimensional stability 
relative to each other, including selvedges. Polyolefin 
material shall be made resistant to ultraviolet light by 
adding 2-3 percent carbon black. Recycled polyester 
shall not be used in the manufacture of geotextiles and 
only virgin polyester shall be used for manufacture of 
polyester containing geotextiles. The isophthalic acid 
content of the virgin polyester shall be nil when tested 
according to the method prescribed in Annex B. 


4.3 Geotextiles shall be dimensionally stable and able 
to retain their geometry under manufacture, transport 
and installation. Woven slit film geotextiles (that is, 
geotextiles made from yarns of a flat, tape-like character) 
shall not be allowed. Geotextiles used as separation 
geotextiles in pavement structures shall conform to the 
requirements specified in Table 1. Average of test results 
from any sampled roll in a lot shall meet or exceed the 
minimum values specified in Table 1. 


NOTES 


1 All numeric values in Table 1 except Apparent Opening Size 
(AOS), represent MARV in the weakest principal direction. 
Values for AOS represent maximum average roll values. 

2 The property values in Table 1 represent default values which 
provide for sufficient geotextile reinforcement and survivability 
under most construction conditions. 


5 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA 
CONFORMITY 


FOR 


5.1 Lot 


The quantity of the same class of geotextile 
manufactured from the same polymer under identical 
conditions and supplied to a buyer against one dispatch 
note shall constitute a lot. 


5.2 Sampling for tests shall be done in accordance with 
IS 14706 from each lot. Acceptance shall be based on 
testing of conformance samples obtained using the 
procedure given in IS 14706. 


5.3 Testing of samples shall be performed in 
accordance with the methods referred to in this standard 
for the indicated requirement(s). The number of test 
specimens shall be as specified in each test method. 
Product acceptance shall be determined by comparing 
the average test results of all the specimens within a 
given sample to the specified MARV. 


5.4 Criteria for Conformity 


The geotextile shall be tested for all the requirements 
as specified in Table 1 and in 4.1 to 4.3. When any 
individual sample fails to meet any specification 
requirement, that roll shall be rejected and two 
additional sample rolls shall be selected from the same 
lot. The lot shall be declared conforming to the 
requirements of this standard, if neither of these two 
additional samples fails to comply with any part of 
this specification, otherwise the entire quantity of rolls 
represented by that sample shall be rejected. 


6 MARKING AND LABELLING 


6.1 The geotextile material shall be marked with the 
following by attaching the printed labels: 


a) Identification of the geotextile material as per 
manufacturer's recommendation, for 
example, polyester multifilament woven 
geotextile for separation in pavement 
structures; 

b) Class of geotextile material that is Class 1 or 
Class 2; 


c) Batch number, lot number and roll number; 

d) Date of manufacture of geotextile material; 

e) Any other information/instruction prescribed 
by the manufacturer or by the law in force; 

f) Manufacturer’s name, initials or trade-mark; 
and 


g) Country of origin. 


6.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The geotextile may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


6.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers, may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 


7 PACKING 


The geotextile shall be packed in rolls or as per the 
contract or order. Each roll or package shall be 
protected by wrapping it in a LDPE film of minimum 


IS 16391 : 2015 


Table 1 Requirements of Geotextiles for Separation Applications 
(Clauses 1.2, 4.3 and 5.4) 


SI Characteristic(s) Requirement Method of Test, 
No. — — M V  yP n O Sn.1 Ref to 
Class 1 Class 2 
Elongation Elongation Elongation Elongation 
< 50 percent 250 percent < 50 percent > 50 percent 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 

i) Index properties: 
a) Type of geotextile <—Woven/non-woven—_>»  <—————Woven/non-woven———_> = 
b) Roll length, m, Min <~—50 or 100 or as agreed <——50 or 100 or as agreed ——> IS 1954 
c) Roll width, m, Min <——2.0 or 5.0 or as agreed—> <—  .0 or 5.0 or as agreed———> IS 1954 
d) Grab strength, N, Min 1 100 700 800 500 IS 16342 
e) Sewn seam strength, N, Min 990 630 720 450 IS 15060 
f) Trapezidal tear strength, N, Min 400 250 300 180 IS 14293 
g) CBR puncture strength, N, Min 400 250 300 180 IS 16078 
h) Burst strength, kPa, Min 2 700 1300 2 100 950 IS 1966 (Part 2) 

ii) Structural integrity properties: 
a) Permitttivity, s", Min 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 IS 14324 
b) Apparent opening size (AOS), 0.60 0.60 0.60 0.60 IS 14294 

mm, Max 

iii) Durability properties: 

a) Pullout interaction coefficient, @ < 0.8 > < Not applicable————= IS 16380 


6 mm displacement, Normal load 
= 5 kPa, Min(see Notes 1 and 2) 

b) Coefficient of direct shear @ Peak 
geotextile shear strength, Normal 
load = 5 kPa, Min (see Notes 3 
and 4) 

c) Resistance to installation damage, «95/93/90 > < 95/03J00—— ISO 10722 
Percent retained strength, 
SC/SW/GP (see Note 5), Min 

d) Ultraviolet stability at 500h, 70 — 70 = IS 13162 (Part 2) 
Retained strength, Percent of 
original strength, Min 

NOTES 


1 The coefficient of interaction, C; , is the ratio between the average shear stress on the geosynthetic specimen in the pullout test and the 
mobilized shear stress in the fill material in direct shear tests under the same confining stress and shall be calculated as follows: 


Not applicable———— Annex C 


A 
un 
y 
A 


as HE 
i 2LW(o, tanp+c) 


where 


= coefficient of interaction; 


measured pullout force; 


initial length of the geosynthetic specimen; 


C, 
F, 
L 
W = initial width of the geosynthetic specimen; 
G, = applied normal stress; 

@ = friction angle of the fill material; and 

c =cohesive intercept of the fill material. 


2 For pullout interaction coefficient test, rate of displacement may be increased to 125 mm/min. A graded angular base material as 
described in Table 2 shall be used in laboratory testing. The test sample shall be at least 0.3 m in length and 0.3 m in width. 

3 For coefficient of direct shear test, rate of displacement may be increased to 50 mm/min. A graded angular base material as described 
in Table 2 shall be used in laboratory testing. Test sample shall be at least 0.3 m in length and 0.3 m in width. 

4 The coefficient of direct shear shall be determined using the peak geotextile shear strength with the shear strength of the graded 
angular base measured at the same displacement as the peak geotextile shear strength. 

5 Resistance to installation damage (loss of load capacity or structural integrity) when subjected to mechanical installation stress in 
clayey sand (SC), well graded sand (SW) and crushed stone classified as poorly graded gravel (GP). 

6 Class 2 geotextile may be specified for aggregate cover thickness of first lift over the geotextile exceeding 300 mm and aggregate 
diameter less than 50 mm or for aggregate cover thickness of first lift over the geotextile exceeding 150 mm, aggregate diameter less 
than 30 mm and construction equipment contact pressure less than 550 kPa based on field experience, laboratory testing and visual 
inspection of a geotextile sample removed from a field test section 

7 Permittivity and permeability of geotextile shall be greater than that of the soil. 

8 For Class 1, the required MARV tear strength for woven monofilament geotextiles shall be 250 N. 


IS 16391 : 2015 


thickness of 40 u to prevent it from the adverse impact 
of heat and moisture, oil, grease, dirt, dust and other 
stains during shipment and storage prior to deployment. 


8 INFORMATION AND SAMPLES TO BE 
SUBMITTED BY THE MANUFACTURER 


The manufacturer shall submit to the purchaser the 
following: 


a) Geotextile product sample approximately one 
square metre or larger; 


b) Geotextile product data sheet and certification 
from himself or by third party certification 
such as the use of the Standard Mark stating 
that the geotextile product supplied meets the 
requirements of this standard; 


c) Manufacturer’s installation instructions and 
general recommendations; 


9 STORAGE AND PROTECTION 


9.1 During storage, elevate the geotextile rolls off the 
ground and adequately protect them from the 
following: 


a) Site construction damage; 

b) Excessive precipitation; 

c) Extended exposure to sunlight; 

d) Aggressive chemicals; 

e) Flames or temperatures in excess of 71°C; 


f) Excessive mud, wet concrete, epoxy, or other 
deleterious materials coming in contact with 
and affixing to the geotextile material; and 


g) Any other environmental condition that may 
damage the physical property values of 
reinforcement. 


9.2 Store the geotextile material at temperatures 
above — 20°C 


9.3 Lay the rolled materials flat or vertical on ends. 


9.4 Do not leave the geotextile material directly 
exposed to sunlight for a period longer than the period 
recommended by the manufacturer. 


9.5 Each geotextile roll shall be wrapped with a 
material that shall protect it from damage due to 
shipment, water, sunlight and contaminants. 


9.6 Keep geotextile dry until installation, and do not 


store directly on the ground. 


Table 2 Gradation of Base Material for 
Determining the Coefficient of Interaction and 


Direct Shear (Sliding) 
(Table 1) 
SI No. Sieve Size Percent Passing 

mm 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 37.5 100 
ii) 25 95 - 100 
iii) 19 60 - 100 
iv) 4.75 30 - 60 
v) 0.425 10-30 
vi) 0.075 3-10 


NOTE — LL < 30 and PI < 10 


IS 16391 : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title 
667 : 1981 Methods for identification of textile 
fibres (first revision) 
Determination of length and width of 
woven fabrics — Methods (second 
revision) 
IS 1966 (Part 2): Textiles — Bursting properties of 
2009/ ISO fabrics — Determination of bursting 
13938-2 : 1999 strength and bursting distension: Part 
2 Pneumatic method (second revision) 


1954 : 1990 


IS No. Title 
14294 : 1995 Geotextiles — Method for 
determination of apparent opening 
size by dry sieving technique 


14324 : 1995 Geotextiles — Methods of test for 
determination of water permeability- 
permittivity 

14706 : 1999 Geotextiles — Sampling and 


preparation of test specimens 
15060 : 2001/1580 Geotextiles — Tensile test for joints/ 


6359 : 1971 Method for conditioning of textiles . . 
13162 (Part 2): Geotextiles — Methods of test: Part2 10321:1992 seams by wide-width method 
1991 Détermination erte tothe 16078 : 2013 Geosynthetics — Static puncture test 
exposure of ultraviolet light and (CBR test) 
water (Xenon-Arc type apparatus) 16342 : 2015 Geosynthetics — Method of test for 
13321 (Part 1): Glossary of Terms for geosynthetics: grab breaking load and elongation of 
1992 Part 1 Terms used in materials and geotextiles 
properties 16380 : 2015 Geosynthetics — Method of test for 
14293 : 1995 Geotextiles — Method of test for measuring geosynthetic pullout 
trapezoid tearing strength resistance in soil 
ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.2) 


METHOD OF TEST FOR ISOPHTHALIC ACID CONTENT OF THE VIRGIN POLYESTER FIBRE 


B-1 PRINCIPLE 


This method is applicable to measure isophthalic acid 
content in polyethylene terephthalate sample. The 
polymer sample is digested in benzyl alcohol, 
depolymerized then esterified to dibenzyl isophthalate, 
dibenzyl terephthalate and glycol’ s. Isopropyl titanate 
is added as a depolymerization catalyst. The sample is 
analyzed by gas chromatography and the peak areas 
of the two esters are used to estimate the weight 
percentage dimethyl isophthalate using an internal 
standard. 


B-2 POTENTIAL ENVIORMENT ISSUE 


B-2.1 In case of spillage, it can lead to pollution near 
the workplace area and environment hazard. After 
analysis sample is disposed as per laid down procedure. 


B-2.2 Hydrogen, nitrogen and instrument air are used 
during analysis. The hydrogen gas has no adverse 
ecological effects are expected. Hydrogen does not 
contain any Class I or Class II ozone depleting 
chemicals. However hydrogen is explosive. Gaseous 
nitrogen is an inert non-flammable gas. High 
concentration in air may cause deficiency of oxygen 
with the risk of unconsciousness and death. Chloroform 
in high concentration in air can kill most animals in 
few minutes. 


B-3 POTENTIAL SAFETY, OCCUPATIONAL 
HEALTH ISSUES 


B-3.1 Proper PPE’s like safety goggles, apron, surgical 
hand gloves to be used. 


B-3.2 Glassware is to be handled with care. 


IS 16391 : 2015 

B-3.3 Leak check to be carried out while handling of 
gas cylinder. 

B-3.4 Glassware is to be handled with care. 


B-3.5 Inhalation of chloroform causes dilation pupils 
with reduced reaction to light as well as reduced 
intraocculat pressure, Irritation of mucous membrane, 
conjunctiva. If contacted with skin and eyes cause 
irritation. Seek medical advice if inhaled. 


B-3.6 Use leather hand gloves while handling hot 
apparatus and equipments. 


B-4 APPARTUS 


B-4.1 Gas Chromatograph (GC), with flame 
ionization detector. 


B-4.2 Capillary Column, 60 m length and 0.53 mm 
ID. 


B-4.3 Dispensette or Pipette, 2 ml, 5 ml and 10 ml. 
B-4.4 Volumetric Flask, 100 ml, 500 ml. 


B-4.5 Beaker 
B-4.6 Funnel 


B-4.7 50 ml Flask 


B-4.8 Heating Mental, to maintain temperature of 
250°C. 


B-4.9 AR Grade Dimethyl Isopthalate (DMI) 
B-4.10 AR Grade Benzyl Alcohol 

B-4.11 AR Grade Chloroform 

B-4.12 AR Grade Isopropyl Titnate 

B-4.13 AR Grade Dimethyl Suburate 


B-5 PREPARATION OF 
SOLUTIONS 


STANDARD 


B-5.1 Stock Dibenzyl Suburate (Internal Standard) 
Solution 


Take 1.0 + 0.01 g of dimethyl suburate (DMS). Add 
100 ml of benzyl alcohol and 6 to 7 drops of isopropyl 
titnate digest 1t for 2 h. Allow it to cool up to room 
temperature then make the volume to 500 ml by 
carefully rinsing the flask by isopropyl alcohol. 
Dimethyl suburate will get converted into dibenzyl 
suburate (DBS). Mark the stock solution as DBS per 
2ml = X-XXXX mg 


B-5.2 Stock Dimethyl Isopthalate (DMI) Solution 


Take 0.2 + 0.01 g of dimethyl isopthalate (DMI). Add 
40 ml of benzyl alcohol and 6 to 7 drops of isopropyl 


titnate digest it for 2 h. Allow it to cool up to room 
temperature then make the volume to 100 ml by 
carefully rinsing the flask by isopropyl alcohol. This 
will be converted to dibenzyl isopthalate (DBI). Mark 
the stock solution as DBI per 2 ml = X-XXXX mg. 


B-5.3 Standard Solution for Response Factor 


Take 2 ml of solution prepared in B-5.1 and 2 ml of 
solution prepared in B-5.2. Add 10 ml of chloroform. 


B-5.4 2.0 Percent Standard IPA Stock Solution 


Weigh out accurately 0.200 + 0.005 g of pure DMI 
powder into round bottom flask, add 30 ml of benzyl 
alcohol and 3 drops of isopropyl titante, reflux the 
solution for 5 h reagent and dilute to 100 g by isopropyl 
alcohol, calculate actual DMI concentration by 
considering its purity and label the flask with actual 
weight taken. Consider this weight during calculation 
of IPA by GC. 


B-5.5 2.0 Percent Standard IPA Solution for GC 
Injection 


Take 2.0 ml IPA stock solution and add 2 ml internal 
standard (see B-5.1) and further add 10 ml of 
chloroform, same bottle to be labelled as 2.0 percent 
IPA Inject 1 ul in GC. 


B-6 CALIBRATION FOR PERFORMANCE 
CHECK — TWICE /MONTH STANDARD CHIPS 


B-7 ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE 


Inject 1 ul of standard solution for response factor 
(see B-5.3) and calculate response factor. Inject 1 ul 
of 2 percent standard IPA solution. If value of 2.0 
percent standard IPA solution is varying in the range 
of 0.01 percent, then there is no need for change in 
response factor. If there is deviation in value then rerun 
standard solution for response factor (see B-5.3). 
Weight 0.2 + 0.02 g of chips into the round bottom 
flask. Add 2 ml of benzyl alcohol. Add 3 drops of 
isopropyl titanate. Digest the solution for 1 h. Allow it 
to cool up to room temperature. Add 10 ml of 
chloroform. Add 2 ml of internal standard solution that 
is solution prepared in B-5.1 and shake vigorously. 
Inject 1 ul of sample solution into gas chromatograph. 


B-8 CHROMATOGRAPH SETTINGS 


Injector temperature : 300°C 

Detector temperature : 320°C 

Oven temperature : 270°C 
Gas flow rates 


Nitrogen : 20 psig 
Hydrogen : 30 + 10 ml/min 
Air : 300 + 20 ml/min 


Attenuation: - 4 
Range: 1 
B-9 CALCULATION 


Response factor (RF) = Më 


2 < 1 


IS 16391 : 2015 


standard) solution; 


= 
1 


weight of DBS in solution, in mg; 


> 
N 
lI 


area of DBI in standard solution; and 


W, = weight of DBI in standard solution, in mg. 


RF x mg of Internal Standard x Area 
of IPA in sample x 100 


where Percent IPA = " - 
Weight of sample, in mg x Area 
A, = area of dibenzyl suburate (DBS) (Internal of internal standard in sample 
ANNEX C 
(Table 1) 


METHOD OF TEST FOR DETERMINING THE COEFFICIENT OF SOIL AND GEOSYNTHETIC 
FRICTION BY THE DIRECT SHEAR 


C-1 PRINCIPLE 


C-1.1 The shear resistance between a geosynthetic and 
a soil, or other material selected by the user, is 
determined by placing the geosynthetic and one or 
more contact surfaces, such as soil, within a direct shear 
box. A constant normal force representative of design 
stresses is applied to the specimen, and a tangential 
(shear) force is applied to the apparatus so that one 
section ofthe box moves in relation to the other section. 
The shear force is recorded as a function of the 
horizontal displacement of the moving section of the 
shear box. 


C-1.2 The test is performed at a minimum of three 
different normal stresses, selected by the user, to model 
appropriate field conditions. The limiting values of 
shear stresses are plotted against the applied normal 
compressive stresses used for testing. The test data are 
generally represented by a best fit straight line whose 
slope is the coefficient of friction between the two 
materials where the shearing occurred. The y-intercept 
of the straight line is the adhesion. 


C-2 APPARATUS 


C-2.1 Shear Device — A rigid device to hold the 
specimen securely and in such a manner that a shear 
force without torque can be applied to the specimen. 
The device consists of both a stationary and moving 
container, both of which are capable of containing dry 
or wet soil and are rigid enough to not distort during 
shearing of the specimen. The travelling container shall 
be placed on firm bearings and rack, or other 
mechanism, to ensure that the movement of the 


container encounters low friction and is only in a 

direction parallel to that of the applied shear force. 
NOTE — The position of one of the containers shall be 
adjustable in the normal direction to compensate for deformation 
of the substrate and geosynthetic. The container shall also be 


aligned to minimize any moment produced by non-colinear 
forces on the containers. 


C-2.1.1 Square or Rectangular Containers, are 
recommended and they shall have a minimum 
dimension that is the greater of 300 mm, 15 times the 
d of the coarser soil used in the test, or a minimum of 
five times the maximum opening size (in plan) of the 
geosynthetic tested. The depth of each container that 
contains soil shall be a minimum of 50 mm or six times 
the maximum particle size of the coarser soil tested, 
whichever is greater. 


NOTE — d,, is the equivalent grain diameter (mm) at which 
85 percent of the soil is finer by weight. 


C-2.2 Normal Stress Loading Device, capable of 
applying and maintaining a constant uniform normal 
stress on the specimen for the duration of the test. 
Careful control and accuracy (62 percent) of the normal 
stress is important. Normal stress loading devices 
include, but are not limited to, weights, pneumatic or 
hydraulic bellows, or piston-applied stresses. For 
jacking systems, the tilting of loading plates shall be 
limited to 2° from the shear direction during shearing. 
The device shall be calibrated to determine the normal 
stress delivered to the shear plane. 


C-2.3 Shear Force Loading Device, capable of 
applying a shearing force to the specimen at a constant 
rate of displacement in a direction parallel to the 


IS 16391 : 2015 


direction of travel of the moving container. The 
horizontal force measurement system shall be 
calibrated, including provisions to measure and correct 
for the effects of friction and tilting of the loading 
system. The rate of displacement shall be controlled 
to an accuracy of 610 percent over a displacement 
range of at least 6.35 mm/min to 0.025 mm/min. The 
system shall allow constant measurement and readout 
of the shear force applied. An electronic load cell or 
proving ring arrangement is generally used. The shear 
force loading device shall be connected to the test 
apparatus in such a fashion that the point of the force 
application to the traveling container is in the plane of 
the shearing interface and remains the same for all tests. 


C-2.4 Displacement Indicators, for providing 
readout of the horizontal shear displacement and, if 
desired, vertical displacement of the specimen during 
the consolidation or shear phase. Displacement 
indicators such as dial indicators, or linear variable 
differential transformers (LVDT), capable of 
measuring a displacement of at least 75 mm for 
horizontal displacement and 25 mm for vertical 
displacement are recommended. The sensitivity of 
displacement indicators shall be 0.02 mm for 
measuring horizontal displacement. 


C-2.5 Geosynthetic Clamping Devices, required for 
fixing geosynthetic specimens to the stationary section 
or container, the traveling container, or both, during 
shear. Clamps shall not interfere with the shearing 
surfaces within the shear box and shall keep the 
geosynthetic specimens flat during testing. Flat jaw- 
like clamping devices are normally sufficient. Textured 
surfaces or soil shall be used to support the top and/or 
bottom of the geosynthetic. These surfaces shall permit 
flow of water into and out of the test specimens. 
Selection of the type of texture surface shall be based 
on the following criteria: 


a) The gripping surface shall be able to prevent 
the outside surface of the geosynthetic being 
sheared from slipping to the extent that the 
geosynthetic fails. 


b) The gripping surface shall be able to 
completely transfer the shear stress through 
the outside surfaces into the geosynthetic. 

c) The gripping surface shall not damage the 
geosynthetic and shall not influence the shear 
strength behavior of the geosynthetic. 


C-2.6 Soil Preparation Equipment, for preparing or 
compacting bulk soil samples. 


C-2.7 Miscellaneous Equipment, as required for 
preparing geosynthetic specimens. A timing device and 
equipment required for maintaining saturation of the 
geosynthetic or soil samples, 1f desired. 


C-3 GEOSYNTHETIC SAMPLING 


Take a minimum of three specimens for shearing in a 
direction parallel to the machine (or roll) direction of 
the laboratory sample and three specimens for shearing 
in a direction parallel to the cross-machine (cross-roll) 
direction. The specimens shall be sufficiently large to 
fit snugly in the container described in C-2.1.1 and 
they shall be of sufficient size to facilitate clamping. 
All specimens shall be free of surface defects, etc. Take 
no specimens nearer the selvage or edge of the 
geosynthetic production unit than 1/10 the width of 
the unit. 


C-4 CONDITIONING 


Bring the specimens to moisture equilibrium in the 
atmosphere for testing textiles as specified in IS 6359. 


C-5 PROCEDURE 


C-5.1 Place soil or rigid substrate in the lower 
container, as required. Compact the soil at the specific 
moisture content to the density desired. If soil is used, 
fill the lower container with soil so that the surface of 
the soil specimen protrudes a distance equal to one- 
half of the d of the soil. A protrusion of 1 mm is 
sufficient for fine-grained soils. Level the soil surface 
carefully. 


C-5.2 Place the geosynthetic specimen loosely over 
the substrate. Remove all folds and wrinkles in the 
geosynthetic. Clamp or otherwise fix the end of the 
specimen temporarily, and reset it to ensure that the 
geosynthetic specimen is in complete contact with the 
soil. Verify that the protrusion of the soil substrate is 
suitable as outlined in C-5.1. 


C-5.3 Fix the two halves of the shear box in the start 
position. Clamp or fix the upper half of the shear box 
so that it cannot move during the next step of 
preparation. 


C-5.4 Place the upper substrate or soil at the desired 
density and moisture content in a manner that 
minimizes damage to the geosynthetic specimen. 
Apply the seating normal stress. 


C-5.4.1 Apply the normal seating load. 


C-5.4.2 If the seating load does not equal the normal 
load for testing, apply the normal load for testing and 
monitor the vertical displacements until the sample 
comes to equilibrium. Verify that equilibrium is 
reached before proceeding. 


C-5.4.3 After the consolidation period, reclamp the 
geosynthetic specimen to the upper or lower container, 
as required. 


C-5.5 Place the displacement indicators and assemble 
the shear loading device. Create a gap between the 


upper box and lower box. The gap shall be large enough 
to prevent friction between the boxes during shear but 
small enough to prevent soil particles from entering 
into the gap and creating friction. If necessary, adjust 
the location of the horizontal loading ram to minimize 
the induced moment. 


C-5.6 Apply the shear force at a rate of 1 mm/min. 


C-5.7 Record the shear force as a function of 
horizontal displacement. Record a minimum of 50 data 
points per test. 


C-5.8 Run the test until the applied shear force remains 
constant with increasing displacement. Displacements 
ranging from 25 to 75 mm are generally required to 
generate a constant shear force for shearing between 
geosynthetic and soil interfaces. 


C-5.9 Remove the normal stress and disassemble the 
device at the end of the test. Carefully inspect and 
identify the failure surface and the area of the clamp. 
Failures shall be consistent for all tests in order for the 
test data to be comparable. 


C-5.10 At the end of the test, remove the soil specimen 
(if used) to determine the density and moisture content. 


C-5.11 Repeat the procedure for a minimum of two 
additional normal compressive stresses. 


C-5.12 Plot the test data as a graph of applied shear 
force versus horizontal displacement. For this plot, 
identify the limiting value(s) of shear force. Determine 
the horizontal displacements for these shear forces. 


C-6 CALCULATION 


C-6.1 For tests using soil, calculate the initial and final 
water content, unit weight, and degree of saturation, if 
required. 


C-6.2 Calculate the apparent shear stress applied to 
the specimen for each recorded shear force as follows: 


T = F u Tee 
A. 
where 
T = shear stress, in kPa; 
F. = shear force, in KN; 
Fœ = correction to shear force for friction, in kN; 
and 
A. = corrected area, in m?. 


C-6.2.1 For tests in which the area of specimen contact 
decreases with increased displacement, a corrected area 
shall be calculated. This shall occur in test devices in 
which the stationary and travelling containers have the 
same overall plan dimensions. In this case, the actual 
contact area will decrease as a function of horizontal 


IS 16391 : 2015 


displacement of the travelling container. For square or 
rectangular containers, the corrected area is calculated 
for each displacement reading using the following 
equation: 


A.=A,- (dx W) 


where 

A. = corrected area, in mi: 

A, = initial specimen contact area, in mi: 

d = horizontal displacement of the travelling 


container, in m; and 


W = specimen contact width in a direction 
perpendicular to that of shear force 
application, in m. 


C-6.2.2 No area correction may be required for tests 
in which the stationary container is larger than the 
travelling container, provided that the horizontal 
displacement of the travelling container does not result 
in a decrease in specimen contact area. 


NOTE — For devices which apply the normal stress to the 
interface as a constant force, for example by dead weights, any 
area correction applied to the shear force shall also be applied 
to the normal force. 


C-6.3 Plot the limiting values of shear stress versus 
applied normal stress for each test conducted. Limiting 
values are typically at peak shear stress and at the end 
of the test. Other limiting values may be specified by 
the user. The shear stress and normal stress axes shall 
be drawn to the same scale. 


C-6.4 Connect the data points with a straight line. 
Some judgment and experience may be required to 
construct this line, which is referred to as the strength 
envelope. The slope of the failure envelope is the 
coefficient of friction. The angle of friction is 
determined using the following equation: 


d, = tan! (W,) 
where 


d, = angle of friction corresponding to the 
limiting shear stress (degrees), and 


W, = coefficient of friction corresponding to the 
limiting shear stress. Friction angle and 
adhesion intercept are typically reported for 
the peak shear stress condition. 


C-6.5 Additionally, the coefficient of friction may be 
calculated at some condition other than peak horizontal 
force, such at a specific value of shear displacement 
or at the end of the test. The procedure given in C-6.4 
can be used to determine a friction angle and adhesion 
intercept, using the shear stress and normal stress for 
this other condition. Parameters obtained for a 
condition other than peak horizontal force shall be 
clearly defined and the condition for which they apply 
defined. 


IS 16391 : 2015 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TX 30 


Organization 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


Business Coordination House, New Delhi 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


CIDCO, Mumbai 
Coir Board, Kochi 


Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 
E. I. Dupont India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 


Indian Jute Industries? Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Manufacture Association, Kolkatta 
Jaya Shree Textiles, Hooghly 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 
Maharashtra Maritime Board, Mumbai 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Supreme Nonwovens Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


10 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. N. Desai (Chairman) 
Suri V. K. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR GUPTA 
SHRIMATI RITIKA GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
SHRI Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


SHRI NRIPENDRA KUMAR 
SHRI MANISH GUPTA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr U. S. SARMA 
Suri M. KUMARASWAMY PILLAy (Alternate) 


DR SwAPAN GHOSH 
Suri K. R. Gupta (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 


SHRI R. GANESH 
SHRIMATI VEDIKA KAPOOR (Alternate) 


Suri S. MAsoop HUSAIN 
Suri Ravi BHUSHAN KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
Suri S. J. Cuirnis (Alternate) 


Suri L. V. ASHARA 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri KousHik Das (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI PAWAN SHARMA 


Suri Y. K. KUSUMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri R. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. P. SincH (Alternate) 


SHRI T. SANYAL 
Suri A. K. KHASTAGIR (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
Suri M. BALUCHAMY (Alternate) 


DR SANJEEV K. VERMA 
SHRI HARINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI M. S. VERMA 
Suri V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH BAGLI (Alternate) 


Suri C. K. CHAUDHURI 
Suri C. K. Jain (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANOI 
DR SAURABH Vyas (Alternate) 


IS 16391 : 2015 


Organization Representative(s) 
The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai DR MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 
Urja Products Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad SHRI JANAK NANAVATY 
Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai SHRI S. P. BoRKAR 
BIS Directorate General SHRI PRABHAKAR Ral, Scientist “E” and Head (TXD) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri J. K. GUPTA 
Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30(1027). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


