NAT HIAS IS 5383 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


da tara — farts 
( RRT GTGA ) 


Tooth Powder — Specification 
( Third Revision ) 


ICS 71.100.70 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2021 Price Group 8 


Cosmetics Sectional Committee, PCD 19 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Cosmetics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division 
Council. 


This standard was originally published in 1966 and first revised in 1978 when changes were made in the 
requirements of fineness. In place of the requirement of abrasion, the requirement of freedom from hard and sharp 
edged particles and method of test was prescribed. Relaxation was given for the determination of heavy metals 
and arsenic, if these were tested in the raw materials. 


In the second revision, the requirement for microbial purity was included. Important marking requirements on 
containers and ECO-Mark certification were also retained in this revision. The fineness requirement with an 
appropriate test method was included to incorporate technologies such as use of soft agglomerates/capsules, which 
are internationally considered as safe ingredients. Important marking requirements for best use before, list of key 
ingredients on containers and ECO-mark certification were also incorporated in this revision. Limit for fineness 
and pH was revised keeping in mind various types of products currently marketed in India. 


Tooth powder formulations may be designed to have optimal abrasivity to effect cleaning action without hurting 
soft tissues or tooth enamel by way of excessive abrasivity. Relative dentine abrasivity (RDA) is recognized in 
most of the International Standards as the measure to determine this parameter. RDA is therefore recommended 
as a type test in this standard. 


The abrasivity of the tooth powder shall not exceed the limits specified when tested as per procedure given in 
Annex H. The abrasivity measurement methodology has been based on ISO 11609 : 2017. As RDA measurement 
facility is currently not available in India, a simpler abrasion test using a photographic paper is being developed. 
This procedure may be adopted in future after completing the studies and establishing validation with RDA. 


A good tooth powder when used in normal manner assists in the removal of usual daily accumulation of debris 
and deposits from the exposed surface of the teeth, without causing injury to the teeth and mucous membrane of 
the mouth. In addition it may remove stains and odour. The use of tooth powder may improve the oral hygiene. To 
prevent/reduce the incidence of oral/dental problems like caries, gingivitis and periodontitis the essential active 
ingredients may be incorporated in tooth powder. 


In this third revision, tooth powder classification has been revised into fluoridated and non-fluoridated types based 
on similar classification for toothpaste. Keeping in line with the Indian standard on tooth paste IS 6356 : 2001, a 
requirement for fluoride has been introduced. The test method for determination of fluoride is provided in Annex J. 


While no changes have been made on the maximum limit on heavy metal content expressed as lead in tooth 
powder, a requirement of mercury has been added. While a method for estimation of heavy metals expressed 
as lead has been provided in Annex F of this standard, alternate, validated methods, such as Atomic Absorption 
Spectrophotometry (AAS), Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) and Inductively Coupled 
Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES) may also be used. However, in case of dispute, the method 
described in Annex F of this standard will be the referee method. 


No stipulations have been made regarding the composition of tooth powder, however, it is essential that the 
tooth powder formulations do not contain any ingredient in sufficient concentration to cause a toxic or irritating 
reaction when used in the mouth. Nor shall it be harmful in normal use, keeping in mind that small amounts may 
be ingested inadvertently. 


A scheme for labelling environment friendly products to be known as ECO Mark has been introduced at the 
instance of the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEF & CC). The ECO Mark shall be 
administered by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 as per 
the Resolution No. 71 dated 20 February 1991 and No. 768 dated 24 August 1992 published in the Gazette of 
the Government of India. For a product to be eligible for ECO Mark it shall also carry Standard Mark of BIS for 
quality, besides meeting additional environment friendly (EF) requirements. For this purpose, the Standard Mark 
of BIS would be a single mark being a combination of the ISI Mark and the ECO logo. The requirements for the 
ECO friendliness will be additional, manufacturing units will be free to opt for Standard Mark alone also. 


( Continued to third cover) 


IS 5383 : 2021 


Indian Standard 
TOOTH POWDER — SPECIFICATION 


( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the requirements and the 
methods of sampling and test for tooth powder. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject 
to revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

265 : 1993 Hydrochloric acid (fourth revision) 

1070: 1992 Water reagent grade (third revision) 

2088 : 1983 Methods for determination of arsenic 
(second revision) 

3958: 1984 Methods of sampling cosmetics 
(first revision) 

4011:2018 Methods of test for safety evaluation 
of cosmetics (third revision) 

4707 Classification of cosmetic raw 
materials and adjuncts: 

(Part 1): Dyes colours and pigments 

2020 (fourth revision) 
(Part 2) : List of raw materials generally 
2017 not recognized as safe for use in 
cosmetics (fourth revision) 

14648 : 2011 Methods of test for microbiological 
examinations of cosmetics 
and cosmetic raw _ material 
(second revision) 

16913: 2018 Methods of test for cosmetics and 
determination of heavy metals 
(Arsenic, Cadmium, Lead and 
Mercury) by atomic absorption 


spectrometry (AAS) 


3 TYPES 


Tooth powder shall be classified into the following two 
types: 

a) Type 1 — Non-fluoridated; and 

b) Type 2 — Fluoridated. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Description 


Tooth powder shall be smooth, uniform, free or 
sluggishly flowing fine powder dentifrice formulation, 
free from any foreign matter. It shall be free from hard 
abrasive materials which could damage dentine enamel. 


4.2 Ingredients 


The ingredient(s) shall be one or more of the 
conventionally used materials in the manufacture of 
tooth powders. A list of ingredients conventionally 
used in the manufacture of tooth powder is given in 
Annex A for information only. All the raw materials 
used shall conform to respective Indian Standards 
wherever they exist. Tooth powder shall not contain 
mono or disaccharide for example, glucose, sucrose or 
other readily fermentable carbohydrates. 


4.3 The dyes, colours and pigments used in the 
manufacture of tooth powder shall comply with the 
provisions of IS 4707 (Part 1). Additional ingredients, 
such as flavours, sweetening agents, active ingredients 
etc. may be added to improve the appearance, 
performance, taste and flavour. These ingredients shall 
conform to the provisions of IS 4707 (Part 2). 


4.4 For safety evaluation of novel ingredients used in 
the formulation of a tooth powder, the tooth powder 
shall comply to IS 4011. It shall be the responsibility of 
the manufacturers of tooth powder to satisfy themselves 
of the dermatological safety of their formulation before 
releasing the product for sale. 


4.5 The tooth powder shall also meet the requirements 
given in Table 1 when tested according to methods 
given in col 5 and 6 of Table 1. 


IS 5383 : 2021 


Table 1 Requirement for Tooth Powder 
( Clause 4.5 ) 


SI Characteristic Requirement for Method of Test, Ref to 
No. 
Type 1 Type 2 Annex No. IS 
(Non- (Fluoridated) 
fluoridated) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Fineness: 
a) Particles retained on 75-micron IS sieve, percent by mass, Max 2.5 2.5 B 
b) Particles retained on 150-micron IS sieve, percent by mass, 1.0 1.0 
Max 
ii) Moisture and volatile matter, by mass, Max 5 5 C 
iii) pH of 50 percent aqueous suspension 5.5-10.5 5.5-10.5 D 
iv) Foaming power, ml, Min" 50 50 E 
(v) Heavy metals as lead (Pb), parts per million, Max 20 20 F 
vi) Arsenic (as As,O,), parts per million, Max 2 2 G or IS 16913 
vii) Available fluoride ion, parts per million, Max 50 1000 J 
viii) Mercury (as Hg), parts per million, Max 1 1 IS 16913 
ix) Microbial count: 
a) Total viable count, cfu/g, Max 1000 1000 14648 
Absent Absent 14648 


b) Gram negative pathogens/g 


Applicable to foaming tooth powder only. 


4.6 Additional 
(Optional) 


Requirements for ECO—Mark 


4.6.1 General Requirements 


4.6.1.1 The product shall confirm to be requirements 
for quality, safety and performance prescribed under 
4.5.1 to 4.5.5. 


4.6.1.2 All the ingredients that go into formulation shall 
comply with the provisions of IS 4707 (Part 1) and 
IS 4707 (Part 2). The product shall also meet specific 
requirements as given in the above standard. 


4.6.2 The product package shall display a list of key 
ingredients in descending order of quantity present. 


4.6.3 The product shall not be manufactured from any 
carcinogenic ingredients. 


4.6.4. The manufacturer shall produce to BIS 
environmental consent clearance from the concerned 
State Pollution Control Board as per the provisions 
of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Cess Act, 1977 and the Air (Prevention and Control 
Pollution) Act, 1981 along with the authorization, if 
required under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
and the Rules made there under, while applying for 
ECO-Mark. Additionally, provisions of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules there under shall 
also be complied with. 


4.6.5 Specific Requirements 


4.6.5.1 Heavy metals calculated as lead (Pb), Arsenic 
(as As2O3), and mercury shall not exceed 20 ppm, 
2 ppm, and | ppm respectively when tested by the 
respective method prescribed in Indian Standards. 


4.6.5.2 Product shall be dermatologically safe when 
tested as prescribed in IS 4011. 


5 ABRASIVITY (TYPE TEST) 


The tooth powder shall not exceed the limits of dentin 
abrasivity that of 2.5 times when tested as per the 
procedure given in Annex H. 


It may be noted that type test is recommended to be 
done on the formulation only once to pass the above 
criterion. This test need not be done for each and every 
batch. However, the type test is a must again, if the 
abrasive system is changed in the formulation. It is not 
required for the new formulation as long as abrasive 
components are not changed. 


6 PACKING AND MARKING 


6.1 Packing 


Tooth Powder shall be packed in suitable containers 
like plastic bottles, sachets or other suitable dispensing 
systems. When packed in containers, the containers 
shall be properly sealed and have a leak-proof cap 


or closure. The containers, if necessary, may further 
be packed in cartons or any other suitable packaging 
material. 


6.1.1 The material for product packaging shall meet 
the parameters evolved under the scheme of labelling 
environment friendly packaging/packaging materials. 


6.2 Marking 


6.2.1 The labelling and marking of tooth powder 
shall comply with the requirements of the Drugs and 
Cosmetic Act and Rules, Legal Metrology and any 
other relevant statutory requirement. In addition, the 
tooth powder containers and the cartons shall be legibly 
marked with the following information: 

a) Name and type of tooth powder; 

b) Indication of the source of manufacture; 


c) Net mass or volume of the material in the 
container; 


d) Batch number, in code or otherwise; 

e) Month and year of manufacture; 

f) Fluoride ion content for Type 2 tooth powder in 
ppm, 

g) “Best use before... .. “ (Month and year to be 
declared by the manufacturer). 


h) Foaming/non-foaming; and 
j) List of key ingredients. 
NOTE — This is exempted in case of pack sizes of 30 g or less. 


IS 5383 : 2021 


6.2.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the products 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


6.2.3 If the product is covered under ECO-Mark 
(optional), it shall be suitably marked with ECO-Mark 
logo besides Standard Mark. The label may clearly 
specify that ECO-Mark is applicable to the contents 
or the package or both, as case may be. If the product 
package is not separately covered under ECO-Mark 
scheme, it shall be clearly mentioned on the product 
that ECO-Mark label is applicable to contents only. 


7 SAMPLING 


7.1 Representative samples of the material shall be 
drawn as prescribed in IS 3958. 


7.2 The lot shall be declared as conforming to 
requirements of the specification, if all the test results 
on each individual samples meet the requirements 
prescribed in 4.1 to 4.5. 


8 QUALITY OF REAGENTS 


Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and distilled 
water (see IS 1070) shall be employed in tests. 


NOTE — ‘Pure chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities which affect the results of analysis. 


IS 5383 : 2021 


A-1 INGREDIENTS 


POWDER 


the material used falls into the following categories: 


a) Polishing agents, 
b) Foaming agents, and 
c) Others as per IS 4707 (Part 1) and (Part 2). 


A-2 POLISHING AGENTS 


The principal polishing agents generally used are one 


or more of those given below: 

Calcium carbonate 

Magnesium carbonate 
Di-calcium phosphate 
Tri-calcium phosphate 

Insoluble sodium meta-phosphate 
Hydrated alumina 

Amorphous precipitated silica 


Aluminium hydroxide 


SOS Oy ae ee ee 


Aluminium/Alumino silicate 


= 
© 


. Alumina 


{= 
— 


. Alumina fumed 


= 
N 


. Calcium phosphate 


jà 
(0S) 


. Calcium pyrophosphate 


= 
D 


. Dicalcium phosphate dehydrate 


j= 
Nn 


. Kaolin 


= 
a 


. Magnesium silicate 


= 
N 


. Potassium meta-phosphate 


=n 
oo 


. Silica fumed 
. Silica hydrated 


NO ë e 
© oO 


. Sodium aluminium silicate 


N 
— 


. Sodium bicarbonate 


N 
N 


. Sodium meta-phosphate 


N 
Ww 


. Hydroxyapatite 


N 
aN 


. Zirconium silicate 


N 
Nn 


. Sodium polymeta-phosphate 


N 
ON 


. Tungsten carbide 


N 
~l 


. Pumice 


N 
co 


. Silicon carbide 


N 
O 


. Magnesium silicate 
. Charcoal 


Ww 
oO 


CONVENTIONALLY 
USED IN THE MANUFACTURE OF TOOTH 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 4.2 ) 


31. 


Agglomerates (mainly consisting of one or more 
of the polishing agents) 


. Rice husk 

. Mica/coated mica 

. Red ochre 

. Others as per IS 4707 (Part 1) and (Part 2) 


A-3 FOAMING AGENTS 


The foaming agent(s) generally used are one or more of 
those given below: 


1. 


SO St Oe ere ea a 


ied ees 
p. So 


Soap 

Sodium ricinoleate 

Sodium sulphoricinoleate 

Sodium lauryl suphate 

Sodium alkyl sulphoacetate 

Sodium salt of sulphated monoglyceride 
Sodium lauryl sarcosinate 

Sodium alpha olefin sulphonate 


Coco-amido-propyl-betaine 


. Sodium dodecyl benzene sulphonate 

. Sodium lauryl sulphoacetate 

. Coconut monoglyceride sulphonates 

. Dioctylsodium-sulphosuccinate 

. Magnesium lauryl sulphate 

. Sodium alkyl benzene sulphonate 

. Sodium alkyl sulphate 

. Sodium lauryl ether sulphate 

. Coco — betaine 

. Others as per IS 4707 (Part 1) and (Part 2) 


A-4 OTHER SUSBTANCES 


1. 
2. 


SOO Oy n 


Fluorides of sodium and stannous 


Monofluoro phosphate of ammonium, 


potassium and sodium 
Sweeteners, saccharine, aspartame 


Petroleum jelly -silicon defoaming compounds 
and mineral oil 


Colouring agents 
Essential oils 
Flavouring agents 
Astringents 


Preservatives 


10. Antibacterial agents 
11. Antiplaque agents 
12. Antitartar agents 
13. Whitening agents 
14. Anticaries agents 


IS 5383 : 2021 


15. Calcium glycerophosphate 

16. Granules / Agglomerates 

17. Anti-gingival agents 

18. Sodium chloride 

19. Others as per IS 4707 (Part 1) and (Part 2) 


ANNEX B 
[ Table 1, SI No. (i) ] 
DETERMINATION OF FINENESS 


B-1 METHOD 
ULTRASONIFICATION 


BASED ON 


B-1.1 Outline of the Method 


Subject the tooth powder suspension to an 
ultrasonic treatment and pass through fineness test. 
Utrasonification loosens out the soft agglomerates into 
the constituent materials. 


B-1.2 Apparatus 


B-1.2.1 Ultrasonic Bath — Trans-o-sonic compact 
model or equivalent (60+10 watts power with 
35+5 kHz Ultrasonic frequency, 1-2 watts/inch 
2 power density, L x B x h : 225 x 125 x 60 mm — Tank). 


B-1.2.2 75 and 150 Microns Sieves, conforming .to 
IS 460 (Part 1). 


B-1.2.3 Glass beakers (250 ml, 500 ml) and stirring 
rods. 


B-1.3 Determination of particle size on 150-Micron 
IS Sieve. 


B-1.3.1 Procedure 


Place about 5 g of the tooth powder, accurately weighed, 
in a 250 ml beaker. Add 200 ml of water and allow 
standing for about 5 min with occasional stirring until 
the tooth powder is completely dispersed. Transfer the 
beaker in an ultrasonic bath. 


Fill the ultrasonic bath (2 litre capacity) to about three- 
fourth height with water. Clamp the above beaker in the 
centre of the bath keeping about 1 cm clearance from 


the bottom of the bath and subject ultrasonification for 
10 min to completely loosen out the constituents. 


Transfer this suspension quantitatively to a 150 micron 
IS Sieve and wash by means of a slow stream of 
running tap water and finally with a fine stream from a 
wash bottle until all the matter that can pass through the 
sieve has passed. Let the water drain out and then dry 
the sieve containing the residue in an oven. If there is 
any residue on the sieve, carefully transfer it to a tarred 
watch glass and dry it to constant mass in an over at 
105+2 °C. 


B-1.4 Calculation 


Material retained on 150 — micron IS Sieve, percent by 


M, x100 
mass = ——— ~~ 


where 
Mı = mass of residue retained on the sieve, in g; and 
M= mass ofthe material taken for the test, in g. 


B-2 DETERMINATION OF PARTICLE SIZE 
ON 75- MICRON IS SIEVE 


B-2.1 Procedure 


Weigh accurately about 5 g of the tooth powder and 
proceed as in B-1.3.1, using a 75-micron IS Sieve. If 
there is any residues on the sieve carefully transfers it 
to a tarred watch glass and dry it to constant mass in an 
over at 1052 °C. 


B-2.2 Calculation 
Calculate as in B-1.4 


IS 5383 : 2021 


ANNEX C 
[ Zable 1 SI No. (ii) | 
DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE AND VOLATILE MATTER 


C-1 PROCEDURE 


In a previously dried and weighed petri dish, take 
about 2 g of the material, accurately weighed. Dry it at 
1052 °C in an oven for 4 h or till constant mass. Cool 
in a desiccators and weigh. 


C-2 CALCULATION 
Moisture and volatile matter percent by mass = 
100 (M -M, ) 
M 
where 
M= mass ofthe material taken for the test, in g; and 
Mı = mass of the material after drying, in g. 


ANNEX D 
[ Table 1, SI No. (iii) ] 
DETERMINATION OF pH 


D-1 PROCEDURE 


Dispense 10 g of the tooth powder from the container 
in a 50 ml beaker and add 10 ml of freshly boiled and 


cooled water (at 27 °C) to make 50 percent aqueous 
suspension. Stir well to make a thorough suspension. 
Determine the pH ofthe suspension within 5 min, using 
a pH meter. 


ANNEX E 
[ Table 1, SI No. (iv) ] 
DETERMINATION OF FOAMING POWER 


E-1 GENERAL 


Strict attention shall be paid to all details of the 
procedure in order to ensure concordant results. 
Particular care should be taken to shake the cylinder 
exactly as described. 


E-1.1 Outline of the Method 


A suspension of the material in water is taken in 
a graduated cylinder and given 12 shakes under 
prescribed conditions. The volume of the foam formed 
is observed after keeping the cylinder for 5 min. 


E-2 APPARATUS 


E-2.1 Graduated Cylinder (250 ml) — Glass 
stoppered, with graduations from 0 to 250 ml, with 2 
ml divisions, overall height about 35 cm and the height 
of the graduated portion about 20 cm. 

E-2.2 Graduated Cylinder (100 ml) — with 
graduations from o to 100 ml, with 1 ml divisions. 


E-2.3 Thermometer, of range 0 to 110 °C. 
E-3 PROCEDURE 


E-3.1 Weigh about 5 g of the tooth powder accurately 
in a 100 ml glass beaker, add 15 ml of water, cover the 
beaker with watch glass and allow to stand for 30 min. 
This operation is carried out to make the tooth powder 
easily dispersible. 
NOTE — Ensure that the detergent is completely dissolved, 
warming the aqueous suspension, if necessary. 


E-3.2 Stir the contents of the beaker with the glass rod 
and transfer the slurry to the 250 ml graduated cylinder, 
ensuring that no foam (more than 2 ml) is produced 
and no lumpy paste goes into the cylinder. Repeat the 
transfer of the residue left in the beaker with further 
portions of 5 to 6 ml water ensuring that all the matter 
in the beaker is transferred to the cylinder. 


IS 5383 : 2021 


INITIAL POSITION INTERMEDIATE 
STOPPER UP POSITION STOPPER 


DOWN FINAL POSITION 
STOPPER UP 


Fic. 1 ONE COMPLETE SHAKE OF CYLINDER 


E-3.3 Adjust the contents in the cylinder to 50 ml by 
adding sufficient water and bring the contents of the 
cylinder to 30 °C. Stir the contents of the cylinder 
with a glass rod or thermometer to ensure a uniform 
suspension. 


E-3.4 As soon as the temperature of the contents of the 
cylinder reaches 30 °C, stopper the cylinder and give it 
12 complete shakes, each shake comprising movements 
show in Fig. | ina vertical plane, upside down and vice 
versa. After the 12 shakes have been given, allow the 
cylinder to stand still for 5 min and read the volumes 
of: 


a) Foam plus water (V: ml), and 
b) Water only (V2 ml) as shown in Fig. 2. 


E-4 CALCULATION 
Foaming power, ml = Vi — V2. 
where 


Vı= volume of foam plus water, in ml; and 


V2= volume of water only, in ml. 


Fic. 2 MEASUREMENT OF FOAM 


IS 5383 : 2021 


ANNEX F 
[ Zable 1, SI No. (v) ] 
TEST FOR LEAD 


F-1 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


The colour produced with hydrogen sulphide solution 
is matched against that obtained with standard lead 
solution. 


F-2 APPARATUS 
F-2.1 Nessler Cylinders — 50 ml capacity. 
F-3 REAGENTS 


F-3.1 Dilute Hydrochloric Acid — Approximately 
SN. 


F-3.2 Dilute Acetic Acid — Approximately | N. 


F-3.3 Dilute Ammonium Hydroxide—Approximately 
SN. 


F-3.4 Hydrogen Sulphide Solution — Standard. 


F-3.5 Standard Lead Solution — Dissolve 1.600 g 
of lead nitrate in water and make up the solution of 
1.000 ml. Pipette out 10 ml of the solution and dilute 
again to 1.000 ml with water. One millilitre of this 
solution contains 0.01 mg of lead (as Pb). 


F-4 PROCEDURE 


Weigh about 2.000 g of material in a crucible and heat 
on a hot plate and then in a muffle furnace to ignite 
it at 600 °C to constant mass. Add 3 ml of dilute 
hydrochloric acid, warm (wait till no more dissolution 
occurs) and make up the volume to 100 ml. Filter the 
solution. Transfer 25 ml of the filtrate into a Nessler’s 
cylinder. In the second Nessler’s cylinder, add 2 ml of 
dilute acetic acid, 1.0 ml of standard lead solution and 
make up the volume with water to 25 ml. 


Add 10 ml of hydrogen sulphide solution to each 
Nessler cylinder and make up the volume with water to 
50 ml. Mix and allow standing for 10 min. compare the 
colour produced in the two nessler’s cylinders. Blank 
determinations without samples are recommended to 
avoid errors arising out of reagents. 


F-5 RESULTS 


The sample may be taken to have passed the test, if the 
colour developed in the sample solution is less than that 
of standard solution. 


ANNEX G 
[ Zable 1 SI No. (vi) ] 
TEST FOR ARSENIC 


G-1 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


Arsenic present in a solution of the material is reduced 
to arsine, which is made to react with mercuric bromide 
paper. The stain produced is compared with a standard 
stain. 


G-2 REAGENTS 


G-2.1 Mixed Acid — Dilute one volume of concentrated 
sulphuric acid with four volumes of water. Add 10 g of 
sodium chloride for each 100 ml of the solution. 


G-2.2 Ferric Ammonium Sulphate Solution — 
Dissolve 64 g of ferric ammonium sulphate in water 
containing 10 ml of mixed acid and make up to one 
litre. 


G-2.3 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid — See 
IS 265. 


G-2.4 Stannous Chloride Solution — Dissolve 80 g 
of stannous chloride (SnCl2.2H2O) in 100 ml of water 
containing 5 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid. 


G-3 PROCEDURE 


Carry out the test as prescribed in IS 2088, adding into 
the Gutzeit bottle, 2 ml of ferric ammonium sulphate 
solution, 0.5 ml of stannous chloride solution and 25 ml 
of sample solution as prepared in F-4. 


For comparison, prepare a stain using 0.001 mg of 
arsenic trioxide. 


IS 5383 : 2021 


ANNEX H 
( Foreword and Clause 5 ) 
ABRASIVITY (RDA) MEASUREMENT TEST (HEFFERREN) 


H-1 SCOPE 


This Annex identifies the specific procedures for 
determination of dentifrice abrasively using the 
ADA laboratory method. 


H-2 SAMPLING 


A representative sample shall be taken from at least 
two batches. 


H-3 PROCEDURE 


H-3.1 Standard Reference Abrasive. 


The standard reference abrasive is from a specific lot 
of calcium phosphate held by the Monsanto company”. 


“Calcium pyrophosphate is an example of a suitable 
product available commercially. This information is 
given for the convenience of users of this Standard 
and does not constitute an endorsement by BIS of this 
product. A sample of the material may be obtained 
by contacting the company at the address below and 
requesting the ADA abrasion standard. Slight shifts 
(less than 10 percent) in abrasivity between lots have 
been reported. 


Monsanto Company 
Detergent Division 

800 N Lindbergh Boulevard 
St Louis MO 

USA 63167 


H-3.2 Apparatus 


H-3.2.1 Brushing Machine — A cross brushing 
machine is the apparatus of choice’. The apparatus 
should have eight positions for holding specimens. 
A toothbrush shall be positioned to pass reciprocally 
over the mounted specimens with a designated tension 
on the brush while immersed in dentifrice slurry. The 
distance traversed by the brush should not be longer 
than the brush head, so that the specimen does not lose 
contact with the brush. The mechanism for holding 
the dentifrice slurry may vary with different machine 
designs, but should allow for easy removal of the 
slurry sample. It is important to have some mechanism 
for agitation of the slurry while the brushing is taking 
place. A convenient method to accomplish this is to 
attach rubber mixing vanes just below the brush head. 
As the brushing takes place, these vanes will prevent 
the abrasive from settling to the bottom of the slurry 
container. 


H-3.2.2 Radioactivity Detector — The two 
recommended methods for determination of the 
radioactivity of the used dentifrice slurries are a 
Gieger — Muller planchet counter or liquid scintillation 
detector. The use of the Geiger counter requires that the 
samples be dried under defined controlled conditions. 
The liquid scintillation method has the advantage of 
reading directly from the slurry. 


The drawings and blue prints of the machine may be 
obtained from the American Dental Association. 


Counting should be done for a period expected to 
reduce the alpha value for counting error to less than 
2 percent. Counting should be performed for a minimum 
of 1.000 counts and at least 1 min. The number of 
brushing strokes may be increased if counting times 
become too long. 


H-3.3 Presentation of Tooth Specimens 
H-3.3.1 Dentin Specimens 
H-3.3.1.1 Selection 


Human root dentin of extracted permanent teeth is used 
as the substrate. Single — rooted teeth that were vital 
at extraction should be selected. An exception, because 
of the small size are, mandibular incisors: these should 
not be used. The specimen should be at least 14 mm 
long and 2 mm wide at the narrow end. All roots shall 
be caries-free and free of anatomical defects. After 
extraction, the roots should be stored in neutralized 
4 percent formaldehyde solution. 


H-3.3.1.2 Preparation 


Scrape the roots clean of all soft tissue and cementum. 
Then remove the crown and the root tips using a 
separating disc under a flow of water. 


H-3.3.1.3 Irradiation 


For each set of eight specimens to be irradiated, add 
one or two extra roots for use in correction factors. 
Pack the specimens in 4 percent formaldehyde solution 
and submit to a nuclear reactor for irradiation. The 
neutron flux should be sufficient to product about 1m 
Ci of 32P beta radiation after several hours. Elevated 
temperatures in the reactor should be avoided. It is also 
advisable to shield the samples from fast neutrons and 
gamma radiation. Handling of the irradiated specimens 
should be done with care using good laboratory 
practice. The specimens should not be used during the 
first half life because of excess radiation and should be 
used before the end of the third half — life because of 


IS 5383 : 2021 


lack of activity. The half-life of 32 P is 14.3 days so the 
usable life-span of a set of teeth is 4 weeks. 


H-3.3.1.4 Mounting of specimens 


The specimens should be mounted individually in cold 
cure methyl methacrylate denture resin: the type of 
mould used will depend upon the holder on the brushing 
machine. The specimens should be mounted so that 
they protrude above the resin surface in a buccal/lingual 
orientation by at least 2 mm. The brushing surface of 
the root shall be parallel in buccal lingual orientation 
to the resin holder and situated so that the brushing will 
take place perpendicular to the long dimension of the 
root. Storage of the mounted specimens should be in 
4 percent formaldehyde. 


H-3.3.2 Enamel Specimens 
H-3.3.2.1 Selection 


Selection criteria for the enamel specimens are the 
same as for dentin. The enamel specimens should be 
obtained from human maxillary incisors. 


H-3.3.2.2 Preparation 


The entire labial surface of the specimen is used after 
removing the root. Clean the enamel in the same way 
as the root. 


H-3.3.2.3 Irradiation 


Irradiation of the enamel is identical to the method used 
with the roots. The roots and enamel specimens may be 
packed together for submission to the reactor. 


H-3.3.2.4 Mounting 


Mount the enamel specimens in the same way as the 
roots. The labial surface shall protrude 2 mm and be 
parallel to the resin surface. 


H-3.4 Tooth Brushes 


The tooth brushes if used should have nylon bristles 
of medium hardness. The bristle ends should lie in a 
plane rather than in separated or end-raised tuft design. 
The bristle length should be about 10 mm. A 50 tuft 
medium-texture brush is a commercially available 
brush that meets acceptable criteria. 


Store the brushes in water overnight prior to their first 
use and then keep them in water until they are discarded. 
Use a new set of brushes for each set of teeth. Do not 
remove the brushes from the machine between runs but 
raise the tufts of the specimen so as not to bend the 
bristles. At the beginning of each run, set the tension, 
of the brush on the specimen to 150 g using a Chatilon 
spring gauge or equivalent. This tension should be 
re-checked at least twice daily. The method of adjusting 
the tension will vary depending upon the type of 
mechanism on the brushing machine. 


10 


H-3.5 Reference Diluent 


The diluents are a 0.5 percent carboxymethylcellulose 
(CMC) (7MF) solution in 10 percent glycerine. To 
prepare | litre of the dilute, heat 50 ml of glycerine 
to 60°C and add 5 g of CMC while stirring. After 
the mixture is homogeneous, add another 50 ml of 
heated glycerine and continue stirring for 60 min. 
Transfer the solution to a | litre flask and add 900 ml 
of distilled water. Allow to cool but continue stirring 
slowly overnight. To stabilize the viscosity, allow the 
solution to stand overnight before using. This solution 
is used to make up slurries of the reference abrasive or 
any other powder being tested. 


H-3.6 Reference Abrasive Slurry 


The reference material is that described above 
(see H-3.4). Dilute 10 g of the abrasive with 50 ml of 
the diluents (see H-3.5). The same ratio is used for all 
powders. It is possible for the reference abrasive to be 
used as a dentifrice, if that has to be done. It shall be 
made up as a 40 percent abrasive dentifrice with the 
rest of the constituents being conventional dentifrice 
components. The slurry is then made with 25 g of 
reference dentifrice and 40 ml of water. 


H-3.7 Dentifrice Slurries 


To prepare the test slurries, add 40 ml of water to 
25 g of each dentifrice. For the machine, prepare eight 
slurries of each dentifrice. This dilution produces a 
final slurry volume and concentration similar to those 
of the reference abrasive slurry. All slurries reference 
and test should be used shortly after preparation and 
after vigorous mechanical stirring to prevent particle 
setting 


H-3.8.1 Dentin 


To reduce the variation caused by dentin surface 
differences, precondition the specimens prior to 
each use. The preconditioning treatment consists of 
brushing with slurry of the reference abrasive but not 
taking a sample. The first time dentin specimens are 
used, the preconditioning should be for 6.000 strokes. 
Each successive daily run should begin with a shorter 
precondition brushing of 1.000 strokes. The tension of 
the toothbrush on the roots shall be 150 g. 


Discard the preconditioning slurries. 


H-3.8.2 Enamel 


Preconditioning of the enamel is similar to that of the 
dentin, except 10.000 strokes are used prior to the first 
use and 1.000 strokes are given at the beginning of 
each day. 


Discard the preconditioning slurries. 


H-3.9 Test Design 
H-3.9.1 Test Design for Dentin 


The test design may be either a sandwich design or a 
Latin square design. The sandwich design is such that a 
set of reference slurries is run (pre-test), followed by a 
second set of reference slurries (post-test). This second 
set of reference slurries then acts as the pre-test slurries 
for the next test group. This continues until all the test 
groups are run. 


The Latin square design is such that a set of reference 
slurries is run first. All the test groups are randomized 
over the eight brushing heads for the next few runs 
(depending on the number of test groups). Then a 
post-test reference set of slurries is run as the final 
procedure. 


In both test designs, the brush tension is set at 150 g 
and brushing is performed for 1.500 to 3.000 strokes 
depending on the radioactivity level of the specimens. 


H-3.9.2 Test Design for Enamel 


The test design for enamel is identical to that for 
dentin, except the number of strokes is 5.000 to 
7.500 depending on the activity of the specimens. 


H-3.10 Sampling of Slurries 


The sampling of the slurries following the brushing is 
identical for both dentin and enamel. An eliquot of each 
slurry is removed immediately following brushing. The 
size of the aliquot will depend upon the counting method 
and equipment, but 3 ml is usually adequate to provide 
a detectable level of radioactivity. A convenient method 
for removing the sample is a syringe fitted with a blunt 
needle. Take care to ensure no carry-over between 
samples. This can best be done by a complete rinsing 
of the syringe between samples. It is also important to 
remove the same quantity of sample from each slurry. 
Dry the sample if a planchet counters system is being 
used to detect the radioactivity. If drying is needed, the 
samples should be air-dried for at least 1 h and then 
dried in an over at 60 °C with forced air overnight. 


H-3.11 Correction Factors 


Correction factors are needed for both dentin and 
enamel abrasion tests when using the planchet counting 
method and are identically prepared in both methods. 
When testing dentifrices with abrasive systems different 
from the reference materials, the self — absorption and 
back scattering characteristics of the abrasives for beta 
radiation may also differ. Real differences in abrasivity 
may then be significantly distorted. The correction 


11 


IS 5383 : 2021 


factor is a means to reduce this variable. The correction 
factor is determined differently depending on the 
counting method used. 


H-3.11.1 Preparation of Correction Factor Slurries for 
Geiger-Muller Planchet Counting 


Dissolve one piece of irradiated dentin (or enamel) in 
5 ml of concentrated HCL. Transfer the solution to a 
250 ml volumetric flask and add water to the mark. 
Add 1.0 ml of this radioactive solution to slurries of 
e reference abrasive and to each of the tests abrasives 
prepared in the same manner as in the test. To neutralize 
the acid, add 1.0 ml of 0.5 mol/NaOH. Mix the slurries 
thoroughly, sample and dry the samples along with 
those from the test runs. Do not brush with these 
correction factor slurries. 


These samples are counted along with the test samples. 


H-3.11.2 Calculation of correction Factors 


The correction factor Cı to be applied to all values of 
the test samples is calculated as follows: 


Mean counts for 4 referece samples 


i Mean counts for 4 tests samples 


H-3.11.2.1 Correction factors for liquid scintillation 
counting 


The correction is with regard to the amount of sample 
mixed with the scintillation cocktail. Each sample is 
weighed and the net count per minute (CPM) is divided 
by the mass to get a net CPM per gram of slurry. This 
net CPM per gram of values are then used in calculating 
abrasivity in place of net CPM values in A-3.12, and 
there is no C, term. 


H-3.11.2.2 Correction factors for liquid scintillation 
detection 


Self-absorption and backscatter are less of a concern 
because of the liquid medium being used. Most modern 
liquid scintillation equipment will automatically 
colour-correct, so this is not a problem. The differences 
in mass of the samples do need to be accounted for 
in the calculation. To do this, each sample taken after 
brushing needs to be weighed to an accuracy of 0.01 g. 


H-3.11.2.3 Applying the correction factor 


Before calculating the relative abrasion values, the net 
CPM of each slurry is divided by the mass of the slurry 
used, to get a net CPM per gram of slurry. These values 
are then used in the calculation of relative abrasive 
values. 


IS 5383 : 2021 


H-3.12 Calculation of Abrasivity Using Gieger-Muller 
Counting 
H-3.12.1 Dentin Abrasivity 


The dentin Abrasivity of the 
(or abrasives) is calculated as follows: 


test dentifrices 


Mean references net CPM = 


Pre—net CPM + Post —net CPM 
2 


Cı x 100 x Test dentifrice 


net CPM 
Mean reference net CPM 


Dentifrice Abrasivity = 


H-3.12.2 Enamel Abrasivity 


The enamel abrasivity of the test dentifrices for 
abrasives is calculated as follows: 


Mean reference net CPM = 


Pre—net CPM + Post —net CPM 
2 


Cı x 10 x Test dentifrice 


pei N net CPM 
Dentifrice Abrasivity = Meanrdrenen iTA 


H-3.13 Calculation of Abrasivity using Liquid 
Scintillation 


H-3.13.1 Dentin Abrasivity 


Mean reference net CPM per gram = 


Pre—net CPM per gram + Post — net CPM per gram 
2 
Dentifrice Abrasivity = 
100 x Test dentifrice net CPM per gram 
Mean reference net CPM per gram 
H-3.13.2 Enamel Abrasivity 


The enamel Abrasivity of the test dentifrices (or 
abrasives) is calculated as follows: 


Mean reference net CPM per gram = 


Pre — net CPM per gram + Post — net CPM per grm 
2 


Dentin Abrasivity = 
10xTest dentifrice net CPM per gram 


Mean reference net CPM per gram 


NOTE — Centres for measuring toothpaste Abrasivity via 
RDA route: 


Indiana University, School of Dentistry 
Oral Health Research Institute 

415 Lansing Street 

Indianapolis, Indian 46202 

USA 


Missouri Analytical Grade Laboratories 
Marcus Research Laboratories, INC 


The dentin Abrasivity of the test dentifrices 1820 Delmar Boulevard 
(or abrasives) is calculated as follows: St. Louis, MO 63103 — 1798 
USA 
ANNEX J 


[ Clause 4.4, Table 1, SI No. (vii) ] 
DETERMINATION OF FLUORIDE ION 


J-1 GENERAL 


This method is suitable for the determination of water 
soluble fluoride species in tooth powder, including free 
fluoride and hydrolyzable complexes, for example, 
sodium mono fluorophosphate. 


J-1.1 Principle 


Water soluble species are converted to fluoride ion 
by acid hydrolysis. The fluoride ion activity is then 
determined potentiometrically with the help of fluoride 
ion sensitive electrode. 


12 


J-2 Apparatus 


J-2.1 pH Meter (Potentiometer) — Scale readable to 
+0.5 mV or better. 


J-2.2 Fluoride Ion Sensitive Electrode — Orion 
94-09 or similar. 


J-2.3 Single Junction Reference Electrode — Orion 
90-0 1,or similar, with filling solution. 


J-2.4 Magnetic Stirrer 


J-2.5  Polythene/Polypropylene Beakers and 


Volumetric Flasks — 100, 250 ml and pipettes. 


J-2.6 Semi-log Graph Papers — 2/3 cycles. 
J-3 REAGENTS 


J-3.1 Sodium Fluoride (Analytical Grade) 

J-3.2 Trisodium citrate (Analytical Grade) 

J-3.3 Sodium chloride (Analytical Grade) 

J-3.4 Hydrochloric acid (Analytical Grade) — | M. 
J-3.5 Sodium Hydroxide — | M. 

J-3.6 Sodium Acetate Trihydrate (Analytical Grade) 
J-3.7 Glacial Acetic Acid 


J-3.8 Tisab L (Total Ionic Strength Adjusting Buffer) 
Solution — Dissolve 294 g trisodium citrate, 29 g 
sodium chloride and 68 g sodium acetate trihydrate in 
600 ml of hot water. Cool, adjust to pH 6.4 with glacial 
acetic acid. Dilute to 1 litre with distilled water. 


J-3.9 Tisab LF (TISAB Containing Fluoride) 
Solution — Prepare 100 ml of 1 mg F-/100 ml solution 
.As described in I-3.8. Dissolve 294 g trisodium 
citrate, 29 g sodium chloride and 68 g sodium acetate 
trihydrate in 600 ml of hot water. Cool, pipette in 
10 ml of Img F-/100ml solution and adjust to pH 
6.4 with glacial acetic acid. Dilute to 1 litre with 
distilled ‘water. Store in a polythene or polypropylene 
bottle. 


J-3.10 Fluoride Blank Solution 


Take 100 ml hydrochloric acid (IM) solution in 1 litre 
flask and then add 200 ml sodium hydroxide (1 M), by 
measuring cylinder. Dilute to 1 litre with distilled water 
and mix well. 


J-3.11 Standard Sodium Fluoride Solution (0.01 mg 
F per ml) 


Dry the sodium fluoride at 110 “C for 4 hours and 
transfer accurately 0.222 g to 100 ml volumetric 
flask. Add distilled water to dissolve the sodium 
fluoride and make up to the mark (Solution-X). Each 
ml of Solution-X contains 1mg fluoride ion (F`). Take 
10 ml of this Solution-X in 1000 ml volumetric flask 
and make up this volume to the mark (Solution-Y). 
Each ml of Solution-Y contains 0.01 mg fluoride (F`) 
ion. Transfer Solution-X and Solution-Y to polythene 
bottles for storing. 


J -3.12 Preparation of Standard Solutions of Sodium 
Fluoride 


Take 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 25 ml of Solution-Y (see I-3.11) 
in 100 ml volumetric flask marked A, B, C, D, E and 
F respectively. From Solution X (see I-3.11), pipette 


13 


IS 5383 : 2021 


out 0.5 and 1.0 mL and transfer to two separate 
100 mL volumetric flasks marked as G, H .To each add 
50 ml of TISAB L buffer solution and 10 ml of fluoride 
blank solution. Check that the pH is in the range of 
6.4 * 0.1, and if necessary correct with 1M NaOH or 1M 
HC1.Transfer quantitatively to a 100 ml polypropylene 
volumetric flask and make up the volume to 100 ml 
with distilled water. Now the solutions A, B, C, D, E, F, 
G and H are containing 0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.25, 
0.5 and 1 mg of F per 100 ml respectively. Transfer 
the solutions to 150 ml polythene beaker for new 
measurement. 

NOTE — Calibration curve can be plotted using any 

5 consecutive concentrations depending on the expected 

concentration of fluoride from sample. 


J-4 MV MEASUREMENT OF STANDARD 
SOLUTIONS OF SODIUM FLUORIDE 


J-4.1 Preparation of Electrodes 


Remove protective cap and soak the fluoride electrode 
in TISAB LF solution for 15 min. 


J-4.2 Fill the reference electrode with filling solution. 


J-4.3 Rinse the electrodes with de-ionized water and 
keep the tips immersed in TISAB L F solution until 
immediately before use. 


J-4.4 Check that the electrodes are correctly connected 
to the pH meter. 


J-4.5 Rinse the electrodes with deionized water before 
use and carefully blot dry with a paper tissue. 


J-5 MV MEASUREMENT 


J-5.1 Transfer the contents of solution A from 100 ml 
flask into a clean, dry 150 ml polypropylene beaker. 


J-5.2 Immerse the tips of the electrodes in the solution 
while stirring the solution with a magnetic stirrer. 


Ensure that no air bubbles adhere to the electrode 
surfaces. 


J-5.3 Leave until the potential reading is constant. This 
should take approximately 2 or 3 min. 


J-5.4 Record the potential reading in mV and check the 
temperature of the solution. 


J-5.5 Rinse the electrodes with de-ionised water and 
blot dry with a paper tissue. 


J-5.6 Repeat the procedure prescribed in I-5.1 to 
I-5.5 for 5 selected standard solutions to record mV of 
these solutions. 


J-5.7 Plot the calibration graph on semi log graph paper 
with the mV reading on the linear ordinate and the final 
concentration of fluoride in the standard F solution on 


IS 5383 : 2021 


the logarithmic abscissa. The graph should be a straight 
line with a gradient of-57-59 mV per decade change in 
concentration. 


J-6 TEST SOLUTION 


J-6.1 Discard the first 5 cm of powder from the container 
and then weigh about 5 g powder to the nearest mg. 
Add approximately 30 ml hot (90-95 °C) deionized 
water, a small amount at a time and slurry the powder 
with a micro spatula after each water addition. 


Allow to cool. Dilute to 100 ml in a polypropylene 
volumetric flask and mix well. 


J-6.2 Ensure that the dispersion is homogeneous 
and then centrifuge about 60 ml of the dispersion in 
a polypropylene centrifuge tube, closed with a cap to 
prevent evaporation, until clear. This will take about 
20 min at 4000 rpm. 


J-6.3 Pipette 20 ml of the clear supernatant into a 
250 ml round-bottomed flask. 


J-6.4 Add a few anti-bumping granules then add 
10 ml hydrochloric acid solution (1M approximately) 
by measuring cylinder. Attach a reflux condenser and 
boil gently for 5 min. 


J-6.5 Add, almost immediately, 20 ml of 1 M sodium 
hydroxide via the condenser, rinsing down with 
approximate 20 ml of distilled water. Then transfer 
quantitatively to a 100 ml polypropylene volumetric 
flask and dilute to volume with distilled water. 


J-6.6 Pipette 25 ml of the clear solution prepared 
above into a 100 ml polypropylene beaker, add 25 ml 
TISAB L (solution L) and check pH. If necessary adjust 


14 


to pH 6.4 by addition of approximately | M hydrochloric 
acid or | M sodium hydroxide. Transfer quantitatively 
into a 100 ml volumetric flask and dilute to volume. 


J-6.7 Transfer the contents of 100 ml flask to a clean, 
dry 100 ml polythene beaker, immerse the tips of the 
electrode in the solution while stirring the solution with 
a magnetic stirrer. Ensure that no air bubbles adhere to 
the electrode surfaces. 


J-6.8 Leave until the potential reading is constant (this 
should take two or three minutes). Record the potential 
reading in mV for the test solution. The reading for 
standard fluoride solutions and test solutions should be 
taken simultaneously. 


J-7 CALCULATION 


A graph is plotted for concentration of F- against 
potential mV on a semi-logarithmic paper for standard 
F solutions, The potential mV is plotted on X-axis 
and concentration of Fluoride (mg of ) on Y-axis (on 
logarithmic scale). Read the F concentration in test 
solution for measured mV from this graph. 


Concentration of F` in toothpowder, parts per million = 
2ax10 000 
M 
where 


a= mg of F from calibration graph for test 
solution; and 


M= Mass of sample in g. 


Advanced methods such as Ion Chromatography 
(IC)/Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) can also be 
used for the determination of fluoride ion, provided 
these methods are appropriately validated. 


IS 5383 : 2021 


ANNEX K 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Cosmetics Sectional Committee, PCD 19 


Organization 


Drugs Controller General (INDIA), Delhi 


All India Cosmetic Manufacturers Association, 
Mumbai 


Chemstar Limited, Mumbai 


Cavinkare Private Limited, Chennai 


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 
(CDSCO), Delhi 


Central Drugs Testing Laboratory (CDTL), Chennai 


Consumer Voice, New Delhi 


CSIR Indian Institute of Toxicological Research, 
Lucknow 


Central Drugs Testing Laboratory (CDTL), Mumbai 


Colgate Palmolive (India) Limited, Mumbai 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 


Dabur India Limited, Sahibabad 


Directorate of Food and Drugs Administration, Goa 


Drugs Control Department, Delhi 


Envisbe Solutions Pvt Limited, Mumbai 
Essential Oil Association of India (EOAI), Noida 


Food Safety and Drug Administration, Lucknow 


Food and Drugs Control Administration Gujarat, 
Gandhinagar 


Food and Drugs Administration Haryana, Panchkula 


Food and Drugs Administration Maharashtra, 
Mumbai 


Fragrance and Flavours Association of India, 
(FAFAT), Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr V. G. SOMANI (Chairman) 


Ms KAJAL ANAND 
Dr VIRENDRA V. CHAVAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL JOSHI 


Dr T. KUMAR 
DR GIREESH KUMAR (Alternate I) 
DR S. SANKAR KA.ipas (Alternate II) 


Dr S. P. SHANI 


Ms C. VIJAYA LAKSHMI 
Dr J. UMA MaAneswari (Alternate) 


SHRI H. WADHWA 


DR A. B. PANT 
Dr R. S. Ray (Alternate) 


Dr RAMAN MOHAN SINGH 
SHRIMATI S. U. WARDE (Alternate I) 
SHRIMATI SUJATA S. KAISARE (Alternate II) 


Dr MAnas V. VYAS 
SHRIMATI SHRUTI HARDIKAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI PURUSHOTTAM JADHAV (Alternate II) 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
Dr M. S. Kamata (Alternate) 


DR PRASUN BANDYOPADHYAY 
Dr S. K. LUTHERA (Alternate I) 
SHRI SHIvaJI Rat (Alternate II) 


Ms Jyoti J. SARDESSAI 


Suri A. K. NASA 
SHRI K. R. CHAWLA (Alternate) 


SHRI BENEDICT M. MASCARENHAS 
SHRI AJAY K. JAIN 


DR ANITA BHATNAGAR JAIN 
SHRI DINESH KUMAR TIWARI (Alternate) 


Dr H. G. KosHia 
SHRI V. R. SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDER KUMAR AHOOJA 
SHRI MANMOHAN TANEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI O. S. SADHWANI 


SHRI HASMUKH PATEL 


15 


IS 5383 : 2021 


Organization 


Galaxy Surfactants Limited, Mumbai 


Godrej Consumers Products Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Lever Limited (HUL), Mumbai 
Hygienic Research Institute Private Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission (IPC), Ghaziabad 


ITC R & D Centre, Bengaluru 


Indian Beauty and Hygiene Association (IBHA), 
Mumbai 


Johnson and Johnson Limited, Mumbai 


Kelkar Education Trusts (KETS) Scientific Research 
Centre, Mumbai 


Loreal India Private Limited, Mumbai 


Marico Limited, Mumbai 


Mikasa Cosmetics Limited, Ahmedabad 


Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSME), Delhi 


Ministry of AYUSH, Delhi 
Procter and Gamble, Mumbai 
PETA India, Mumbai 


The Himalaya Drug Company, Bengaluru 


Voluntary Organization In Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE), Delhi 


Bureau of Indian Standards, Jammu 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI R. K. SINGH 
SHRI SAGAR TRAILOKYA (Alternate I) 
SHRI PRAMOD SABAT TRAILOKYA (Alternate II) 


Ms RUPINDER KAUR RAWAT 
Dr MANOJ GAUR (Alternate) 


Ms VRINDA RAJWADE 


Dr JAYASHREE ANAND 
SHRI MANOJ SARKAR (Alternate) 


Dr ANIL KR TEOTIA 
Dr Mano; Kr PANDEY (Alternate) 


DR GURUBASAVARAJA K. M. 
DR JAMES BHASKAR (Alternate I) 
Dr JOHN Bosco STANISLAUS (Alternate II) 


Ms MALATHI NARAYANAN 


DR DILIP TRIPATHI 
SHRI RAJNEESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR S. S. BARVE 


Ms VEENA BALGI 
Ms RuPALI TURAKHIYA (Alternate) 


Dr MITALI HEDGE 
Dr SUDHAKAR MHASKAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI PRABODH S. HALDE (Alternate II) 


Ms TRUPTI PATEL 


DR ARUN KUMAR 
DR IZZATULLAH (Alternate) 


Dr D. C. KATOCH 
SHRI GIRISH PARHATE 


SHRI MANILAL VALLIYATE 
Ms DirTI M. KAPOOR 


DR SUNDARAM RAMACHANDRAN 
DR KRISHNAN SRIRAMAN (Alternate) 


Dr M. A.U. KHAN 


SHRIMATI NISHA BURA 


SHRIMATI NAGAMANI T., SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (PCD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-Officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI D. UMA 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (PCD), BIS 


16 


IS 5383 : 2021 


Decorative And Miscellaneous Cosmetics Subcommittee, PCD 19:4 


Organization 


Regional Drugs Testing Laboratory, Chandigarh 
Arbro Pharmaceuticals Limited, New Delhi 


Colgate Palmolive India Limited, Mumbai 


Consumer Education and Research Centre, 
Ahmedabad 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 


Dabur India Limited, Sahibabad 
Directorate of Drugs Control, West Bengal, Kolkata 


Food and Drug Administration, Mumbai 
Food and Drugs Control Administration, Ahmedabad 


Godrej Consumer Products Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Unilever Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, Ghaziabad 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 
Johnson and Johnson Private Limited, Mumbai 
Koel Colours Private Limited, Mumbai 


Loreal India Private Limited, Mumbai 
Procter and Gamble India, Mumbai 
Reckitt Benckiser India Private Limited, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity 


Representative(s) 


Dr R. A. SINGH (Convenor) 
SHRI SOURAB ARORA 


SHRI MAnNas V. Vyas 
SHRIMATI SHRUTI HARDIKAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI PURUSHOTTAM JADHAV (Alternate II) 


SHRI H. S. TRIPATHI 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
Dr M. S. Kamat (Alternate) 


Dr S. K. LUTHRA 
SHRI PRASUN BANDYOPADHYAY (Alternate I) 
SHRI SHIVAJI Rat (Alternate II) 


SHRI SAJAL KUMAR ROY CHOWDHURY 
SHRI O. S. SADHWANI 


Suri H. G. KOsHIA 
SHRI V. R. SHAH (Alternate) 


DR RUPINDER KAUR RAWAT 
Dr Manos GAUR (Alternate) 


DR VRINDA RAJWADE 


DR ANIL KR TEOTIA 
Dr MANOJ KUMAR PANDEY (Alternate) 


DR AMIT P. PRADEEP 


DR DILIP TRIPATHI 
SHRI RAJNEESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri D. DESAI 
SHRI SHAILENDRA SHRIPANNAVAR (Alternate) 


Ms VEENA BALGI 
Ms RupaLt TURAKHTYA (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH PARHATE 
Dr PoosJA SHARMA 


SHRI VINAY KUMAR SINGH 


17 


( Continued from second cover) 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given at Annex K. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 19 (16525). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


