IS 1191:2003

wm9nm Wa? WI@ f%iw--

dtWi$C19 mm-mikmfm

( WT!?!?-m)
Indian Standard

HYDROMETRIC DETERMINATIONS VOCABULARY AND SYMBOLS ( Second Revision)

--

ICS 01.040.17;

17.120.20

@ BIS 2003

BUREAU
MANAK

OF IN I) I AN

STANDARDS

BHAVAN, *9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 Price Group 12

April 2003

Fluid Flow Measurement

Sectional Committee, WRD 1

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Fluid Flow Measurement Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. This standard was first published in 1959 as IS 1191:1959 `Glossary of terms used in measurement of flow of water in open channels'. This standard was mainly based on the first draft ISO proposal submitted by India. Subsequently deriving assistance from ISO/R 772:1968 `Glossary of terms and symbols used in connection with the measurement of liquid flow with a free surface', the second revision was published in 1971 as IS 1191:1971 `Glossary of terms and symbols used in connection with the measurement of liquid flow with a free surface (first revision)'. In the preparation of this second revision, a great deal of assistance (over 95 percent) has been derived from 1S0 772:1996 `Hydrometric determination -- Vocabulary and symbols'. The title of this standard, therefore has been revised in line with 1S0 772:1996. Apart from this, sediment materials as defined in 7.56 have been c Iassified on the basis of particle size range in accordance with IS 1498:1970 `Classification and identification of soils for general engineering purposes'. Definitions of terms such as `Point integration method' and `Time integration method' for the sediment sampling under 7.16 `Integration method' and of `Range pillars' under 7.55 `Vertical control', not presently covered in 1S0 772:1996 have also been included in this revision. Certain terms with more than one definition, as covered in this standard, are to be used in the context of their application. Further in this standard possibre: a) To standardize the following three principles as adopted in 1S0 772:1996 were followed, wherever

suitable terms and symbols without perpetuating

unsuitable ones.

b) To discard any term or symbol used with differing meanings and to replace that term or symbol by one which has an unequivocal meaning. c) To exclude terms which are self-evident. The terminology entries are presented in systematic order, grouped into sections according to particular methods of determination or in relation to particular subjects. Annex A lists the symbols used in this standard. An alphabetical index is included at the end. The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B.

IS 1191:2003

Indian Standard

HYDROMETRIC DETERMINATIONS VOCABULARY AND SYMBOLS
( Second Revision )
1 SCOPE This standard stipulates symbols used in the determinations. 2 GENERAL TERMS terms, definitions and field of hydrometric

--

2.9 Transverse Flow -- Flow horizontally perpendicular to the main direction of flow parallel to the axis of the open channel(s).
NOTES 1 Transverse flow is frequently associated with secondary flow. 2 Transverse flow in open channel(s) with a curved plan form causes super elevation of the water surface at the outside of the bend.

2.1 Liquid Flow -- Movement of' a volume of a substance that is neither a solid nor a gas, that is practically incompressible, that offers insignificant resistance to change of shape and that flows freely. Example : Water or water with sediment. 2.2 Flow Regime -- State of flow in alluvial streams characterized by abed configuration of ripples, dunes (lower regime), plane bed (transition), standing waves and imtidunes (upper regime).
NOTE -- The lower regime flow is sub-critical; regime flow is super critical. the upper

2.10 Stratification of Flow -- State of a fluid that consists of two or more layers arranged according to their density, the lightest layer being on top and the heaviest at the bottom. 2.11 Critical-Depth critical flow occurs. -- Depth of flow at which

2.12 Critical Velocity -- Velocity at critical flow. 2.13 Channel waterway. -- Deep part of a river or other

2.3 Steady Flow -- Condition in which the discharge does not change in magnitude with respect to time. 2.4 Unsteady Flow -- Condition in which the discharge changes in magnitude with respect to time. 2.5 Uniform Flow -- Flow, in an open channel, in which the depth and velocity remain constant along the open channel.
NOTE -- For uniform flow, the velocity vector is constant along every stream line. Uniform flow is possible only in an open channel of constm cross-section.

NOTE -- The term can be qualified adjectivally to describe a particular type of channel, such as, a low-water channel, a main channel, or an artificial channel.

2.14 Open Channel -- Longitudinal boundary surface consisting of the bed and banks or sides within which the liquid flows with a free surface. 2.15 Canal -- Man-made channel, usually of regular cross-sectional shape. 2.16 Stable Channel -- Open channel in which the bed and the sides remain essentially stable over a substantial period of time in the control reach, and in which the scour and deposition during the rising and falling stages are negligible. 2.17 Unstable Channel -- Open channel control reach that changes frequently significantly. with a and

2.6 Critical Flow -- Flow in an open channel, in which the specific energy is a minimum for a given discharge.
NOTE -- Under this condition the Froude number is equal to unity and small surface disturbances cannot travel upstream.

2.7 less less can

Sub-Critical Flow -- F1OW in an open channel at than critical velocity, that has a Froude number of than unity and in which small surface disturbances travel upstream.

2.18 Tidal Channel -- Open channel in which the flow is subject to tidal action. 2.19 Tidal Waterway -- One or more tidal channels together with the shallows and the banks or sides by which the water at high tide is bounded. 2.20 Estuary -- Partially enclosed body of water in the lower reaches of a river that is freely connected with the sea and which receives fresh water supplies from upland drainage areas. 1

2.8 Super Critical Flow -- Flow in an open channel at more than critical velocity, that has a Froude number of greater than unity, and in which small surface disturbances cannot travel upstream.

IS 1191:2003 2.21 Stream -- Water flowing in an open channel (see 2.23).
NOTE -- By extension: containing it. moving water and the channel

2.34 Thalweg -- Line of greatest depth, and thus the lowest water thread, along the stream channel (see also 2.33). 2.35 Transition Crossover -- Inflection reach between two meander loops in which the main flow crosses from one side of the channel to the other.
NOTE -- The depth of flow in a transition is usually reduced from normal depth.

-

2.22 Current -- Liquid flow in a discemable general direction. 2.23 River channel. -- Steam of water in a natural open

2.24 Alluvial River -- River which flows through alluvium formed from its own deposits.
NOTE -- The sediment carried by an alluvial river, except for the wtish load, is similar to that in the bed.

2.36 Node, Nodal Point, Inflection Point -- Point in a transition at which the sinuous path crosses the mean axis of the meander system.
NOTE -- In a meandering stable channel, the node migrates downstream with the meander loops. Migration can be prevented by tfre creation of a natural or artificial obstruction in the channel.

2.25 Incised River -- River which has cut its channel down through part of the valley floor (see also 2.26). 2.26 Incised River -- River which has formed its channel by a process of degradation (see also 2.25).
NOTE -- The sediment carried by an incised river generally is dissimilar to that in the bed,

2.37 Discharge -- Volume of liquid flowing through a cross-section in a unit time.
NOTE -- This term is not synonymous with flow,

2.27 Braided River -- River characterized by a wide and shallow open channel in which flow passes through a number of small interlaced channels separated by shoals.
NOTES 1 Frequently [here is Iiltle or no erosion of the main banks of a braided river. 2 Generally there is little or no meandering of the main channel of a braided river, but meandering in the minor channels is usual,

2.38 Unit Discharge per Unit Width -- Discharge through a unit width of a section at a given vertical. 2.39 SpecitIc Discharge -- Discharge of catchment (see also 2.40). per unit area

2.40 Specific Discharge -- Discharge corresponding to a specific stage or to a specific gauge height (see also 2.39). 2.41 Stream Gauging -- All of the operations necessary for the measurement of discharge of a stream. 2.42 Discharge Measurement -- Process of measuring the discharge of liquid in an open channel. 2.43 Gauge -- Device installed at a gauging station on a stream/open channel for measuring the level of the surface of the liquid relative to a datum. 2.44 Velocity -- Discharge per unit area. 2.45 Left Bank -- Bank to the left of an observer looking downstream. 2.46 Right Bank -- Bank to the right of an observer looking downstream. 2.47 Invert -- Lowest part of the cross-section natural or an artificial channel. of a

2.28 Reach -- Length of open channel between two defined cross-sections, 2.29 Meandering Channel -- Channel following a sinuous path, characterized by curved flow leading to bank erosion alternating with shoaling. 2.30 Dune -- Large bed form having a triangular profile, a gentle upstream slope and a steep downstream slope.
NOII -- Dunes are formed in quiet flow and thus are out of phase with any water surface disturbance that they may produce. They travel slowly downstream as sand is moved across their comparatively gentle upstream slopes and deposited on their steeper downstream slopes.

2.31 Antidune -- Bed form of a curved symmetrically-shaped sand wave that may move upstream, remain stationary or move downstream.
NOTE -- Arrtidunes are curved in wave train but [hey are in phase wi[h, and interacl strongly with, gmvity water surface waves,

2.32 Ripple -- Small triangular-shaped similar to a dune.

bed form

2.48 Bed Slope, Bottom Slope, Friction Slope (Up Stream) -- Difference in elevation of the bed per unit horizontal distance measured in the direction of flow.
NOTE -- The slope is usually mathematically direction of flow. positive in the

NOTE -- Ripples have much smaller and more uniform amplitudes and lengths than dunes. Ripple wavelengths are less than 0.6 m and wave heights are less than 0.06 m.

2.33 Thalweg -- Line in plan joining the deepest points of stream bed, a channel or a valley (see UISO2.34).
7

2.49 Bed Profiie -- Shape of the bed in a vertical plane.
NOTE--The shape of the bed maybe considered longitudinally or transversely; this should be stated.

IS 1191:2003 2.50 Side Slope -- Ratio of the horizontal to the vertical components of the bank slope unless stated otherwise. 2.51 Surface Slope -- Difference in elevation of the surface bf the stream per unit distance, measured horizontally in the direction of flow. 2.52 Surface Drawdown -- Local lowering of the water surface in an approach channel, caused by acceleration of the flow passing over an obstacle or through a control. 2.53 Fall -- Difference in elevation of the water surface between the extremities of a defined reach at a given instant of time, for example, as recorded at twin-gauge station. 2.54 Top Width -- Width of the open channel measured across the stream at the water surface. 2.55 Wetted Perimeter -- Extent of wetted contact between a stream of flowing water and its containing open channel, measured in a direction normal to the flOW (We C&) 2.56). 2.56 Wetted Perimeter -- Wetted boundary of an open channel at a specified section (see also 2.55). 2.57 Cross-Section (of a Stream) -- Section normal to the mean direction of flow bounded by the free surface and wetted perimeter of the stream. 2.58 Gauging Section, Measuring Section -- Section in which discharge measurements are taken. 2.59 Measuring Reach -- Reach of open channel selected for measurement of hydraulic parameters. 2.60 Converging Reach -- Reach in which the cross-sectional area gradually decreases in the direction of flow. 2.61 Expanding Reach -- Reach in which the cross-sectional area gradually increases in the direction of flow. 2.62 Flood Mark, Trash Line, Debris Line -- Traces of any kind left on the banks or obstacles or flood plain by a flood (see 7.6).
NOTE -- The flood mark maybe used to determine the highest level attained by the water surface during a flood.

2.66 Mean Velocity (at a Cross-Section) -- Velocity at a given cross-section of a stream, obtained by dividing the discharge by the cross-sectional area of the stream at that section. 2.67 Mean Velocity (of a Reach) -- Velocity calculated by dividing the discharge by the average cross-sectional area of the stream along the reach. 2.68 Velocity of Approach, Approach Velocity -- Mean velocity at a cross-section at a specified distance upstream of a measuring device. 2.69 Velocity Head -- Head due to velocity, equal to the vertical height through which a fall under the influence of gravity alone would give the liquid a velocity equal to the actual velocity, expressed as the square of the velocit y divided by twice the acceleration due to gravity.
NOTE -- The velocity head is the kinetic energy of the flow (total head line).

2.70 Gauged Head -- Level of the water surface, or stage, related to the inverse of the flume or weir crest level as datum, 2.71 Piezometric Head -- Elevation of the free surface plus the pressure head; at any cross-section, it is the total head above the datum minus the velocity head at that cross-section. 2.72 Total Head, Energy Head -- S urn of the elevation of the free surface above the horizontal datum of a section plus the velocity head based on the mean velocity at that section (see 2.78 and Fig. 6 ).
NOTE -- The total head, expression: H, is given by the following

H=h+ct where h = head of liquid level;

E 2g

V = meanvelocity of the liquid:
~ g = = ~oriolis ~~effi~ient; and acceleration due to gravity.

The Coriolis coefficient (cz> 1) takes into account the non-uniform velocity dktribution. In many cases, tx is assumed to equal unity.

2.73 Total Head Line, Energy Head Line -- Plot of the total head in the direction of flow (see Fig. 6). 2.74 Total Head Level -- Sum of the elevation of the free surface plus the velocity head based on the mean velocity at the section. 2.75 Energy Gradient -- Difference in total head per unit horizontal distance measured in the direction of ffow. 2.76 Energy Loss, Head Loss -- Difference in total head between two cross-sections in the direction of flow (see also 2.77).

2.63 Normal Velocity Distribution -- Velocity distribution in a straight open channel of uniform cross-section which is of sufficient length to develop uniform, resistance-controlled flow. 2.64 Surface Velocity -- Velocity of a liquid at its surface at a given point. 2.65 Mean Velocity Depth -- Depth below the surface at which the mean velocity on a vertical occurs. 3

IS 1191:2003 2.77 Energy Loss, Head Loss -Decrease in total head, expressed in units of height, due to energy dissipation (see also 2.76). 2.78 Specitic Energy -Sumofthe elevation of the free surface above the bed and the velocity head based on the mean velocity at that section (see 2.72). 2.79 Stage, Gauge Height, Liquid Level -- Elevation of the free surface of a stream, lake or reservoir relative to a specified datum (see 2.116). 2.80 Gauge Height of Zero Flow -- Highest point on the thalweg downstream from the gauge in a natural or artificial channel. 2.81 Gauge Height of Zero Flow Line -- Line on a shift diagram where the sum of the stage plus the shift adjustment is equal to the gauge height at zero flow for the rating. 2.82 Stage-Discharge Relation -- Curve, equation or table that expresses the relation between the stage and the discharge in an open channel at a given cross-section, for a given condition of steady, rising or falling stage (see Fig. 1). 2.87 Gauging Station -- Site selected on a stream, river or open channel at which systematic measurements of water level or discharge, or both, are made. 2.88 Single-Gauge Station -- Gauging station at which stage records from a single gauge are adequate to establish a stage discharge relation. 2.89 Twin-Gauge Station -- Gauging station at which two waterlevel gauges define a reach for measurement of water surface slopes as an essential parameter for establishing a stage-discharge relation. 2.90 Control -- Physical properties of a crosssection or a reach of an open channel, either natural or artificial, that govern the relation between stage and discharge at a location in the open channel. 2.91 Rating -- Relation between discharge and other variables, or the taking of observations and making of calculations needed to establish the relation. 2.92 Calibration Rating (of a Station) Establishment of a discharge relation with measured variables. -- the

3-

2.93 Unit Fall Rating -- Relation between stage and discharge when the fall is equal to 1 m. 2.94 Discontinuous Rating -- Rating that exhibits a change in shape resulting from change from a lower to upper flow regime in all or part of the control reach.
NOTE -- The change in shape is usually abrupt.

E. : $ W

2-

1-

2.95 Shift Diagram -- Curve or set of curves expressing the relation betwetm stage and shift adjustment for a given rating. 2.96 AtTlux -- Rise in liquid level immediately upstream of and due to an obstruction.
1 I

100

200 /

300

USCHARGE, m 3 s

2.97 Backwater -- Afflux upstream from a given location on an open channel resulting from impedance offered to flow. NOTE -- Backwater maybe caused by momentary stcrage in a
channel.

FIG.

1 STAGE-DISCHARGE

RELATION

2.83 Stage Hydrography -- Graphical representation of chunges in stage with respect to time. 2.84 Discharge Hydrography -- Graphical representation of changes in discharge with respect to time. 2.85 Shift Adjustment -- Correction made to the recorded stage to compensate for vertical movement of the bed or for shifting of the control reach. 2.86 Cumulative Volume Curve, Mass Discharge Curve -- Curve in which the cumulative volume of flow or flow mass is plotted against time.

2.98 Backwater Curve -- Profile of water surface, concave upwards, along an open channel, from the raised surface at an obstruction or confluence to the point upstream at which the flow is at normal depth.
NOTE -- The term is also used to denote all liquid surface profiles that are non-uniform with respect to distance upstream or downstream. However, this usage is deprecated.

2.99 Drawdown Curve -- Profile of the liquid surface when its surface slope exceeds the bed slope.
NOTE -- From the point at which the bed slope increases, or drops abruptly, to the point at which normal depth occurs the profile along an open channel is convex upwards in an upstream direction and concave upwards in a downstream direction.

2.100 Depth -- Linear dimension measured in the vertical direction from the water surface to the bed. 4

IS 1191:2003 2.101 Normal Depth -- Depth from the water surface to the bottom grade line of a channel, for uniform flow.
NOTE -- Normal depth is a function of the geometry, slope and roughness of the channel and of the rate of discharge.

2.115 Stage Gauge -- Device installed for measuring the level of the surface of the liquid relative to a gauge datum. 2.116 Gauge Datum -- Elevation of the zero of the gauge, to which the level of the liquid surface is referred.
NOTE -- The gauge datum is related to a benchmark.

2.102 Length -- Linear dimension direction of the stream tlow. 2.103 Width, Breadth measured perpendicularly stream.

measured in the

-- Linear dimension to the direction of the

2.117 Benchmark -- Permanent mark, the elevation of which should be related, where practicable, to a national datum. 2.118 Gauge Well, Stilling Well -- Chamber open to the atmosphere and connected with the stream in such a way as to permit the measurement of the stage in relatively still water. 2.119 Stilling Tube -- Tube connected with the stream in such a way as to permit the measurement of the stage in relatively still liquid. 2.120 Float Well -- Stilling well in which a float device is used. 2.121 Rugosity Coefficient, Roughness Coefficient -- Coefficient that characterizes the roughness of the wetted perimeter and which is taken into account when computing the resistance to flow. 2.122 Friction Coefficient -- Coefficient used to calculate the energy gradient caused by friction. 2.123 Froude Number, Fr -- Mean velocity divided by the square root of the product of the mean depth and the acceleration due to gravity: F,=% (gD) where ii t? E = mean velocity of the liquid; = acceleration due to gravity; and = mean depth of the cross-section.

2.104 Frazil Ice -- Fine spicttles, plates or discoids of ice suspended in water that are generally formed by the super cooling of turbulent water.
NOTE -- Fmzil ice may float or accumulate under ice cover or adhere to the stream bed as anchor ice.

2.105 Anchor Ice -- Submerged ice found attached to the bed, irrespective of the nature of its formation. 2.106 Rime Ice -- White mass of titty ice crystals or granular ice tufts formed, on exposed objects, due to atmospheric moisture. 2.107 Surface Ice, Ice Cover, Ice Sheet -- Layer of ice formed on the surface of a lake or river. 2.108 Slush Ice -- Mass of loose] y packed anchor ice that is released from the bottom, or frazil ice that floats or accumulates under surface ice. 2.109 Peak Stage -- Maximum instantaneous during a given period (see 2.43 and 6.6). stage

2.110 Friction, Drag -- Boundary shear resistance that opposes the flow of a liquid. 2.111 Conveyance Factor, K -- Conveyance (deprecated) carrying capacity of a channel: K = where
Qj

factor

1/2

Q
s

= total discharge, and
= bed slope.
from

NOTE -- The Froude number is dimensionless.

2.112 Hydraulic Jump -- Sudden transition supercritical flow to sub-critical flow.

2.124 Reynolds Number, Re -- Ratio of the forces of inertia to forces of viscosity. For open channels: --

NOTE -- Immediate y upstream of Lhe hydraulic jump, the velocity and the depth are, respectively, greater and less than their critical values; beyond the jump the velocity and the depth are respectively less and greater than their critical values.

2.113 Hydraulic Mean Depth, Mean Depth -- Area of the cross-section of water flowing in an open channel divided by the width of the open channel at the water surface. 2.114 Hydraulic Radius -- Cross-sectional area of water flowing in an open channel divided by the length of the wetted perimeter at that cross-section. 5

mean velocity of the liquid; mean depth of the cross-section; kinematic viscosity of the liquid.
NOTE -- The Reynolds number is dimensionless.

and

2.125 Weber Number, We -- Ratio of the forces of inertia to surface tension forces.

IS 1191:2003
For

open channels:

2.138 Power -- Time-rate of transferring energy or of transforming energy, or of doing work (see 2.139). 2.139 Work -- Transfer of energy expressed as the product of a force and the distance through which its point of application moves in the direction of the force.

where P= 7= 5= 0= density of the liquid; mean velocity of the liquid; mean depth of the cross-section; surface tension of the liquid,

2.140 Hardware with a system.

-- Tangible equipment

associated

NOTE -- The Weber number is dimensionless.

2.141 Software -- Intangible element of a system which, when applied to the hardware, enables the system to perform in the desired manner. 2.142 Firmware -- Element of hardware in which its associated software is integrated as a stage in its manufacture.
NOTE -- In operation, the hardware together as a fixed entity. and the software act

2.126 Telemetry -- Data or information acquisition system in which the measurement facility is sufficiently remote from the location of data presentation that a system of data transmissions is necessary. 2.127 Remote Sensing (Hydrometry) -- Acquisition of data or information on some property of an object or phenomenon by a sensor which is significantly remote from the object or phenomenon. NOT-ES 1 Common usage of this term usually implies that tbe sensor is
mounted in an aircraft or in a space vehicle. 2 It is recommended that tbe term not be applied when the sensor merely is not in contact with the object or phenomenon.

2.143 Realtime -- Pertaining to the processing of data by a computer in connection with another process outside the computer according to time requirements imposed by the outside process. 2.144 Free Surface Flow -- Flow within a closed conduit, under gravity, and normally having a free surface.
NOTE -- Where tbe flow exceeds the free surface capacity of the conduit, the flow will become surcharged with the consequent dk+appearance of the free surface. Instances of surcharging of short duration normally do not affect the overall concept of free surface flow in closed conduits.

2.128 Remote Telemetry Station -- Al 1 the facilities necessary to accept or to acquire measured data and to transmit the data from a hydrometric station without human intervention. 2.129 Remote Telemetry Unit -- Set of equipment which acquires the input of signals from sensors and status indicators, and performs all the processes required to present a data message to a communication link. 2.130 Redundancy -- Employment of extra facilities, each capable of performing the same function, in order to improve the reliability of a particular function. 2.131 Encoding specific code. -- Process of converting data to a

3 VELOCITY-AREA

METHODS

3.1 Velocity-Area Method -- Method of discharge determination deduced from the area of the cross-section, bounded by the wetted perimeter and the free surface, and the integration of the component velocities in the cross-section. 3.2 Slope-Area Method -- Indirect method of the discharge determination in a reach which is based on the surface slope, the reach roughness, the wetted perimeters and the flow areas of the various wetted cross-sections in the reach. 3.3 Mean Direction of Flow -- Direction in which the summation of the component velocity elements in a cross-section is a maximum when the components are taken along that direction. 3.4 Vertical measurements -- Vertical line on which velocity or depth measurements are made.

2.132 Parity Check -- Addition of an extra bit so that the total number of bits in a sample is either always even or always odd. 2.133 Code -- Set of rules which specifies the format in which data may be represented. 2.134 System -- Set of elements organized to pet-form a set of designated functions in order to achieve the desired results. 2.135 Data, Raw Data -- Output resulting directly ftotn the measurement of variables. 2.136 Information interpreting data. -- Result of analyzing or

3.5 Drift -- Distance that a measuring boat travels during the time taken to make a velocity observation (see also 3.6). 3.6 Drift -- Distance that a current-meter assembly is carried downstream when used with a flexible suspension (see also 3.5). 3.7 Drift Velocity -- Velocity in the direction of the drift current. 6

2.137 Energy -- Quantity characterizing, of a system to do work (see 2.138).

the ability

IS 1191:2003 3.8 Period of Pulsation -- Average period of a cycle of pulsation during which the velocity in the cross-section fluctuates between limiting high and low values. 3.9 Vertical Velocity Curve -- Curve showing the relation between depth and velocity along a vertical line in a specified section of a stream (see Fig. 2). 3.10 Velocity Vertical Gradient -- Change in velocity per unit distance along the vertical velocity curve. 3.11 Vertical Velocity Coefficient -- Coefficient applied to a single, or an equivalent single, velocity determination at any depth on a vertical to infer the mean velocity on that vertical. Sounding -- Operation of measuring the depth the free surface to the bed.

3.12 & --. ------ from

3.13 Air Line Correction -- Correction to the sounding line measurement applied to that part of the sounding line above the liquid surface (see Fig. 3). 3.14 Wet Line Correction -- Correction to the sounding line measurement applied to that part of the sounding line below the liquid surface (see Fig. 3). 3.15 Reference Gauge -- Stage gauge linked to a specified datum. normally

3.16 Reference Current-Meter -- Current-meter that is immersed at a fixed position in the cross-section during the discharge measurement.
NOTE -- For slight change in discharge during the gauging operation it is assumed that the change in velocity indicated by the reference current-meter is proportional to the change in discharge.

1

VELOCITY, FIG.

mk
CURVE

2 VERTICAL

VELOCITY

3.17 Standard Current-Meter -- Calibrated current-meter used as a basis of comparison for other current-meters.

11 \
I I 1 I I ,_#J ..-- --_-- ----. I I I I I I

,

/kl, --.. -- -- _ -L

I
! I I 1

KEY LINE M,,AIR

CORRECTION

DIRECTION ~

OF FLOW

\\

12 i
I

I I
~ DRIFT

-

\ !
\ 12', �, \ \ \

kl ~ WET LINE CORR

\\

\

FIG.

3 SOUNDING LINE CORRECTION

7

IS 1191:2003 3.18 Integration Method (Velocity-Area Measurement) -- Method of measuring the velocity along a vertical, involving the raising and lowering of a current-meter at a constant rate through the entire depth of the vertical. 3.19 Point Method -- Method of measuring the velocity along a vertical by placing a current-meter at a number of designated points on the vertical.
NOTE -- The velocity is usually measured at one, two, three, five or six points on the vertical.

3.27 Cubature -- Numerical technique for computing discharges in a tidal channel at a cross-section from the rates of change in volume of water up to the tidal limit, with algebraic allowance for the fresh water discharges entering the channel.
NOTE--The maximum volume is usually that Occurnng at high water of spring tide.

3.20 Float Gauging -- Measurement of velocity of a stream by means of a float or velocity rod. 3.21 Moving Boat Method -- Method of measuring discharge from a boat by traversing the stream along the measuring section while continuously measuring velocity, depth and distance travelled (and also angle of current velocity in one of the moving boat methods). 3.22 Channel Storage -- Generally, the volume of liquid contained in an open channel at a given instant; specifically, the volume contained in a defined reach at a given instant, which is function of the mean depth of flow in the reach. 3.23 Mean Section Segment -- Area bounded by two consecutive verticals in a cross-section, the bed of the open channel and the water surface (see Fig. 4). 3.24 Mid-Section Segment -- Area at a vertical defined by the depth at that vertical multiplied by one-half of the distance between the preceding and succeeding verticals (see Fig. 4). 3.25 Panel -- That part of the surface of the stream enclosed between the corresponding traces of segments in adjacent cross-sections (see Fig. 4). 3.26 Storage Curve -- Curve depicting the volume of stored water plotted against stage or time.

3.28 Looped Stage-Discharge Curve, Hysteresis of the Stage-Discharge Relation -- Effect on the stage-discharge relation at a gauging station where, for the same gauge height, the discharge on the rising stage is different from that on the falling stage (see Fig. 5). 3.29 Sensitivity of the Stage-Discharge Relation -- Measure of the change in stage of gauging station due to a change in discharge.
NOTE -- When a small increase in discharge produces a relatively large increase in stage, the relation is said to be sensitive. When a large increase in discharge produces a relatively small increase in stage, the relation is said to be non-sensitive.

3.30 Stilling Well Lag -- Difference at a given instant between the channel stage and the stilling well stage, during conditions of rising and falling stages in a channel. 3.31 Normal Fall Stage-Discharge Relation, Normal Fall Method -- Relationship between stage and discharge established graphically from a number of distinct sets of measurements of stage, discharge and fall, at a gauging station subject to variable slope, so as to define the condition of minimum backwater in term of the upstream gauge. 3.32 Constant Fall Stage-Discharge Relation, Constant Fall Method -- Relationship established by graphical interpolation between a number of distinct sets of measurements of stage, discharge and fall, recorded at a gauging station subject to variable slope, so as to define those pairs of stage and discharge

RTICAL

MEAN

SECTION

SEGMENT~

~

MIDSECTION

SEGMENT FIG. 4 GEOMETRICDEFINITIONS

8

IS 1191:2003

, /,9
FALLING STAGE ,R // > `/ E id" c92 s u) / `/ //
/ /-

/

3

/

/' / [-//
1

RISING STAGE

/ K
J 1 I

100.

200 DISCHARGE,m 3 /
s

300

FIG.5

LOOPED

STAGE-DISCHARGE

CURVE

measurements same value.

for which the measured

fall has the

3.33 Fall Stage-Discharge Relation, Slope Stage-Discharge Relation -- Family of curves that expresses the relationship between the free water surface slope, stage and discharge in an open channel in a given reach subject to variable backwater. 3.34 Tide -- Periodic rise and fall of water due principally to the gravitational attraction of the sun and the moon. 3.35 Ebb Tide -- Occurrence of falling water surface of a tide. 3.36 Ebb Current -- Seaward movement of water along a tidal channel. 3.37 Flood Tide -- Occurrence surface of a tide. of rising water

3.40 Neap Tide -- Tide of small amplitude, occurring twice during a lunar month near the time of quadrature of the moon with the sun, that is when the resultant of the attractive forces acting upon the earth is at a minimum. 3.41 H@ Water (Tidal) -- State of tide when the water is highest for any given tidal cycle. 3.42 Low Water (Tidal) -- State of the tide when the water is lowest for any given tidal cycle. 3.43 Ebb Volume -- Total discharge of an ebb tide. 3.44 Flood Volume (Tidal) -- Total discharge of a flood tide. 3.45 Tidal Amplitude -- One-half of the difference in height between consecutive high water and low water, hence half the tide range. 3.46 Tidal Cycle -- Period that includes a complete set of tide conditions or characteristics, such as, a tidal day. 3.47 Tidal Day -- Interval between two upper transits of the moon over a local meridian.
NOTE -- Approximately 24,84 h.

3.38 Flood Current (Tidal) -- Landward movement of waler along a tidal channel. 3.39 Spring Tide -- Tide of large amplitude, occurring twice during the lunar month, when the resultant of the attractive forces of the sun and the moon acting upon the earth is at a maximum.
9

IS 1191:2003 3.48 Duration of Tide -- Time completion of one tidal cycle. taken for the 3.56 Current-Meter water velocity. 4 NOTCHES, -- Instrument for measuring

NOTE -- Usually 12,42 h for a semidiurnal tide or 24,84 h for a diurnal tide.

WEIRS AND FLUMES

3.49 Tidal Prism -- Volume of water that flows into a tidal channel on the flood tide. 3.50 Tidal Range -- Difference in level between high water and low water of a tide.
NOTE -- The range is specific to a particular tide if consecutive high and low waters are used; otherwise, the range can refer to ex[remes of high and low waters over any specified period of [ime.

4.1 Approach Channel -- Reach of the channel upstream of the gauging structure in which suitable flow conditions have to be established to ensure correct gauging. 4.2 Straightening Vane, Guide Vane, Baffle -- Device placed in the approach channel to improve flow conditions. 4.3 Bathe -- Wall or block placed downstream of a structure to dissipate energy or to cause improved velocity distribution. 4.4 Control Block, Baflle Pier, Energy-Breaking Block -- Block constructed in a channel or stilling basin to increase turbulence and thereby dissipate the energy of water flowing at high velocity. See Fig. 6 for application to a weir construction.

3.51 Diurnal Inequality -- Difference in heights and duration of the two successive high waters or two successive low waters of each day (see also 3.52). 3.52 Diurnal Inequality -- Difference in speed and direction of the two flood currents or the two ebb curt-ents of each day (see also 3.51). 3.53 Seiche -- Oscillation of the surface of a liquid caused mainly by winds and variations in atmospheric pressure. 3.54 Density Current -- Phenomenon of gravity flow of a liquid relative to another liquid, or of relative flow within a liquid medium due to difference in density (see 3.55). 3.55 Salt-Water Wedge -- Wedge like intrusion of a large tnass of salt water flowing in from the sea under the fresh water in a tidal waterway.

4.5 Weir -- Overflow structure that maybe used for controlling upstream surface level or for measuring discharge or for both (see Fig. 6). 4.6 Thin-Plate Weir -- Weir constructed of a vertical thin plate in such a manner that the nappe springs clear of the crest when operated within specified limits (see Fig. 7). 4.7 Thin-Plate Notch Weir -- Weir whose crest is a notch cut in a thin plate (see Fig. 8).
JUMP HYDRAULIC

WEIR BLOCK

vt-r-44----

TOTAL

HEAD

LINE

OF FLOW

U i\

. .

-.---

J

-*

CONTROL BLOCK

J"

STILLING

BASIN 1

FIG.

6 WEIR

~

NAPPE

-----

-

FIG. 7 THIN-PLATE

WEIR

10

IS 1191:2003
THIN-PLATE NOTCH WEIR

I
RECTANGULAR

1
TRIANGLMR (V-NOTCH)

1
TRAPEZOIDAL

1
CIRCUtAR

FIG.8 THIN-PLATEN� TCHWEIR 4.8 Long-Base WeirWeirofdimensions suchthat a section through the block forming it has a horizontal longitudinal dimension at bed level equal to or greater than the maximum operating head. 4.9 Short-Crested Weir -- Weir of dimensions such that a section through the block forming it has a horizontal longitudinal dimension at bed level equal to or smaller than the maximum operating head. 4.10 Broad-Crested Weir -- Weir of crest length in the direction of flow such that critical flow occurs on the crest of the weir (see Fig. 9). 4.11 Triangular-Profile Weir -- Long-base weir with J triunguiar longitudinal profile (see Fig. 10). . 4.12 Flat-V Weir -- Weir whose crest takes the form of a shallow V when viewed in the direction of flow (see Fig. 11). 4.13 Compound Weir -- Weir containing two or more sections that may be of different types and/or dimensions. 4.14 Compound Structure -- Series of weirs and/or flumes disposed across the width of an open channel and separated by divide walls. 4.15 Full-Width Weir [Suppressed Weir (Deprecated)] -- Weir whose crest fills the width of the channel in which it is placed, thus eliminating side contraction of the stream.

RECTANGULAR

ROUND- NOSE

--
TRAPEZOIDAL

V-SHAPED

a) LONGITUDINALPRdFILE

. \ k

b) CROSS-SECTION OVER CREST

FIG. 9 BROAD-CRESTEDWEIR 11

IS 1191:2003

v

LONGITUDJ)qAL PROFILE
FIG. 10 TRIANGULAR-PROFILE WEIR

FIG. 11 FLNI'-V WEIR 4.16 Weir Block, Weir Body -- Part of a weir lying between the abutments and over which the water flows (see Fig. 6). 4.17 Weir Abutment, Abutment, Wing Wall -- Wall at the side of a channel, genemlly normal to the axis of the weir, against which the weir terminates. 4.18 Divide Wall -- Wall running in the direction of flow and separating the individual sections of a compound measuring structure. 4.19 Glacis -- Sloping downstream block and continuation of the crest. face of a weir Flume, Critical-Depth 4.22 Standing-Wave Flume -- Measurement flume of dimensions which produce critical flow in the throat and in which the measurement of only the upstream water permits the calculation of the discharge. 4.23 Short-Throated Flume -- Measuring flume having a substantially shorter throat length as critical-depth or compared with venturi, standing-wave flumes (see also 4.24). 4.24 Short-Throated Flume -- Measuring flume with a throat that does not include a parallel-walled section (see also 4.23). 4.25 ParShall Flume -- Measuring flume having a converging entrance section with a level floor, a short throat section with a floor inclined downwards at a gradient of 3:8, and a diverging exit section with a floor inclined upwards at a gradient of 1 :6 (see Fig. 13).

4.20 Flume -- Artificial open channel with clearly specified shape and dimensions that may be used for measurement of flow. 4.21 Venturi Flume -- Measuring flume containing a constriction in which, in principle, a measurement of two water levels, one upstream and one either at or downstream from the constriction, allows a calculation of the discharge (see Fig. 12).

12

IS 1191:2003

`UBCR'T'CALFL"W7 *'"'"AT+ T'S"BCR'T'C
CRITICAL FLOW~ L SUPERCRITICAL FLOW

LONGITUDINAL

PROFILE

PLAN

FIG. 12 VENTURI FLUME

LEVEL FLOOR ~
\

14
1---

1

CREST

f

PARTI ALLY `UBMERGED FLOW

DIRECTION OF FLOW -

\

f h

b c
0 4

A-A

TA
L_ ALTERNATIVE 45 WING WALL

T

A

PIAN

FIG. 13 PARSHALLFLUME 13

IS 1191:2003 4.26 Saniiri Flume -- Measuring flume with a converging entrance section having a level floor with a fall at its downstream end and vertical walls to join it to the downstream channel (see Fig. 14). 4.27 Throat -- Minimum cross-sectional a flume. area within 4.31 Drowned Flow, Non-Modular Flow -- Flow, over or through a structure, which is drowned when it is affected by changes in the level downstream. 4.32 Submergence Ratio -- Ratio of the downstream total head to the upstream total head over a weir. 4.33 Double Gauging --Measurement of two simultaneous but independent heads to facilitate measurement in the drowned flow range. 4.34 Nappe -- Jet formed by the flow over a weir (see Fig. 7). 4.35 Clinging Nappe -- Nappe that maintains contact with the downstream face of a weir. 4.36 Unconfined Nappe -- Jet formed by the flow where the guide walls of the structure end at the crest (or at the edge), thus permitting free lateral expansion of the flow.

NOrE -- The throat maybe rectangular, trapezoidal, U-shaped [Jr UI'another specially designed shape. 4.28 Stilling Basin -- Basin constructed downstream of a structure to dissipate the energy of fast-flowing water and to protect the bed and banks from erosion (see Fig. 6). 4.29 Modular Flow -- Flow over or through a structure when the upstream level is independent of [he downstream level for a given discharge. 4.30 Modular Limit -- Submergence ratio for flow over a weir at which the upstream level just begins to be affected by the downstream level for a given discharge.
I

I I

II
DIRECTION OF FLOW

A-A

h,

IT

STILLING WELLS

T
A

PLAN

FIG. 14 SANHRI FLUME

14

IS 1191:2003 4.37 Fully Ventilated Nappe, Fully Aerated Nappe -- Nappe springing clear of the downstream face of the weir with atmospheric pressure on the underside of the nappe. 4.38 Fully Developed Contraction (of a Nappe) -- Contraction that occurs when further increase in the depth or width of the approach channel no longer affects the nappe. 4.39 Separation Pocket -- Near-cylindrical volume of slow-moving water immediately downstream ofthe crest of a triangular-profile weir (see also 4.40). 4.40 Separation Pocket -- Region of re-circulating flow at a structure caused by separation of the main Ilow from the structure at a corner or at a point of large curvature (see also 4.39).
NOTE -- This phenomenon can occur at broad-crested weirs which do not have rounded upstream or downstream corners or which do not have a crest of sufficient length in the direction of tlow,

to that of the tracer (see 5.14 and 5.15).

at the sampling cross-section

5.3 Constant-Rate Injection Method -- Method of measuring the discharge in which a tracer of known concentration is injected at a constant and known rate at one cross-section and its dilution is measured at another section sufficiently downstream that complete mixing has taken place. 5.4 Integration Method, Dilution Gauging (Dilution Methods) -- Method of measuring the discharge in which a known quantity of tracer is injected over a short time at one cross-section and its dilution is measured at another cross-section sufficiently downstream that complete mixing has taken place, over a time period sufficient to allow ail the tracer to pass that cross-section, so that the mean concentration of tracer during the sampling time can be determined (see 3.18). 5.5 Multiple Injection -- Simultaneous injection of tracer at several points in the injection cross-section, with the aim of improving transverse mixing in a given downstream measuring reach. 5.6 Background Concentration -- Concentration of the tracer substance, or a substance that reacts like the tracer in the detection scheme used, in the liquid in the channel, not attributable to the injection of the tracer for the gauging, that is, present upstream or before the injection. 5.7 Constant Level Tank -- Equipment for the injection of a concentrated solution at constant rate.
NOTE--Using an overftow weir, a constant head is maintained above a selected nozzle or ori fice.

4.41 Control Section -- Section which, over a specified range of flow, renders the upstream elevation of the liquid surface independent of the liquid level downstream, and which determines the depth, velocity and slope for a given discharge.
NOIE-- Under these conditions the discharge can be described as a function of the upsweam liquid level. 4.42

Height of Weir -- Height from the upstream bed to the lowest point of the crest.

4.43 Head Over the Weir -- Elevation of the water surface above the lowest point of the crest, measured at a point sufficiently upstream to be unaffected by the drawdown of the weir.
NOIT -- The dis[ance upstream of the point of measurement depends on dlc type of weir used.

5.8 Mariotte Vessel -- Equipment for injection of a concentrated solution at constant rate.
NOTE -- Constant-rate injection is achieved by; means of an airtight vessel provided with an orifice plate or nozzle at its bottom portion. The liquid flows, through the constriction and air enters the vessel through a tube, maintaining atmospheric pressure at tbe lower end of the tube, set at a determined height above the constriction. The head on the constriction and consequently the injection rate remain constant, independent of the liquid level in the vessel.

4.44 Discharge Coefficient dischat-ge equation.

-- Coefficient

in the

4.45 Downstream Total Head -- Elevation of the total head relative to the flume invert level or weir crest level, measured downstream of the structure. 4.46 Upstream Total Head -- Elevation of the total head relative to the flume invert level or the weir crest level, measured upstream of the structure. 5 DILUTION METHOD

5.9 Floating Siphon -- Equipment for injection of a concentrated solution at constant rate.
NOTE -- Tbe solution is taken from a vessel by means of a siphon that is fixed on a float. The lower end of the siphon is fitted with an orifice plate or nozzle. The head on the constriction. And consequently the injection rate, remains constant, independent of the level of the liquid in the vessel.

5.1 Tracer -- Ion, compound or radionuclide introduced into a flow system to follow the behaviour of some component of that system.
NOTE -- It is necessary that the tracer, which can be observed, behave in exacdy the same fwhion as the component to be followed, whose behaviour cannot easily be observed.

5.2 Dilution Gauging -- Any gauging method in which the discharge is deduced from the determination of the ratio of the concentration of the injected tracer 15

5.10 Mixing Length (Constant-Rate Injection Method)-- Minimum length of the reach between the injection cross-section and cross-sections where the tracer concentration is homogeneous in the section. 5.11 Mixing Length (Integration Method) -- Minimum length of the reach between the injection

IS 1191:2003 cross-section and cross-section where transverse mixing is such that the integrul of the tracer concentration as a function of time is constant throughout the section. 5.12 Degree of Mixing -- Extent to which mixing hw+ been achieved in a cross-section downstream of the point of injection of the tracer.
NOTE -- The dcgrte of mixing immediately downstream of an illjcc(l(ln is nearly zero. Complete ( 100 percent) mixing does noI occur until further downstream.

5.22 Classified Worker -- Person occupationally exposed to ionizing radiation, who is registered and is under medical surveillance.
NOTE-- A classified worker is permitted to enter an area where the radiation dose rate exceeds the threshold i reposed by national legislation.

5.23 Electronvolt, eV -- Kinetic energy acquired by an electron in passing through a potential difference of 1 V in vacuum. 1 eV= 1.60x 10-t9J
NOTE -- The following multiples are employed: 1 keV = t03eV: 1 MeV = 106eV.

5.13 Adsorption -- Fixation of an ion (for example, a [rticer) from solution on to the surface of a solid (for example, sediment in suspension). Dilution Factor Ratio, 5.14 Dilution (Constant-Rate Injection Method) -- Ratio between the concentmtion of the injected tracer solution and the concentration of added tracer detected at the satmpling cross-section when steady conditions have been reached. 5.15 Dilution Ratio, Dilution Factor (Integration Method) -- Ratio between the concentration of the injec[ecl tracer solution and the tnean, over the time of Lracer passage, of the concentration of added tracer detected at the sampling cross-section. 5.16 Sampling Cross-Section, Sampling Station -- Cross-section of an open channel, downstream of the injection cross-section, at which samples are taken or in which concentration is directly measured. 5.17 Standard Solution -- Reference solution containing a selected concentration of dissolved subs(ance. 5.18 Conductivity Method -- Technique for determining the concentration of the tracer by means ot electrical conductivity. 5.19 Becquerel, lBq=l s-* Bq

5.24 Geometric Efficiency -- Ratio of the number of particles or photons that enter the sensitive volume of a detector to the total number of particles or photons emitted by a radioactive source. 5.25 Half-Life -- Time required for the activity of a radioactive substance to decrease to one-half of its initial value. 5.26 Isotope -- One of two or more atoms which have the same number of protons in their nucleus, and hence the same atomic number, but differ in the number of neutrons, and hence in their atomic weights.
NOTE -- Their chemical properties are identical. 5.27

Rad

1 rad = 10-2 J/kg of absorbent material.
NOTE -- It is used as a unit of absorbed dose of radiation.

5.28 Radioactive Isotope, Radioisotope -- Nuclide whose nucleus is unstable and which, on becoming stable, emits energy in the form of a- or ~-particles, ~or X-rays. 5.29 Radioisotopic [Isotopic] Solution -- Solution containing radioactive isotopes. 5.30 Rontgen, R -- Unit of exposure, corresponding to the production of two ions of opposite charges in 1 kg of air under normal temperature and pressure conditions.
NOTE -- Exposure is expressed where t R = 2.58 x tO-4 C/kg. in coulombs per kilogram,

Noms 1 `rhc becquerel is the special name for second to the ~wcr
minus one, used as the S1 unit of volumetric radioactivity: it has replficed the curie (Ci), where 1 Ci = 3.7 x 10'0 Bq (exactly). 2 Ihc Iollowing Mulliples ore used: I kBq = 1(13Bq ; 1 MBq = 1($ By; 1 Guy= log Bq,

5.31 Scintillator -- Solid or liquid which, after having absorbed electrically charged particles, emits visible or ultraviolet radiation detectable by a photo multiplier.
NOTE -- In a scintillator, A-rays produce interactions leading to electrically charged particles which can be detected.

5.20 Carrier -- Non-radioactive acLive lrucer eletnent.

isotope of the radlo-

NorE -- A cwrier is usually added to radioactive solutions when the concentmtiorr of the radioactive isotope of the element I\ so small dlat there is a danger of loss by adsorption on the w :IIIs of the recipient contziner.

5.32 Unclassitled Worker normally occupationally radiation.

-- Person who is not exposed to ionizing

NOTE -- An unclassified worker is restricted to areas where the dose rate is below the threshold imposed by national legislation.

5.21 Transit Time Method -- Method of ~ietermining the mean velocity by measuring the time taken for a cloud of injected tracer to travel between two sections. 16

5.33 Volumetric Activity -- Activity volume of a given radioactive material.

per

unit

NOTE -- It is expressed in becquerels per cubic metre (Bq/m3).

IS 1191:2003 5.34 Ion-Selective Electrode -- Potentiometric probe whose output potential, when measured against a suitable reference electrode, is proportional to the activity of the selected ion in the solution under test. 5.35 Interference -- Error in the determination of a chemical ion caused by the sensitivity of the analytical method to the presence of other ions in solution. 5.36 Beer-Lambert Law -- Physical law stating that the absorption of light energy by an absorbing medium varies exponentially with the thickness and the molar concentration of the medium. 5.37 Calorimetry -- Method of chemical analysis based on the measurement of the absorption of visible light, in a given range of wavelengths, by substances in solution. 5.38 Atomic Absorption Flame Spectrometry -- Method of chemical analysis based on the measurement of the absorption of visible light, in a given range of wavelengths, by a sample atomized in a flame. 5.39 Atomic Emission Flame Spectrometry -- Method of chemical analysis based on tbe measurement of flight, in a given range of wavelengths, emitted by a sample atomized in aflame. 5.40 Fluorescence -- Emission of electromagnetic waves of characteristic energy when atoms or molecules decay from an excited state to a lower energy state.
NOrE -- The excitation may be induced by subjecting the substance to radiation of slightly higher energy (shorter wavelength) Lhan that of the characteristic emission, and it ceases as soon as the external source is removed.

6.2 Inclined Gauge, Ramp Gauge -- Gauge on a slope, generally graduated directly to indicate vertical heights, 6.3 FIoat Gauge -- Gauge consisting essentially of a float that tides on the liquid surface and rises or falls with it, its movement being transmitted to a recording or indicating device. 6.4 Point Gauge -- Gauge whose essential element is a pointed rod that is lowered until it touches the surface (see Fig. 15).
NOTE -- The instant when the point touches the water surface is often indicated by an electrical device.

FIG. 15 POINT GAUGE 6.5 Hook Gauge -- Gauge whose essential element is a pointed hook which, after immersion, is raised until it touches the surface (see Fig. 16). 6.6 Crest Stage Gauge -- Gauge, usually vertical, used to indicate peak stage.

5.41 Fluorimeter, Filter Fluorimeter -- Instrument equipped with a lamp or other means of exciting fluorescent radiation in a sample, with filters and with a detector to measure relative fluorescence intensities caused by variations in concentration of the substance under examination.
NOTE - If the radiation wavelengths are determined using a monochromator, the instrument is called a spectro fluorimeter.

5.42 Fluorescence Quenching (Tracer Dilution Methods) -- Reduction of fluorescence intensity, due to interaction of dye molecules with other chemicals present in the water.
NOTE -- Concentration quenching is a phenomenon which appearsto be similarto fluorescence quenching but is not a true quenching. Rather, it is a reduction in the rate of increase in optical density of the dye itself. Concentration quenching occurs only at very high dye concentrations.

6 INSTRUMENTS

AND EQUIPMENT

6.1 Vertical Gauge, Staff Gauge -- Graduated vet-tical scale, fixed to a staff or to a structure, against which may be read the liquid level. 17

FIG. 16 HOOK GAUGE

IS 1191:2003 6.7 Wire Weight Gauge -- Graduated gauge connected to a weighted wire or chain, which js lowered to make contact with the surface of the liquid.
NOTE -- Contact with liquid is determined visually.

air is allowed to bleed through a tube to an immersed fixed orifice.
NOTE --The pressure measured by a pressure sensor is directly proportional to the liquid head.

Servo System -- System that detects an imbalance between the actual and desired states of a controllable quantity and then applies a restoring force which reduces the imbalance to an acceptable value.
6.8 NOTES

6.12 Backlash, Instrumental Hysteresis -- Difference between the movement of the input mechanism and the associated movement of the st ylus, occurring as a result of the mechanical linkage. 6.13 Liquid Level Recorder, Stage Recorder -- Device that records automatically, either continuously or at regular time intervals, the liquid level as detected by a sensor. 6.14 Sensor -- Device that responds to a physical or chemical stimulus (see 6.46). 6.15 Rotating-Element Current-Meter -- Device provided with a rotor, the rotational velocity of which corresponds to the local velocity of the surrounding liquid. 6.16 Cup-Type Current-Meter -- Current-meter whose rotor is composed of a wheel fitted with cups htming on a vertical axis and perpendicular or nearly perpendicular to the flow (see Fig. 17). 6.17 Propeller-Type Current-Meter -- Currentmeter whose rotor is a propeller rotating around an axis approximately parallel to the flow (see Fig. 18). t

1 The typical Ioca[ion of a servo system is the output shaft of
an electromechanical water-level sensing instrument. 2 A typical restoring force armrrgement is to have the motor contact switches in zero position to control the output shaft to correspond to the correct water level.

6.9 Servo Manometer, Servo Beam Balance -- Type of liquid head sensor that incorporates a servo system to convert a detected liquid pressure into a recording or an indication of the liquid level. 6.10 Elastic Pressure Bulb -- Device, operating on a closed gas system, sometimes used to transmit liquid pressure to a sensor.
NOTE -- It normally comprises a short cast hollow cylinder with an open end, sealed with a slack highly flexible diaphragm connected to the sensor by means of suitable tubing.

6.11 Gas Purge Technique, Bubbler Technique -- Method of transmitting liquid pressure in which a small discharge of non-corrosive gas or compressed

DIRECTION OF FLOW �ffl!l

L SOUNDING WEIGHT
FIG. 17 CUP-TYPE CURRENT-METER

DIRECTION OF FLOW

FIG. 18 PROPELLER-TYPECURRENT-METER 18

IS 1191:2003 6.18 Component Propeller-Type Current-Meter Propeller-type current-meter whose rotor is designed to provide a cosine response; that is, angular flow components are resolved on an axis parallel to the axis of the meter. 6.19 Propeller Pitch -- Degree of inclination or slope of the blade, or the distance that a given propeller would advance in one revolution. 6.20 Rotor Pitch -- Degree of inclination or slope of the blade, or the distance that a given rotor would advance in one revolution. 6.21 Spin Test -- Test in which the rotor of a current-meter is spun, either with the lingers or by blowing into the cup or into the propeller, to check that it rotates freely and uniformly. 6.22 Minimum Velocity of Response -- Minimum velocity of the liquid relative to the rotor of a current-meter, at which the rotor attains continuous and uniform angular motion.
NOTE -- Deprecated meaning: minimum velocity of the liquid, relative to the rotor of it current-meter which is immersed in the liquid, ~t which continuous and angular motion of the rotor is initiated.

6.25 Cableway System, Cableway -- Cable and carriage, often incorporating a winch, used for placing measuring or sampling instruments at any desired point in the cross-section. 6.26 Main Cable, Track -- Anchored cable in a cableway system along which the instrument or personnel carriage travels (see Fig. 19 and 20). 6.27 Suspension Equipment -- Cables and cable winches or rigid rods to which hydrometric instruments may be attached for suspension in a channel. 6.28 Anchorage -- Cableway fixture to which the track (main cable) or stay line is attached (see Fig. 19 and Fig. 20). 6.29 Stay Line -- Cable, placed between the towers (pier posts) and anchorages, that is used with a manned cableway system for ensuring the stability of the towers (pier posts). NOTE-- Stay lines are sometimes also used with an unmanned
cableway system (see Fig. 19 and 20).

Rating Tank, Calibration Tank -- Tank 6.23 containing still liquid through which the current-meter is moved at a constant velocity for calibrating the meter. 6.24 Epper Effect -- Phenomenon in which the wave crest produced by a current-meter and its suspension, moving forward, causes an increase in the height of Lhewetted cross-section and a consequent reduction in the relative velocity.

6.30 Suspension Cable -- Wire, from which the current-meter is suspended, possibly incorporating an electrically insulated core and controlled by the winch (see Fig. 19 and 20). 6.31 Tow Cable, Traversing Cable -- Moving cable, controlled by the winch, by which an instrument carriage is positioned from the bank (see Fig. 19). 6.32 Hand-Held Suspension -- Suspension of the current-meter by a hand-held suspension cable or rod, used for gauging from bridges or similar structures.

&f'
@P

/-

TOWER

(PIER

POST)

4
<o #
4

`+

..

r
Ir

MAIN

CABLE

TOW r

CABLE

o
)

x'

\

STAY

LINES

&

CURRENT-METER DOUBLE DRUM WINCH

&
v -- ---- --. -- . --

SOUNDING

WEIGHT

--

FIG. 19 CABLEWAYSYSTEM: TYPICALUNMANNEDINSTRUMENT CARRIAGE 19

1S 1191:2003
PERSONNEL CARRIAGE `o 5U5pENsION CABLE

=souNDING

WEIGHT

FIG. 20 CABLEWAYSYSTEM: TYPICALMANNED INSTRUMENT CARRIAGE 6.33 Gauging Reel Winch -- Drum-type hand- or machine-operated winch around whose drum is wound a suspension cable. 6.34 Double Drum Winch -- Winch with two drums, one of which controls the suspension cable, while the other controls the movement of an unmanned cableway carriage (see Fig. 19).
NOTE -- The cablew~y carriage control drum olay be a spooling drum or be in the form of a friction drive pulley driving an endless loop. The opemtor is able to drive both drums simultaneously in traversing mode, or in sounding mode, to lock (Iw travers!irg drum [o operate [he suspension cable drum rrnly. Tbe same operations may be carried out using two single drum winches, each allocated to one function. Measuring counters are fit[ed [o record horizontal and vertical cable movements.
DIRECTION

-4--=
OF FLOW -%

u

FIG. 21 WADING ROD 6.40 Float -- Any natural or artificial body that is supported by buoyancy (Archimedian) forces (see Fig. 22). 6.41 Surface Float -- Float with its greatest drag near the surface, used to determine surface velocities [see Fig. 22 (a)]. 6.42 Sub-Surface Float -- Float with its greatest drag below the surface for measuring sub-surface velocities [see Fig. 22 (b)]. 6.43 Double Float -- Body of slightly negative buoyancy that moves with the stream at a known depth and whose position is indicated by a small surface float from which it is suspended [see Fig. 22 (c)]. 6.44 Velocity Rod, Rod Float -- Float, in the form of a rod, weighted at its base so that it travels in a current in an almost vertical position, used for determining stream velocities [see Fig. 22 (d)].
NOTE -- The immersed portion may be adjustable.

6.35 Bridge Winch Board -- Hardwood plank, reinforced with brass or steel, to which a hand-operated suspension cxtble winch is bolted, constructed to slide along bridge handrails for traveling between gauging observation points. 6.36 Sounding Weight, Sinker -- Weight of streamlined shape attached to a sounding line or to the suspension of a current-meter when observing depths or velocities in streams (see Fig. 17, 18, 19 and 20). 6.37 Sounding Rod, Sounding Line -- Graduated rigid rod. or a chain or cable usually with a weight at[achcd to its lower end, used for determining depth. 6.38 Wading Rod -- Light, hand-held, graduated rigid rod for sounding depth, and for positioning the current-meter for measuring the velocity in shallow streums suittible for wading (see Fig. 21).
NOTE-- A wading rod may also be used from boas or ice cover JI shallow depths.

6.39 Pendant Wire, Tag-Line -- Wire or cord mwking the measuring section and carrying pendants or markers to indicate the position of the observation points.
NO'I-E --The wire or cord is not used for suspending apparatus.

6.45 Echo Sounder -- Instrument using the reflection of an acoustic signal from the bed to determine the depth. 6.46 Transducer -- Device that responds to a phenomenon and produces a signal which is a function

20

IS 1191:2003

SURFACE

FLOAT

SUB-SURFACE

FLOAT

DOUBLE FL OAT

VELOCITY

ROO

+ -- .---- --

!
11'1 I Ill I

I 1111
,1

, 1'1 ,

1,1, `1 I ,11 I

I I'1 I I 111 I I 1,1I II I

b)

c)

d)

FIG. 22 TYPES OF FLOATS of one or more characteristics (SW 6.14). of the phenomenon 6.55 Electromagnetic Gauging Station -- Gauging station at which the integrated velocity is determined by inducing a magnetic field in the channel and measuring the induced electromotive force produced by the motion of the conducting liquid in the magnetic field. 6.56 Default Mode -- automatically by a system otherwise, or to which it reverts to sustain the directed condition is unclear. Condition adopted unless it is directed when either it is unable or the direction given

6.47 Tracking Window (Echo Sounder) -- Opening of limited size which follows and automatically centres itself at the depth indicated by the last received echo.
NOTE -- If the next echo tolls within the window, the signal is accepted us correct; if it does not, the signal is rejected. The purpose of a tracking window is to screen out erroneous readings ctiused by sonor-reflecting materials which are present in the wa[cr (fish, debris, etc. )

6.48 Pulse -- Controlled transient decrease in transmitted energy. 6.49 Bit -- Bintiry digit (see also 6.50).

increase

or 6.57 Influencing Factor, Environmental Factor -- Quantifiable effect of environmental elements, external to the measuring equipment, which may influence equipment performance. 6.58 Performance Measure -- Degree to which the intended functions of the equipment are accomplished. 6.59 Range of Values -- Span of values of a quantity being measured or of an influencing factor. 6.60 Conditions of Storage and Transport -- Conditions specified by the manufacturer under which equipment may be stored and transported in an inoperative state and may be subjected to influences outside those experienced in use or operation.
NOTE -- Under these conditions, the equipment may be special] y packed or protected in whatever way considered appropriateby the manufacturer,in order that the equipment should not suffer damage or degradation of performance when subsequently operated within the range of operating conditions foreseen,

6.50 Bit -- Digit (1 or O) used to represent a number in binary notation (see also 6.49). 6.51 Byte -- Group of adjacent binary digits operated on by a computer as a unit. 6.52 Baud -- Unit measure of data flow on a communication path, equivalent to one bit per second. 6.53 Electromagnetic Current-Meter -- Current-meter which creates a magnetic field perpendicular to the flow direction, thus enabling the velocity to be deduced from the induced electromotive force produced by the motion of a conducting liquid in the magnetic field. 6.54 Ultrasonic (Acoustic) Velocity Meter -- System that uses the difference in travel time of ultrasonic (acoustic) pulses between transducers in a stream to determine the mean velocity on the signal path.

6.61 Operating Conditions -- Those conditions within which the equipment is expected to measure the

21

IS 1191:2003 determinant in accordance criteria of performance. with the appropriate 7.5 Bed Material -- Material of the same particle size as that which is found in appreciable quantities in that part of the bed affected by sediment transport. 7.6 Bed Material Load -- That part of the total sediment transport that consists of bed material and whose rate of movement is governed by the transporting capacity of the channel. 7.7 Suspended Load -- That part of the total load (transport) that is maintained in suspension by turbulence in the flowing water for considerable periods of time without contact with the stream bed.
NOTES 1 It moves with practically the same velocity at that of the flowing water. 2 Suspended load is generaJly expressed in mass or volume per

NOTE -- The range of operating conditions will be defined by the user.

6.62 Abnormal Those conditions lie outside the operation, and provided with no

Conditions of Equipment Use -- occurring only exceptionally, which range applicable to equipment against which the equipment is special protection.

NOTE -- The equipment is expected to resume required pel-fonmimce levels as soon as the influencing factors return to ~hose lying within the range applicable to the operation mode. The limits of these conditions should be specified by the manufacturer.

6.63 Hazardous Area -- Area in which there exist hazardous conditions potentially capable of endangering safety.
NOTE -- Such conditions may be attributable to physical Iocalion or a situation where a potentially explosive atmosphere may exist from time to time, for example, in sewers.

unitof time. 7.8 Bed Load -- That part of the total load (transport) in almost continuous contact with the bed, carried forward by rolling, sliding or hopping. 7.9 Wash Load -- That part of the suspended load that is composed of particle size smaller than those found in appreciable quantities in the bed material.
NOTES 1 It is in near-permanent suspension and, therefore, is transported through the stream without deposition. 2 The dischargeof the washloadthrougha reachdependsonly on the rate with whichthese particles become available in the catchment, and not on the transport capacity of flow. 3 Wash load is generally expressed in mass or volume per unit of time.

6.64 Overall Performance Level -- Statement of the expected performance of the equipment, relative to the true values of the measured hydrological variable. 6.65 Timing Performance -- Statement of the expected performance of any timing element of the equipment which is employed to control the sampling r~~e or frequency of the equipment. 7 SEDIMENT TRANSPORT (see Fig. 23)

7.1 Sediment -- Solid particles formed as a result of erosion that are or have been transported by liquid l-low. 7.2 Sediment Transport -- Movement of solids tmnsported in any way by a flowing liquid. 7.3 Total Load (Origin) -- Sum of the bed material load and the wash load (in suspension). 7.4 Total Load (Transport) -- S urn of the along-the-bed load and the suspended load.

7..10 Sediment Concentration -- Pror)ortion by mass or volume of the dry sediment in a water-sediment mixture to the total mass or volume of the mixture.
A

7.11 Mean Suspended Concentration, TimeWeighted Mean Suspended Sediment, Concentration (Time) -- Time-average sediment concentration. 7.12 Average Suspended Concentration (Space) -- Average of the mean suspended concentration (time) over the entire area contributing to a particular station.

FIG. 23 SCHEMATICOF TERMS CONCERNINGSEDIMENTTRANSPORT

22

IS 1191:2003 7.13 Specific Mass -- Ratio of the mass of a given volume of the sediment to the mass of an equal volume of water. 7.14 Bulk Density (Deposited Sediment) -- Total dry mass of a unit volume (including pores) of undisturbed deposit. 7.15 Oden Theory -- Principle, for uniformly dispersed sediment systems, which postulates that the sediment concentration at any level remains constant until the largest particle in suspension has had time to settle from the surface to the level in question. 7.16 Integration Method (Sediment Sampling) -- Method of sampling in which the sampler is lowered from the surface to the stream bed and raised to the surface at a uniform rate, so that the sample is collected continuously during the travel of the sampler. Point integration method of sampling is when the sampler held stationary at a point, is filled to almost its full capacity during the sampling period (with water sediment mixture), due to velocity of stream, after equalizing pressure inside the sampler with the pressure at the point of sampling. Suspended sediment sampling can be made with respect to time as well as with respect to sp~ce. When it is with respect to time, the method is termed time integration. Mathematically it can be explained as: 7.20 Sedimentation-Decantatio-Evaporation Method -- Method of obtaining the sediment concentration in a sample containing suspended sediment by letting the sample stand undisturbed, so that the sediment will settle out from suspension, then successively decanting the sediment-free liquid and ultimately allowing the sample to dry by evaporation. 7.21 Filtration Method -- Process of passing a liquid through a filter paper or other filtering medium for the removal of suspended or colloidal material. 7.22 Hydrometer Method -- Method of estimating the total concentration of suspended load and dissolved matter from the density indicated by a hydrometer. 7.23 Gravimetric Method -- Method of estimating the total sediment by allowing the sediment to settle in a container, with a suitable additive to hasten settling, siphoning off the supematant water and carefully transferring all the sediment from the container to a beaker and from the beaker to a filter paper, then drying the sample and determining the mass of total sediment. 7.24 Pipette Method -- Analysis of very fine particles of sediment (less than 0.032 mm in diameter) by means of sampling with a pipette. 7.25 Fall Velocity, Settling Velocity -- Limiting velocity reached asymptotically by a particle falling under the action of gravity in a still water. 7.26 Size Distribution -- Numerical or graphical representation of the results of a particle size analysis. = average sediment transport rate, = time interval of integration, = the instantaneous and transport rate. 7.27 Particle Size Distribution, Grain Size Distribution -- Proportion by mass of each particle size present in a given sediment sample. 7.28 Hydrometer -- Device, based on Archimedes' principle, used for determining the relative density of a liquid. 7.29 Siltometer -- Instrument the separates into different sizes the particles of a sample of settlement, either by deposition through a water column or by means of an air current, and measures the volume or mass of the different grades thus separated. 7.30 Bottom Withdrawal Tube -- Instrument for analysis of sediment particles less than 0.5 mm in diameter, based on the principle that in uniformly dispersed suspension (such as, used in the bottom withdrawal tube), the sediment concentration at any level remains constant until the largest particle has had time to settle from the surface to the level in question. 7.31 Sedimentation Tube -- Basic component of many items of equipment through which particles settle in a column of liquid, usually water. 23

where ~, T g,

7.17 Depth Integration Method -- Method of sampling suspended sediment in which, by traversing the depth of the stream both in the downward and upward directions at a uniform speed, the sampler takes, at every point on the vertical, a small specimen of the water sediment mixture, each increment of which is proportional to the local sediment discharge, so that the sampler gets filled to almost its full capacity. 7.18 Direct Method of Measurement -- Method in which, with the aid of one device, the time average suspended sediment load at a point is measured directly. 7.19 Indirect Method of Measurement -- Method in which the time-average concentration of the sediment and the time-average current velocity at a point are measured practically simultaneously with the aid of separate devices.
NOTE -- The two values are multiplied together to obtain the sediment discharge.

IS 1191:2003 7.32 Pynometer -- Instrument for measuring specific mass of liquids and solids. 7.33 Depth-Integrating Sampler -- Instrument that obtains a sample of the sediment-water mixture while it is moved at a uniform rate vertically through a given distance in a column of moving water. 7.34 Instantaneous Sampler -- Instrument that attempts to trap instantaneously a sample of sediment-water mixture. 7.35 Point-Integrating Sampler -- Instrument that obtains'a sample of sediment-water mixture at a given point over a fixed period of time. 7.36 Pumping Sampler -- Instrument that consists of a pumping system with the intake facing perpendicular to the stream flow and the outlet going to a container or a flushing system. 7.37 Particle Size, Grain Size -- Dimension that is representative of the size of an individual particle (see Table 1). 7.38 Mean Particle Diameter -- Arithmetic mean of (he individual particle diameters. 7.39 Median Particle Diameter, D<O-- Particle size of a given sample such that the ma~~ of particles of smaller diameter equals the mass of particles of larger diameter. 7.40 Geometric Mean Particle Diameter, ~g -- Diameter whose logarithm is the mean of the logarithms of the individual particle diameters: 7.46 Full Reservoir Level -- Level corresponding to the gross storage which includes both the dead and live storages, but does not normally include additional flood storage. 7.47 Horizontal Control -- Basic framework of points whose horizontal position azimuth and inter-relationship have been determined accurately. 7.48 Normal Ponded Reservoir -- Storage reservoir normally ponded up to full reservoir level. 7.49 Range Line -- Line joining the ranging rods, in a survey. 7.50 Ranging Rod -- Rod (2 m or 3 m long, painted in two or three colours and shod with iron shoes) used to mark stations or other points in a survey, so that straight lines may be laid out over the ground and chained, if necessary. 7.51 Reservoir -- Naturally-occurring space, such as a pond, lake or basin, or man-made construction, for storage, regulation and control of water. 7.52 Rate of Sedimentation of Reservoir -- Annual reduction in the capacity of a reservoir caused by the deposit of suspended and bed loads in the reservoir. 7.53 Reservoir Delta -- Delta formed by a river discharging into a reservoir, causing sediment deposition where the river enters the reservoir. 7.54 Trap Efficiency of Reservoir -- Ratio of sediment retained in the reservoir to the sediment brought in by the stream. 7.55 Vertical Control, Level Control -- Series of benchmarks or other points of known elevation, established throughout an area. Range pillars are the pillars erected around the water spread area of a reservoir to identify the cross-section selected for conducting sedimentation survey. 7.56 Sediment Material -- Sediment (clay, silt, sand, gravel, cobble or boulder) as classified by particle size range in accordance with Table 1. Table 1 Particle Size Ranges for Sediment Materials (Clauses 7.37 and 7.56) S1 ~~; O
ii)

where pi is the probability or percentage having a particle diameter.

of a sample

7.41 Nominal Diameter -- Diameter of a sphere of [he same volume as the given particle. 7.42 Projected Diameter -- Diameter of a circle that circumscribes the projected image of the particle when viewed in the plane of maximum stability. 7.43 Sedimentation Diameter -- Diameter of a sphere of the same specific mass and the same terminal settling velocity as the given particle in the same sedimentation fluid. 7.44 Sieve Diameter -- Length of the side of the smallest square opening through which the particles will pass. 7.45 Baseline -- Line established in a triangulation survey for reference, coordination and correlation.
NO~E-- This is the only line whose length is actually measured in [he survey; [he mxxmcy of the survey will depend on the occuracy of measurement of this line.

Material (2)
Clay Silt

ParticleSize Range mm (3) <0.002 > 13.(r02to s 0.075 >0.075 to< 4.75
>4.75 to< 80 >80to S300

iii)
iv) v) vi)

Sand
Gravel Cobble Boulder

>300

24

IS 1191:2003 8 UNCERTAINTIES DETERMINATIONS IN HYDROMETRIC 8.12 Experimental Standard Deviation, s--For a series of n measurements of the same measure and, the parameter characterizing the dispersion of the results. r n

8.1 Resolution -- Quantitative expression of the ability of an indicating device to distinguish meaningfully between closely adjacent values of the quantity indicated. 8.2 Precision -- Closeness of agreement between the results obtained by applying the experimental procedures several ti'rnesunder prescribed conditions.
NOTE--The smaller the random part of the experimental errors which affect the results, the more precisethe procedure.

where x, 1= = result of the ith measurement; and arithmetic mean of then results considered. NOTES 1 The experimental standard deviation should not be confused

8.3 Average Value, Z -- Arithmetic reading of the value .x :

mean of

n

with the standard deviation u of a population of size N and of mean m, given by the formula I N

`=~~'i i=l 8.4 Sensitivity Coefficient, Influence Coefficient, 8X -- Ratio of the change in a result R to a change in an input parameter ~: ~=g x
~.

N 2 If the series of n measurement is considered to be an example
of a population, deviation. s is an estimate of the population standard

J
j=t

2(x - m)'

Ax

NOTE -- In relative terms this becomes: ~ x . AR/R Ax/x

8.13 Experimental Standard Deviation of the Mean, s (7) -- Estimate of the standard deviation of the arithmetic mean I with respect to the mean m of the overall population: S(I)=

8.5 Frequency Distribution -- Relationship between the measured values of variable and their frequency of occurrence. 8.6 Population consideration. -- Totality of items under

P

Sx n

8.7 Sample -- One or more items taken from a population and intended to provide information on the populatitm, and possibly to serve as a basis for a decision concerning the population or the process
which 8.8 produced it.

8.14 Experimental Variance, S2 -- Measure of the scatter or spread of a distribution, estimated by calculating the sum of the squares of deviations of measurements about the mean, divided by the number of degrees of freedom.

~(.i `$'
s'=

i='n_l
of the

Sample Size, n -- Number of items included in the sample.

8.9 True Value -- Value which characterizes a quantity perfectly defined in the conditions which exist when that quantity is considered.
NOTE -- It is an ideal value which can be determined only it all causes of measurement error are eliminated.

8.15 Residual Variance, S2R -- Square standard error of estimation (see 7.31).

8.10 Number of Degrees of Freedom, v -- In general, the number of observations minus the number of parameters. Example The standard deviation is said to have (n�1) degrees of freedom because, for the estimation of the mean, it is necessary to use one degree of freedom. 8.11 Deviation -- Difference between the value of a qwmtity and a standard reference value.
NOTE --Particularly in statistics, the reference value is frequently the arithmetic mean of a series of measurements.

8.16 Weight of Measurement, ~i -- Number which expresses the degree of confidence in the result of a measurement of a certain quantity, in comparison with the result of another measurement of the same quantity. 8.17 Arithmetic Weighted Mean, Weighted Average,Yw -- Sum of the products of each value and its weight of measurement divided by the sum of the weights of measurement,

25

1S 1191:2003 8.18 Calibration -- Process of comparing the response of a measuring device with a calibrator or a measuring standard over the measurement range. 8.19 Calibration Hierarchy -- Chain of calibrations which link or trace a measuring device to a primary standard. 8.20 Normal Distribution, Laplace-Gaussian Distribution -- Probability distribution of continuous random variable x such that the probability density is: f(x) =+exp 8.24 Error of Measurement -- Result of a measurement minus the true value of the measurand.
NOTES 1 The term relates equally to: -- the indication; -- the uncorrected result and -- the corrected result. 2 The known parts of the error of measurement may be compensated by applying appropriate corrections. The error of the corrected result can only be characterized by an uncertainty.

~ [01
-2 x�m2 y of the

8.25 Absolute Error of Measurement a measurement minus the conventional the measurand.
NOTES 1 The term relates equally to: -- the indication; -- the uncorrected result; and -- the corrected result.

-- Result of true value of

where m
CT

= arithmetic mean; and = standard deviation distribution. normal

2 The know parts of the error of measurement may be compensated by applying appropriate corrections. The error of the corrected result can only be characterized by an uncertainty. 3 `Absolute error' which has a sign, should not be confused with `absolute value of an error' which is the modulus of an error.

8.21 Method of Least Squares -- Technique used to compute the coefficients of an equation, when a particular form of equation is chosen for fitting a curve to data.
NOTE -- The principle ot' the method of least squares is the minimizationof the sum of squares of deviations of the data from the curve.

8.26 Outlier -- Observed value in a set of data which appears to be inconsistent with the remainder of the set of data. 8.27 Spurious Error -- Error which invalidates measurement (see Fig. 24). a

8.22 Regression -- Process of quantifying the dependence of one variable on one or more other variables (see also 7.23). 8.23 Regression, Least Squares -- Procedure for determining the unknown constants of a proposed model in such a manner that predictions from the model are as close as possible to the data (see also 8.22).
NOTE -- Often as `close as possible' is taken to mean that the sum of sqcaues of the deviations is a minimum. Many of the available computer programmed suitable for curve-fitting have the word `regression' in the title.

NOTE -- It generally has a single cause, such as the incorrect recording of one or more significant digits or the malfunction of instruments.

8.28 Random Error -- Component of the error of measurement which, in the course of a number of measurements of the same measurand, varies in an unpredictable way (see Fig. 24). NOTE -- his not possibleto correctfor randomerror. 8.29 Systematic Error -- Component of the error of measurement which, in the course of a number of measurements of the same measurand, remains constant or varies in a predictable way (see Fig. 24). NOTE -- Systematic errors and their causes maybe known.

SPURIOUS

ERROR

MEANMEASURED
VALUE OF QUANTITY+ -.

x

----

--

X
TRUE VALUE OF QUANTITY (UNKNOW+C

v
~

RANDOM

~RROR VALUE OF MEASURED QUANTITY

x

--+06 x

x

x

---_---

xx

xx

2
a
---. a

RANDOM UNCERTAtN tTY = er ASSESSED WITH SPECIFIC CONFIDENCE LEVEL

SYSTEMATIC IS UNSEEN LIMITS (

ERROR WITHIN

PROSAEIILITY'DENSITY

SYSTEMATIC

ERROR

THE TERMSRELATINGTO ERRORS AND UNCERTAINTIES FIG. 24 DIAGRAM ILLUSTRATING 26

IS 1191:2003 8.30 Elemental Error -- Random or systematic error associated with a single source or process in a chain of sources or processes. 8.31 Standard Error of Estimation, Residual Standard Deviation,s~ -- Measure of dispersion of the dependent variable (output) about the least squares line obtained by curve-fitting or regression analysis. Example

(1
`r where er () 5=
lgs s= =

= t$@

5

random uncertainty confidence level; appropriate

at the 95 percent

value of Student's t;and

sample standard deviation.

E

NOTE -- It is used to set the confidence limits of the population mean, in particular in cases where the mean has been estimated from small samples. It is obtained from tables giving the number of degrees of freedom and the confidence level, where: ~=1+ m

where n k = number of data points, and = number of coefficients in the equation

where p is the population

mean.

NOTE -- This equation similar to the expression for standard deviation, except dlat the curve-fit value j replaces the mean value 1 and k replaces 1.

8.35 Uncertainty, e( ) -- Estimate characterizing the range of values within which the true value of a measurand lies. 8.36 Random Uncertainty, er( ~-- Component of uncertainty associated with a random error (see Fig. 24). NOTE-- Its effecton the meanvaluecan be reducedby taking manymeasurements. 8.37 Systematic Uncertainty, e,( ) -- Component of uncertainty associated with systematic error. NOTE -- Its effect cannot be reduced by taking many measurements. 8.38 Accuracy -- Qualitative expression for the closeness of a measured value to the true value.
NOTE -- The quantitative expression of accuracy should be in terms of uncertainty. Good accuracy implies small random and systematic errors.

8.32 Confidence Limits -- Lower and upper limits within which the true value is expected to lie with a specified probability, assuming negligible systematic error. 8.33 Confidence Level -- Probability that the true value will lie between the specified confidence limits, assuming negligible systematic error.
NOTE -- The confidence level is expressed as a percentage.

8.34 Student's t Distribution -- Distribution of the deviations of the mean values of the samples from the population means, expressed as a proportion of the sample standard deviation (the samples being taken from normal distributions).

27

IS 1191:2003

ANNEX

A

(Foreword)
SYMBOLS Quanti~ Area Total breadth (width) of the channel Coefficient Chezy coefficient Diameter Total depth Geometric mean particle diameter USED IN HYDROMETRIC Symbol A B c c D D ~g D F H K K K L M N P
Pw

DETERMINATIONS Dimensions L* L * L1'2 ~1 L L L L MLT2 L *
L3T-1 ML-IT-2 `Pa

S1 Units m' m * ml-2Ls m m m m N M * m3/s

Particle diameter Force, pull or thrust (tension) Total (energy) head Constant Conveyance Bulk (or volume) modulus of elasticity Length Measured value Dilution ratio Power Wetted perimeter Total discharge Electrical resistance Result of a measurement Slope, bed slope Transmissivity Volume Weight Percentage error of .x Shape factor Sub-area Unit breadth (width) (partial) Concentration Wave celerity, propagation Unit depth Uncerttiinty in a result (with various subscripts) Function factor Frequency Acceleration due to gravity or measured) velocity

L * t ML*T `3 L
L3T-1

M * t W m
m3/s

Q
R R s T v w x z a b c c d e

*
1 L~-l

* t m3/s m3 N t t m' m mtdl mls m *

L3 ML T_* t i L' L
ML-3

LT1 L *
1

f f
~ h

p
LT2 L

Hz mls2 m

Head of liquid level (gauged, geometrical

28

IS 1191:2003 Quantity Adjustment factor Symbol k k k 1 m m n in a set n n n P P P P 9 9 9 r standard deviation standard deviation of the mean s s(l) sI/ s' sRz t t v u v w w x T ZW x,y,z A @ e `n a et Dimensions * L t L M t
L-1/3T s/m

SI Units * m t m kg t
1/3

Effective roughness height Number of sources of error in a result Length (partial) Mass Side slope (cross slope) Manning coefficient Number of measurements Sample size Rotational speed Height of weir Height of flume invert Pressure -- Probability Unit discharge Rate of injection of chemical tracer Rate of sampling Radius Experimental Experimental

t * T' L L
ML-IT-2

t * radfs m m Pa (or N/m*) t
m2/s

t
L2T-1

L3T-1

ml/s ml/s m * * * * * s t rnls mls rnls ds * * * * m * K * rad rad t

L3T-1

L * * * * * T t LT_l LT-I LT-l LT-l * * * * L * e * t t t

Residual standard deviation Experimenwl variance

Residual variance Time Student's f Velocity .r velocity component y velocity component - velocity component ., Weight of measurement Variable quantity Average value Weighted average Coordinate Difference between two values of the same quantity --Thermodynamic temperature Dimensional sensitivity coefficient

Radian measure Angle Energy correction factor (coriolis energy coefficient)

29

IS 1191:2003 Quantity Boundary layer displacement Uncertainty Efficiency Tem~erature Wavelength Dynamic viscosity Kinematic
Number

Symbol thickness &

Dimensions L * t

SI Units M * t "c m pas
m2/s

(Celsius)

e,l

e L ML-IT- I
L2T-I

a
v? P v v viscosity

of degrees of freedom

*

*

Head loss per unit length Mass per unit volume (density) Standard deviation Surface tension Shear stress Thompson's T -- Froude number Correction Equivalent factor for measured discharge in open channels sand roughness

P
o
ts,

ML-3

*

kg/m3 * N/m Pa (or N/m2) t T
*

).

ML-2

T T F,
Fm

~L-lT-2

t t
*

k,

Reynolds number Hydraulic mean depth Hydraulic radius (hydraulic mean depth) Weber number ra nr we

L t L L t

m
1

m m t

NOTE -- The above symbols, except when otherwise specifically smted, are indicated in their most general form. For any specific use such symbols may be qualified by a subscript 1 or 2 indicate `upstream' and `downstream' respectively where necessary, and also explained to indicate the exact meaning. * Dimensional order depends on its meaning in context. t Non-dimensional quantity.

30

IS 1191:2003

ALPHABETICAL
A Abnormal conditions of equipment use ..............6.62 Absolute error of measurement ........................... 8.25 Abutment .............................................................4.l7 Accuracy .............................................................. 8.38 Acoustic velocity meter ....................................... 6.54 Activity .volumetric .............................................5.33 Adjustment, shift ................................................. 2.85 Adsorption ...........................................................5.l3 Afllux. .................................................................. 2.96 Air line correction ................................................ 3.13 Alluvial river ....................................................... 2.24 Atnplitude ............................................................3.45 Anchorage ............................................................6.28 Anchor ice ..........................................................2.lO5 Antidune ..............................................................2.3l Approach channel ................................................ 4. I Approach velocity ............................................... 2.68 Area, hazardous ................................................... 6.63 Arithmetic weighted mean .................................. 8.17 Atomic absorption flame spectrometry ............... 5.38 Atomic emission flame spectrometry .................. 5.39 Average suspended concentration ....................... 7.12 Average value ...................................................... 8.3 Average, weighted ............................................... 8.17

INDEX

Bottom slope ....................................................... 2.48 Bottom withdrawal tube ...................................... 7.30 Boulder ................................................................7.56 Braided river ........................................................2.27 Breadth ...............................................................2.lO3 Bridge winch board ............................................. 6.35 Broad.crested weir ..............................................4.lO Bubbler technique ............................................... 6.11 Bulb, elastic pressure .......................................... 6.10 Bulk density .........................................................7.l4 Byte ......................................................................6.5l

B
Background concentration, .................................. 5.6 Backlash ...............................................................7.l2 Backwater ............................................................2.97 Backwater. curve .................................................. 2.98 Baffle ..............................................................4.2. 4.3 Baffle pier ............................................................ 4.4 Balance, servobeam ............................................. 6.9 Bank, left .............................................................2.45 Bank. right ..........................................................2.46 Baseline ...............................................................7.45 Basin. stilling .......................................................4.28 Baud ....................................................................6.52 Becquerel .............................................................5.l9 Bed load ............................................................... 7.8 Bed tnaterial ......................................................... 7.5 Bed material load ................................................. 7.6 Bed pro file ...........................................................2.49 Bed slope .............................................................2.48 Beer-lambert law ................................................. 5.36 Benchmark ..........................................................2.ll7 Bit ................................................................&4.9T6.50 Block, control ...................................................... 4.4 Block, energy-breaking ....................................... 4.4 Block, weir ...........................................................4.l6 Board, bridge winch ............................................ 6.35 Body, weir ...........................................................4.l6

c Cable, main .......................................................... 6.26 Cable, suspension ................................................ 6.30 Cable, tow ............................................................ 6.31 Cable, traversing .................................................. 6.31 Cableway ............................................................. 6.25 Cableway system ................................................. 6.25 Calibration ........................................................... 2.92 Calibration hierarchy ........................................... 8.19 Calibration tank ................................................... 6.23 Canal .................................................................... 2.15 Carrier .................................................................. 5.20 Channel ................................................................2.l3 Channel, approach ............................................... 4.1 Channel, meandering ........................................... 2.29 Channel, open ...................................................... 2.14 Channel, stable .................................................... 2.16 Channel, storage .................................................. 3.22 Channel, tidal ...................................................... 2.18 Channel, unstable ................................................ 2.17 Classified worker ................................................. 5.22 Clay ...................................................................... 7.56 Clinging nappe .................................................... 4.35 Cobble ................................................................. 7.56 Code ....................................................................2.l33 Coefficient, discharge ......................................... 4.44 Coefficient. friction ............................................2.l22 Coefficient, influence .......................................... 8.4 Coefficient, roughness ........................................2.l2l Coefficient. rugosity ...........................................2.l2l Coefficient, sensitivity ........................................ 8.4 Coefficient, vertical velocity ................................ 3.11 Calorimetry ......................................................... 5.37 Component propeller-type current-meter ........... 6.18 Compound stmcture ............................................ 4.I4 Compound weir ................................................... 4.13 Concentration, average suspended ..................... 7.12 Concentration, background ................................. 5.6 Concentration, mean suspended ......................... 7.11 Concentration, sediment ...................................... 7.10

31

IS 1191:2003 Concentration sediment time-weighted mean suspended.. ........................................................7.ll Conditions of equipment use, abnormal .............6.62 Conditions of storage and transport .................... 6.60 Conditions, operating .......................................... 6.6 I Conductivity method ........................................... 5.18 Confidence level .................................................. 8.33 Confidence limits .................................................8.32 Constant fall stage-discharge relation .................3.32 Constant level tank .............................................. 5.7 Cor?stant rate injection method ........................... 5.3 Contraction of a nappe, fully developed .............4.38 Control .................................................................2.9O Control block ....................................................... 4.4 Conu-ol horizontal ................................................ 7.47 Conlrol, level ....................................................... 7.55 Control. vertical ...................................................7.55 Colltroi section .....................................................4.4l Converging reach ................................................ 2.60 Convey ance .......................................................2.lll Correction, air line ............................................... 3.13 Correction, wet line ............................................. 3.14 Crest stage gauge ................................................. 6.6 Critical.depth .......................................................2.ll Critical-depth flume ............................................ 4.22 Critical flow ......................................................... 2.6 Critical velocity ................................................... 2.12 Cross-section ....................................................... 2.57 Cross. sectioll.meter ............................................. 5.16 Cl.ossoveI . .............................................................2.35 Cubattlre ............................................................... 3.27 Cumulative volume curve ................................... 2.86 Cup.type current. meter ....................................... 6.16 Current .................................................................2.22 Current, density ................................................... 3.54 CLlt.retlt. ebb .........................................................3.36 Current, flood ......................................................3.38 Current.lnetel . ......................................................3.56 Current-meter, component propeller-type .......... 6.18 Currenl-meter, cup-type ...................................... 6.16 Current-meter, electromagnetic ........................... 6.53 Current-meter, propeller-type .............................. 6.17 Current-meter, reference ..................................... 3.16 Current-meter, rotating-element .......................... 6.15 Current-meter, standard ....................................... 3.17 Curve, b:Lckwater ................................................. 2.98 Curve, cumulative volume .................................. 2.86 Curve, drawdown ................................................ 2.99 Curve, looped stage-discharge ........................... 3.28 Curve, lnassdischarge ......................................... 2.86 Curve, storage ...................................................... 3.26 Curve, vertical velocity ....................................... 3.9 Cycle. tidal ...........................................................3.46 D Data .....................................................................2.135 Data, raw ...........................................................2.l35 Datum, gauge .....................................................2.ll6 Day, tidal.. ........................................................... 3.47 Debris line ........................................................... 2.62 Defau]t mode .......................................................6.56 Degree of mixing ................................................. 5.12 Degrees of freedom, number of .......................... 8.10 Delta, reservoir .................................................... 7.53 Density, bulk ....................................................... 7.14 Density .cument ................................................... 3.54 Depth ..................................................................2.loo Depth, critical ...................................................... 2.11 Depth, hydraulic mean .......................................2.113 Depth, mean .......................................................2.ll3 Depth, mean velocity .......................................... 2.65 Depth, normal .....................................................2.lOl Depth-integration method ................................... 7.17 Depth-integration sampler ................................... 7.33 Deviation .............................................................g.ll Deviation, experimental standard ....................... 8,12 Deviation, experimental standard, of the mean .. 8.13 Diagram shift .......................................................2.95 Diameter, geometric mean particle ..................... 7.40 Diameter, mean particle ...................................... 7,38 Diameter, median particle ................................... 7,39 Diameter, nominal ............................................... 7,41 Diameter. projected ............................................. 7.42 Diameter, sedimentation ..................................... 7,43 Diameter, sieve .................................................... 7,44 Dilution factor .............................................5. JA.5.l5 Dilution gauging ..............................................5.2.5.4 Dilution ratio ...............................................5.14,5.15 Direct method of measurement ........................... 7,18 Discharge ............................................................. 2.37 Discharge coefficient .......................................... 4,44 Discharge hydrograph ......................................... 2.84 Discharge measurement ...................................... 2.42 Discharge per unit width .............................2.32. 2.38 Discharge, specific ......................................2.39. 2.40 Discharge, unit .................................................... 2.38 Discontinuous rating ........................................... 2.94 Distribution, frequency ....................................... 8.5 Distribution, Laplace-Gaussian., ......................... 8.20 Distribution, normal ............................................ 8.20 Distribution, size ................................................. 7.26 Distribution, Student's t ...................................... 8.34 Diurnal inequality ........................................3.5l. 3.52 Divide wall .......................................................... 4.18 Double drum winch ............................................. 6.34 Double float ......................................................... 6.43 Double gauging ...................................................4.33 Downstream total head., ...................................... 4.45 Drag ....................................................................2.llO Drawdown curve ................................................. 2.99 32

IS 1191:2003 Drift .................................................................3.3. 3.6 Drift velocity ....................................................... 3.7 Drowned flow ......................................................4.3l Dune .....................................................................2.29 Duration of tide .................................................... 3.48 Flat-V weir .......................................................... 4.12 Float ..................................................................... 6.40 Float, double ........................................................ 6.43 Float gauge .......................................................... 6.3 Float gauging ....................................................... 3.20 Float, rod ............................................................. 6.44 Float, sub-surface ................................................ 6.42 Float, surface ....................................................... 6.41 Float well ............................................................2.l2o Floating siphon .................................................... 5.9 Flood current ....................................................... 3.38 Flood mark .......................................................... 2.62 F1oodtide .............................................................3.37 Flood volume ....................................................... 3.44 Flow, ctitical ........................................................ 2.6 Flow, drowne$ ..................................................... 4.31 Flow, free surface ...............................................2.lM Flow, gauge height of zero .................................. 2.80 Flow, liquid ......................................................... 2.1 Flow, mean direction of ...................................... 3.3 Flow modular ...................................................... 4.29 Flow, non.modular .............................................. 4.31 Flow, steady ......................................................... 2.3 Flow, stratification of .......................................... 2.10 Flow, sub.critical ................................................. 2.7 Flow, supercritical ............................................... 2.8 Flow, transverse .................................................. 2.9 Flow, uniform ...................................................... 2.5 Flow, unsteady .................................................... 2.4 Flow line, gauge height of zero .......................... 2.81 Flow regime ......................................................... 2.2 Flume ................................................................... 4.20 Flume, critical-depth ........................................... 4.22 Flume, Pmshall .................................................... 4.25 Flume Saniiri ....................................................... 4.26 Flume, shofi.throated ..................................4.23. 4.24 Flume, standing wave .......................................... 4.22 Flume, Venturi .................................................... 4.21 Fluorescence ........................................................ 5.40 Fluorescence quenching ...................................... 5.42 Fluorimeter .......................................................... 5.41 Fluorimeter, filter ................................................ 5.41 Frazil ice .............................................................2.lW Free surface flow ................................................2.la Freedom number of degrees of .......................... 8.10 Frequency distribution ........................................ 8.5 Friction ...............................................................2.llO Friction coefficient .............................................2.l22 Friction, slope US ................................................ 2.48 Froude number ...................................................2.l23 Full reservoir leve ................................................ 7.46 Full-width weir .................................................... 4.15 Fully aerated nappe ............................................. 5.37 Fully developed contraction of nape . ................ 5.38 Fully ventilated nape . ..................................... 5.37

E
Ebb current .......................................................... 3.36 Ebb tide ................................................................3.35 Ebb volume .......................................................... 3.43 Echo sounder ....................................................... 6,45 Efficiency, geometric .......................................... 5.24 Elastic pressure bulb ............................................ 6.10 Electrode, ion-selective ....................................... 5.34 Electromagnetic current-meter ........................... 6.53 Electromagnetic gauging station ........................6.55 Electronvolt .........................................................5.23 Elemental emor .................................................... 8.30 Encoding .............................................................2.l3l Energy ................................................................2.l37 Energy .breaking block ........................................ 4.4 Energy gradient ................................................... 2.75 Energy head .........................................................2.72 Energy head line .................................................. 2.73 Energy loss ..................................................2.76 .2.77 Energy, specific ................................................... 2.78 Environmental factor ........................................... 6.57 Eppereffect ..........................................................6.24 Equipment, suspension ........................................ 6.27 Equipment use, abnormal conditions of .............. 6.62 Error, elemental ................................................... 6.30 Error, random ....................................................... 8.28 Error, spurious .....................................................8.27 Error, systematic .................................................. 8.29 Error of estimation, standard .............................. 8.31 Error of measurement .......................................... 8.24 Estuary .................................................................2.2O Expanding reach .................................................. 2.61 Experimental standard deviation ........................8.12 Experimental standard deviation of the mean .... 8.13 Experimental variance ......................................... 8.14

F Factor, dilution ............................................5.l4. 5.15 Factor, environmental .......................................... 6.57 Factor, influencing ............................................... 6,57 Fall .......................................................................2.53 Fall method, normal ............................................ 3.31 Fall stage-discharge relation ............................... 3.33 Fall stage-discharge relation, normal ..................3.31 Fall velocity .........................................................7.25 Filter fluorimeter ................................................. 5.41 Filtration method ................................................. 7.21 Firmware ............................................................2.l42 33

IS 1191:2003 G Gaspurge technique ............................................6.ll Gauge ...................................................................2.43 Gauge. crest stage ................................................ 6.6 Gauge. float ......................................................... 6.3 Gauge. hook ......................................................... 6.5 Gauge. inclined .................................................... 6.2 Gauge. point ........................................................ 6.4 Gauge. ramp ........................................................ 6:2 Gauge, reference .................................................. 3.15 Gauge. staff .......................................................... 6.1 Gauge, stage .......................................................2.ll5 Gauge. vefiical ..................................................... 6.1 Gauge. wire weight .............................................. 6.7 Gauge datum .......................................................2.ll6 Gauge height ........................................................ 2.79 Gauge height of zero flow ................................... 2.80 Gauge height of zero flowline ............................. 2.81 Gauge well .........................................................2.ll8 Gauged head ........................................................ 2.70 Gauging. dilution ................................................. 5.2 Gauging, double .................................................. 4.33 Gauging, float ...................................................... 3.20 Gauging, stream ................................................... 2.41 Gauging reel ........................................................6.33 Gauging section ................................................... 2.58 Gauging station ....................................................2.87 Gauging station, electromagnetic ........................ 6.55 Geometric efficiency ...........................................5.24 Geometric mean particle diameter .....................5.40 Glacis ...................................................................4.l9 Gradient, energy .................................................. 2.75 Gradient, velocity vertical ................................... 3.10 Grain size .............................................................7.37 Grain size distribution ......................................... 7.27 Gravel ..................................................................7.56 Gravimetric method .............................................7.23 Guide vane ........................................................... 4.2 Head over the weir ...............................................4.43 Height, gauge ...................................................... 2.79 Height of weir ...................................................... 4.42 Hierarchy, calibration .......................................... 8.19 High water ........................................................... 3.41 Hookgauge ......................................................... 6.5 Horizontal control ............................................... 7.47 Hydraulic jump ...................................................2.ll2 Hydraulic mean depth ........................................2.113 Hydraulic radius .................................................2.ll4 Hydrography, discharge ........................................ 2.84 Hydrography, stage ............................................... 2.83 Hydrometer .......................................................... 7.28 Hydrometer method ............................................ 7.22 Hysteresis, instrumental ...................................... 6.12 Hysteresis of the stage-discharge relation ......... 3.28

H
Half.life ...............................................................5.2~ Hand-held suspension .......................................... 6.32 Hardware ...........................................................2.l4O Hazardous area ....................................................6.63 Head, downstream total ....................................... 4.45 Head. energy ........................................................2.72 Hear. gauged ........................................................2.7O Head, piezometric ................................................ 2.71 Head. total ............................................................2.72 Head, upstream total ............................................ 4.46 Head. velocity ......................................................2.69 Head level, total ................................................... 2.74 Head line, energy ................................................. 2.73 Head line total ...................................................... 2.73 Head loss ......................................................2.76 .2.77 34

I Ice, anchor ..........................................................2.lO5 Ice, frazil .............................................................2.lM Ice, rime ..............................................................2.lO6 Ice, slush .............................................................2.lO8 Ice, sutiace ..........................................................2.lO7 Ice cover .............................................................2.lO7 Ice sheet ..............................................................2.lO7 Incised tiver .................................................2.25. 2.26 Inclined gauge ..................................................... 6.2 Indirect method of measurement ....................... 7.19 Inflection point .................................................... 2.36 Influence coefficient ............................................ 8.4 Influencing factor ................................................ 6.57 Information .........................................................3.l36 Injection. multiple ............................................... 4.5 Injection method, constant rate .......................... 5.3 Instantaneous sampler ......................................... 7.34 Instrumental hysteresis ........................................ 6.12 Integration method (dilution method) ................. 5.4 Integration method (sediment sdmpling) ............7.16 Integration method (velocity-area measurement) 3.18 Interference .......................................................... 5.35 Invefl .................................................................... 2.47 Ion.selective eleccwode ....................................... 5.34 Isotope ................................................................. 5.26 Isotopic solution .................................................. 5.29

Jump..hydraulic

J ..................................................2.ll2

L Lag, stilling well .................................................. Laplace-Geaussian distribution ........................... Law, Beer-Lamber .............................................. Least squares, method of .............................8.2l.

3.30 8.20 5.36 8.23

IS 1191:2003 Left bank .............................................................. 2.45 Length ................................................................2.lo2 Length, mixing ............................................5.lO. 5.11 Level, confidence ................................................ 8.33 Level control ........................................................ 7.55 Level, full reservoir ............................................. 7.46 Level, liquid ......................................................... 2.79 I.imit. modular .....................................................4.3O Limits, confidence ............................................... 8.32 Line, debris .......................................................... 2.62 Line, range ........................................................... 7.49 Line. sounding .....................................................6.37 Line. stay .............................................................6.29 Line. tag ...............................................................6.3~ Line. trash ............................................................2.62 Liquid level ....................................................2. L.2.79 Liquid level recorder ...........................................6.l3 Load. bed ............................................................. 7.8 Load. bedmaterial ............................................... 7.6 Load. suspended .................................................. 7.7 Load. total ........................................................7.3.7.4 Load. wash ........................................................... 7.9 Long. base weir .................................................... 3.8 Looped stage-discharge curve ............................. 3.28 Loss. energy .................................................2.76 .2.77 Loss. head ....................................................2.7.6.2.77 Low water ............................................................3.42 Measuring section ............................................... 2.58 Median particle diameter .................................... 7.39 Meter, cument ...................................................... 3.56 Meter, velocity, ultrasonic (acoustic) .................. 6.55 Method, conductivity .......................................... 5.18 Method, constant fall ........................................... 3.32 Method, constant rate injection ........................... 5.3 Method, depth. integration ................................... 7.17 Method, filtration ................................................ 7.21 Method, gravimetric ............................................ 7.23 Method, hy&ometer ............................................ 7.22 Method integration (dilution method) ................. 5.4 Method, integration (sediment sampling) ...........7.16 Method, integration (velocity-area measurement) .................................................... 3.18 Method, moving boat .......................................... 3.21 Method, normal fall ............................................. 3.31 Method, pipette .................................................... 7.24 Method, point ...................................................... 3.19 Method, sedimentation-recantation-evaporation 7.20 Method, slope. area .............................................. 3.2 Method, transit time ............................................ 5.21 Method, velocity-area ......................................... 3.1 Method of least squares ....................................... 8.21 Method of measurement, direct ......................... 7.18 Method of measurement, indirect ....................... 7.19 Midsection segment ............................................ 3.24 Minimum speed of response .............................. 6.22 Mixing degree of ................................................. 5.12 Mixing, length .............................................5.lo. 5.11 Mode, default ...................................................... 6.56 Modulwflow .......................................................4.29 Modula ...............................................................4.3O Moving boat method ........................................... 3.21 Multiple injection ................................................ 5.5

M Main cable ........................................................... 6.26 Manometer. servo ................................................ 6.9 Mariotte vessel ..................................................... 5.8 Mark. flood ..........................................................2.62 Mass. specific ......................................................7.l3 Mass discharge curve .......................................... 2.86 Material. bed ........................................................ 7.5 Material load. bed ................................................ 7.6 Material, sediment ............................................... 7.56 Mean, arithmetic weighted .................................. 8.17 Mean depth .........................................................2.ll3 Mean direction of flow ........................................ 3.3 Mean particle diameter ........................................ 7.38 Mean section segment ......................................... 3.23 Mean suspended concentration ........................... 7.11 Mean velocity ............................................2.66.. 2.67 Mean velocity depth ............................................ 2.65 Meandering channel ............................................ 2.29 Measure, performance ......................................... 6.58 Measurement, absolute error of ........................... 8.24 Measurement, error of ......................................... 8.24 Measurement, direct method of ........................... 7.18 Measurement, discharge ...................................... 2.42 Measurement, indirect method of ....................... 7.19 Measurement, weight of ...................................... 8.16 Measuring reach .................................................. 2.59 35

N Nappe ................................................................... 4.34 Nappe, clinging ................................................... 4.35 Nappe, fully aerated ............................................ 4.37 Nappe, fully developed contraction of ................ 4.38 Nappe, fully ventilated ........................................ 4.37 Nappe, unconfined .............................................. 4.36 Neap tide .............................................................. 3.40 Node .................................................................... 2.36 Nodal point .......................................................... 2.36 Nominal diameter ................................................ 7.41 Non.modula flow ............................................... 3.31 Normal depti ......................................................2.lOl Normal distibution ............................................. 8.20 Normal fall method ............................................. 3.31 Normal fall stage-discharge relation ................... 3.31 Normal ponded reservoir ..................................... 7.48 Normal velocity distribution ............................... 2.63 Number of degrees of freedom .......................... 8.10

IS 1191:2003 Number, Froude ..................................................2.l23 Number, Reynolds ..............................................2.l24 Number, Weber ..................................................2.l25 R Rad ....................................................................... 5.27 Radioactive isotope ............................................. 5.28 Radio isotope ....................................................... 5.28 Radio isotopic solution ........................................ 6.29 Radius, hydraulic ................................................2.ll4 Ramp gauge ......................................................... 6.2 Random error ....................................................... 8.28 Random uncertainty ............................................ 8.36 Range, tidal .......................................................... 3.50 Range line ............................................................ 7.49 Range of values ................................................... 6.59 Ranging rod ......................................................... 7.5o Rate of sedimentation of reservoir ...................... 7.52 Rating ..........................................................2.9l. 2.92 Rating, discontinuous .......................................... 2.94 Rating, unit-fall ................................................... 2.93 Rating tank .......................................................... 6.23 Ratio, dilution ..............................................5.l4. 5.15 Ratio, submergence ............................................. 4.32 Raw data .............................................................2.l35 Reach ................................................................... 2.28 Reach, converging ............................................... 2.60 Reach, expanding ................................................ 2.61 Reach, measuring ................................................ 2.59 Realtime ..............................................................2.l43 Recorder, liquid level .......................................... 7.13 Recorder, stage .................................................... 7.12 Redundancy ........................................................2.l3l Reel, gauging ....................................................... 6.33 Reference cument-meter, ..................................... 3.16 Reference gauge .................................................. 3.15 Regime, flow ....................................................... 2.2 Regression ...................................................8.22. 8.23 Relation, constant fall stage-discharge ............... 3.32 Relation, fall stage-discharge .............................. 3.33 Relation, hysteresis of the stage discharge ......... 3.38 Relation, normal fall stage-discharge ................. 3.31 Relation, sensitivity of the stage discharge ......... 3.39 Relation, slope stage-discharge ........................... 3.33 Relation, stage-discharge .................................... 2.82 Remote sensing ..................................................2.l27 Remote telemetry station ...................................2.128 Remote telemetry unit ........................................2.l29 Reservoir ............................................................. 7.51 Reservoir, normal podded ................................... 7.48 Reservoir, rate of sedimentation of ..................... 7,52 Reservoir; trap efficiency of ............................... 7.54 Reservoir del& ..................................................... 7.53 Reservoir level, full ............................................. 7.46 Residual standard deviation ................................ 8.31 Residual variance ................................................ 8.15 Resolution ............................................................ 8.1 Response, minimum speed of ............................. 6.22 Reynolds number ................................................2.l24 Right bank ........................................................... 2.46 36

o
Oden theory .........................................................7.l5 Open channel .......................................................2.l4 Operating conditions ........................................... 6.61 Outlier .................................................................. 8.26 Overall performance level ................................... 6.64

P Panel ....................................................................3.25 Parity check ........................................................2.l32 Parshall flume ...................................................... 3.25 Particle diameter, geometric mean ...................... 7.40 Particle diameter, mean ....................................... 7.38 Particle diameter, median .................................... 7.39 Particle size ..........................................................7.37 Particle size distribution ...................................... 7.27 Peak stage ..........................................................2.lO9 Pendant wire ........................................................6.39 Performance, timing ............................................ 6.65 Performance level, overall ................................... 6.64 Performance measure .......................................... 6.58 Perimeter, wetted .........................................2.55. 2.56 Period of pulsation ............................................... 3.8 Pier. baffle ........................................................... 4.4 Piezometric head ................................................. 2.71 Pipette method .....................................................7.24 Pitch. propeller ....................................................6.l9 Pitch. rotor ...........................................................6.2O Pocket. separation ........................................4.39 .4.4O Poinl, inflection ................................................... 2.36 Point, nodal ............... . . . .................................... 2.36 Point gauge .......................................................... 6.4 Point-integrating sampler .................................... 7.35 Point method ........................................................3.l9 Population ............................................................ 8.6 Power .................................................................2.l38 Precision .............................................................. 8.2 Prism, tidal ...........................................................3.48 Profile. bed ...........................................................2.49 Projected diameter ...............................................7.42 Propeller pitch .....................................................6.l9 Propellel--type clll~ent-n~eter ............................... 6.17 Pulsation, period of .............................................. 3.8 Pulse .....................................................................6.48 Pumping sampler ................................................. 7.36 Pycnotneter ..........................................................7.32

Quenching,

Q fluorescence

..................................... 5.42

IS 1191:2003 Rime ice .............................................................Q.lO6 Ripple ...................................................................2.32 River .................................................................... 2.23 River, alluvial ................................................. .....2.24 River-braided ....................................................... 2.27 River, incised ...............................................2.25. 2.26 l{od. ranging ........................................................7.5O Rod, soundiIlg ...................................................... 6.37 Rod. velocity ........................................................6.44 Rod, wading .........................................................6.38 Rod float ..............................................................6.44 Rontgen ................................................................5.3O Rotating-ele~nent cul-l-ent-meter .......................... 6.15 Rotor pitch ...........................................................6.2O Roughnes scoefficient ........................................2.121 Rugosity coefficient ...........................................2.121 Settling ve]ocity ................................................... 7.25 Shift adjustment ................................................... 2.85 Shift diagram .......................................................2.95 Shofl.crested weir ............................................... 4.9 Short-throated flume ...................................4.23. 4.24 Side slope ............................................................ 2.5o Sieve diameter ..................................................... 7.44 Silt ........................................................................ 7.56 Siltometer ............................................................7.29 Single-gauge station ............................................ 2.88 Sinker ................................................................... 6.36 Siphon. floating ................................................... 5.9 Size, grain ............................................................ 7.37 Size. pafiicle ........................................................7.37 Size. sample ......................................................... 8.8 Sizedistfibution ................................................... 7.26 Size distribution, grain ........................................ 7.27 Size distribution, particle .................................... 7.27 Slope. bed ............................................................2.48 Slope, bottom ...................................................... 2.48 Slope, ftiction US ................................................ 2.48 Slope, side ........................................................... 2.50 Slope, surface ...................................................... 2.51 Slope. areamethod ............................................... 3.2 Slope stage-discharge relation ............................ 3.33 Slush ice .............................................................2.lO8 Software ..............................................................2.l4l Solution, isotopic ................................................. 5.29 Solution, standard ................................................ 5.17 Solution, radio isotopic ....................................... 5.29 Sounder, echo ...................................................... 6.45 Sounding .............................................................. 3.12 Sounding line ....................................................... 6.37 Sounding rod ....................................................... 6.37 Sounding weight .................................................. 6.36 Specific discharge .......................................2.39. 2.40 Specific energy .................................................... 2.78 Specific mass ....................................................... 7.13 Spectrometry, atomic absorption flame .............. 5.38 Spectrometry, atomic emission flame ................. 5.39 Speed of response, minimum .............................. 6.22 Spin test ............................................................... 6.21 Spring tide ........................................................... 3.39 Spurious emor ...................................................... 8.27 Stable channel ..................................................... 2.16 Staff gauge ........................................................... 6.1 Stage ....................................................................2.79 Stage-discharge curve, looped ............................ 3.28 Stage.discharge relation ...................................... 2.82 Stage-discharge relation, constant fall ................3.32 Stage-discharge relation, fall ............................... 3.33 Stage-discharge relation, hysteresis of the .......... 3.28 Stage-discharge relation, normal fall ..................3.31 Stage-discharge relation, sensitivity of the ......... 3.39 Stage gauge ........................................................2.ll5 Stage gauge, crest ................................................ 6.6 37

s
Salt. water wedge .................................................3.55 Sample ................................................................. 8.7 Salllple size .......................................................... 8.8 Sampler, depth. integrating .................................. 7.33 Sampler, installtaneolis ........................................ 7.34 Sampler. point. integrating ...................................7.35 Sampler. punlping ................................................7.36 Sampling cross. sectioll ........................................ 5.16 Sampling station ..................................................5.l6 Sand .....................................................................7.56 Saniiri flume ........................................................4.26 Scilltillator ...........................................................5.3l Section. conlrol ....................................................4.4l Section, gauging .................................................. 2.58 Section, measuring .............................................. 2.58 Sediment .............................................................. 7.1 SediIl~ent concentration ....................................... 7.IO Sediment concentration, time-weighted mean suspended ..........................................................7.ll Sediment material ................................................ 7.56 Sediment transport ............................................... 7.2 Sedimentation-recantation-evaporation [nethod ............................................................... 7.20 Sedimentation diameter .......................................7.43 Sedimentation tube .............................................. 7.31 Sedimentation of reservoir, rate of ...................... 7.52 Segment, mean section ........................................ 3.23 Segment, midsection ........................................... 3.24 Seiche .... ............................................................... 3.53 Sensing. renlote ..................................................2.l27 Sensitivity coefficient .......................................... 8.4 Sensitivity of thestage-discharge relation .......... 3.39 Sensor ..................................................................6.l4 Separation pocket ........................................4.39. 4.40 Servo beam balance ............................................. 6,9 Servo lnanometer ................................................. 6.9 Servo system ........................................................ 6.8

IS 1191:2003 Stage hydrograph .................................................2.83 Stage, peak .........................................................2.lO9 Stage recorder ......................................................6.l3 Standard cument.meter ........................................ 3.17 Standard deviation, experimental ........................ 8.12 Standard deviation, residual ................................ 8.31 Standard deviation of the mean, experimental .... 8.13 Standard emorof estimation ................................ 8.31 Standard. solution ................................................. 5.17 Standing-wave flume ........................................... 4.22 Tank, rating ......................................................... 6.23 Technique, bubbler .............................................. 6.11 Technique, gas purge .......................................... 6.11 Telemetry ............................................................2.l26 Telemetry station, remote ...................................2.128 Telemetry unit, remore .......................................2.l29 Test, spin ............................................................. 6.21 Thalweg .......................................................2.33. 2.34 Thin-plate weir .................................................... 4.6 Thin-plate notch weir .......................................... 4.7 Throat .................................................................. 4.27 Tidal amplitude ................................................... 3.45 Tidal channel ....................................................... 2.18 Tidal cycle ........................................................... 3.46 Tidal day .............................................................. 3.47 Tidal prism .......................................................... 3.49 Tidal range ........................................................... 3.50 Tidal waterway .................................................... 2.19 Tide ...................................................................... 3.34 Tide, duration of .................................................. 3.48 Tide, ebb .............................................................. 3.35 Tide, flood ........................................................... 3.37 Tide, neap ............................................................ 3.40 Tide, spring .......................................................... 3.39 Timing performance ............................................ 6.65 Top width ............................................................ 2.54 Total head ............................................................ 3.72 Total head, downstream ...................................... 4.45 Total head, upstream ........................................... 3.46 Total head level ................................................... 2.74 Total head line ..................................................... 2.73 Total load .........................................................7.3. 7.4 Tow cable ............................................................6.3l Tracer ................................................................... 5.1 Track .................................................................... 6.26 Tracking window (of echo sounder) ...................6.47 Transducer ........................................................... 6.46 Transport, sediment ............................................. 7.2 Transverse flow ................................................... 2.9 Transit time method ............................................ 5.21 Transition ............................................................. 2.35 Trap efficiency of reservoir ................................ 7.54 Trash line ............................................................. 2.62 Traversing cable .................................................. 6.31 Triangular.profile weir ........................................ 4.11 True value ............................................................ 8.9 Tube, bottom withdrawal .................................... 7.30 Tube, sedimentation ............................................ 7.31 Tube. stilling .......................................................2.ll9 Twin-gauge station .............................................. 2.89

Station. gauging ...................................................2.87 Station. sampling .................................................5.l6 Station, single. gauge ........................................... 2.88 Station, twin. gauge .............................................. 2.89 Stay line ...............................................................6.29 Steady flow .......................................................... 2.3 Stilling basin ........................................................4.28 Stilling tube .........................................................2.ll9 Stilling well .........................................................2.ll8
Stilling well lag .................................................... 3.30 SLorage, channel .................................................. 3.22 Storage curve .......................................................3.26 Storage and transport, conditions of .................... 6.60 Straightening vane ............................................... 4.2 Stratification of flow ........................................... 2.10 Stream ..................................................................2.2l Stream, cross-section of a .................................... 3.57 Stream gauging ....................................................2.4l Structure, compound ........................................... 4.14 Student's tdistribution ........................................ 8.34 Sub-critical flow .................................................. 2.7 Submergence ratio ...............................................4.32 Subsurface float ...................................................8.42 Supercritical flow ................................................ 2.8 Sutiace drawdown ...............................................2.52 Surface float .........................................................6.4l Surface ice .........................................................2.lO7 Surface slope .......................................................2.5l Surface velocity ................................................... 2.64 Suspended concentration, average ...................... 7.12 Suspended concentration, mean .......................... 7.11 Suspended load .................................................... 7.7 Suspended sediment concentration, timeweighted mean .................................................. 7.11 Suspension, hand-held ......................................... 6.32 Suspension cable .................................................6.3O Suspension equipment ......................................... 6.27 System ...............................................................2.l34 Systematic emor ................................................... 8.29 Systematic uncertainty ........................................ 8.37

T Tag.line ................................................................6.39 Tank, calibration .................................................. 6.23 Tank, constant level ............................................. 5.7 38

u
Ultrasonic velocity meter .................................... 6.54 Uncertainty .......................................................... 8.35 Uncertainty, random ............................................ 8.36

IS 1191:2003 Wall, divide ......................................................... 4.lg Wall, wing ........................................................... 4.17 Wash load ............................................................ 7.9 Water, high .......................................................... 3.4 I Water,low ........................................................... 3.42 Waterway, tidal ................................................... 2.19 Webernumber ....................................................2.l25 Wedge, salt. water ................................................ 3.55 Weight, sounding ................................................ 6.36 Weighted average ................................................ 8.17 Weight. gauge. wire ............................................ 6.7 v Weight of measurement ...................................... 8.16 Value. average ..................................................... 8.3 Weighted mean, arithmetic ................................. 8.17 Value. true ........................................................... 8.9 Weir ..................................................................... 4.5 Values, range of ................................................... 6.59 Weir, broad.crested ............................................. 4.10 Vane. guide .......................................................... 4.2 Weir, compound .................................................. 4.13 Vane. straightening .............................................. 4.2 Weir, flat-V ......................................................... 4.12 Variance. experimental ........................................8.l4 Weir, flat-width ................................................... 4.15 Variance. residual ................................................8.l5 Weir, head over the ............................................. 4.43 Velocity ...............................................................2.44 Weir, height of ..................................................... 4.42 Velocity, approach ............................................... 2.68 Weir. long.base ................................................... 4.8 Velocity, critical .................................................. 2.12 Weir. shoti.crested .............................................. 4.9 Velocity .drift ...................................................... 3.7 Weir. thin.plate .................................................... 4.6 Velocity .fall ........................................................7.25 Weir, thin-plate notch .......................................... 4.7 Velocity, mean .............................................2.66. 2.67 Weir, triangular-profile ....................................... 4.11 Velocity .settling ..................................................7.25 Weir abutment ..................................................... 4.17 Velocity .surface ..................................................2.64 Weir block ........................................................... 4.16 Velocity.area method .......................................... 3.1 Weir body ............................................................4.l6 Velocity coefficient, vertical ............................... 3.11 Well, float ...........................................................2.l2O Velocity curve. vertical ....................................... 3.9 Well, gauge .........................................................2.ll8 Velocity depth, mean ........................................... 2.65 Well stilling ........................................................2.ll8 Velocity distribution, normal .............................. 2.63 Wet line comection .............................................. 3.14 Velocity head .......................................................2.69 Wetted perimeter .........................................2.55. 2.56 Velocity meter, ultrasonic [acoustic] ..................6.54 Width ..................................................................2.lO3 Velocity rod .........................................................6.44 Width, discharge per unit .................................... 2.38 Velocity v~rtical gradient .................................... 3.10 Width, top ............................................................ 2.54 Venturi flume .......................................................4.2l Winch .................................................................. 6.33 Vefiical ................................................................ 3.4 Winch, double drum ............................................ 6.34 Vertical control ....................................................7.55 Wing wall ............................................................ 4.17 Vertical gauge ...................................................... 6.1 Wire, pendant ...................................................... 6.39 Vertical velocity coefficient ................................ 3.11 Wireweight gauge .............................................. 6.7 Vellical velocity curve ........................................ 3.9 Withdrawal tube, bottom ..................................... 7.30 Vessel. mariotte ................................................... 5.8 Work ...................................................................2.l39 Volume, ebb ........................................................3.43 Worker, classified ................................................ 5.22 Volume, flood. .............................................3.44 Worker, unclassified ........................................... 5.32 Volumetric activity .............................................. 5.33 Uncertainty, systematic ....................................... 8.37 Unclassified worker .............................................5.32 U1lconfined nappe ................................................4.36 Uniform flow ....................................................... 2.5 Unit discharge ......................................................2.38 Unit. fallrating .....................................................2.93 Unstable channel ................................................. 2.17 Unsteady flow ...................................................... 2.4 Upstream total head .............................................4.46

z w
Wading rod .......................................................... 6.38 Zero flow, gauge height of., ................................ 2.80 firoflow line, gauge height of ..........................2.8l

39

IS 1191:2003

ANNEX B (Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION

Fluid Flow Measurement Sectional Committee, WRD 1
Orgurrization Central Water Commission , New Delhi AIMIL Private Ltd, New Delhi f3hakm Bcas Management Chrmrl Water& Board, Punjab Representative (s) SHRiS. K. DAS (Chairman) SHRIS. C. JAIN SHR1K. S. SuBRAMANtAM(Alternate)
DtRECTOR (WR) SENIORDESIGNENGINEER (WR) (Alternate) SHRIA. R. CHAVAN SHRIB. S. KULKARNI (Ahernafe) SHRIS. K. SENGUPTA DIRECTOR(P& D) (Alfernafe) SHRIT. S. BATHJJA SHRI S. S. NARANG (Alternate) SHR1V. R. MUNAGEKAR SHRIS. R. MUNAGEKAR(Alternate) DR NAGARAJSITARAM SHRIJACOBCHANDAPILLAI (Ahernate) DR K. SRIDHARAN DR G. L. ASAWA DIRECTOR (ERS) DIRECTOR (ERS) CHIEFENGINEER (lPRI) RESEARCH OFFICER(IPRl) (Affernafe) DIRECTOR (lRI) CHIEFENGINEER (GANGA) (Alternate) JOINTDIRECTOR (STANDARDS) DEPUTYDIRECrOR(STANDARDS) (Alternate)
.$HRt SHANKRACHARYA

PowerResearchStation,Pune

CentralWaterCommission,New Delhi
Consulting Engineering Services (India) Private Ltd, New Delhi Electronic Equipments, Pune Fluid Con[ml Research Institute, Palghat (Kerala) Indian Institute of Science, Barrgalore Indian Institute of Technology (Department of Civil Engineering), Roorkee Irrigation Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh Imigation Department, Government of Karnataka Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh Ministry of Railways (RDSO), National Hydroelectric Lucknow

Power Corporation Ltd, Faridabad

SHRIRAJIVBABOOTA (Alternate 1) SHRtANIL BHATNAGAR (Alternate 11)

National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi In personal capacity (425//4 T.V. Nagar, Purr< 411 037) BIS Directorate General

DIRECTOR DR P. K. MOHAPATRA(Alternate) RESEARCH OFFICER DIRECTOR (Alfernafe) DR S. V. CHtTALE SHRIS. S. SETHI,Director& Head(WRD)

[Representing DirectorGeneral(Ex-oficio)]
Member Secretary
SHRI S. S. sETHt

Director ( WRD), BIS

40

Bureau of Indian Standards
B 1 S is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country.

of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods

Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments `!31S Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed of comments. Standards are also reviewed such review indicates that no changes are up for revision. Users of Indian Standards or edition by referring to the latest issue of

from Doc : No WRD 1 (268).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 603843 609285 { 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 J3ahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, K mkurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Eastern

Northern

Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

fIOO113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. : 4HMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. IGHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NAL.4GARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at Rabhat Offset Press. New Delhi-2

