(Reaffirmed 2012)

IS: 9826 -1981

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO HARVESTING AND THRESHING EQUIPMENT
Harvesting, Threshing and Transport Equipment Sectional Committee, Al%C5i
Chairman DR S, I<. VERMA
Representing

Punjab Agricultural

University,

Ludhiana

DR L. N. SHIIKLA ( Alterttate to DR S. R. VERMA) National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), Karnal SHRI V. I'. ANEJA DR S. P. AOARWALA( Alternate ) Department of Agriculture, Government of Punjab, SHRI S. S. BAINS Chandigarh National Agricultural Co-operative Marketing SHRI BHUP~ZNDRA I-ederation of India Ltd, New Delhi Punjab Tractors Limited, Ropar SHRI CHANDRAMOHAN SIIRI G. S. RIHAL ( Alternate ) Indian Investment Ccntre, New Delhi SHRI C. B. CHUC~H Tractor Training Centre ( Ministry of Agriculture ), DIKECTOR Jiissar SENIORTtx ENCXNXER ( Alfernure ) Mahindra Owen Limited, Pune SHRI A. K. GARG SHRJ G. C. SINGHAL( Alternate ) Department of Agriculture, Government of U. P., SHtU R. C. GOEL Lucknow SHRI C. S. SHARMA( Alternafe ) State Farms Corporation of India Ltd. New Delhi SHRI R. K. GUI'TA SHRI h4. L. GARG (Alternate ) Tractor Training & Testing Station ( Ministry of SHRI S. K. MISRA Agriculture ), Budni SHRI J. PRASAD( Alternnte ) Union Forgings, Ludhiana SHRI I~osaJIr .%~Citi SHRI PARAMJIT SINGH ( Alternate ) Dunlop India Limited, Calcutta SHRI H. S. KUMARASWAMY Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering PROF A. C. PANDYA ( ICAR ), Bhopal ( Continued on puge 2 )

INDIAN

STANDARDS

INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indirm Cop.vrik/zt Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:9826-

1981

( Continued from page 1 ) Members Represenlitg

SHR~P.N.

PANGOTRA

DK J. S. PANWAR
SHRI K. K. KAUL ( Alternate) DR K. M. PATEL SHRI K. K. PATBL ( Aiternute ) SHKI E. C. PETER

Ministry of Agriculture ( Department of Agriculture & Co-operation ), New Delhi Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ). New Delhi Jyoti Limited, Vadodara Haryana Agro-Industries Chandigarh Vicon Limited, Rangalore Escorts Limited, Faridabad Corporation Ltd.

SHRI M. R. AHLADA RAO SHRI RIPDAMANSINC~H SHKI N. L. K. MAL~IOTRA ( AlfernoIe ) Hindsons Private Ltd, Patiala SHRI R. K. SABHARWAL Govind Ballabh Pant University of Agriculture & DR K. N. SINOH Technology, Pantnagar ( Distt Nainital ) PKOF BHWWAN SINGH ( Alrernate ) U. P. State Agro-Industrial Corporation Ltd. SHRI R. S. YADA~A Lucknow Director General, IS1 ( Er-officio Member ) SHRI T. PURNANANDAM. Director ( Agri & Food )
Secreiory

SHRI R. N. SHARMA Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

2

IS : 9826 - 1981

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING HARVESTING AND THRESHING EQUIPMENT
0.

TO

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 May 1981, after the draft finalized by the Harvesting, Threshing and Transport Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 With the increasing usage of harvesting and threshing equipment, a large number of such equipment are being manufactured and new equipment are A need has, therebeing designed, developed and modified in the country. fore, been felt for a comprehensive glossary which would provide authentic It is hoped definition of the various terms associated with these equipment. that this standard would fuhil this need. The terms associated with combine-harvester-thresher have been covered in IS : 8122 ( Part I )-1976*.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the definition harvesting and threshing equipment. 2. GENERAL TERMS or or of various terms used in relation to

2.1 Harvesting - The operation of cutting, picking, plucking or digging, a combination of these for removing the crop from under the ground above the ground or removing the useful part or fruit from the plants.

2.2 Separating - The process of isolating the detached grain, small debris and incompletely threshed or completely unthreshed grain from the bulk of straw, stem or stalk. 2.3 Threshing - The process of detaching the grains from the earheads or from the plants. 2.4 Winnowing - The process of separation grain and chaff or straw or BHUSA. *Test code for combine-harvester-thresher of grains from the mixture of

: Part I Terminology. 3

IS : 9826 - 1981 3. HARVESTING EQUIPMENT

3.1 Equipment for Forage and Grain Crops 3.1.1 Cock A small conical heap of hay.
to cut crops and

3.1.2 Cutter Loader vehicle.

A machine

to deliver them to a

3.1.3 Cutting Mcchnnism 3.1.3.1 Cutter bar - The assembly comprising guard ( finger ) bar, guards ( fingers), knife guides, wearing plate, outer shoe and main shoe, that is, the non-reciprocating part of the cutting mechanism. to a shoe mainly for dealing with tangled a) Divider - An attachment crops. b) Guard (finger ) - A finger like attachment bolted to the forward edge of a guard bar and through which knife section reciprocates ( S~JL' Fig. I ). c) Guard (jngcr ) bar - A steel bar to carry guards ( fingers ), wearing plates and knife guide ( st'c Fig. 1 ). an inner shoe to d) fntwr shot slcid - A steel skid fitted underneath adjust the height of the cutter bar. e) Inter s110c whwl -- A wheel fitted to an inner shoe to adjust the height of the cutter bar. f) Inner swath board - An attachment to an inner shoe tonarrow the swath. g) Knife guide - A guide bolted to the finger bar to maintain the knife section and the finger in close content ( see Fig. 1 ). h) Lcdqer plate - A hardened metal insert in a guard over which knife section moves to give a scissor-like cutting action. This may have plain or serrated cutting edge ( see Fig. 1 ). part to support the inner end j) Main slroe - The non-reciprocating of the cutter bar. It is also known as inner shoe ( scae Fig. 2 ). k) Outer shoe -- The non-reciprocating pointed attachment at the outer end of the cutter bar carrying a wheel or a skid and a grass board ( XL' Fig. 2 ). m) OLltcr SIUX skid - A steel skid fitted underneath an outer shoe to adjust the height of the cutter bar. n) Outer shoe wheel - A wheel fitted to an outer height of the cutter bar. 4 shoe to adjust the

IS:9826p)
Wearing pla?e -

1981

to form a bearing

A hardened steel plate attached to the finger bar surface for the back of the knife ( set Fig. 1 ).

r

KNIFE SECTION

/-KNIFE

GUIDE

FIG. I KNIFE AND GUARD ASSEMBLY
INNER

CUTER

DRIVING WHEEL

&LLlTCH

\-CLUTCH LEVKR

FIG. 2 MOWER
3.1.3.2 Knife - The reciprocating parts of the cutting mechanism comprising of knife head, knife back and knife sections. a) Kt@ hack -- The strip of steel to which knife sections are rivetted and knife head is attached (SW Fig. 1 ). b) Knife head - The portion of the knife connected to a mechanism to give reciprocating motion.

5

IS:9826-

1981

c) Knife section - A flat steel plate ( roughly triangular in shape) with two cutting edges. The cutting edges may be plain or serrated ( xc Fig. 1 ). 3.1.3.3 PiTman- A connecting to the knife head ( SW Fig. 2). 3.1.3.4 Rcupit~gattaclrmrnt to cut grain crops. rod to transmit A set of attachments reciprocating motion

to adopt a mower

3.1.3.5 Swatluirgattachmrnt -- An attachment concentrate the swath. 3.1.3.6 Swath hnar(J-An attachment swath away from the uncut crop. 3.1.4 Difmp Rnke desired interval. A machine

to mower cutter bar to shoe dumps to direct material the at a

to an outer

which collects and

3 1 5 Fnqqr Hurv?stcr - A machine fod&r and deliver it to a vehicle. 3.1.6 Tray Locdcr -A machine

to cut or pick up, chop or lacerate

to pick up and load hay from windrows. to collect dried cut crops into transverse in swath ( s). blades

3.1.7 Hay R~zkewindrows. 3.1.8 Mower ( SW Fig. 2 ).

A machine

A machine

to cut herbage

crops and leave them by animal

3.1.8.1 At~imul-drawnmower -

A mower operated with

3.1.8.2 Cylinllcr mower - A mower arranged in horizontal cylindrical form. 3.1.8.3 Flail mower - A operating tither in a horizontal 3.1.8.4 Gn11g mower cylinder mowers.

rotating

helical

mower with high speed swinging knives plane or around a horizontal cylinder. of two or more A mower A mower with high operated ground-driven speed knives or

An assembly

3.1.8.5 Horizontal rotary mower rotating in the horiLonta1 plane. 3.1.5.6 Powcpr-operated mower power tillers.

by tractor

3.1.8.7 Rcciprocatittg mower - A mower having knife reciprocates against stationary fingers ( guards ) ( see Fig. 3 ). 6

section

that

IS:9826-

1981

FIG. 3 RECIIWKXTING MOWER 3.1.9 pich_-lq BuI`lr - A machine to collect the crop or straw from swaths or windrows, to compress it to rectangular shaped mass and to tie firmly with wire or twine for easy handling and storage.
3.1.10
Rmpr -- A machine bid,r -

to cut grain

crops. after cutting the crops, tics

3.1.10.1 Rcqw

them into neat and uniform

A reaper which, sheaves.

3.1.10.2 Si&&liwry rcqwr - A reaper which delivers crop on the side having the space for the next run clear.

the harvcstcd grip used for

3.1.11 Sic~ltk harvesting

A curved by manual power. Cut material

steel

blade

having

a hand

3.1.12 Sw~tlz swaths.

as left by a machine. formed cut by combining and deliver two or more them in a

3.1.13 Wbulrow -

A row of material
to

3.1.14 W'idmvcr --- A mac!nne uniform manner in a row. cutter

crops

3.1.14.1 Windrowiq trttmlwzent -- A series of bars attached to the bar, curved upward at the rear end, to roll the swath into a windrow.

3.2 Root Crop Equipment 3.2.1 G'rozr~l~~t Di::ger - A machine from the soil to facilitate their picking. to expose the pods digger of groundnut with a mechato the surface

3.2.1.1 Groumhut cii,ysrcr .sJmkc)r -- A groundnut nism for separating soil from the pods. 3.2.2 Pornto Di:<,cer of the soil for collection.

A machine

to bring

the potatoes

IS:9826-

1981

3.2.2.1 Potato digger shkcr - A potato digger to separate potatoes from soil by means of reciprocating grids and to deliver the potatoes in a narrow band on the ground. 3.2.2.2 Potato elevator dig,yc'r - A potato digger to separate potatoes from soil by means of a open-web elevator and to deliver the potatoes in a narrow band on the ground. 3.2.2.3 Potato hmwter - A potato digger to separate soil, trash, etc, and to deliver them into a container. 3.2.2.4 Yotaro spinner - A potato digger to deliver side by means of fingers carried on a rotating hub. 3.2.3 Potato Plough ~ A plough used for harvesting raising the potatoes to the surface of the soil. 3.2.4 Szrgarhcrt Harvrster ---- A machine which the tubers and delivers them ready for carting. 3.25 S'tqarbect from the soil. 3.3 Miscellaneous
Lifter -

potatoes potatoes

from to one

potatoes

and also cleans

lifts, tops and/or and lift

An

implement

to

loosen

sugarbeets

Equipment
A device to pull the cotton I@$ -

3.3.1 Cofforl Stalk Puller field. 3.3.2 Sy~arcanc Harvcsthg edge with hand grip. 3.3.3 Sugar-carte Stripper and leave sheaths from cane. 4. THRESHING 4.1 Thresher -

stalks

from

the

The

steel

plate removal

with sharp

cutting

A device used for

of dry leaves and

EQUIPMENT A machine used for threshing An equipment operation. of groundnut crop. operation with

4.2 Groundnut Thresher crop. 4.3 Millet Thresher -

used for threshing

An equipment

used for threshing which performs

of millet

4.4 Mobile Thresher - The thresher while the machine itself is moving.

the threshing

4.5 Multicrop Thresher --- An equipment or without minor adjustments. 8

used for more than one crop

IS : 9826- 1981 4.6 Olpad Thresher - A mainly wheat thresher consisting of a series of notched discs placed on three axles fixed on a wooden or iron frame on which a seat and a platform are provided. This thresher is operated by animal ( s ). 4.7 Paddy Thresher - An equipment used for threshing of paddy crop. 4.8 Pedal-operated Paddy Thresher - A paddy thresher consisting of mainly a balanced cylinder with series of threshing teeth fixed on slats and worked by a pedal and gear drive mechanism. 4.9 Power Thresher - A machine opcratcd by a prime mover, such as electric motor, engine, tractor, power tiller used for threshing (XC Fig. 4).
NOTE - The threshers may clean the grain with or without
THRESHING BEATER !i ,-

be designed to make RHUSA. to separate the grains, to
elevating
DRUM ARM BEATER

system

for the direct

bagging.

BNUSA

OUTLET

/,,-

SIEVE FRAME

FIG. 4 POWER TIIRESHER

IS : 9826- 1981 4.9.1 Components
of Power Thresher

4.9.1.1 ConcaveA concave shaped metal grating partly surrounding the cylinder against which the cylinder rubs the grain from the plant or earheads and through which the grains fall on the sieve (see Fig. 5).

4.9.1.2 C~GJer or drum - A balanced rotating rasp, beater bar or spikes on its periphery and their the crop ( .WCFig. 5 ).

assembly comprising support for threshing

CONCAVE FIG.

AND DRUhl

5 CONCAVE

4.9.2.1

Chute-fed

thresher -- A thresher

in which

the feeding

of the of

crop is done through

a chute.
thresher -

4.9.2.2 Conveyor-fed the crop is done through

A thresher

in which

the feeding

a conveyor.

4.9.2.3 Drummy-type thresher - A hammer mill type thresher without separation and cleaning systems. Usually a centrifugal blower is provided for partial separation and cleaning of grains. 4.9.2.4 Feed roller-fed thresher - A thresher in which the feeding done with the feed rollers equipped with chute or an endless conveyor. is

4.9.2.5 Hammer-mill thresher - A thresher with threshing unit consisting of the hammers or beaters with a closed cylinder casing and concave. It is equipped with a set of oscillating sieves and an aspiratory blower for separation and cleaning. 4.9.2.6 Hopper-fed thresher ~- A thresher in which feeding of the crop is done through a hopper. It is also known as bulk-fed thresher. 4.9.2.7 Rasp&r cylinder type thresher - A thresher, the threshing unit of which consists of bars with scrrations having an open concave. 10

IS: 9826 - 1981 4.9.2.5 Spike-tooth cylinder type thresher - A thresher, the threshing unit of which consists of drum having rows of spikes with a closed cylinder casing and concave, and equipped with a set of sieves and an aspiratory blower. 4.9.2.9 Syndicator-type thresher - A thresher, the threshing unit of which consists of a corrugated fly wheel with serrated chopping knives and This is also known as chaff cuttera closed cylinder casing and concave. type thresher. 4.10 Soyabean crop. Thresher An equipment used for threshing performs of soyabean the threshing

4.11 Stationary Thresher operation while the machine

The thresher which itself being stationary.

4.12 Wheat Thresher - An equipment or without BHUSA making provision. 5. WINNOWING EQUIPMENT

used for threshing

of wheat crop with

5.1 Winnower - A machine across falling grain. 5.2 Winnowing Fan purpose of winnowing

with one or two sieves and fan using used for creating air blast mainly

air steam for the

A machine of grain.

5.2.1 Manually-Operated Winnowing Fan - A winnowing by manual power either by hand or by pedals (see Fig. 6).

fan operated

FIG. 6 MANUALLY-OPERATED WINNOWING FAN

11

IS:

9826 - 1981 by a

5.2.2 Power-Operated Winnowing Fan - A winnowing fan operated prime mover, such as engine, electric motor, tractor or power tiller. 6. COMBINED HARVESTING AND THRESHING EQUIPMENT

6.1 Combine-Harvester-Thresher - A machine designed for harvesting, threshing, separating, cleaning and collecting grain while moving through Bagging arrangement may be provided. With a pick up the standing crop. attachment, it may be used for handling crop that has been swathed. It may be of self-propelled or tractor-operated ( trailed or side-mounted ) type.
NOTE-

For other definitions relating IO combine see IS : 8172 ( Part I )-1976*.

*Test code for combine-harvester-thresher

: Part I Terminology. 12

