IS 5410 : 2013 


(Reaffirmed 2018) 


TRAA Wb 
ade am IA — fatte 
(FAT Yate ) 
Indian Standard 
CEMENT PAINT — SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 87.040 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


October 2013 Price Group 7 


Paints, Varnishes and Related Products Sectional Committee, CHD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Paints, Varnishes and Related Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. Cement paint is a material consisting of Portland cement and other ingredients like lime, pigments, 
hygroscopic salts, water repellants, fungicides, etc. The material readily mixes with water and is used on porous 
surfaces like masonry, concrete, rough plaster except gypsum plaster. These paints have relatively better 
performance than distemper paints for outdoor protection and decoration of buildings. In view of the growing 
demand for this material, this standard was first formulated in 1969. 


The need to ensure absence of organic binding materials and the fungi static action of cement paint were considered 
important. While test for freedom from organic binders had been included in this standard, inclusion of a test for 
fungi static properties would be considered at a later date when facilities are available for commercial testing. 
This was revised in 1992. In this revision, test methods for determination of free lime, chlorides and loss on 
ignition had been modified. As the percent of all the raw materials were not mentioned in the standard, the loss on 
ignition value for individual raw materials could not be calculated and taken into consideration, it was felt that 
various difficulties could be removed, if the cement paint composition was not less than 65 percent ordinary 
Portland cement and also it satisfied all the performance requirement. 


Revision of this standard has been taken up with a view to incorporate the limit of lead restriction in this standard. 
The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard observed that in practice most of the paints like 
this paint are used for household/decorative as well as in industrial/commercial applications. Taking cognizance 
of the fact that lead exposure of human being, particularly children in residential premises is injurious to health 
and having adverse impact on human health and safety, the Committee felt the need to introduce lead restriction 
in all paints standards likely to be used for household and decorative purposes. 


This product is extensively used for interior or exterior decorative and protective finish in addition to other 
applications. The Committee observed that due to the vary nature of constituents used in formulation of this 
product, it may not be feasible to manufacture this product having lead restriction very low. Therefore, in this 
revision, lead restriction up to a maximum permissible limit of 300 ppm has been prescribed to avoid hazardous 
impact of lead exposure in homes and consequent adverse impact on environment and human health. This limit 
has also been prescribed keeping in view of the scope for exposure to children to the paint once dried. Further, 
majority of consumers are not aware of the consequences of lead toxicity and its long term implications to human 
health. Therefore In this revision, along with lead restriction, a suitable cautionary notice has been included in 
the marking clause. 


A scheme for labelling environment friendly products to be known as ECO-Mark is already there at the instance 
of the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MEF). The ECO-Mark shall be administered by the Bureau of 
Indian Standards (BIS) under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 as per the Resolution No. 71 dated 20 
February 1991 published in the Gazette of the Government of India. For a product to be eligible for ECO-Mark 
it shall also carry Standard Mark of BIS for quality besides meeting additional optional environment friendly 
(EF) requirements. 


The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex L. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5410 : 2013 


Indian Standard 
CEMENT PAINT — SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes requirements and methods of 
sampling and test for cement paint colour as required. 
The material is intended for use on walls, ceilings, and 
as an interior or exterior decorative and protective 
finish. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contains provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 1303 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) — It is 
defined as the volatile matter content minus the water 
content. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 Composition 


The material, on analysis as prescribed in Annex B, 
shall show a chemical composition as given below. The 
composition of the bulk supply shall be similar to that 
of the registered sample: 


Percent by Mass 
Portland cement 65 Min 
Hydrated lime 25 Max 


Alkali resistant pigments, 
water repellants, 
hygroscopic salts, 
fungicides 


In suitable proportions 
to produce a material to 
satisfy the requirements 
of this standard 


4.1.1 Freedom from Organic Binders 

The material shall be free from organic binders, when 
tested as prescribed in Annex C. 

4.2 Preparation for Use 

The material shall be in the powder form, free from 


lumps that are not friable and when mixed with required 
volume of water shall be suitable for use on porous 


surfaces of masonry, concrete, stucco, common brick 
and rough plaster work, except gypsum plaster. The 
surface to which the paint is applied shall be free from 
chalking or other extraneous matter which interfere 
with the adhesion of the paint to the surface. 


4.3 The water mixed paint shall be kept well stirred 
during use and shall be applied within 1 h of 
preparation. The surface to be painted shall be wetted 
with water before application. 


4.4 Lead Restriction 


The material shall be tested for restriction from lead in 
accordance with IS 101 (Part 8/Sec 5). When thus tested 
the material shall not contain lead or compounds of 
lead or mixtures of both, calculated as metallic lead 
exceeding 300 ppm. 


4.5 Fastness to Light 
4.5.1 Panel 


Panel used fort his test, unless otherwise mentioned, 
shall be prepared as prescribed in 7 of IS 101 
(Part 1/Sec 3). 


4.5.1.1 Asbestos cement or gypsum board panel 
(see IS 2096) 


These panels are for testing in xenon Arc apparatus 
and having dimensions, suitable for the apparatus being 
used for the test but, shall not be smaller than 60 mm x 
40 mm. The panel to colour with paints as prepared 
in D-2.1 and D-3.1. 


4.5.1.2 Concrete panels 


It is of size 150 mm x 150 mm x 12.5 mm prepared as 
described in D-1, D-2 and D-3. 


4.5.2 Test Conditions 


The material shall be tested according to the method 
prescribed in IS 101(Part 4/Sec 3) in xenon arc 
apparatus with the test conditions as prescribed below: 


a) Black panel temperature, 63 + 3°C; 


b) Continuous exposure in light; and 
c) Time of exposure to light for 250 h. 


4.6 Durability 


When prepared and tested for normal outdoor exposure 
as prescribed under D-4, a general breakdown of the 
film prepared from the registered sample, shall not 
occur in less than 18 month. 


IS 5410 : 2013 


NOTE — As a precaution against inadvertent accidents, the 
outdoor exposure test (see D-4) shall be carried out in duplicate. 


4.7 Keeping Properties (on Dry Material) 


The material shall comply with the requirements given 
in Table 1, when the sample of the material is prepared 
for testing as prescribed in 4.2 and 4.3, on completion 
of one year from the date of manufacturing when stored 
in original sealed containers under normal atmospheric 
conditions and particularly under dry conditions. 


4.8 In addition to the above, the material when mixed 
with equal volume of water shall also comply with the 
requirements given in Table 1. 


4.9 Optional Requirement for ECO-Mark 
4.9.1 General Requirements 


4.9.1.1 The product shall conform to the requirements 
for quality, safety and performance prescribed 
under 4.1 to 4.6. 


4.9.1.2 The manufacturer shall produce to BIS 
environmental consent clearance from the concerned 
State Pollution Control Board as per the provisions of 
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 
and Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 
along with the authorization, if required under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and rules made 
there under, while applying for ECO-Mark. 


4.9.2 Specific Requirements 


4.9.2.1 The product shall contain not more than 5 
percent by mass, Volatile Organic Compounds, when 
tested according to the method prescribed in IS 101 
(Part 2/Sec 1) and IS 101 (Part 2/Sec 2). 


4.9.2.2 The product shall not contain more than 0.1 
percent, by mass (as metal), of any toxic metals such 
as lead, cadmium, chromium (VI) and their compounds 
when tested by the relevant atomic absorption 
spectrophotometric methods. 


4.9.2.3 The product shall not be manufactured from 
any carcinogenic ingredients. 


NOTE — The Central Drugs Research Institute and Industrial 
Toxicological Research Centre would furnish a list of 
carcinogenic ingredients to Bureau of Indian Standards and 
would also keep Bureau of Indian Standards informed about 
the changes therein. 


5 PACKING AND MARKING 


5.1 Packing 


Unless otherwise agreed to, the dry material shall be 
packed in polyethylene bags in suitable metal/plastic 
containers. The packing is subject to the provisions of 
the law in force in the country at that time. 


5.1.1 The ECO-Mark product shall be packed in such 


packages which shall be recyclable/reusable or 
biodegradable. It shall be accompanied with 
instructions for proper use so as to maximize product 
performance and minimize wastage. 


NOTE — Subsequently the parameters evolved for packaging 
material/packages for ECO-Mark, which are being separately 
notified/ circulated, shall also apply. 


5.2 Marking 
Each container shall be marked with the following: 


a) Name of the material; 

b) Indication of the source of manufacture; 
c) Lead content (Maximum); 

d) Mass of the material; 


e) Batch number or Lot number in code or 
otherwise; 


f) Month and year of manufacture; 

g) Colour/shade of the material; and 

h) A cautionary note as given below: 
1) Keep out of reach of children. 


2) Dried film of this paint may be harmful, 
eaten or chewed. 


3) This product may be harmful, swallowed 
or inhaled. 


5.2.1 In case of products certified for ECO-Mark three 
major ingredients and hazardous chemicals shall be 
marked on the container. 


5.2.1.1 The criteria for which the product has been 
labelled as ECO-Mark may also be marked on the 
container. 


6 SAMPLING 

6.1 Representative samples of the material shall be 
drawn as prescribed in IS 101(Part I/Sec 1). 

6.2 Criteria for Conformity 


A lot shall be declared as conforming to the 
requirements of this standard if the test results of the 
composite samples satisfy the requirements as 
prescribed in 4.1, 4.1.1, 4.4 to 4.7. 


7 TEST METHODS 


7.1 Tests shall be conducted as prescribed in 4.1, 4.1.1, 4.4 
to 4.7 and the test methods referred in col 4 and col 5 
of Table 1. 


7.1.1 For match against IS colour, SP 1650 shall be used. 


7.2 Quality of Reagents 


Unless specified otherwise, pure chemical and distilled 
water shall be employed in tests (see IS 1070). 


NOTE — ‘Pure chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities which affect the result of analysis. 


IS 5410 : 2013 


Table 1 Requirements For Cement Paint 
(Clauses 4.8 and 7.1) 


SI Characteristic Requirement Method of Test, Ref to 
No. 
Annex IS 101 
d) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Drying time, hard dry, Max 24h E — 
ii) Finish Smooth and matt — (Part 3/Sec 4) 
iii) Colour Close match to the specified — (Part 4/Sec 2) 
IS colour or as agreed to 
iv) Fastness to light Passes the test, if there shall be no — (Part 4/Sec 3) 
appreciable colour change observed 
when compared to the unexposed 
panels. 
v) Residue on sieve (on dry material), 5.0 F — 
percent by mass, Max 
vi) Resistance to dry rubbing To pass the test G — 
vii) Water repellency To pass the test H — 
viii) Pot life of mixed paint Not less than I h J — 
ix) Recoating properties To pass the test K — 


IS No. 
101 


(Part I) 


(Sec 1) : 1986 
(Sec 3) : 1986 
(Part 2) 


(Sec 1) : 1987 
(Sec 2): 1987 
(Part 3) 
(Sec 4) : 1989 
(Part 4) 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


Title 


Methods of sampling and test for 
paints, varnishes and related products 
Test on liquid paints (general and 
physical), 

Sampling (third revision) 
Preparation of panels (third revision) 
Test on liquid paints (Chemical 
examination), 

Water content (third revision) 
Volatile matter (third revision) 

Tests on paint film formation 

Finish (third revision), 

Optical tests on paint films, 


IS No. 


(Sec 2) : 1989 
(Sec 3) : 1988 
(Part 8) 
(Sec 1) : 1989 
(Sec 5) : 1993 
265 : 1993 
266 : 1993 
1070 : 1992 


1303 : 1983 


SP 1650 : 1973 


Title 


Colour (third revision) 

Light fastness test (third revision) 
Tests for pigments and other solids 
Residue on sieve (third revision) 
Lead restriction test (third revision) 
Hydrochloric acid (fourth revision) 
Sulphuric acid (second revision) 
Reagent grade water — Specification 
(third revision) 

Glossary of terms relating to paints 
(second revision) 

Standard colours for building and 
decorative finishes 


IS 5410 : 2013 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.1) 


ANALYSIS OF CEMENT PAINT 


B-0 GENERAL 


B-0.1 Outline of the Methods 


The analysis consists of determination of Portland 
cement, total hydrated lime, and un hydrated calcium 
oxide and magnesium oxide in hydrated lime. 


B-1 APPARATUS 
B-1.1 Beakers (see IS 2619) 
B-1.2 Long-Necked Flasks 


B-1.3 Reflux Condenser, of suitable size (see 
IS 6052). 


B-1.4 Platinum Crucible or Silica Crucible, of 20 to 
30 ml capacity(see IS 14837). 


B-1.5 Gooch Crucible, see IS 5011. 
B-1.6 Carbon Dioxide Absorption Train 


B-1.7 Electric Muffle Furnace — Range up to 
1 200°C. 


B-2 REAGENT 
B-2.1 Ammonium Chloride 


B-2.2 Bromine Water — It is prepared by saturating 
freshly distilled water with bromine. 


B-2.3 Ammonium Hydroxide Solution 


B-2.4 Ammonium Oxalate Solution, saturated. 


B-2.5 Sulphuric Acid, Dilute (see IS 266) — Mix I 
volume of sulphuric acid with 5 volumes of water. 


B-2.6 Standard Potassium Permanganate Solution 
0.1 N (see 54 of IS 2316). 


B-2.7 Neutral Glycerine-Alcohol Solution — 1:5. 
Mix I part by volume of glycerine with 5 parts by 
volume of absolute alcohol. To each litre of solution 
add 2 ml of phenolphthalein indicator solution. It is, 
necessary that the glycerine alcohol solution should 
be neutral. If the solution is colourless after addition 
of indicator, add dilute solution of alcoholic sodium 
or potassium hydroxide until the pink colour appears 
and first remove this by addition of alcoholic 
ammonium acetate solution in drops. If the initial 
colour is pink, remove it by addition of alcoholic 
ammonium acetate solution. 


B-2.8 Standard Ammonium Acetate Solution 
(1 ml = 0.005 g Calcium Oxide) — Prepare the 
solution by dissolving 16 g of crystalline ammonium 
acetate (See Note) in I litre of ethanol. Standardize 
this solution by titrating against pure calcium oxide that 
is freshly prepared by calcining pure calcium carbonate 
or calcium oxalate in a platinum crucible at 900°C to 1 
000°C to constant weight. When the calcined calcium 
oxide has cooled in a desiccator, perform the operations 
described under B-2.8.1 in quick succession. 

NOTE — Ammonium acetate is generally sold in a damp 

condition and should be as dry as possible. II may be dried by 

placing over a dehydrating agent, such as, sulphuric acid or 


fused anhydrous calcium chloride contained in a desiccator 
for two weeks or more. 


B-2.8.1 Grind it in an agate mortar, weigh out 0.05 
to 0.06 g into a dry 200 or 250 ml Erlenmeyer flask, 
and add 60 ml of the glycerol ethanol solvent to be flask 
(see Note 1). In order to minimize the danger of 
hydration and carbonation, separate samples of pure 
calcium carbonate may be calcined in small sized 
platinum capsules. The calcium oxide thus produced is 
cooled in a desiccators, re-weighed for a check and 
introduced in the flask. The grinding of oxide may be 
unnecessary, if original calcium carbonate is in a finely 
powdered form. Disperse the calcium oxide in the 
solution by shaking the flask and attach a reflux 
condenser (see Note 2). Boil the mixture. The ebullition 
should be positive but not so violent as to cause bumping 
or excessive evaporation. Then remove the condenser 
and immediately titrate the solution, while near boiling, 
with the standard ammonium acetate solution. Replace 
the condenser and boil the solution again. Repeat the 
titrations at intervals (see Note 3), shake the flask 
frequently between titrations to shorten the time required 
for the boiling. The titration is complete when no further 
colour appears in the solution during continuous boiling 
for one h (see Note 4). Calculate the calcium oxide 
equivalent of the ammonium acetate solution, in gram 
per millilitre, by dividing the mass of calcium oxide used 
by the volume of solution required. 


NOTES 


1 Sometimes pure calcium oxide shall take on the bottom of 
the flask. Particularly, if the glycerol is anhydrous. This trouble 
may be avoided by putting a few grams of clean, dry quartz 
sand in the flask before the introduction of calcium oxide and 
solvent. 


2 If a new stopper is used and has while powder on it. It should 
be thoroughly washed before using. A glass tube about 6 mm 
in diameter and 50 to 100 cm in length because a loss of alcohol 
is liable to occur through evaporation. In such a case, it is 


necessary to add neutralized ethanol from time to time to 
maintain the same proportion of glycerol to ethanol. If the 
proportion is greater than one to three, a partial decomposition 
of cement may taken place. Instead of an ordinary flask, plain 
tubing and a stopper, a flask with a ground in glass stopper 
and condenser tube may be used, preferably one with a standard 
taper joint. A water cooled condenser is the most satisfactory 
and it may be as short as 30 cm. Some loss of alcohol may also 
occur through dripping from the condenser during the titrations 
and should be compensated for by the addition of neutralized 
ethanol. 


3 In general the intervals may be of 20 min but they shall chiefly 
depend on the rapidity of the dissolution of calcium oxide. 
They may be of 5 min to 10 min in the beginning and then be 
increased to 30 min or | h in the end. If the solution contains a 
large amount of dissolved calcium oxide and the boiling is 
continued a long time without titration. Crystals (probably of 
calcium glyceride) may form which dissolve slowly and 
increase the lime required for the completion of the titration. 


4 The end point shall not be the same for a hot solution and a 
cold solution. especially when a large amount of calcium 
acetate is present. The titration should always be carried out 
while the solution is boiling hot. If the end point is determined 
accurately, the solution shall turn pink upon cooling, and this 
can serve as evidence that the end point has not been greatly 
overstepped. 


B-2.9 Hydrochloric Acid — | : 2 (see IS 265). Mix I 
volume of hydrochloric acid with 2 volumes of distilled 
water. 


B-2.10 Ammonium Phosphate Solution — Saturate 
freshly distilled water with dibasic ammonium 
phosphate. 


B-2.11 Ammonium Hydroxide Solution 


B-2.12 Potassium Chromate Indicator Solution — 
Dissolve 5 g of potassium chromate in 100 ml of water. 


B-2.13 Standard Silver Nitrate Solution — 0.1 N 
(see 55 of IS 2316). 


B-3 PROCEDURE 
B-3.1 Carry out the analysis on the material as received. 
B-3.1.1 Total Calcium Oxide 


Weigh accurately about 0.5 g of the material and mix 
with 0.5 g of ammonium chloride in a 50 ml beaker. 
Add 5 ml of hydrochloric acid, cover the beaker and 
heat over a water bath for 15 min. Transfer the gel 
completely to a Gooch filter and wash the insoluble 
residue thoroughly with hot water. Discard the residue 
and preserve the filtrate. To the filtrate add 8 to 10 g of 
ammonium chloride. Bring to near boiling, add a few 
milliliters of bromine water and make alkaline with 
ammonium hydroxide solution. Allow the precipitate 
to settle, filter and wash thoroughly with hot water. 
Concentrate the filtrate to about 200 ml, adding a few 
drops of ammonium hydroxide. Boil and add while 
boiling 25 to 30 ml of hot saturated ammonium oxalate 
solution, stir and continue to boiling until the 
precipitated calcium oxalate becomes granular. Set aside 


IS 5410 : 2013 


over a water bath for 1 h. Filter and wash the precipitate 
with small amounts of hot water. Preserve the filtrate 
for magnesium oxide determination (B-3.1.3). Transfer 
the moist precipitate to a 400 ml beaker by means of a 
stream of water from a wash bottle, dissolve the 
precipitate adhering to the filter paper with warm dilute 
sulphuric acid and catch it in the beaker. Add to the 
beaker 20 ml of dilute sulphuric acid, dilute to 300 ml 
with hot water and titrate the hot solution against 
standard potassium permanganate solution. 


Calculate the amount of calcium oxide (as CaO) present 
in the material using the following formula: 


0.002 8 g of 
calcium oxide. 


1 ml of 0.1 N potassium 
permanganate 


B-3.1.2 Free Lime 


The method does not differentiate between free calcium 
oxide and free calcium hydroxide, thus any free 
calcium hydroxide that may be present will be included 
in the determination and calculated as free calcium 
oxide. 


Weigh I g of material into a flask, for the determination 
of free calcium oxide and add 60 ml of the solvent to 
the flask and proceed as in the standardization of the 
ammonium acetate solution (see B-2.8). The end point 
is considered to have been reached when the content 
of free calcium oxide in the sample does not increase 
by more than 0.05 percent during the last 2 h of boiling. 


NOTE — Avoid unnecessary exposure of the sample to the 
atmosphere. 


B-3.1.2.1 No excess of ammonium acetate shall be 
added at any time because an excess of it may react 
with calcium aluminates and silicates. To avoid such 
excess, use a small burette or measuring pipette fitted 
with a glass stopcock or a rubber pinchcock and small 
tip which delivers about 50 drops per millilitre. If the 
titrations are far apart and the reagent evaporates in 
the tip, a few drops may be discarded before each 
titration and the drops used in titration may be counted 
and converted in terms of millilitre. It is good 
precaution to allow a slight pink colour to remain in 
the solution after each of the early titrations. 


Vigorous boiling is more essential with cement than 
with pure calcium oxide and, if possible, should be so 
conducted that it is not necessary to shake the flask 
vigorously at intervals. The flask should not be shaken 
vigorously while it is disconnected from the condenser 
because the solvent, if superheated, may boil, expel 
alcohol vapour and then draw in air carrying water and 
carbon dioxide. A good procedure is to bring the 
solution and sample to boiling rapidly over a Bunsen 
flame in the beginning before placing the flask on a 
hot plate and connecting it with the condenser. If there 


IS 5410 : 2013 


is a tendency to bump, it may be reduced by adding 
glass beads or pure quartz sand to the flask or putting 
a thin mat of asbestos between the flask and the hot 
plate. 


If in the final titrations there is doubt as to the exact 
end point, add a drop of the phenolphthalein indicator 
to the quiescent liquid in the flask and carefully observe 
the point where the indicator strikes the liquid. If no 
colour appears, the end point has been reached. If the 
sample settles during boiling and leaves a partially clear 
layer of solution, another way to overcome difficulty 
in discerning a change in the colour of the solution is 
to swirl the flask after the addition of the solution of 
ammonium acetate so as to avoid the dispersion of the 
sample. A strong daylight lamp with a reflector may 
be used as an aid in the discernment of the end point. 
The contents of the flask may be matched with similar 
contents in another flask which contains an excess of 
ammonium acetate. If it is necessary to leave the 
determination incomplete, remove the flask, add just 
enough ammonium acetate to discharge the pink colour 
and stopper the flask tightly. When renewing the 
determination, boil the mixture before repeating the 
titrations. 


Calculate the percent of free calcium oxide to the 
nearest 0.1 as follows: 


Free calcium oxide (CaO), percent = EV x 100 


where 
E = CaO equivalent of the ammonium acetate 
solution, in grams per millilitre; and 
V = Ammonium acetate solution required by the 


sample, in millitire. 
B-3.1.3 Total Magnesium Oxide 


Acidify the filtrate obtained from B-3.1.1 with 
hydrochloric acid, concentrate the solution over a 
water-bath to about 150 ml and make slightly alkaline 
with ammonium hydroxide solution. Boil and filter to 
remove traces of iron, aluminium and calcium. Cool, 
acidify with hydrochloric acid, add 10 ml of saturated 
ammonium phosphate. Add ammonium hydroxide 
drop by drop with constant stirring. When the 
crystalline ammonium magnesium phosphate has been 
formed, add 10 ml of the ammonium hydroxide in 
excess. Set aside over night in a cool place, filter and 
wash with 2.5 percent ammonia solution. Dissolve the 
precipitate in a small quantity of hot hydrochloric acid, 
dilute to about 100 ml and add I ml of ammonium 
phosphate solution and ammonium hydroxide drop by 
drop, with constant stirring, until the precipitate is again 
formed. Allow the precipitate to stand for 2 h, filter 
and wash. Place the filter paper with contents in a 
weighed platinum crucible, char the paper slowly and 


carefully bum off the resulting carbon. Ignite the 
Precipitate to constant weight over a suitable burner. 
Cool and weigh the precipitate. Calculate the amount 
of magnesium oxide by multiplying the mass of 
precipitate obtained by 0.362. 


B-3.1.4 Carbon Dioxide 


Weigh accurately about 5 g of the material and transfer 
to a small long-necked flask. Put this flask in a carbon 
dioxide train consisting of an upward inclined 
condenser, U-tubes containing calcium chloride, 
anhydrous cupric sulphate and calcium chloride, then 
a U-tube filled with porous soda lime, a U-tube 
containing half soda lime and half calcium chloride 
and an additional U-tube containing only soda lime 
and the last U-tube containing only calcium chloride. 
Pour some hot water to the material in the long-necked 
flask, connect the flask to the train and pass a current 
of carbon dioxide free air through all the train except 
soda lime tubes. Weigh and attach the soda lime tubes. 
Add some dilute hydrochloric acid into the flask slowly. 
When any apparent action has ceased, heat the flask 
gradually to boiling and continue boiling until no more 
gas is evolved. Cool, pass a current of carbon dioxide- 
free air throughout the experiment. Detach and close 
the soda lime tubes, let stand in a balance case, weigh 
them at 30 min intervals until two successive weighings 
agree within 0.5 mg. Record the gain in mass of soda 
lime tubes as the mass of carbon dioxide. 


B-3.1.5 Chlorides 


Weigh about 2 g of the material accurately into a 100- 
ml beaker and add about 20 ml of water, stir well and 
set aside for 30 min. Filter the contents through a filter 
paper into a 250 ml volumetric flask. Wash the residue 
on the filter a few times with water, catch the washings 
also in the volumetric flask and make up to the mark. 
Pipette out 50 ml of the solution into a conical flask 
and add 3-4 drops of methyl orange (0.1 g in 50 ml of 
rectified spirit and made up to 250 ml with water). Add 
potassium nitrate solution (1:10 by volume in water) 
in such a quantity so that red colour is obtained. Add 
solid calcium carbonate in such a quantity that red 
colour disappears and yellow (or yellowish white) 
colour is obtained. Add 1 ml of neutral potassium 
chromate indicator solution. Titrate the solution against 
standard silver nitrate solution slowly swirling the 
contents of the flask constantly until the first colour 
change from yellow is observed. The titration is 
continued further by adding the silver nitrate solution 
in drops lo a faint red-brown colour which persists even 
after brisk shaking calculate the amount of chloride 
present in the material as follows: 


VxNx17.75 


Chloride (as Cl), percent by mass = wW 


where 

V = volume of standard silver nitrate solution 
used, in ml; 

N = normality of standard silver nitrate solution; 
and 

W = mass of the material taken for test, in g. 


B-3.1.6 Loss on Ignition 


Heat 1.00 g of the sample for 15 minutes in a weighed 
and covered platinum crucible of 20 to 25 ml capacity 
by placing it in a muffle furnace at temperature between 
900°C and 1 000°C; cool and weigh. Check the loss in 
mass by a second heating for 5 min and re-weigh. 
Record the loss in mass as the loss on ignition and 
calculate the percent loss on ignition to the nearest 0.1. 
Calculate the percent loss on ignition as below: 


Percent loss on ignition = loss in mass x 100 
B-3.1.7 Free or Extraneous Water 


Weigh about | g of the material accurately into tared 
platinum crucible and dry the material in a suitable 
electric furnace at 350 percent for 30 min. Cool in a 
desiccator and weigh rapidly. The loss in mass gives 
the free or extraneous water. 


B-4 REPORT 


B-4.1 Compute the percentages of Portland cement, 
hydrated lime and the percent of the sum of unhydrated 
calcium oxide and magnesium oxide in the hydrated 
lime in the material as given in B-4.1.1 to B-4.1.2.14. 


B-4.1.1 Portland Cement — Compute the amount of 
calcium oxide combined with carbon dioxide 
(see B-3.1.4) and also with chloride (see B-3.1.5) and 
add to the amount of free lime (see B-3.1.2). Subtract 
this sum from the total calcium oxide (see B-3.1.1) and 
multiply the difference by 1.56 (see Note). Report this 
value as the percentage of Portland cement. 

NOTE — The factor 1.56 is based on he assumption that 


Portland cement contains on average 64 percent of calcium 
oxide. 


B-4.1.2 Total Hydrated Lime, and Percent of Un 
hydrated Calcium Oxide and Magnesium Oxide in 
Hydrated Lime 


From the total magnesium oxide value (see B-3.1.3) 
subtract 3.0 percent of computed Portland cement 
(see B-4.1.1) to determine magnesium oxide in the 
hydrated lime. 


NOTE — The factor 3.0 percent is to make allowance for 
magnesium oxide which may be present in Portland cement to 
a maximum of 6 percent. 
B-4.1.2.1 From the loss of ignition (see B-3.1.6) 
subtract the sum of free water (see B-3.1.7) and carbon 


IS 5410 : 2013 


dioxide (see B-3.1.4) to determine the percentage of 
combined water. 


B-4.1.2.2 Multiply the free lime (see B-3.1.2) by 0.321 
to determine the percentage of water combined with 
calcium oxide. 


B-4.1.2.3 If the value in B-4.1.2.2 is less than the 
combined water (see B-4.1.2.1), proceed as in B-4.1.2.4 
to B-4.1.2.9 inclusive. If the value in B-4.1.2.2 is 
greater than the combined water (see B-4.1.2.1) 
proceed as in B-4.1.2.10 to B-4.13.13 inclusive. If the 
value in B-4.1.2.2 is equal to combined water 
(see B-4.1.2.1), compute total lime as in B-4.1.2.8 and 
un hydrated lime as in B-4.1.2.14. 


B-4.1.2.4 Subtract the value obtained in B-4.1.2.2 from 
combined water (see B-4.1.2.1). This gives the 
percentage of water combined with magnesium oxide. 


B-4.1.2.5 Multiply the value obtained in B-4.1.2.4 by 
2.238 to determine the percentage of hydrated 
magnesium oxide. 


B-4.1.2.6 Subtract the percentage of hydrated 
magnesium oxide (see B-4.1.2.5) from magnesium 
oxide in the hydrated lime (see B-4.1.2) to obtain the 
percentage of un hydrated magnesium oxide. 


B-4.1.2.7 Compute carbon dioxide to calcium 
carbonate by multiplying by 2.27. 


B-4.1.2.8 The sum of free lime (see B-3.1.2), calcium 
carbonate (see B-4.1.2.7), magnesium oxide in 
hydrated lime (see B-4.1.2) and combined water 
(see B-4.1.2.1) gives the total hydrated lime. 


B-4.1.2.9 The percentage of un hydrated magnesium 
oxide (see B-4.1.2.6) divided by total hydrated 
lime (see B-4.1.2.8), multiplied by 100, gives the 
percentage of un hydrated magnesium oxide and 
calcium oxide in the mixture. 


B-4.1.2.10 Multiply the percentage of combined 
water (see B-4.1.2.1) by 3.11 to get the percentage of 
hydrated calcium oxide. 


B-4.1.2.11 To determine the percentage of un hydrated 
calcium oxide and magnesium oxide, subtract the 
percentage of hydrated calcium oxide (see B-4.1.2.10) 
from the sum of free lime (see B-3.1.2) and magnesium 
oxide in hydrated lime (see B-4.1.2). 


B-4.1.2.12 The sum of free lime (see B-3.1.2), calcium 
carbonate (see B-4.1.2.7), magnesium oxide in 
hydrated lime (see B-4.1.2) and combined water 
(see B-4.1.2.1) gives the total hydrated lime. 


B-4.1.2.13 Divide the percentage of unhydrated 
calcium oxide and magnesium oxide (see B-4.1.2.11) 
by total hydrated lime (see B-4.1.2.8) to obtain the 


IS 5410 : 2013 
percentage of un hydrated calcium oxide and 
magnesium oxide in the mixture. 


B-4.1.2.14 Divide magnesium oxide in hydrated 
lime (see B-4.1.2) by total hydrated lime (see B-4.1.2.8) 


to obtain percentage of un hydrated calcium oxide and 
magnesium oxide in mixture. 


B-4.1.3 Report the percentages of Portland cement, 
hydrated lime, etc, as obtained by above calculations. 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 4.1.1) 


FREEDOM FROM ORGANIC BINDERS 


C-0 GENERAL 
C-0.1 Outline of the Method 


The material is heated in an evaporating dish and 
examined for any smoke and odour given out. If 
appreciable smoke is given out then the material is 
made into a coating composition, painted on a tinplate 
panel and examined for adhesion. 


C-1 APPARATUS 
C-1.1 Evaporating Dish 


C-1.2 Tinplate Panel 


The panel shall be prepared as prescribed in 3 of 
IS 101(Part 1/Sec 3). 


C-2 PROCEDURE 


C-2.1 Place 1 to 3 g of the material in an evaporating 
dish and gently heat over an open flame. Examine for 
any smoke having oily odour. Only a trace of smoke 
having an oily odour should be given off. If appreciable 
smoke is noted, mix 25 ml of sample with 25 ml of 
water and let stand for 30 minutes. Stir and brush on 
clean tinplate panel. Allow to dry for I h. If the material 
bonds to the impervious surface, organic binder is 
present. 


C-2.1.1 The material shall be deemed to have passed 
the test, if the paint film does not bond to the 
impervious surface of the panel. 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 4.6) 


DETERMINATION OF DURABILITY 


D-0 GENERAL 


D-0.1 Outline of the Method 


The durability of the material is determined by 
ascertaining actual behaviour of suitably prepared test 
panels in normal outdoor exposure test for a specified 
period and evaluating the results of this exposure by a 
suitable method of rating for various characteristics of 
the film. 


D-1 TEST PANELS AND THEIR PREPARATION 


Concrete panels of sizes 150 mm x 150 mm x 12.5 
mm used for this test, unless otherwise mentioned, shall 
be prepared as prescribed in 7 of IS 101 (Part 1/Sec 3). 


D-2 PREPARATION OF PAINT FOR TESTING 


Using a suitable measure, take one measure of dry 


material and add the material to half a measure of water. 
To the cement paint, add small quantity of water at a 
time and mix thoroughly until a smooth, uniform paste 
is obtained. Then add another half a measure of water 
stirring all the while. Allow this mixture to stand for 
15 min. Apply this by stiff fibre brush ensuring that 
the application is completed within 1 h. 


D-3 PREPARATION OF PAINTED PANELS 


D-3.1 Thoroughly wet with water the concrete panels 
prepared by immersing in water for 1 h and allow to 
drain until no free water remains on the surface. Apply 
the mixed paint by brushing with a stiff fibre brush to 
the top surface of the concrete panel. Place the panel 
in an air draught and fume-free area. 


D-3.2 Apply two coats, with a minimum interval of 
24h in between coats, keeping the panel wet 


throughout this period. It is essential to keep the surface 
wet after the final coat for about 2 days by frequent 
splashing of water to get the best performance. 


D-4 NORMAL OUTDOOR EXPOSURE TEST 


D-4.0 Subject the samples for registration to normal 
outdoor exposure test in the manner described in D-4.1 
to D-4.6. 


D-4.1 prepare the test panels and the paint as prescribed 
under D-1 and D-2.1. Three coats of the paint are 
applied as prescribed under D-3. 


D-4.2 Expose one set of panels facing east and another 
south, vertically. The panels are exposed for 18 month. 
Commence the exposure not earlier than third week of 
January and not later than the first week of April. 


D-4.3 Examine the conditions of the exposed films at 
an interval of 6 month for the following characteristics: 


a) Colour; 

b) Flaking; 

c) Cracking; and 
d) Chalking. 


D-4.3.1 For the above examination, wash the right band 
half of the surface of test panels by pouring water and 
then wiping with soft cloth. Examine the same half of 
the test panels at each examination. At the end of the 
stipulated period for durability test, examine the two 
halves of the test panels for the above characteristics. 
The sample shall be considered satisfactory, if the 
condition of the film in both the halves, the one washed 
periodically as well as the one washed only for the 
final examination, is satisfactory by the method of 


IS 5410 : 2013 


evaluation described in D-4.4. Stray film failure due 
to extraneous causes other than climatic shall be 
ignored. 


D-4.4 Method of Rating 


The film of the unexposed panel shall be rated with 
the following basic values for the respective 
characteristics: 


a) Possessing correct colour 25 


b) Freedom from flaking (loss of 25 
adhesion and hence lifting) 


c) Freedom from cracking 25 
d) Freedom from chalking 25 
100 


D-4.5 Evaluation of Exposed Films 


In recording the condition of exposed films at each 
examination; express the observed relative values of 
different characteristics in percentages of the basic 
value allotted to each characteristic under D-4.4. The 
allotment of performance value should be multiples 
of 10. For arriving at an assessment multiply the basic 
value for each characteristic (see D-4.4) by the 
percentage awarded for the performance in the test and 
divide the product so obtained by 100 to obtain the 
percentage award for the observed value of each 
characteristic. Take the sum total of these resulting 
values as the overall assessment. 


D-4.5.1 The following table is intended to serve as an 
example for the assessment of a cement paint film after 
exposure: 


SI No. Characteristic Basic Value Performance Value Assessment Value 

(1) Q) (3) (4) (5) 

i) Possessing correct colour 25 70 17.50 

ii) Freedom from flaking (loss of adhesion 25 70 17.50 

and hence lifting) 

iii) Freedom from cracking 25 60 15.00 

iv) Freedom from chalking 25 10 2.50 

52.50 


D-4.6 Result of Exposure 


Reckon the period for general breakdown of the 
exposed film from the date of commencement of 
exposure to the time when the overall assessment falls 
below 50 percent or when the performance value of 
any one characteristic falls below 25 percent of the 


basic value adopted for that characteristic. In the 
example given above although the overall assessment 
in 52.50 percent, yet the film is to be regarded as having 
generally broken down, because the performance value 
of chalking has fallen below 25 percent of its basic 
value. 


IS 5410 : 2013 


ANNEX E 
[Table 1, SI No. (i)] 


DETERMINATION OF DRYING TIME 


E-0 GENERAL 


E-0.1 Outline of the Method 


A concrete panel is prepared is coated with the material 
uniformly and its drying time determined. 


E-1 PROCEDURE 


A concrete panel as prescribed under D-1 is prepared 
and is evenly coated with one coat of paint prepared as 
prescribed under D-2 observing all the precautions. 
Allow the panel to air dry in a well-ventilated room in 
a horizontal position and note the drying time. During 


drying, protect the film from direct sunlight. 


NOTE — Drying time denotes time for hydration and hardening 
of the paint film and not for evaporation of moisture. 


E-2 OBSERVATIONS AND RESULTS 


The material shall be deemed to have complied with 
the requirements of this standard for drying time, when 
a second coat can be applied with slight rubbing down 
without the development of any film irregularities such 
as lifting or loss of adhesion of first coat and the drying 
time of second coat does not exceed the maximum 
specified for the first coat that is 24 h. 


ANNEX F 
[Table 1, SI No. (v)] 


DETERMINATION OF RESIDUE ON SIEVE 


F-0 GENERAL 


F-0.1 Outline of the Method 


The material is made into a thin paste with water and 
passed through a 63 micron IS Sieve. 


F-1 APPARATUS 


The apparatus shall be as prescribed in 3 of 
IS 101 (Part 8/Sec 1). 


F-2 PROCEDURE 


F-2.1 Weigh accurately not less than 50 g of the sample 
and transfer to a 250 ml beaker. Mix the material to a 
thin paste with water and keep for 24 h. After this 
period, thoroughly mix the contents of the beaker and 
break up all lumps with the flattened end of a stirring 
rod without grinding action. 


F-2.2 Transfer the contents of the beaker to the sieve, 
using a wash bottle containing water. Remove with a 
camel-hair brush any small particles of the material 


10 


that may be retained on the stirring rod or the sides of 
the beaker. Wash the residue left on the sieve with water 
and gently brush with a camel-hair brush until the water 
passing over the residue and through the sieve is clear 
and free from solid particles. 


F-2.3 When washing is complete, dry the sieve for 1 h 
at 105 + 2°C in an electrically operated oven. Cool 
and transfer the residue with the help of the brush to a 
weighed watch glass and determine the weight of the 
residue. 


F-2.4 Calculate the residue on sieve by the equation: 


R= 100xm, 
m 
where 
R = residue on sieve, percent by mass; 
m = mass of the sample, in g; and 
m, = mass of the residue, in g. 


IS 5410 : 2013 


ANNEX G 
[Table 1, SI No. (vi)] 


DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO DRY RUBBING 


G-0 GENERAL 
G-0.1 Outline of the Method 


The dry material is converted into consistency suitable 
for application and then spread on a neat cement block. 
A second coat is applied and allowed to dry for a 
specified time. By rubbing the coated material with a 
piece of cloth, the extent to which the test cloth is soiled 
as compared to an approved sample of the material 
similarly tested at the same time, the material is 
assessed for resistance to dry rubbing. 


G-1 PROCEDURE 
Prepare the panel as prescribed under D-1 and apply 


two coats of paint as prescribed under D-2 and D-3. 
Allow the panel to cure for 24 h after second coating. 
Rub the film with a piece of white or black soft cambric 
cloth according to the colour of the material. Carry 
out the test under similar conditions and at same time 
on a registered sample. 


G-2 OBSERVATIONS AND RESULTS 


The material shall be deemed to have passed the test, 
if the test cloth is not soiled by the film prepared from 
the material to a greater extent than that prepared from 
the approved sample when both are tested by the same 
person in the same manner at the same time. 


ANNEX H 
[Table 1, SI No. (vii)] 


DETERMINATION OF WATER REPEELLANCY 


H-0 GENERAL 


H-0.1 Outline of the Method 


The painted film is subject to a spray of water for I h 
and the amount of water absorbed is determined. 


H-1 PROCEDURE 


H-1.1 Prepare a concrete panel of size 450 mm x 
350 mm and condition it for 48 h at room temperature. 
Apply two coats of the material at an interval of 24 h 
and wetting in between the coats. After second coat, 
allow to cure for 7 days (by keeping the panel moist 


during these days). Seal the edges and back of the panel 
with wax and weigh the panels. Keep the panel inclined 
at an angle of 30° to 45° and allow 135 litre of water to 
be sprayed at a constant rate for 1 h at the central area 
of the panel, through a nozzle placed 60 cm away and 
60 cm above the panel. At the end of the stipulated 
period remove the panel. Carefully drain away all the 
surface water and determine its mass. 


H-2 OBSERVATIONS AND RESULTS 


H-2.1 The material shall be taken to have passed the 
test if the water absorbed by the concrete panel is not 
more than 200 g/m?. 


ANNEX J 
[Table 1, SI No. (vii1)] 


DETERMINATION OF POT LIFE OF MIXED PAINT 


J-1 PROCEDURE 


J-1.1 Prepare a mix of the material as prescribed 
under D-2 and allow it to stand for 1 h. At the end of 
this period, examine the mix for any setting. 


J-1.2 Observations 


The material shall be deemed to have passed the test, 
if the degree of settling of the mix-is not such as to 
affect the easy application of the material. 


IS 5410 : 2013 


ANNEX K 
[Table 1, SI No. (ix) ] 


DETERMINATION OF RECOATING PROPERTIES 


K-0 GENERAL 


K-0.1 Outline of the Method 


The material is converted into brushing consistency 
and a coat applied on concrete panels. After allowing 
to dry for a specified period, a second coat is applied 
over the first coat to test the ability of the material to 
take the second coat. The ability of the material to take 
the second coat is termed as recoating properties. 


K-1 PROCEDURE 


Prepare a panel as prescribed under D-1 and apply one 
coat of the paint as prescribed under D-2 uniformly 


12 


observing all the precautions. Allow the paint film to 
air-dry for 24 h. At the end of 24 h apply another coat 
of the paint. Examine the ability of the paint to take 
the second coat. 


NOTE—Drying time denotes time for hydration and hardening 
of the paint film and not for evaporation of moisture. 


K-2 OBSERVATIONS AND RESULTS 


The paint shall be deemed to have complied with the 
requirement of this standard, if this second coat of this 
same paint can be applied over the first coat without 
lifting, working up, rolling up or softening of the first 
coat. 


IS 5410 : 2013 


ANNEX L 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Paints, Varnishes and Related Products Sectional Committee, CHD 20 


Organization 
National Test House, Kolkata 
Akzo Nobel Coatings India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 
Asian Paints Ltd, Mumbai 
Berger Paints India Ltd, Howrah 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchirapalli 
Central Building Research Institute, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Clariant Chemicals (India) Ltd, Thane 


Consumer Unity & Turst Society (CUTS), Jaipur 


Consumer Association of India, Chennai 


Directorate of Naval Architecture, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Harcourt Butler Technological Institute, Kanpur 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 
Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Indian Paints Association, Kolkata 


Kansai Nerolac Paints Ltd, Mumbai 


Kerala Minerals and Metals Ltd, Kollam, Kerala 


Maruti Udyog Ltd, Gurgaon 


Metachem Paints & Adhesive Pvt Ltd, Nasik 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), New Delhi 


Ministry of Defence, Department of Standardization, New Delhi 


Ministry of Industry, DIPP, New Delhi 
National Test House (ER), Kolkata 
Naval Materials Research Laboratory (NMRL), Thane 


Office of the Micro Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME), 
New Delhi 


Paint and Coating Technologists Association, Kanpur 
Punjab Paint Colour and Varnish Works Pvt Ltd, Kanpur 


Research Designs & Standards Organization, Lucknow 


13 


Representative(s) 
Dr SuniL Kumar Sana (Chairman) 
Dr T. KANAKARAJU 
Dr B. P. MALLIK 
Dr B. BERA 
Suri L. GRAGORI 


Dr S. R. KARDE 
Dr P. C. THaPLIYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI Manos KUMAR TALREJA 
SHRI GURBAX SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri NITIN VAIDYA 
Suri UMESH Kapoor (Alternate) 


Ms Keya GHOSH 
Suri VIJAY SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI N. GOPALASWAMI 
Suri R. DEsIKAN (Alternate) 


COMMODORE R. GHOSH 
COMMANDER R. K. SEHGAL (Alternate) 


SHRI R. CHAUDHURY 
SHRI A. Sarya SHRIDHAR (Alternate) 


Dr PrRAMop KUMAR 
DR Arun MAaITHANI (Alternate) 


Dr K. V. S. N. Raju 
Dr A. S. KHANNA 


Dr M. B. Guna 
Suri V. M. Natu (Alternate) 


Suri D. SATPUTE 
SHRI Manos Soman! (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJENDRA PRASAD 
Dr Jonn GEorGE (Alternate) 


SHRI Amit TIWARI 
Suri ÅSHISH AHUJA (Alternate) 


Dr B. PANJA 
SHRI HEMANT KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Suri A. V. SAWAKHANDE 
SHRI SOMNATH SONI (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. KAIBARTA 
Suri V. K. CHHABRA (Alternate) 


SHRI NAND LAL 
SHRIMATI RATNA DE SARKAR 


SHRI S. K. SINGH 
Suri V R More (Alternate) 


Dr IZZATULLAH 
Dr S. K. SHarma (Alternate) 


Suri V. N. DUBEY 
Suri G. N. TIWARI 


SHRI C. SENGUPTA 
Suri R. K. BHAGCHANDANI (Alternate) 


IS 5410 : 2013 


Organization 


SGS India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


Shalimar Paints Ltd, Kolkata 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


SSPC India Chapter, Kolkata 


Tata Motors Limited, Pune 


The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 


University Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


VOXCO Pigments and Chemicals Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
20 Micron Ltd, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Suri Dipsyoti BANERJEE 
SHRI GARISH MALHOTRA (Alternate) 


Dr S. K. Misra 


Dr U. K. Nioci 
Suri A. K. Masumpar (Alternate) 


Dr BUDDHADEBA DUARI 
SHRI ANIL SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri H. K. ASHTHANA 


SHRI RAJESH Soop 
Suri N. K. TripatHi (Alternate) 


Dr P. A. MAHANWAR 
Dr V. V. SHERTUKADE (Alternate) 


SHRI ISHAN RAVESHIA 


Dr KrisHNA KUMAR MISHRA 
Dr AnIL BANsaL (Alternate) 


SHRI DHIRENDRA KUMAR 


In personal capacity (16/204, Kailsah Nagar, Vadavali Section, 
Ambernath (E), Dist Thane 421 501) 


Dr Ranv K. JHa, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (CHD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 
Suri K. K. PauL 
Scientist ‘E’ (CHD), BIS 


14 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 20 (1880). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


