**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 8048 (1985): Electrocardiograph [MHD 19: 
Immuno-Biological Diagnostic Kits] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



iS : S048 • 1985 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFrCATION FOR 
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPH 



f First Revision) 



f.Dl. t'^L-i2'i;(-;-^-i'T3 '.'6 - f)i.j ; 84' 




INDIAN isTANOARDS INSTITUTION 

VtANAK BHAVaN, 9 BAHADUR SHaH ZaFaR MARG 
NEW OtLHl UtMOi 

Gr 3 Jiijifr ^966 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 SEPTEMBER 1094 

TO 
IS 8048:1985 SPECIFICATION FOR 
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPH . 

(First Revision) 
(Page 13, clause 8.8.Z ) —Add ihe following note aftci ihjs clause: 

'Note — Class P eledrocardiognpbs are lt«le potiahle equipment «nd Class S 
ctMtiocardiogiaphs ate niaresophislica(ed(mos(tysl«lionaiy) equipment ' 



(MHD19) 



Repiogcaphy Unit, 81S, NcwOelW. JiWi'a 



Amendment no, i march 1993 

TO 

IS 8048 : 1985 SPECIFICATION FOR 

ELECTROCARDIOGRAPH 

( First Revision } 

( Page 11, clause 8.5, line 3 ) — Substitute 'preset' for 'present'. 

( Page 12, clause 8.8.1 ) — Substitute the following for the existing 
clause: 

'The amplitude-frequency characteristic of the electrocardiographs shall 
be in the shaded area between the +0-83 dB line and the drawn line 
( see Fig. 3 ).' 

{ Page 13, Fig. 2A) ~- Substitute the following caption of Fig. 2A 
for the e;tistmg caption: 

'2B Application of Test Voltage to Bridged Patient Connections'. 
( Page 13, Fig. 2B ) — Substitute the following caption of Fig. 2B 
for the existing caption: 

'2A Application of Test Voltage to Individual Patient Connections'. 

( Page 14, Fig. 3 ) — Substitute the following figure for the existing 
figure: 



A(W) 



+ -js 




[N1N1J>M>M>1>^ 1 



O'OI 



IS 0) 




4 6 1-0 3 J S 10 
Leg (FREQUENCY IH Wl 

A ((*■) IS the gam at frequency W 
/I (10) is the gain at 10 Wz 

Fig. 3 Amplitude Frequency Characteristics 

( Page 14, clause 8.10 ) — Substitute the following for the existio 
heading; 

'Sopply Freqaency Interference' 

[ Page 20, clause 10.1( j ) ] — Substitute '(b) to (g)' for '(a) to (g)'. 

I Page 21, clause 10.6(c) ] — Substitute 'col 4,' for 'col 3'. 

(MHDI9) 



printed at Priniwell Frinten. AUgub, ladl* 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPH 



f First Revision/ 



Electromedical Equipment Sectional Committee, ETDG 50 

ChtttrnJOTi Representing 

SokOeon Rea.b ApHiBAti A, K. Dbb Ministry of Deftnce (R&D Organization ) 

Sh»i B. S Bedi Department of Elcctronifs, New Delhi 

Shbi B. a, Chetty ( Alternate ) 
Phot S. K. Guha Directorate Genf ral of Health Servic«, 

New Delhi 
Db P K. Gojuaij Encardio-Rite-Elecironics Pvt Ltd, Lucknow 

Sum Akhilbsh Miaa* ( Alternate ) 
Db G. Hjjvidaban Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Shbi G. SoBHunM vnian { Aitttnale ) 
Col S K Jain Armed Forces Medical Services, New Delhr 

Mm-GenJ. M. GitoVEit ( Aiinnale 1 
ShriU.S K-uasWii. Ceniral Scientific Injtrumenta Organization 

( CSIR ), Chandigarh 
Slim V. K. Shabma ( Alternati ) 
Shui D, B, Malik Directorate GenL-ral of Technical DevelopmeiM, 

New Delhi 
Shbi I*. K Mantei Elprtromcdical Pvt Ltd, Indore 

Lt-Col S. S. MoiiANiY Directorate of Standardization, Ministry of 

Deftnce (R&D), New Delh' 
Shbi A. S. KnisHNAitUB'iiiy ( Alternate ) 
Sebi B. Pasbicha All India Instruments Manufacturers' & Dealers' 

Association, New Delhi 
Sbbi M. M. Kala ( Alternate ) 
Sebi D. NaQabaj Rao Siemens India Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi R. P. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Sbbt B. Sareab Elpro International Ltd, Fune 

Shki D. L. Sule ( Alternate ) 



( C*ntiiuaJ on page 2 ) 



® Cotfnght 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication ii protected under the Indian CtpyrtgM Act ( XIV of 1957 ) add 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the laid Act. 



IS t 8048 -1985 



( Continued frim page \ ) 
Mfnbers 

Db R. S. Sakkna 
Shut K. Vobra 

Shpi Bhaudwaj ( Altirnate ) 
Shki S. p. SftCMrtEv, 
Director ( Elec tech ) 



Repressnlmg 

Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi 
J. N. Marshall & Co, Pune 

Director General, ISt ( Ex-efido Member ) 



SetTSlary 

Shbi B. K. Mabata 

Joint Director ( Elec tech ), ISI 



lS:8048.t9BS 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPH 

( First Revision ) 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 21 August 1985, after the draft finalized by the 
Electromedical Equipment Sectional Conunittcc had been approved by 
the Electrotechnical Division Council 

0.2 This Indian Standard was first published in 1 976 and has been revised 
to incorporate latest developndent. 

0.3 Methods for using electrocardiographs are not covered in this stand- 
ard but some essential information relating to use of electrocardiographs 
is given in Appendix A 

0.4 Appendix B describes a simple device by which some of the more 
important performance requirements, like low and high frequency response, 
linearity, input impedance and common mode rejection ratio may be spot 
checked. 

0.5 For the purpose ol deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expres- 
sing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2- 
1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value 
should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the safety and performance requirements and 
test methods for direct-writing single-channel and multi-channel electro- 
cardiograph;. 

•Rules for rounding off aumencal values (reetieJ). 



1& i t04B • 1985 

1.1.1 It also includes the requirements for recording chart. 

1.2 This standard does not cover electrocardiograph lor direct lecordmg 
from heart muscles. 

2. TERMINOLOGV 

2.0 For the purpose of this s andard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Accuracy ^ The deviation of result obtained by a particular method 
from the true value. It is usually expressed as a percentage of full scale. 

2.2 Common Mode Rejection — The ability of a differential amplifier 
to reject common mode signals It is expressed as a ratio, namely, 

Common mode q^;^ ^f ^f^^ jo differential mode signal 

rejection ratio = — T=r-; p — !— p^ — — — — — j ■ ■ ■ 

fCMRR) Gam of amplifier to common mode signal 

2.3 Direct-Writing Electrocardiograph — An item of electromedical 
equipment in which electrodes are directly applied to a paiient cxtcrnaHy 
for the purpose of recording on paper the fluctuating voUages caused by 
the heart's action 

Note — Direct-writing eleclrocardiographs are hereinafter leferred to as 
'ElectrocaidiogTaphs' \\ roughuiK tins '.pacification 

2.3.1 StngU-channtl Electrocardiograph — Equipment fur the recording 
of otic electrocardiograph only. 

2.3.2 Multi-channel Electrocardiograph - Equipment for the simukaneous 
recording of several electrocardiographs, often combined with phono- 
cardiography and pulse recording. 

2.4 Distortion — The change in shape of an electrocardiographic wave- 
form introduced by the recording instrument. 

2.4.1 Linear Distortion — A type of distortion resulting when, for a 
sinusoidal input, the gain of instrument varies with the frequency of the 
sinusoidal signal. 

2.4.2 Non-lmear Distortion — A type of distortion in which the output 
departs from a sinusoidal wave shape when the input is sinusoidal. 

2.5 Frequency Response — A record of the sensitivity of the electro- 
cardiograph versus frequency of sinusoidal input in the specified range 
keeping input constant. 

2.6 Impedance — A mc.isure of the opposition to flow of an alternat- 
ing current in a circuit and caused by (he combination of resistance. 



IS : AHft - 198S 

capacitive reactance and inductive reactance. It is the ratio of the efFective 
voltage to the effective current. 

2.7 Input Signal — The signal injected into the electrocardiograph. 

2*8 Input Terminal — The terminal or terminals for the input signal of 
an electrocardiograph. 

2.9 Inpat Circuit — The part of the electronic circuit immediately 
adjacent to the input terminals. 

2.10 Linearity — A measure of the non-linear distortion ( see 2.4i2 ) in 
an electrocardiograph 

2.11 Noise — ■ Unwanted signal introduced either from ihe f lectrocardio- 
graph or from other sources, 

2.12 Output — The conversion of an input signal as it appears in the 
form of power, energy or signal from the electrocardiograph amplifier or 
as it appears in the form of recording on the electrocardiograph chart. 

2.13 Output Terminal — The terminals or terminal of an amplifier to 
which the galvanometer is connected. 

2.14 Output Circuit — That part of the electronic circuit immediately 
adjacent to the output terminals. 

2.15 Sensitivity — The amplitude of the output produced by a given 
input voltage expressed in mm/mV. 

2.15.1 Standard Sensitivity — A sensitivity of 10 mm/mV. 

2.16 Signal — The electrocardiographic waveform attributable to the 
electrical activity of the myocardium, 

2.17 Skew — The departure of the writing stylus from an absolutely 
vertical path, that is, from a path perpendicular to the direction of move- 
ment of the paper. 

2.18 Time Constant — The time required for the recorded output 
obtained from a direct current step input to decay to 36 8 percent of its 
original magnitude. 

2.19 Lead Electrode — Electrode fastened on a certain part of the body 
to detpct heart action potentials in combination with another electrode. 

2.20 Neutral Electrode — Reference point for dilFerential amplifiers and 
or connection for an ac suppressor amplifier involved m electrocardiograph 
lead combinations. 



IS I 8048 . 1985 

2.21 Central Terminal According to Wilson — Terminal with 
average potentials of the right arm, left arm and left leg potentials. 

2.22 Central Point According to Goldberger — ~ A point with average 
potentials of 2 limbs. 

2.23 General — Comprises recording s/steiu with the proportionate 
width of the recording paper and the associated amplifier. 

2.24 Type Tests ■ — Tests carried out to prove conformity with the 
requirements ol this standard. These are intended to prove the general 
qualities and design of a given type of equipment. 

2.23 Acceptance Tests — Tests carried out on samples taken from a 
lot for the purpose of acceptances of the lot. 

2.26 Routine Tests — Tests carried out on each item to check the 
essential requirements which are likely to vary during production, 

3. SERVICE CONDITIONS 

3.1 Electrocardiographs shall be capable of complying with the require- 
ments of this specification over the full range of each of the following 
conditions includmg any combinations thereof : 

a) Over the temperature range 10 to 40*0 inclusive. 

Note — The electrocardiograph shall be able to withstand a tempera- 
ture of 40 to 50°G in dry heat condition. 

b) At altitudes from sea level to 3 000 m above sea level, 

c) At relaijve humidities up to 95 percent inclusive, and 

d) 1) For electrocardiographs operating from a nominal 240 V, 

50 Hz supply — at any supply voltage within the range 200-255 
V inclusive and 48-52 Hz inclusive. 
2) For battery-operated electrocardiographs — to the end point 
of the voltage limits specified by the manufacturer. 

4. CONSTRUCTION AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 General — All the sub-systems shall be fully transistorized. Electro- 
cardiograph shall be So designed and constructed that it meets the safety 
and performance requirements It shall be finished externally to with- 
stand the normal handling. Attention shall be given to the layout of the 
controls and their labelling to provide effortless operation over long 
period with minimum error. The grouping of controls and the type of 
knobs used should be such that they can be operated by touch without 
the removal of the attention of the recordist from the patient or the 



18 I «M8 - IMS 

record. Construction should also be made such that the view of the 
patient is not obstructed by any portion of the equipment. 

4.2 Nature of Supply — The system shall be designed to work from 
supply mains and/or battery. 

4.3 Electrocardiograpli Amplifier 

4.3.1 The amplifier shall be capable of amplifying the cardiac 
signals from the patient and displaying diagnostic quality electrocardio- 
graph on the pen recorder. It shall be completely transistorized. The 
amplifier shall have a differential input. 

4.3.2 Sensitivity shall be such as to give a deflection of not less than 
15 mm for an input of 1 mV. The sensitivity shall be adjustable. 

4.4 Electrocardiograph Electrodes 

4.4.1 The electrocardiograph electrodes shall be light-weight and 
comfortable for the patient to wear. 

4.4.2 The electrodes shall be made of suitable non-corrodable 
material. 

4.4.3 The electrode-cable shall be connected to the electrocardiograph 
machme through a suitable plug. 

4.5 Recorder 

4.5.1 This is meant for obtaining a permanent record of the electro- 
cardiograph on paper. The recorder shall comply with the requirements 
specified in 4.5.2 and 4.5.3. 

4.5.2 The graduated portion of the chart shall be at least 40 mm in 
width, the overall width shall be -|-50 mm maximum. 

4.5.3 Recording shall be permanent. 

4.6 Control and Functions 

4.6.1 In integrated electrocardiographs, the following controls and 
functions shall be present: 

a) Power OFF, ON, CHART movement switch; 

b) 1 mV switch for calibration; 

c) Socket for electrode-cables; 

d) Sensitivity control knob either preset or continuously variable; 

e) Output terminal for electrocardiograph ( optional ); 



IS t 804». 1M5 

f) Lead seJcctor switch for leads I, II, III, aVR, aVL, aVF, Tor F„ 
^j) Vs, V4, V^, Vb and test position; 

g) A trace reset facility; 

h) A lamp or flag or indicator to indicate presence of power; 

j) Stylus heat control and control knob, uncalibrated (in case of 

heat-sensitive writing system ); 
k) Stylus position control knob, uncalibrated; 
m) Chart speed control switch, where possible; 
n) Paper roll machinism; 
p) Transparent cover on the stylus; and 
q) Facility for recording any other phonomenon through input 

socket. 

4.6.2 In multi-channel electrocardiographs the lead selector system 
shall at least enable sequential selection of test and lead positions I, II and 
III, aVR, aVL and aVF and V„ V^, V^, Vi, F5 and Vg. 

5. GENERAL SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 Compliance with Other Requirements — The rlccirocardiograph 
shall comply with the relevant requirements specified in IS : 8607 
( Part 1 ).1977*. 

6. PROTECTION AGAINST ELECTRIC SHOCK HAZARDS 

6.1 The relevant requirements of IS : 8607 ( Part 2 )- 19781 shall 
apply. 

6.2 Isolation from Supply Mains ( Mains-Operated Electrocardio- 
graphs Only ) — Electrocardiographs operating from the mains supply 
shall have all patient circuits effectively isolated from the mains supply 
by means of a transformers having the secondary winduig insulated from 
the piimary winding by means not inferior to those specified for protective 
isolating transformer specified in IS : 8607 { Part 7 )-1985J. 

6.2.1 The transformer shall be capable of passing the relevant tests 
prescribed in 10.5, 10.6, 10.20 and 10.21. 

6.2.2 Conductors and components electrically connected to the patient 
circuit shall be: 

a) double insulated, and 



Geaeral and saftey requirements for electrical equipmeDt used in medical 
practice: 

•Pan 1 General. 

fPart 2 Protection agaiiiit electric shock 

{Part 7 Construction. 

8 



IS t 8048 ■ im 

b) arranged and supported so that in the event of a failure such as 
loosening of terminals for breaking of conductors they may not 
make electrical contact with live conductors components electri- 
cally connected to the primary winding of the transformer. 

6>3 Cord Anchorages — The requirements specified in 20 of IS : 302- 
1977* shall apply. 

C.4 Screws Threads and Fixing — The requirements speciGed in 23 of 
IS : 302-1977* shall apply. 

7. MARKING IDENTIFICATION AND DOCUMENTS 

7.1 Marking on the Outside of Egnipment 

7.1.1 In addition to the provisions of 7,1 to 7.2 of IS : 8607 ( Part 1)- 
1977t, the requirements specified in 7.1.2 and 7.1.3 shall apply, 

7.1.2 If applicable marking on the panel that the electrocardiographs 
is protected against the effects of defibrillation ( see 8.7.2 ), 

7.1.3 Instructions for Use — The instructions for use shall additionally 
contain the following: 

a) Advice on the procedures necessary for safe operation to avoid 
hazards, which may occur as a result of an inadequate electrical 
installation; 

b) Advice that conductive parts of electrodes and their connectors, 
including the neutral electrode, should not contact other con- 
ductive parts including earth; 

c) Advice on the type of electrical installation to which the equip- 
ment may be safely connected, including the connection of any 
potential equalization conductor; 

d) The specification ( or type-nunnber ) of the patient cable to meet 
any defibrillation protection and protection against high frequ- 
ency burns ( see 8.7.2 ); 

e) If the electrocardiograph is provided with protective means 
against burns when used with HF surgical equipment such 
means shall be described; 

f) Advice on the possible hazard caused by the summation of 
leakage currents when several equipments are interconnected; 

g) Instructions for regular testing of the electrocardiographs and the 
patient cable; 

'General and safety requirements for houaehold and similar electrical appliances 
{ fifth reeistan ). 

tGeneral and safety requirements for electrical equipment u.«ed in medical practice: 
Pare I Genera], 



IS I 80i8 . 1985 

h) Where relevant a statement that the electrocardiographs is pro- 
tected, against the effects of a cardiac defibrillator discharge; 
and 
j) Advice on the precautions to be taken when a defibrillator is 
used on a patient. 

8. PERFORMANCE REQtriREMENTS 

8.1 Recording Co-ordinates and Pen Position 

8.1.1 Recorditig Co-crdinatts — Electrocardiographs shall be desigoed 
and constructed so as to record on rectilinear co-ordinates and not on 
curvillinear co-ordinates. 

8.1.2 Pen Position — The pen position shall be variable over a width 
of 1 5 mm on both sides of the central line. 

8.2 Linearity — When tested in accordance with the method indicated 
in 10.16, electrocardiograph shall show amplitude up to 20 mm in upper 
and lower side and shall not permit over 10 percent +0'5 mm variation 
in upper and lower, 1 5 mm from base line illustrated in Fig. 1 . 




Fio. 1 Base Line for Testing of Linearity 

8.3 Interlead and Input Impedance 

8.3.1 Interlead Impedance — Interlead impedance shall be not less than 
0'3 MQ between any pair of active patient electrodes at any position of 
the lead selector in the frequency range of O'l to 200 Hz. 

10 



ISt8(M8.lMS 

This value of 0-3 MI2 is only high enough if the impedance between 
two { sum ) electrode-skin resistances is lower than 30 kii. 

Note — The amplifiei interlead impedance shall be sufficiently high to satisfy 
the requirement of 8,6.3. When impedance is lower than 3 MQ, it is posuble that 
the electrocardiograph may be misinterpreted. 

8.3.2 Input Impedance — The input impedance shall be not less than 
2x2 MQ in common mode and 4 Mil in differential mode. 

8.4 Limiting Value of dc Current — DC current in any input lead 
shall not exceed 0- 1 /j,A. 

8.5 Adjustment of Sensitivity — The sensitivity is to be adjustable 
from the panel of the instrument continuously by an uncalibrated knob 
or by a present sensitivity control knob, in which case the selectable 
ranges shall be 5 mm/1 mV, 10 mm/1 MV and 20 mm/1 mV. 

8.6 Stability 

8.6.1 Fluctuation of Recording Base Line — When tested in accordance 
with the method as indicated in 10.12.1, single-channel electrocardiograph 
shall show less than ± 1 mm aberration of base line in 20 seconds, and 
multi-channel electrocardiograph, less than ± 1 mm aberration of base 
line in 40 seconds. 

8.6.2 Fluctuation of Base Line Caused by Change of Power Source Voltage — 
When the voltage of power source is charged for plus or minus 5 V accor- 
ding to the testmg method indicated in 10.12.2, ac-type electrocardio- 
graph shall show less than ±5 mm deflection of base hne in 20 seconds. 

Note — The requirements for battery-operated electrocardiograph is under 
consjdpration. 

8.6.3 Variation of Recording Sensitivity — When the voltage of power 
source is changed from 230 to 250 V according to the testing method 
indicated in 10.12.3, ac-type electrocardiograph shall not permit more 
than ±10 percent change is recording sensitivity. 

Note — The requirement for battery-operated electrocardiograph is under 
consideration, 

8.7 Additional Re(|uireinents for Electrocardiographs to be Used 
with Pacemakers and Defibrillators 

8.7.1 Automatic Unblocking after Defibrillations — An electrocardiograph 
shall be provided with means that a recorded electrocardiograph shall be 
visible within 5 seconds after a defibrillation pulse, at normal sensitivity 
of the electrocardiograph, 400 J or 4 000 V onto a 100 Q or any equiva- 
lent pulse has been applied. 

8.7.2 Voltage withstand Test for DeJibTiilatiT-proof Equipment 

8.7.2.1 General — All equipment, which is marked as suitable for tise 
with defibrillators, shall withstand the voltage withstand test specified 
in 8.7.2.2 to ensure: 

a) that any accessible parts of equipment, patient cable coDOecton, 

11 



ISi8(MI»-198S 

cables, etc, which are not connected to earth in nornial use, will 
not become live due to flashover of defibrillator voltage; and 

b) that the equipment will continue to function after exposure to 
defibrillator voltage. 

Note — Patient-circuits can rise to high voltages when a defibrillator is in 
use, and accessible metal on cannectora, cables, etc, carrying such patient-circuits 
must, therefore, be adequately earthed or adequately insulated from the patient- 
circuit. 

This requirement applies to plug and socket combinations where the 
socket is chassis-mounted, and where the combination is used to connect 
parts of the patient cable, transducer lead, etc ( for example, inline 
connectors ). 

The equipment shall be deemed to comply if: 

a) during the test there is no failure or arcing over of insulation; 

b) during the test, the accessible parts do not become live; and 

c) after the test, the equipment is capable of correct operation, 

8.7.2.2 Test protedwe and connteltons — The equipment and test cir- 
cuit shall be connected as described in Fig, 2A and then as described in 
Fig. 2B. 

In the test described in Fig 2B, the test voltage is applied to all the 
patient-circuit connections bridged together and isolated from earth. 

The accessible parts are first connected directly to earth to deter- 
mine any flashover or insulation failure and then connected through an 
oscilloscope to earth to determine whether any part becomes Uve. 

S.7.3 Use with Pacemakets — The function of an eIectrocardi«>graph 
shall not be affected unduly by operation of a pacemaker. Pacemaker and 
electrocardiograph waveforms should be visible on the recording. 

8.7.3.1 When pulses having an amplitude of 250 mV peak with a 
rise time of 10 microseconds and duration 1 millisecond and 100 pukes/ 
minute are applied to the input of the electrocardiograph, which is set to 
10 mm/mV sensitivity, the maximum cumulative shift of the base line 
thould not exceed 10 mm. 

8.8 Distortion 

(.8.1 Amplitudt-frtquency Charactenslic — Both Glass P and Class S 
electrocardiographs shall have an amplitude-frequency characteristic in 
the shaded area between the +0-83 dB line and the drav^rn line i sw 
Fig. 3). 

12 



IS : 804a -ISI^ 



CONDUCTIVE P4RTS NOT 




SA Application of Test Voltage to Individual Patient Connections 



CONDUCTIVE Pf^fJIS NOT 




L,-. 

I PARTS NOBH 
I EARTHED 




I i<n 



SB App/ication of Test Voltage to Bridged Patient Connections 
Note — fi is iocluded to protect contactor in test set-up. 

Fio. 2 Voltage Withstand Test Arbanqements 

8.8.2 Phase-Jrequency CharacUTistic — Class S electrocardiographs shaJl 
not exceed maximum delay time difference between any two Irequency in 
the range of 3 to 100 Hz of 4 miiliseconds. 

8.8>3 Maximum single overshoot shall be 10 perceot for a square 
wavcfornij when step of 1 mV input is applied. 

Note — This performance may be adversely affected if recording p»perhaving 
a specification oitier cliaa that recommended by tlie manufacturer u used. 

8.8.4 Time Constant — Time constant shall be between 3 and 4 seconds, 
both inclusive. It is allowable to have 2 time constants ( switchable ) 
and, where a switch for lower time constant is applied, the shorter value 
should be 1 -5 seconds minimum. 



13 



IS t SIMS - 1985 

8.8.5 Filter — If a filter is used, it is recommended to have low-paas 
filter of - 3 dB at 25 Hz { the slope of the filter shall not exceed 6 
dB/octave ). 

NoTB — The effect oftramients on the maim lupply are under consideration. 

8.9 Radio-Frequency Interference — The instrument shall be insensi- 
tive to interference caused by radio frequency sources, such as therapeu- 
tic and surgical diathermy equipment. 



( 


A(W) 






AMO» 






S3 



-0-S 
































































































/" 






















\ 










-2 

-3 

- S 

~ 6 








i 


/ 
























\ 


\ 












J 


/ 




























N 


S| 










^ 
















































































11 






































D 


11 : 


i 




1 





I 


i 


( 




1 


; 


t 


' 




10 


t 


> 




00 



l«l <FR£aUENCT IN WJ 

A (W) 19 the gala at frequency W. 
A (10) IS the gain a: 10 Hz. 

FtG. 3 Amplitude Frequency Characteristics 

8.10 Radio Frequency Interference — As a facility for reducing 
interference from supply mams, the electrocardiograph may be provided 
with a separate earthing terminal for connection to metal objects in the 
vicinity of a patient. 

Such an earth terminal shall conform to relevant requirements of 
IS : 302-1979*. 

8.11 Calibration 

8.11.1 Signal of 1 mV shall be provided and it shall be possible to 
inject this signal into the amplifier for any lead position while the record- 
ing is in progress, 

8.11.2 Means shall be provided for the calibration voltage to be: 

a) added to the electrocardiogram and applied at the input of the 
amplifier from any lead position, and 

'General and safety requirements for household and siinilar electrical appliances 
{ jijik tensien ) . 

14 



1Bt8M»-lM0 

b) recorded with the patient disconnected from the instrument. 

With multi-channel electrocardiographs, meam shall be provided 
for the simultaneous application of the calibration signal to all channels. 

5.12 Speed and Speed Aeanrucy — A minimum of two speeds, namely, 
25 mm/s and 50 mm/s shall be available. The speed shall have an accu- 
racy within ±3 percent when operating from a 50 Hz source. 

Note I — Appropriate allowance shall be made if the frequency is different 
from 50 H2. 

Note 2 — The requirement Tor battery-operated electrocardiograph is under 
consideration. 

8.13 RecoxdJng Chart — Electrocardiographs shall be supplied with 
recording chart having rectilinear rulings of l-O mm ± 1 percent pitch 
along both the time and voltage axes. Every fifth division shall be ruled 
darker than the others. 

It is recommended that the ruled divisions cover a width not less 
than 40 mm. 

The chart shall be capable of retaining its dimensional accuracies 
thoughout a temperature range of 10 to SO'C inclusive and for relative 
humidities from 1 to 95 jjcrcent inclusive. 

It is recommended that the chart does not readily take finger mark- 
ing or water marking. 

8.H Skew 

8,14.1 General — Skew of recording, due to all causes, shall not exceed 
0*1 mm of horizontal displacement i>er 10 mm of vertical deflection. 

8*14.2 Multichannel Electrocardiographs — With the amplifiers for each 
channel set to the same frequency response limits, all traces shall faU 
dynamically within a 0-5 mm band of the ideal ( zero skew ) response at 
all transport speeds for the entire frequency range of the electrocardio- 
graph. 

NoTK — In multichannel recording it is especially importaat to ensure 
temporal alignment of traces. 

8.15 Resolotion of Recording — The vertical width of the undetected 
trace shall be capable of adjustment so that It does not exceed 1 -0 mm at 
any chart speed. 

The electrocardiograph shall, at any paper speed and sensivity, 
leave a visible continuous trace when recording a triangular waveform 

15 



IS I 8048 ■ 1985 

having a peak-to-peak amplitude equal to full chart width and a frequency 
within the range of to 12 Hz. 

NorE — This waveform is approiciraately equivalent to a succenion of Q^S 

complexes at normal writing speeds. 

The writing system shall be such that, with a sensitivity of 10 mm/ 
mV, a step change of 50 microvolt at the input shall be readable on the 
trace. 

8.16 Trace Reset — A trace reset facility shall be incorporated to 
operate whenever a new lead is selected. 

With 100 mV dc applied to the input terminals the trace reset faci- 
lity shall be capable of returning the trace to within 1 mm of its initial 
position within 0-5 second when the lead selector is switched between any 
two lead positions. 

8.17 Auxiliary Input and Output 

8.17.1 An auxiliary input may be provided. This may be of a single- 
ended and/or double-ended type. 

8.17.2 It is recommended that electrocardiographs be provided with a 
tip and sleeve, single-ended jack to which the output of the instrument 
shall be wired such that the active electrode is connected to the tip. 

The output signal, if provided , shall be direct coupled, shall have 
characteristics identical with those specified for the electrocardiograph 
and shall have a magnitude of 1 V per millivolt of electrocaidit^raph 
input. The signal shall be capable of driving a load of 10 kO. or more 
and shall have an output impedance not exceeding 1 kii. 

The signal at the jack shall be of such polarity that the tip is positive 
relative to the sleeve when the electrocardiograph is recording a signal 
which causes the pen to move upward on the chart. 

The output signal shall have no dc offset voltage when the input is 
shorted. 

The circuit of the auxiliary output shall be so designed and cons- 



ISt8048-t9fS 

that a peak change of i 5 V rms in the supply voltage does not result 
in a deflection of the recorded output greater than 0*5 mm. 

8.18.2 Battery-powered El ectrocardio graphs — Battery-powered electro- 
cardiographs shall be provided with a device to indicate when the battery 
voltage has fallen below the required minitaum voltage specified by the 
manufacturer. 

8.19 Patient Leads — Colour Coding and Marking of Terminals 

8.19.1 The electrocardiograph shall have a connector with a free 
polarized socket coded to the various leads and which may not be inserted 
incorrectly. 

8.19.2 Patient leads shall be of the appropriate colour specihed in co\ "2 
of Table 1 . The patient terminals shall be Jegibly and indelibly marked 
with ai least 4 mm long legend specified in col 3 of Table 1 . 



TABLE 1 


PATIENT LEADS - 


- COLOUR CODING AND 




MASKING OF TERMINALS 


Lbad 


CoLons 


Patiint Tbbmihal 
Maskinq 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


Right arm 


Red 


R 


Left arm 


Yellow 


L 


Left leg 


Green 


F 


Right leg 


Black 


A 


Cheat 


White 


V (in case of cardiQgca.pb 
with single cheat lead ] 
or V„ V„ v.. V^, Vt, Vt 
in case of moiethtui one 
cheit lead 



8.20 Patient Lead Configurations — The electrocardiographs shall be 
provided with bipolar lead configurations I, II and III and augmented 
unipolar lead configurations — a VR, aV, a VF and V, all of which shall be 
obtainable from lead selector. The configurations shall be in conformity 
with Fig. 4. 

9. MARKING, INSTRUCTION FOR USE AND PROVISION OF 
CONTROL 

9.1 Marking 

9.1.1 Each electrocardiograph shall be marked indelibly and clearly 

with the following information: 

a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark; 

b) Manufacturer's model, batch and senal number; 

c) Smgle-channel or multi-channel; 

d) Country of origin; 

17 



18 I 8048 . IMS 



c) Mains- and battery-operated or only mains or battery operated; 
I) Rated voltage; 
g) Rated power; and 

h) Symbol for defibrillator proof equipment [ see 2.5>11 of 
IS : 2032 ( Part 19 )-1977* ] 






OVL 



aVF 




Fig. 4 Jjekd Gonfiourations 

9.1.2 The electrocardiographs may also be marked with the ISI Certi- 
fication Mark. 

NoTK — The use of the 1ST Certification Mark is governed bv the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( CertiGcation Marks) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with th« 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the 
producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions, under which a licence 
for the use of the ISI CertiJication Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

9.2 Instmction for Use 

9.3 MarkiDg of Controls — The controls incorporated in the electro- 
cardiograph shall be marked in accordance with Table 2. 



•Graphical symbols used in electrotechnology: 
used in medical practice. 

18 



Part 19 Electrical equipment 



ISi8048-19t5 



TABLE 2 MARKING OF CONTROLS 

( Claase 9.3 ) 

CONTBOI. 



(I) 

Switch for switching electrocardiographs 

'ON' and 'OFJ' 
Control for selecting paper speed 
Calibration 
Lead selector 



Positioniag ar trace 



MAn-Kiua 

(2) 

'ON' 

{ mrn/s for example, 25 mm/s ) 
1 mV 

TEST/GAL, /, //, in, aVR, aVL 
aVV, For^i, F„ V,, Y^, V^.Yt 
( in caie of more than one cbett 
lead) 



^ 



Knob for varying sensitivity ( continuous ) 

OR 
Knob for varyieg sensitivity ( preset ) 

Switch for the high frequency cutout filter 
(if fitted ) 



Stylus heat control 



5 mm/1 mV, 10 mm/1 mV, 
20 mm/1 mV F 



V 



19. TESTS 

10.0 General — The electrocardiograph shall satisfactorily pass the tests 
prescribed in 10.1, 10.2 and 10.3. 

NoTB 1 — Unless otherwise specified, the general test conditions shall be same 
those specified in 3 of IS : 8607 ( Part L )-l977*. 

m 10.1, 10.2 and 10.3 the following sh„i, 
I higher fnd of tbe voltage range and at any 



■9 



Note 2 — Out of the tests specified in 10.1, 10,2 and 10.3 the following shall 
be carried out both at the lower and higher fnd of the voltage range and at any 
frequency between 48 and 52 Hz: 

a) Time constant, 

b) Linearity, 

c) Speed, 

d) Sensitivity, and 

e) 1 mV standardization. 

•General and safety requirements for electrical equipment used m medical practice: 
Part 1 General. 



19 



a 1 8i4a • 1983 

10.1 Type Tests — The tests specified in Table 3 shall constitute type 
testa. Three samples of the electrocardiograph of the same model, type 
and rating shall be subjected to these type tests. All the tests specified 
from SI No, (iii) to (xxi] of Table 3 shall be carried out on the samples. 
On the third sample the following test shall be carried out in the order in 
which they are appearing below: 

a) Dry heat, 

b) Speed accuracy, 

c) Sensitivity, 

d) 1 mV standardization, 

e) Overshoot, 

f) Time constant, 

g) Linearity, 
h) Damp heat, 

j) Tests specified under (a) to (g), 
k) High voltage, and 
m) Leakage current. 

lO.l.l All samples shall successfully pass all the type tests for proving 
conformity with the requirements of this standard. If any of the sample 
fails in any of the type test, the testing authority, at its discretion, may 
call for fresh samples not exceeding twice the original number and subject 
them to all the tests or the tests in which failure(s) occurred. No single 
failure shall be permitted in the repeat test{s) . 

10.2 Acceptance Tests — The tests specified in Table 4 shall constitute 
acceptance tests. 

10.2.1 A recommended sampling procedure for acceptance tests is given 
in Appendix G. 

10.3 Routine Tests — The tests specified in Table 5 shall constitute 
routine tests. 

10.4 Dry Heat Test — The test shall be carried out in accordance with 
IS : 9000 { Part 3/Sec 1 to 5 )-1977*. 

10.5 Damp Heat Test - — The damp heat test shall be carried out in 
accordance with IS : 9000 ( Part 5/Scc 1 and 2)-I981t for 1 cycle. 



*Basic enviionmeiital testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Fart 3 
Dry heat test, Section 1 to 5. 

tBaaic enviroDBiental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part 5 
D«inp heat ( cycliDg ) test. Section I to 2. 

20 



1$ t 84M8 • 1985 





TABLE 3 TYPE TESTS 






( Clauie 10 I] 




St 


Test 


CtATJSB 


No. 




Rejebbnce 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


i) 


Dry Keat 


10.4 


ii) 


Damp heat 


10.5 


iii) 


High voltage 


10 6 


iv) 


Vanation of mains voJtage 


J0.7 


V) 


Cord anchorage 


6.3 


vi) 


Screws, threads and fixing 


64 


vii) 


Overload 


10.8 


viii) 


Accuracy of the speed 


10.9 


be) 


Noise level 


10.10 


^) 


Ability to withstand radio frequency interference 


101] 


xi) 


Stability 


10.12 


:cii) 


I mV standardization 


10.13 


xiii) 


Time constant 


10.14 


xiv) 


Common mode rpjection ratio 


lO.n 


XV) 


Linparilv 


10 Ifi 


Kvi) 


Distortion 


10 17 


xvii) 


Damping'over^hoot 


in 10 


xviii) 


Filter 


10. 1<) 


jciit) 


Voltage withstand test for defihrillator — proof 
equipment 


872 


«i) 


Insulation resistance 


10.20 


xxi) 


Leakage ctirrent 


I0.21 


xxii) 


Interlead and input impedance 


10 22 



10.6 High Voltage Test — Electrocardiographs shall be subjected to an 
ac voltage of : 

a) 1 000 volts rms applied between the parts specified in 10.20( a ), 

b) 1 000 volts rms applied between the parts specified in 10.2O( b ), 
the patient electrodes being connected to earth; 

c) the voltage specified in col 3 of Table 6 applied between the 
corresponding parts specified in col 1 of Table 2. 

10.6.1 The voltage, shall be applied in accordance with IS : 8607 
( Part 2 )-1978*. 



•General and safety requirements for electrical equipment used in medical practice: 
Part 2 Protection against electric shock, 

21 



U I MM > I98S 



TABLE 4 ACCEPTANCE TESTS 

( Clause 10.2 ) 



Sl 


Test 


No. 




(0 


C2) 


i) 


fligh voltage 


") 


Overload 


iii) 


Accuracy of the speed 


iv) 


Noise level 


V) 


Stability 


vi) 


1 mV standardization 


vii) 


Time constant 


viii) 


Common mode rejection ratio 


«) 


Linearity 


«) 


Distortion 


xi) 


Da mpinglovenhoot 


xii) 


Insulation resistance 


xiii) 


Leakage current 



Clacss 

Rbfbbbhcie 

(3) 

lo.e 

10.3 

10.9 

10.10 

10.12 

10 13 

)0.H 

10.S5 

10.16 

10.17 

10.18 

10.20 

10.21 



TABLE 5 ROUTINE TESTS 

( Clause 10 3) 



Sl 

No. 


Test 


(1) 


(2) 


i) 


Stability 


ii) 


1 mV standardization 


iii) 


Time constant 


iv) 


Common mode rejection ratio 


v) 
vi) 


Linearity 
Distortion 


vii) 
viii) 


Da mpiug/o versboot 
Insulation resistance 


ix) 


Leakage current 



Claubi 
Refbbencs 

(3) 
10.12 
10.13 
10.14 
10.15 
10.16 
•10.17 
10.18 
10.20 
10.21 



10.6.2 There shall be no failure or arcing over the insulation during any 
of the test, and immediately following the tests, insulation resistance test 
described in 10.20 shall be repeated. 



22 



IS I 80« . IBM 



TABLE 6 INSULATION RESISTANCE AND HIGH VOLTAGE TEST 
VALUES FOR DOUBLE INSULATED TRANSFORMER 




( CUust 10.6 ) 




No. 


PabTs 


Insueatiou 

rssisiascb 


VoLTAO« 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


W 






Mfl 


kV (rnu) 


1. 


Between input and output 
windings 


100 


3-5 


2. 


Between the input winding and 
core connected to any screen 
and any exposed coaductiwe 
part 


10 


1 


3. 


Between the output winding and 
core connected to any screen 
and any exposed conductive 
part 


10 


I 



10.7 Variation of Mains Voltage — The supply voltage shalJ be 
changed to ± 5 percent of its peak value and the output shaJJ be recorded. 
The deflection of the output due to this change of supply voltage shall not 
exceed 0-5 mm. 

10.8 Overload — With the sensitivity control and lead selector switch at 
any position a voltage of I'O V rms shall be applied between any electrode 
and earth at any frequency within the range 48 to 52 Hz inclusive for not 
less than 2 seconds. Electrocardiographs shall be capable of withstanding 
this voltage without any deleterious effect. 

10.9 Accuracy of the Speed — The mains operated electrocardiograph 
shall be supplied with a voltage from a 50 Hz source. The speed shall not 
deviate from the declared speed by more than ±3 percent. 

NoTB — Test procedure for battery-operated electrocardiograph is under 
consideration. 

10.10 Noise Level 

lO.lOil Random Noise — With completely shielded 27 kO resistors 
connected from the right leg ( JV) electrode to each of the right arm {R ), 
left arm (t), left leg (F] and chest {V) electrodes and sensitivity set at 10 
mm/mV the output tioise shall be measured. The noise shall not exceed 
the equivalent of 25 mm peak-to^peak on the chart for any position of 
the lead selector switch, 

23 



ISia(H<.I985 

10.10.2 Cross Talk Between Channels { Multi-channel EiectTocardiographs 
Only ) — For multi-channel electrocardiograph the cross-talk between any 
two channels shall be measured and this cross-talk shall be better than 
60 dB. 

10.11 Ability to Withstand Ratio Frequency Interference — With 

the sensitivity set at 10 mm/mV, a 100 mV rms signal, 100 percent modu- 
lated at 50 Hz, at any frequency ( carrier ) between 0*25 and 35 MHz, 
applied between the reference ( right leg ) electrode and all other lead 
electrode connected together shall cause no perceptible deflection for the 
stylus for any position of the lead selector. 

10.12 Stability 

10.12.1 Fluctuation of Recording Base Point — The electrocardiograph 
fixed on a stable place and it is set in the standard sensitivity with 5 kQ 
resistances connected to two inputs and groundings terminals of electro- 
cardiograph. Then fluctuation of base line is measured for 20 seconds 
starting in Sve nainutes after prower source is switched on, in the case of 
single channel electrocardiograph. For multi-channel electrocardiograph 
the fluctuation of 40 seconds starting in ten minutes after power source is 
switched on is measured. The voltage of the power source shall not vary 
by more than 1 percent during the test. 

10.12.2 Fluctuation of Base Line Cause by a Change of Power Source 
Voltage — The test is conducted by using a stable power source as prescri- 
bed in 10.12.1. Single channel electrocardiograph and multi-channel pres- 
cribed electrocardiographs are connected to the supply for five minutes 
and ten minutes respectively before carrying out the teat. 

As indicated in Fig. 5 a series resistances, capable ofgiving to power 
source a potential difference of ±5 V over 240 V is inserted and the 
resistance is short-circuited or inserted by switching. The aberration of 
base line obtained within 20 seconds immediately following short-circuit 
OT insertion shall be less than ±5 mm. A parallel condenser may be inser- 
ted to the switch for short-circuit, 

NoTB — Test procedure for battery-operated electrocardiograph is under coasi- 
deratiOD. 

10.12.3 Variation of Recording Sensitivity — The electrocardiograph is 
adjusted to standard sensitivity with stable power source of 240 ^ 2 V. 
Then by continuously changing power source voltage from 230 to 250 V 
the recording sensitivity is checked. This sensitivity should remain within 
± 10 percent from that obtained with 240 ±_2V power source. 

Nors — Test procedure for battery-operated electrocardiograph li under coDsi' 
delation. 

24 



18 t IMHft- IMS 

10il3 Standardization — The calibration voltage shall be applied in 
such a manner as to determine the overall sensitivity of the amplifier 
attenuator and writing system. The calibrating voltage shall provide a pen 
diaplacement equal to that obtained from an input signal of \ mV ± 5 
percent applied at the electrode. 




Fio. 5 Mbasurino Circuit for Fluctuation of Base Line 

10.14 Time Constant — , Calibration signal of I mV is applied and the 
calibrator knob is kept pressed. The time, which the tracing takes to settle 
down to 36 8 percent of its original values, is measured. This measured 
time shall be between 3 and 4 seconds both inclusive. 

19.15 Common Mode Rejection Ratio 

10.15.1 The common mode rejection ratio shall be checked at difTcrcD- 
tial offset voltages not exceeding 1 00 mV do, and common mode offset vol- 
tage not exceeding 200 mV dc or 500 mV ac, applied to the input. 

10.15.2 With electrocardiograph sensitivity set at 10 mm/mV and for 
each position of the lead selector switch, the deflection in the recorded 
output shall be measured with the following voltages applied between the 
right leg electrode and all other electrodes connected together. 

a) 0*5 volt peak-to-peafc at any frequency within the range 45 to 65 
Hz inclusive ( this corresponds to a common mode rejection ratio 
of 5 COO : 1 ); and 

b) 50 mV peak^to-peak at any frequency outside the range 45 to 65 
Hz inclusive ( this corresponds to a common mode rejection ratio 
of SCO : I ) . 

The deflection shall not be more than TO mm with or without the 
right leg electrode being separately connected to earth. 



25 



10.15.3 Electrocardiographs shall also pass the test specified in 10.15.2 
when a resistance of 4 7 kQ is placed in series with, and at the patient 
end of, any of the patient leads supplied with the equipment. 

NoTB — To meet the above commoD mode rejection ralios, the patient cable 
screen may have to be driven with a signal equal to the coxamoa mode signal from 
the patient. 

Furthermore, to meet the requirement when using augmented leads, 
a resistor which is equal in value to the equivalent resistance of averaging 
network may need to be inserted in series with the exploring electrode 
( that is, resistor r in Fig. 4 ) . 

If buffer amplifiers are used for each active electrode the values of 
resistor R may be reduced below that which would otherwise be necessary 
whilst still maintaining the requirements for common mode rejection and 
input impedance. 

This note applies also to weighing networks other than the central 
terminal. For example, in a corrected orthogonal lead system, the value of 
the resistors chosen shall be sufficiently high to meet the input impedance 
specifications. 

10.16 la Linearity — Test shall be conducted with electrocardiograph 
adjusted to standard sensitivity and by using step voltage generator for 
testing. By orderly increasing step input voltage at steps of O'l mV to 
positive and negative directions, the vertical deflection is noted. The verti- 
cal deflection of at least 20 mm should be obtainable. Also the variation of 
this deflection to base line is measured. 

The variation to base line shall be calculated using the following 
equation and A and B in Fig. 1: 

A — B 

Variation =- r- x 100 ( percent ) 

A 

The base line shall be defined as a straight line that tics the starting 
point in non-input stage with the rising point at 10 mm, 

10.17 Distortion 

10.17.1 Amplitude Frequency Ckaracterisiic — The equipment shall be test- 
ed at nominal sensitivity, over the whole frequency band with a sinusoidal 
input signal of 1 mV, 

10.17.2 Phase-frequency CharacUristic — Test is under consideration. 

10.18 Damping/Overshoot — Calibration signal of I mV is applied at 
standard sensitivity and the overshoot is measured on the trace. This over 
shoot shall not exceed 10 percent. 

Note — Test for daapii^ is under consideration, 

26 



IS : |N)46 • 1915 

10.19 Filter — The test on filter shall be carried out in the same manner 
as given in 10.17.1. 

10.20 Insulation Resistance ( for Mains-operated Equipment 
Only ) — The insulation resistance shall be measured at a voltage of 500 
volts between the following; 

a) Live supply terminals, and any exposed conductive parts and/or 
metal foil placed in intimate contact with non-conductive parts 
liable to be handled in service; 

b) Live supply terminals, and all patient electrodes connected 
together; and 

c) The parts of the double insulated transformer listed in col I of 
Table 6. 

10.20.1 The insulation resistance so measured shall not be less than 
2 MQ for (a) above, 7 MO for (b) above, and the values given in col 2 
of Table 6 for (c) above. 

Note — Battery-nim-maina operated electrocardiographs ( implying a built-in 
battery eliminator ) shall be treated aa mams-operated electrocardiograph. 

In case of only battery-operated electrocardiographs, the manufac- 
turer shall clearly indicate that it should be operated only from a battery 
source and not from any battery eliminator supplied from mains, as such 
operation may result in sub-standard performance and may not meet the 
safety requirements. 

The manufacturer may opt to supply /suggest a suitable eliminator for 
battery operated electrocardiographs and, in such cases also, the battery 
operated electrocardiographs operated/intended to be operated from supp- 
lied/suggested battery eliminators shall be treated as mains-operated 
electrocardiograph. 

10.21 Leakage Current Test ( see Note under I0.20.I } 

10.21 <1 Enclosure Leakage Current ( Between Mams Supply and External 
Paris ) —The equipment shall be connected in the manner shown in Fig. 6 
whereby the active and neutral supply conductors may be transposed. 
Any earthing conductor to the equipment shall be disconnected and the 
equipment shall be mounted so as to be isolated from earth. The neutral 
conductor of the teat circuit shall be connected to earth. The equipment 
shall be operated until maximum operating temperature is reached. 

10.21.1.1 The leakage current shall be measured with the supply 
conductors connected normally and then with the supply conductors 

27 



18 1 8048 - 198S 

reversed. When taking each measurement, the controls of the equipment 
shall be adjusted over the complete range liable to be used in normal 
practice. 

10.21.1.2 The leakage current shall be measured between earth and 
external metal parts of the electrocardiograph of metal foil arranged in 
intimate contact with external insulating parts. Measurements shall be 
made with an instrument capable of clearly indicating 100 pA. The 
leakage current so measured shall not exceed an instantaneous value of 
100 /*A. 



HAWS SUPPIV 



UEASURJNC DEVICE- 



MEftSURING RESISTANCE ^ 




~— MeASgRINe IMSIRUMENI 



Fio. 6 Measuring Circuit for Testing Lkakage Current 
Between Mains Supply and External Parts 

I0.2I.2 Patient Leakage Current ( Between Mains Supply and Patient Circuit) — 
The equipment shall be connected in the manner shown in Fig. 7 whereby 
the active and neutral supply conductors may be transposed, and ail patient 
electrodes are connected together and to the earth pin of the mains con- 
necting plug. Any earthing conductors to the equipment shall remain con- 
nected but the equipment shall be mounted so that its case is isolated from 
the earth. The equipment shall be operated until maximum operating tem- 
perature is reached. 

10.21.2.1 Patient leakage current between all electrodes connected 
together and the earth shall not exceed 100 fj.A. 



28 



IS : 8048 ■ 1W5 



MEASURING 
DEVICE -- 




MEASURING inSIHUMENT^ 



ME&SURlN^ RESISIANCE 



Note — Measurement is to be made with switch 5i closed. 

Fio. 7 Measuring GiRnurTFOR Testjno Leakage Guhhe\t 
Between Mains Supply and Patient Circuit 

10.21.3 Patient Leakage Current ( Between Enclosure and Patient Circuit ) — 
The equipment shall be connected m the manner shown in Fig. 8 whereby 
voltage of 30 V is applied to enclosure and the current between the enclo- 
sure and al! the electrodes connected together is measured. This leakage 
current shaJJ not exceed 100 fi A ( This test is under review ). 

10.22 Interlead and Input Impedance 

10>22.1 Interlead Impedance — A pcak-to-peak sinusoidal signal of I mV 
at a frequeucy of 200 Hz is applied to each electrode in turn, all unused 
electrodes being connected together ( see Fig. 9 ). 

10.22.1.1 A resistor ( 300 kQ ) is connected in series with a genera- 
tor. The input signal is first applied with the resistor at zero ( switch S 
closed ) and the peak-to-peafc output from electrocardiograph amplifier is 
monitored by means of an oscilloscope. Then the resistor is connected into 
the input circuit ( switch ,S open ). The output amplitude shall not be less 
than half amplitude of the original value when switch S is closed. 



29 



IS t aoa • 1985 



tnansfokher- 



u 



rOWEB SUPPLY 



7 



^ 



HEASURINS DEVICE 




MEASUfflN& RESISTANCI 



HEASURIMC INSIRUHEN: 



^t^ 



ECe 



ELECTRODES 




FlQ 



8 Measuri'MBnt OF A Patient Leakaqb Current 
Between Enclosure and Patient Ctrcuit 




ecu 

EOUIPMCNI 



Fio. 9. Mbasureuent of Interlbad Impedance 

10,22.2 Input Impedance — The mcasuTcment shall be carried out in 
accordance with Fig. 10. A peak-to-peak sinusoidal signal of 1 mV at a 
suitable frequency not exceeding 70 Hz shall be applied between leads R 
^nd L and the lead selector switch is kept at position 1 { set Fig. 4 ). A 
reuitance of 2 M£l is put in scries with the generator. The input signal is 
first applied with resistor at zero ( switch S closed ) and the peak-to-peak 
output on the trace noted. Then resistor is applied into input circuit 
( switch .S open ). The output amplitude shall not be lew than half the 
original value. 



30 



tS tftfHft-lM) 




0-70 Hz (r^j] 

ImV(PEAK) 



Flo. 10 Measurement of Input Impedance 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 0.3 ) 

INFORMATIONS RELATING TO USE OF 
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPH 

A-1. POLARITY AND IDENTIFICATION OF PATIENT LEADS 

A-1.1 The polarity and identification of each type of leads shall be as 
follows: 

Standard 

Limb lead 

( Einthoven ) 

Augmented 

Leads 

( Goldberger ) 

Unipolar chest 

lead ( Wilson test ) 

A-1.2 Identification of the chest positions according to 
follows; 

C 1 : Fourth intercostal space at right border of sternum 

C 2 : Fourth intercostal space at left border of sternum 

C 3 : Fifth rib between C 2 and C 4 

C 4 ; Fifth intercostal space on left mid-clavicular line 



I 


L 


R 


II 


F 


R 


III 


F 


L 


aVR 


R 


Central point L and F 


aVL 


L 


Central point R and F 


aVF 


F 


Central point R and L 


V 


Chest 


Wilson's central terminal 



Wilson is 



as 



31 



tAt9048-198S 

C 5 : Left anterior axiJIary line at the horizontal JeveJ of C 4 

C 6 : Left mid-axillary line at the horizontal level of C 4. 

C 7 : Fifth intercostal space on the left posterior axillary line. 

C 8 : Fifth intercostal space on the left mid-scapular line. 

A.2. PRECAUTIONS 

A>2.1 The scnaitivity of the electrocardiographs specified in this standard 
may be such as to make the instruments unsuitable for recording electro- 
cardiograms directly from the heart muscle. 

A>2.2 Where, in special circumstanceSj it is required to record directly 
from the heart muscle for safety reasons it is essential that the right leg 
electrode is not brought into electrical contact with the heart muscle and 
that no other items of a electrical equipment arc in contact with the 
patient. 



APPENDIX B 

{ Clause 0.4 ) 

TESTING DEVICE 

B-1. Since deterioration of the electrical characteristics of an electrocar- 
diograph is not readily apparent from examination of a calibration pulse 
or a clinical record, a simple testing device is advocated. The testing 
system employs a switch, seven resistors, and a capacitor ( Fig. U ). 
By serially advancing the switch and depressing the calibration button, 
the low-frequency response, linearity, high-frequency response, input 
impedance, and common mode rejection ratio may be evaluated. The 
result of each test may be read as an amplitude of deflection of the pen in 
accordance with Table 7. One exception is the test of low-frequency res- 
ponse which is evaluated in terms of the time required for a 10 mm (1 mV) 
signal to decay to 9 mm. 

Although the foregoing system will permit regular testing to be done 
easily by an electrocardiographic technician, it is not intended that such 
test be regarded as equivalent to complete performance evaluation nece- 
ssary to satisfy all recommendations in this standard. 

32 



IS : S048 - IMS 



(TOE:! ECTROCAfiDIOGRAPH PATreNT CAQLE J 

— V 



CHE SI 




NoTB I — AIJ test* to be performeii with lead switch in F position. 

NoTB 2 — All resistors arc ^ 1 percent tolerance and capacitor is ±2 percent 
toleraace. 

Fio H Suggested Device FOR CHECKtiMo Pebtodigally THE Low- 

AND HlOH-FREQfJENCY ResPOKSE, LiNEARITY, InPUT ImPEDANCE 

AND Common Mode Rejection of Direct- Writing 

KLCGTttOCAJtpiOQRAPHS 



33 



IS t 8048 ■ 1985 



TABLE 7 OPERATION OF AN INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS FROM 
TESTING DEVICE ILLUSTRATED IN FIGURE 10 



Switch 
PoainoN 

(1) 


1 



Tbst 

SlONAL 

{2) 



None 

1 raV step to chest 
lead 



2 mV step to chest 
lead 

2 roV »tep to cen- 
tral terminal 



(Ciiw^B-l ) 

Test 
(3) 



Low-frequency 
response ( time 
constant J 



Linearity 
Linearity 



i 
Whe^ the calibration button is 
hrld down and the electro-car- 
diograph is on iO mm/mV sen- 
sitivity the time for the fall of 
magnitude ( cgnoring any ovf^r 

shotit ) to the — the value, 

thai is, 37 percent should be 
at least I "5 seconds 

Upward deflection of 

' 20!± 0'5 mm 

Downward deRection of 

20 ± 0-5 mm 




High-frequency 
response 



l.-Oms 



50 mV step to chest 
lead through to 10 
kfl resistor and to 
central terminal 
through 5 kSk 



Deflection should be equal to 
or larger than 2 vam 



Input impedance Deflection should be less than 
and common 1 mm 
mode rejection 
ratio 



34 



1$ t t(Ma - 198S 

APPENDIX C 

( Clause 10.2.1 ) 

SAMPLING PROCEDURE FOR ACCEPTANCE TESTS 

C-l! LOT 

G>L1 In any consignment, all electrocardiographs of the same make, 
model and type and manufactured under similar conditions of production 
shall be grouped together to constitute a. lot. 

C-2. SELECTION OF SAMPLE AND CRITERION FOR CONFOR- 
MITY 

G-2.I The number of electrocardiographs, to be selected from the lot shalJ 
depend on the size of the lot. 

C>2.2 For a lot size up to 25 electrocardiogTaphs, one electrocardiograph 
shall be subjected to the acceptance tests. If it passes all the tests, the lot 
shall be considered to conform to the requirements of acceptance tests. If 
the sample fails in any of the acceptance tests, a further sample of 2 elec- 
trocardiographs shall be subjected to all the acceptance tests, and no 
failure shall occur in any of the tests. 

C-2.3 For a lot size of more than 25 electrocardiographs, 2 electrocardio- 
graphs shall be subjected to the acceptance tests. If both these electrocar- 
diographs paiS all the acceptance tests the lot shall be considered to con- 
form to the requirements of acceptance test. If both the electrocardio- 
graphs fail in any of these test the lot shall be rejected. If only one of the 
electrocardiographs fails in any of the acceptance tests, a further sample 
of 4 electrocardiographs shall be subjected to ail the acceptance teats. No 
electrocardiograph shall fail in any of the acceptance tests. 



H 



tNTEftNATlONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( 81 UNITS ) 



Baa* Unite 










Ouaallty 


Unit 


Sfmbol 






Length 


metre 


m 






Mass 


kilogram 


kg 






Time 


second 


s 






Electric current 


ampere 


A 






Thermodynamic 


kslvift 


K 






temperature 










Cumlnous Intensity 


candela 


cd 






Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 






Supplementary Units 










Qutntity 


Unit 


Symdo/ 






Plane angle 


radian 


rad 






Solid nnflle 


steradian 


■r 






Oeilved Unit* 










Quantlh 


Unil 


Symbol 




Deftnlllon 


Force 


newton 


N 




N « 1 kg.ni/si 


Eneroy 


]oule 


J 




J - 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 




W ~ 1 J/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 




Wb >= 1 V.« 


F)ox density 


tes/a 


T 




T = 1 Wb/m» 


Frequency 


lierlz 


Hz 




Hz = 1 c/s (8-') 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 




S - 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 




V » 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


psscal 


Pa 




Pa - 1 N/m» 



J^l INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 
Telephones: 3 31 01 31, 3 31 13 75 Telegrams i Manahsanstha 

{ Common to all offices ) 
Regional Offices • Telephone 

•Western i Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6 32 92 95 
BOMBAY 400093 

rEaslern i 1 ;i4 C- I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road. 36 24 99 

Maniktola. CALCUTTA 700054 
Northern i SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, (2 18 43 

CHANDIGARH 160036 (3 16 41 

Southern i C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 f41 24 42 

U\ 25 19 
[41 29 16 
Brar}ch Offices' 

'Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, C2 63 48 

AHMADABAD 380001 (2 63 49 

'F' Block. Unity BIdg, Narasimharaja Square, 22 48 05 

BANGALORE 560002 

Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 6 67 16 
BHOPAL 462003 

Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 5 36 27 

53/5 Ward Mo. 29. R G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, — 

GUWAHATI 7o1003 

5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg (NampaKy Station Road), 22 10 83 

HYDERABAD 500001 

R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 

3S 
117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 /21 63 76 

82 92 
Patllputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 300013 6 23 05 

Hantex BIdg ( 2nd Floor ), RIy Station Road, 52 27 

TRiVANDRUM 695001 

Inspection Office ( With Sale Point ) : 

institution of Engineers ( India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 5 24 35 
PUNE 41100S 



f6 34 71 
le 98 32 

f21 

121 



•Sales Offlcs in Bombay Is at Novelty Chambara, Grant Road, 89 63 26 
Bombay 400007 

tSalas Offlce In Calcutta Is al 5 Ctiowrlnatiee Approacii, P. O. Princsp 27 68 i)0 
Straat, Calcutta 700072 



Printed U Na« India Printing PrHl. Khurta, India 



