UDC

321'927'4

IS :9309 - 1979
Indian Standard

m
1 iI
I

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

SPECIFICATION FOR ROLL CRUSHER
which are commonly used for crushing

I. Scope-Covers rocks, minerals,

design and supply of roll crushers coke, coal and simiiar materials.

Note - Particulars regarding information to be given to the manufacturer by the purchaser with enquiry or order and the information to be furnished by the manufacturer' to the purchaser along with the quotations are given in Appendix A and B respktively. 2. Nomenclature and Terminology of roll crusher shall be as designated - For the purpose in Fig. 1. of this stan.dard, the various components

for crushing rocks, minerals, coal, coke and similar materials, 2.1 Roll Crusher - A machine between two rotating cylindrical surfaces rotating towards each mainly by compression other; or one stationary surface (either curved or straight) and one rotating cylindrical surface; or fhree rotating cylindrical surfaces so arranged that material to be crushed passes between any two rotating cylindrical surfaces at one time. 3. Classification -. For the purpose of this standard, the roll crusher shall be classified as follows, a rot

3.1 Classification Depending Upon the Roll Surface - Depending upon the type of roll surface, crusher may be of smooth, beaded, spoked or corrugated roll type. 3.1.1 Smooth 3.1.2 Beaded roll crusher roll crusher-A A crushing crushing machine machine where the roll or rolls surfaces where the roll surface is beaded. are smooth,

A crushing machine where the roll surface is composed oi 3.1.3 Spiked or toothed roll crusher spikes or teeth ( of different shapes and sizes based on individual manufacturer's design ), made UF by combination of circular rings or longitudinal curved sectors carrying such spikes or teeth. 3.1.4 Corrugated roll crusher - A crushing comprise of one corrugated and one smooth 3.2 Classification Depending the crusher may be single, machine where the roll surface is corrugated. roll surfaces or both the roll surfaces corrugated. Rolls Depending upon the number It car

Upon Number of Rotating double or triple.

of rolls

A crusher having a single roll which rotates towards a stationary 3.2.1 Single roll crusher surface (see Fig.-1 ), The roll or rolls may be made up of crushing rings of different'shapes ant sizes based on individual design and on the specific application. The stationary surface may bt plain or of toothed design, straight or curved. 3.2.2 Double roll crusher A crusher having two-rolls rotating towards each other ( see Fig. 2 ).

3.2.3 Triple roll crusher - A crusher having rotating arranged that material to be crushed passes between composed of a single and double roll crusher. 4. Principle of Operation restricted by the angle of nip. The raw material

roll ( of same or different diameter ) SC one set of twc such roils at one time or iz

is crushed

by one, two or three

rolls, the feed sizt

4.1 The feed lump size is governed by the roll diameter since a certain angle of dip should not bt exceeded. If feed size larger than the specified one are fed, the material may simply ride on rol surface and thereby cause choking. 4.2 Furthermore, a certain degree of reduction to match the characteristics adhered to and the peripheral speed of roll matched with the crushing process. size, roll diameter and length, roll speed, roll setting determine the output. of feed material i: Consequently, feet

Adopted 30 October 1979

Q February 1980, ISI I
STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INDIAN
MANAK

INSTITUTION
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

IS : 9309 - 1979
FEEDING %$G COVER --7 "

ROLL

ASSEMBLY

IRIVE -

/
BASE FRAME DISCHARGE CHUTES

h
FIG. 1 SINGLE ROLL CRUSHER

COVER I

FEEOING /---

w)LL

ASSEMBLY

DRIVE

t n..,

. .. . w
DtSCHARGt CHUTES

,

FIG.

2

DOUBLE ROLL CRUSHER

2

IS : 9309 - 1979
5. Construction The roll crusher shall comprise of the following parts ( see Fig. 1 and 2 ) :

a)! Base frame, b) Roil assem biy, d Drive unit, d) Cover,

4
f) g) h)

Roil gap adjustment Feeding

and safety device, chutes, of roils, and

device and discharge for maintenance mover.

Attachment Electric

motor/prime

The various

parts mentioned

above shall conform

to the requirements

given in 5.1 to 5.7. adjustment assembly, of locating the floating

5.1 Base Frame - It shall serve the purpose of supporting the roils, housing, Secondly, it shall also serve the purpose and the drive motor/prime movers. roll parallel to the axis of fixed roil.

5.1.1 It shall
sections.

consist

of an

adequately

strong

fabricated

steel frame

made out

of roiled

steel

5.2 Roll Assembly - One roll shall roil shall serve the purposes of:

be fixed whilst

the other shall be of floating material

design.

The floating and thus

a) giving way when any occasional safeguarding the crusher; and

uncrushabie

fails into the feed opening, as well

b) adjustment of setting of the crusher for different for the wear and tear of the roil surface.

applications

as for compensating

5.2.1 The roil assembly shall consist of the shaft, roll hub, locking ring, roil shell ( or rings or segments depending on type and size of roil crusher), bearings housed in dust-proof labyrinth rings with greasing arrangement for labyrinths and bearings.
5.2.2 The roil shaft shall be of forged or rolled alloy steel, or medium carbon steel,running in seifaligning heavy duty spherical or taper roller bearings. The roll hub shall be of cast iron or cast steel. The wearing roil tyre shall be of suitable wear resistant alloy steel. 5.2.3 The roll width capacity of crusher. may be varying from 0'66 to 3'0 times the roil diameter depending upon the

5.3 Drive Unit-The drive to roil crusher will be such that all the roils will be individually driven or through suitable gears or pneumatic tyres. The prime mover may be an electric motor, flame proof or nonfiame proof as per requirement.

5.3.1 Power developed and transmitted performed. The power unit shall conform
5.4 Cover -The purpose into the roil cavity through

by the power unit shall be adequate to relevant Indian Standard.

for the duty to be

of cover is to minimize dust nuisance and is to guide side lines, which shall also minimize spillage.

the feed material

5.4.9 The cover shall consist of number of suitably welded sections fitted with at least two numbers inspection windows. The sections shall be bolted togetherto permit easy dismantling during maintenance. The cover shall be suitably secured to the base frame by means of rapid lock mechanism. 5.5 Roll Gap Adjustment and Safety DeviceThe roil gap shall be adjusted by moving the floating roil either towards or away from the stationary roil. This setting shall be adjustable by means of operating a handwheel or similar device so located to permit easy operation. The adjustment shall be possible by keeping the floating roil axis parallel to the fixed roil axis.

5.5.1 The roll crusher shall be equipped with a safety device for protecting the crusher against any occasional .uncrushabie material entering the crusher. This shall be achieved by providing either a shear pin or a breaker bolt or spring loading attachment, which yields.
3

IS : 9309 - 1979
5.5.2 Heavy duty roll crushers shall be provided with either single or combination of truncated cone springs or both annular springs ensuring damped recoil; or with hydraulic springs, Soon after removal of uncrushable foreign matter, the springs shall regain original prefixed position, 5.53 The above two arrangements, that is roll gap adjustment grouped together in one device or arranged separately. or overload safety shall be either

upon individual requirement, a suitable feeding 5.6 Feeding and Dishcharge Chutes - Depending device may be incorporated. Special consideration need to be given to the height of drop of Incorrect attention in this respect material and uniform feeding across the entire width of the rolls. may have unfavourable effect on throughput and may result in uneven wear of roll surfaces. 5.6.1 Where required, suitable dischrge chutes 6.6.2 Suitable depending upon the understanding shall be given. at the feeding between manufacturer and purchaser,

flange connections

and discharge

sides shall be given.

5.7 Attachment for Maintenance of Rolls - In order to maintain the roll surfaces properly, either the rolls has to be built-up by welding or by grinding corrugation, if any, which develops on smooth The following attachment may have to be roll surfaces during crushing may have to be removed. procured in consultation with the manufacturer. 5.7.1 To build up the roll surface by the purchaser. by welding, manufacturer will offer a suitable kit where required

5.7.1.1 In case of smooth roll crushers, where required by purchaser, the manufacturer shall provide a suitable grinding attachment to remove the possible corrugations that may have taken The attachment shall be such that both the rolls are facemilled simultaneplace during crushing. ously in a single work cycle. The operation will be such that longitudinal movement of the attachment shall be automatic with only feed out being given manually. 5.7.1.2 Alternatively, where required, suitable for axial shifting of the same to remove corrugation. 6. General Requirements All - The design of the crusher shall minimize hazards to the operator, belt sprockets, dangerous moving parts and parts which are subject to high or are energized electrically shall be insulated, well guarded and protected. by the purchaser, a Similarly, if required dampen the crusher arrangement may be given on one of the rolls

6.1 Safety Requirements gears, pulleys, chains, operating temperatures

6.2 The roll shall be housed suitably in dust-proof covers and if required suitable flange connection for dust extraction system may be incorporated. by the purchaser, the machine may be mounted on vibration mounts to vi brations. 6.3 To facilitate changing of rolls and for conducting by the purchaser, the crusher may be provided with brougtit out of the feeding chute. 6.4 Maintenance all components, Accessibility sub-assemblies

maintenance work on the crusher, if required collapsible wheels, so that the crusher can be

The design of the crusher and parts for maintenance

shall provide and repairs.

convenient

accessibility

to

-Lubrication means shall be provided for the bearings and other parts requiring 6.5 Lubrication All lubricating nipples shall be of similar type, preferably located centrally with lubrication. Lubrication points shall be conspicuously marked to identify properly arranged grease or oil pipes. them. Chains shall be enclosed, and where standard reduction gear boxes are used, the same shall confirm relevant Indian Standard. 6.6 Automatic greasing station may be provided, if required by the purchaser. suitable cooling arrangements for shafts

6.7 Where the crusher is used for crushing and bearings shall be provided.

hot materials,

6.8 Maintenance Tools and ManualA strong tool box with lock and key containing the special and normal tools for maintaining the roll crusher together with instruction and maintenance manual The tool bcx shall be suitably affixed to the machine. shall be provided, 4

IS : 9309 - 1979
7. Designation a) Commonly b) Number

The designation used name;
of roll;

of roll crusher

shall include:

c) Type of roll surface d) Roll diameter e) Roll rpm or peripheral I) Roll width g) Number Example:

S = smooth,

B = beaded, T = toothed

and C - corrugated:

in millimetres; speed and . . . m/s;

in millimetres;

of this standard.

A roll crusher comprising 1 200 mm be designated as: Double Roll Crusher,

of two

smooth

rolls

of diameter

1 000 mm and width

Type S, 1 000 x 1 200 mm, IS : 9309 certificate to the purchaser along with each machine for freedom from visible defects and the crusher has to be covered under this certificate are given in machine during and after fabrication. data provided by the purchaser and agreed to by

8. Supply-The manufacturer shall supply a certifying that the crusher has been inspected Items satisfactorily withstood the trial run. Appendix C. The purchaser may inspect the

8.1 Crusher
the supplier.

shall generally

meet the application

8.2 For large crushers,

load test shall

be conducted

at purchaser's

end.

APPENDIX ( Clause
INFORMATION 1)

A

TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE PURCHASER TO THE MANUFACTURER WITH THE ENQUIRY AND ORDER and order should of feed material state: to be crushed: If moist

A-l.

The enquiry

a) b) cl

Description Bulk density

in kg/m3 of feed material; (dusty, moist, hard, granular medium-hard, or slabby); index ); soft, clean, dirty).

Condition of feed material percentage of moisture.

d) Structure of feed material (crystalline or 4 Crushing strength ( work index, flakiness f 1 Size range of feed material in mm; and 9) Duty ( continuous or intermittant ).
APPENDIX
(Clause

index, elongation

B
1)

INFORMATION TO BE FURNISHED BY THE MANUFACTURER TO THE PURCHASER ALONG WITH THE QUOTATION AND SUPPLY B-1. The manufacturer
shall give the following of roll crusher; information along with his quotation and supply:

a) Size and b) Maximum c) Minimum d) Capacity

designation

feed size in millimetres; and maximum in tonne size of discharge in millimetres with guaranted sieve analysis;

per hour mentioning

the bulk density 5

taken into consideration;

IS : 9309 - 1979
e) Power requirements at the output of motor/prime mover shaft in kW;
f 1 Details

of crusher underlying the materials of construction type and size of important components such as shafts, roll hub, rolls and bearings, drive units, roll gap adjustment and safety devices, etc;

cl) Expected product analysis at different settings; h) Normal expected life; i) List of recommended spares for 2 years of normal operation; and k) General arrangement drawing giving overall dimensions, foundation
and details of input and output flanges.

plan and loading size

APPENDIX ( Clause 8 )

C

INFORMATION TO BE GIVEN IN THE CERTIFICATE BY THE MANUFACTURER TO THE PURCHASER AT THE TIME 0: SUPPLYING THE MACHINE inspection report shall state that each part of the crusher has been C-l. Inspection-The inspected before painting to ensure that it is free from any visible defects in casting, machining, etc. C-2. Test Run - The test run report shall state the following: a) The number of hours the crusher has been run continuously of the assembly; and b) That after dismantling out to ensure that: i) ii) iii) iv) under no-load after completion has been carried

the crusher consequent to the trial run, inspection

the construction of the crusher is satisfactory, lubricating condition is satisfactory, there is no slackness or unusual wear on any component, and the bearings are evenly loaded.

Printed

at Arcre

Press, New Delhi 110055

