IS 15221:2002

Indian Standard SAFE HANDLING AND TRANSFER PROCEDURES OF HALON1211 AND HALON 1301 (HALOGENATED HYDROCARBONS) -- FIRE EXTINGUISHING MEDIA -- CODE OF PRACTICE

ICS 13.220.10

CJ BIS 2002

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARC

December

2002

Price Group

3

Fire Fighting

Sectional

Committee,

CED 22

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized Fighting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. These specifications are designed to establish that the medium in question has at least a minimum extinguish ing capability and can therefore be reasonably used for fire extinguishing purposes. by the Fire

useful tire

This standard gives procedures for the transfer of Halon 1211 and Halon 1301 from one container to another. These procedures can be applied to the filling and emptying of halon fire extinguishers and the containers used in halon extinguishing systems, to the handling of halon shipping containers and to the recovery of halons frolm containers which are to be scrapped, cleaned, internally examined, etc. These procedures are recommended as good practice to reduce unnecessary have a damaging effect on the atmosphere. emission of these halons wh ich may

HaIons (halogenated hydrocarbons), which exhibit exceptional fire fighting and explosion prevention/suppression characteristics, have been found to possess high ozone depleting potential. They come under Group 11of Appendix A of the Montreal Protocol, the international environment treaty for phasing out ozone depleting substances, which came into force on 1 January 1989. For developing countries like India, the total phase out of halons is to be achieved by 1 January 2010 as per the Montreal Protocol. India has ratified Montreal Protocol Treaty in 1992 and obligated to phase out use of ozone depleting substances including halons. Government of India has notified phase out of halons in the fire protection sector with effect from 1 January 2001 except for essential use. Meanwh iIe, the practical implication of the phasing out of the halons will cover, by and large, the following aspects: a) b) c) d) e) Production Availability Discharge of halons in India to be stopped w.e.f. 1 January 2001. of halons will be restricted. of halons for testing/training, etc, shall not be permitted.

All efforts shall be made for avoiding/minimizing halons emissions at various levels, such as production, fire equipment manufacture, user, service and maintenance. HaIons shall be restricted for `essential uses' only, for protection of critical fire explosion risk areas which would otherwise result in serious impairment of an essential service to society, or pose an unacceptable threat to life, the environment, or national security and all other appropriate fire protection measures have been taken. instead of halon, use of suitable alternative Non-standard halon extinguishers, extinguishing media/methods shall be resorted to. like aerosol type, shall not be permitted. of the country w ith.

f) g)

Detailed instructions issued by the Government of India from time to time for implementation program me for the phasing out of ozone depleting substances (ODS) shall have to be complied The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation

of this standard is given at Annex A.

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2: 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

lS 15221 :2oO2

Indian Standard SAFE HANDLING AND TRANSFER PROCEDURES OF HALON 1211 AND HALON 1301 (HALOGENATED HYDROCARBONS) -- FIRE EXTINGUISHING MEDIA -- CODE OF PRACTICE
I SCOPE
This

standard recommends procedures to be used in the transfer of Halon 1211 and HaIon 1301 from one container to another to reduce unnecessary emission of these halons to the atmosphere. It also provides recommendations and information relevant to the health and safety of persons engaged in such procedures.

Manufacturers' test data should be consulted when selecting materials suitable for use in contact with halons. 5 AVOIDANCE TAMINATION 5.1 Avoidance OF MIXING AND/OR CON-

of Mixing

2 REFERENCE The standard listed below contains provisions which through reference in this text, constitutes provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: I,YNo. 15220: 2!002 Tide Specification for halogenated hydrocarbons -- HaIon 1211 and halon 1301 -- Fire extinguishing media

HaIon 1211 and HaIon 1301 are miscible in all proportions. Halons should not be mixed because this. will unnecessarily complicate their subsequent recovery and reprocessing. 5.2 Avoidance of Contamination

Precautions should be taken to prevent the entry of oil, water and/or other foreign matter into ha]on containers.
NOTE -- Excessive moisture in containers may lead to corrosion. either directly, or indirectly by causing hydrolysis of the halon.

6 PRESSURE 6.1 General

HAZARD

3 DEF1NITION For the purposes of this standard, dctinition shall apply. 3.1 HaIon tlalogenated medium.
NOTES 1The tcnn "haIon(s)' is used to mean HaIon 1211 and HaIon

the following

Halons are shipped, stored and used in fire extinguishing equipment as liquefied gases under pressure. Appropriate precautions should be observed when filling and handling containers. 6.2 Pressure Control in Transfer Procedures It is essential that nitrogen cylinders are fitted with a pressure-reducing valve to control the nitrogen pressure to not more than the working pressure of the halon containers in use at any particular time. The pressure-reducing valve should be fitted with a pressure gauge on the outlet side, and with a pressurerelief valve in the line to vent excess pressure if the pressure-reducing valve fails. WARNING -- Bursting discs are not suitable pressure-relief devices for this application because their operation will vent the total contents of the halon container. 7 TOXICITY HAZARD

hydrocarbon

used as a fire extinguishing

1301.

2 The wc~rd `baton' is followed by a number, usually comprising Ioor digits, which represents, in the order given, the number of carbon. lluorine, chlorine and bromine atoms. Where this number would terminate with one (or more) zero(s), such zeros are omitted, `Thus. I{alon 12] 1 is bromochlorodifluoromethane (CFICIBr) and I lalon 130 I is bromotritlooromethane 3 I lalon 12 I I is a colorless, 1301 is a colorless, odourless gas. (CFIBr), gas, HaIon

faintly sweet-smelling

4 MATERIALS FOR USE IN CONTACT HALON 1211 AND HALON 1301

WITH

4. I Hal on 1211 and HaIon 1301 are stable and inert to most common construction materials. 1

7.1 Skin Contact Hazard Direct contact with liquid halons can degrease the skin

lS 15221 :2002 and cause a strong chilling effect. Gloves and eye protection should be worn during transfer procedures. 7.2 Inhalation 7.2.1 Natural 7.2.1.1 Hazard (Undecomposed) HaIons 8 METHODS 8.1 General Halon should be transferred from one container to another by one of the methods described in 8.2 and 8.3. 8.2 Nitrogen Overpressurization Method OF TRANSFER

Effects of exposures

Tests on human volunteer subjects have shown that the maxim urn safe exposures are 7 to 10 percent (v/v) ot- Halon 1301 for 1 min and 4 to 5 percent (v/v) of Halon 121 I for 1 min. After exposure for 1 min at these concentrations, any person may experience symptoms of dizziness and SIight tingling of the fingers and toes. Exposures to concentrations less than these for several minutes would be unlikely to produce any significant effect, but prolonged exposure to concentrations greater than these is hazardous and should be avoided. 7.2.1.2 Precautions

Use dry nitrogen to pressurize the vapour space in the supply container to dispense the contents. It is essential that the moisture content of the nitrogen should not exceed 0.006 percent (m/m) (see also 5.2) It is essential that the safe working supply container is not exceeded.
NOTES 1 Excessive moisture in containers may lead to corrosion, either directly or indirectly by causing hydrolysis of the halon. 2HaIon1211 and HaIon 1301 can be propelled from extinguishing equipment by using nitrogen.

pressure

of the

8.3 Pumping The pump should be located as near as possibIe to the supply container. If a positive displacement pump is used, provision should be made to recycle halon back to the supply container, so as to avoid the need to stop the pump every time that halon is not being dispensed. 9 FILLING 9.1 General To avoid contamination, operations involving the filling and/or re-filling of shipping containers, halon extinguishers and/or halon extinguishing system containers should be completely separate from recovery operations. 9.2 Filling Rig Construction products The rig should withstand, without leakage or permanent deformation, a test pressure of not less than twice the anticipated normal working pressure. Pipe runs should be as short as possible. Hose of a suitable pressure rating may be used to make any necessary flexible connections. The tilling hose should be as short as possible and should be valved at the outlet. 9.3 Filling Rig Use The rig should be dry before use, It should be tested for leaks before use and at regular intervals during service.
NOTE used. -- Soap solution or an electronic leak detector may be \

Attention should be paid to checking for and sealing any leaks in the equipment. All transfer procedures should be carried out in well-ventilated areas. It is good practice to avoid al I unnecessary exposure to halons and an occupational exposure limit of 1000 ppm (8 h time-weighted average) should be applied. 7.2.1.3 Treatment of affected persons

OPERATIONS

Persons suffering from over exposure to halon vapour SI1OU Id immediately move, or be moved, to an area contain ing fresh air. In treating persons suffering from the effects of over exposure to halons, the use of epinephrine (adrenaline) and similar drugs should be avoided because they may produce cardiac arrhythmias including ventricular fibrillation. 7.2.2 Decomposition 7.2.2.1 Formation Products of decomposition

On exposure to a flame or hot surface, halons pyrolyse into decomposition products usually identified as a halogen acids (that is, HF, HC1 and HBr) and free halogens (for example, Cl, and Br2). HaIon decomposition products have a-characteristic, sharp, acrid odour even in minute concentrations that are fat' below the concentrations considered to be immediately dangerous. The irritation produced by these products provides a built-in warning system and thus encourages people to evacuate the area. 7.2.2.2 l'recau;ions

Radiant heaters, heaters with open flames and heaters with hot elements in contact with the air should not be used in areas in which halon transfer procedures are carried out. Other open flames and, in particular, smoking should be prohibited in these areas. 2

9.4 Containers

for Filling or Re-filling

Only extinguishers and balon containers complying with appropriate standards should be tilled or re-fi Iled.

1S 15221:2002 Extinguishers for re-filling should be free of halon residues from the original filling. This recommendation should also be followed when refilling other halon containers, except where the original manufacturer can advise appropriate procedures and good practice. Where extinguishers or containers are to be emptied before refilling, residual halon should not be discharged to atmosphere but transferred to suitable containers using the recovery rig (see 10). Extinguishers and containers should be checked and rectified as necessary and should be free from external and internal corrosion or damage, and should be clean and dry at the time of filling or re-filling. Large containers should be checked for leakage before re-filling with halon. After filling or re-filling, it is essential that containers are checked for leakage and that any showing excessive leakage that cannot be corrected should be emptied as soon as it practicable using the recovery rig. 9.5 Shipping Containers 10.2 Recovery Rig Construction The rig should withstand, without leakage or permanent deformation, a test pressure of not less than twice the anticipated normal working pressure. Pipe runs should be as short as possible. Hose ofa suitable pressure rating may be used to make any necessary flexible connections. 10.3 Recovery Rig Use

The rig should be dry before use. It should be tested for leaks before use and at regular intervals during service.
NOTE -- Soap solution or an electronic used. leak detector ma} be

All liquid halon, and in the case of HaIon 130 I as much vapour as possible, should be recovered from each container presented for halon recovery. 10.4 Receiving Receiving appropriate Containers with an

containers should comply standard for pressure vessels.

C)n delivery of shipping containers, the valves should be checked for leaks before transfer to the store or connection to the filling rig. When the container has been emptied, the valves SI1OU Id be c Iosed and the container disconnected from the transfer system. The protective covers should be {Itted immediately over the valves.
NO'1"[: -- I t'the valves are left open, the inside of the container will be exposed to atmospheric moisture and the risk of corms ion.

It is essential that receiving containers are not overfilled, and a means of weighing the containers should be provided. To minimize the need for reprocessing, it is essential that separate receiving containers are used for Halon 1211 and HaIon 1301 and for any mixtures which may be presented for recovery (see 5.1). Receiving containers should be clearly Iabelled to identify the halon contents and whether the halon is, is not, or may be contaminated. 10.5 Recovered HaIon

1(t RECOVERY 10.1 General

OPERATIONS

To avoid contamination, be completely separate operations.

recovery operations should from filling and re-filling

It is essential that recovered hal on is not used unless it can be properly checked and shown to comply with the requirements of [S 15220. Where this cannot be done, or if the halon is contaminated, it is essential that the material is reprocessed so that it compi ies with the requirements of IS 15220 before it is used.

lS 15221 :2002

ANNEX A (Foreword)
COMMITTEE Fire Fighting
Organization
Ministry otl Iome AtTairs, New Delhi Airport Authority oflndia, New Delhi

COMPOSITION CED 22
Representative(s) SHRJ OM PRAKASH (Cltairman)
L, C. GUFTA SFUU SHRIH. S. RAWAT (Alternate)

Sectional Committee,

Andhra Pradw.h Fire Services, Hyelerabad Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai Bombay Fire Ilrigade, Mumbai

SHRJ SWARANJJT SEN CNJSFFJFW OFHCER CSUEF FJREOFFICER (Alternate) SHRJG. S. SAWANT

Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee

DRT, P, SHAW
DR A. K. GUPTA(Alfernafe)
DEWY INSPECTOR GErqAL (FJRE)

Central [ndustriai Security Force, New Delhi

SHRJS. L. NAGARKAR (Alternate)
('entral [>ob!ic Works Department, New Delhi Centrc for Environment and Explosive Safety, Delhi

CHJEFENGSNEER (E) I SHJUA. K. KAPDDR SHRJH. S. KAPARWAN (Alternate) %ttu R.
COL fiMAKRISHNAN

Concord Arai Pvt Limited, Chennai C'ontrollerate of Quality Assurance (Fire), Pune Deience Rtxwarch and Development Organization, Delhi

G. P. KtuSHNAMOR~tV

DJRECTOR (FIRESAFETY) (Alternate) DEPUTY DIRECTOR (FJRESAFETY) SHRJ R. C, .%ARMA SHRJ SURINDER KUMAR (Akernute) SHRJ M. GANGARAJU SHRIV. K. VERMA (Alternate) SHRJR. A. DUBEY SHRIAJAYSHANKAR (Akerrra[e) SHRJS. N. KUNOU DEPUTY DIRECTOR (FurESAFETY) DIRECTOR DtRIcToR DEPUTY SHRJ G. B. MENON SHRIS. K. DHERt pREstDENr GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate)
P. H. SETHNA SHRJ SHRJN. T. PANJWAiW (Alternate) H. M, SABADRA SHRJ

Delhi Fire Service, New Delhi

Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, Hyderabad Ellgilleer-itl-Cllief's Branch, Army Headquarter, New Delhi

Fire and Safety Appliances Company, Kolkata Home (Police Department), Hyderabad Home Department (Fire Service), Chennai

(Alternate)

In personal capacit y (33/2965-A,
In

Vennala High School, Vennala, Cochin)

personal capacity (29/25, Rajendra Nagur, New Delhi)

[nstitulion ot'l:ire Engineers (India), New Delhi

Koove[ii Devshi & Co (P) Limited, Mumbai

K.V. Fire Chemicals, Navi Mumbai Loss Prevention Association of India, Mumbai

MANAGJNG DJRECTOR SHRJD. K. SARKAR (A//errrate) SHRJ DEEPAK AGARWAL SHruR. N. CHACHRA SHRISUMLDAS (Ahernaie)
D. K. SHAMI SHRJ

Matlwr and Platt (India) Limited, New Delhi ME(-VN limited, Ranchi

Ministry ofl [ome AtTairs, New Delhi Nefvagc industries, Mumbai

SHRIB. J. SHAH SHRIA. M. SHAH(Alternate)

(Continrred on page 5)

4

lS 15221 :2002
([ 'orrlinued,~rom page 4) Organization
Northern Railway, New Delhi ~il and Natural Gas Commission, Debra Dun Oil Industry Safety Directorate, New Delhi Real Value Appliances Limited, New Delhi SatieXFire Services Limited, Mumbai

Representative(s)
Ssrru 1. M, MANSOW+ %a R. P. SAXENA

SHRINEERAJ SHARMA (Alternate)
Join-TDIRECTOR (PROCESS)

SHRtASHUTOSH MANGAL
SHRIJITENDRA SHAH SHRI SANOIP SHAH (Alferrrafe)

Slate Bank ot'lodia, Mumbai State Fire Train iog C'entre, Mumbai Steel Authority oflndia, Rourkela Steel Authority oflrrdia, Bokaro

SHRI J. S. GAHLWT
DR NAVINCHANDRA JAIN SHRI B. N. DAS SHIU B. P..DAs SHRSA, RAUTELA

(A[fernafe)

SW C. P. SINGH (Alternate) Steel age industries Limited, New Delhi SHIVNATH SHRI SHRI V. KAMALANATHA (A[fernafe) Surex production and Sales (P) Limited, Kolkata TAIUTSUR SHRI SHRI D. NEOGI (Alfernate) l'wit?'Advisory Committee, Chennai A. SHRI
MUKHERJEE

SW H. C. MAHESHKUMAR (A//errrafe) `laritYAdvisory Committee, Mumbai Vijay Fire Protection Systems Pvt Limited, Mumbai West Bengal Fire Service, Kolkata t31SDirectorate General

Smu T. R. A, KRISHNAN
SW HAtUSHSAUJT Sw+t B. PATHAK SW S. K, JAIN, Director & Head (Civ Engg) [Representing Director General (.Ex-o#lcio)

Member Secreiary
sHRr s. cHA71nwEoI Joint Dkector (Civ Engg), BIS

5

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments `B1S Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions' This Indian Standard has been developed of comments. Standards are also reviewed such review indicates that no changes are up for revision, Users of Indian Standards or edition by referring to the latest issue of of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods

from DOC : No. CED 22 (5950).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone { { 3237617 3233841

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :3230131,3233375, 3239402 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336. Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Eastern

3378499,3378561 3378626,3379120 { 603843 602025

Northern

Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 {

2541216,2541442 2542519,2541315 8329295, 8327891, 8327858 8327892

Western

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

{

Branches

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Rinted at Prabhat

OtfsetPress,New Delhi-2

