NAT HIAF IS 4287 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


mus — meaai 
( dtaa gaor ) 


Starch — Glossary 
( Third Revision ) 


ICS 67.060 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM eat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2022 Price Group 5 


Foodgrains, Allied Products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee, FAD 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Foodgrains, Allied Products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


This standard defines the terms most frequently used, at present, in industries concerned with starch, including its 
derivatives and by-products. 


This standard was originally published in 1992 as identical adoption of ISO 1227 : 1979 ‘Starch, including 
derivatives and by-products — Vocabulary’. The standard was subsequently revised in 1976 and 1979 to align 
with the revised versions of ISO standard. 


ISO 1227 has since been withdrawn by ISO, Foodgrains, Allied Products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional 
Committee, FAD 16, considering the importance of the subject decided to revise the standard and convert it to 
indigenous standard. 


Through the current revision, various terminologies have also been updated in line with the latest technological 
development and practices prevailing in this sector. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4287 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


STARCH — GLOSSARY 
( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard defines the terms most frequently used in 
industries concerned with starch, including derivatives 
and by-products. 


2 CLASSIFICATION 


The terms have been grouped according to the following 
classification: 


2.1 General Terms 

2.2 Source Materials 

2.3 Technology 

2.3.1 Industries 

2.3.2 Processes and Manufacturing Terms 
2.3.3 Auxiliary Materials 
2.4 Products 

2.4.1 Native Starches 
2.4.2 Modified Starches 
2.4.3 Hydrolysis Products 
2.4.4 Other Products 


2.5 Analytical Terms 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 General Terms 


3.1.1 Amylose — Amylose is defined as under: 


a) Polysaccharide constituent of starch, the 
macromolecules of which have a linear structure; 
and 

b) Industrial product consisting essentially of 
amylose which can be obtained by fractionation 
of a starch solution. 


3.1.2 Amylolysis — Depolymerization of the starch 
macromolecule. 


3.1.3 Amylopectin — Amylopectin is defined as under: 


a) Polysaccharide constituent of starch, the 
macromolecules of which have a branched 
structure; and 


b) Industrial product consisting essentially 
of amylopectin which can be obtained by 
fractionation of a starch solution. 


3.1.4 Gelatinization — Process involving the 


transformation of starch into a starch paste. 


3.1.5 Gelling — Solidification of an aqueous dispersion 
of gelatinized starch (frequently on cooling). 


3.1.6 D-glucose — Aldose of the molecular formula 
C,H,,O0,, of which several anomers exist, for example, 
a-D-glucose and -D-glucose. 


3.1.7 Maltose — Disaccharide of general formula 
C,,H,,O,,, composed of two molecules of D-glucose 
joined by 1, 4 links, whose systematic name is 4-O-a- 


D-glucopyranosyl-D-glucopyranose. 


3.1.8 Starch — Carbohydrate occurring in granular 
form in the organs of certain plants, and corresponding 
to a polymer composed almost exclusively of anhydro- 
a-D-glucose units. 


3.1.9 Starch Derivatives — Generic term for all products 
produced from native starch, modified starches, starch 
hydrolysis products. 


3.1.10 Starch Granule — The form in which starch 
occurs in the plant cell. 


3.1.11 Starch Paste — The viscous mass resulting from 
the swelling and the colloidal dispersion of starch in 
an aqueous medium (in the presence or absence of 
chemical reagents, at normal or elevated temperatures). 


3.1.12 Pentosans — Polymeric carbohydrates almost 
entirely of anhydrous pentose units. 


3.1.13 Retrogradation — Gradual and irreversible 
insolubilization of an aqueous dispersion obtained 
by gelatinization of starch or its derivatives, with 
the formation of a precipitate or gel according to 
concentration. 


3.2 Source Materials 


3.2.1 Broken Rice — Grains of rice (Oryza sativa) 
broken longitudinally or transversally during the 
processing of rice. 


3.2.2 Farina Potato — Potatoes belonging to varieties 
characterized by a high content of starch. 


IS 4287 : 2022 


3.2.3 Manioc or Cassava Root — Commercial name 
of the tuberous root of manioc (Manihot utilissima, 
Manihot esculenta). 


3.2.4 Manioc or Cassava Flour — Powder obtained 
by dry grinding tuberous roots of manioc (Manihot 
utilissima, Manihot esculenta). 


3.2.5 Manioc Root — Dried sections of the tuberous 
roots of manioc (Manihot utilissima, Manihot 
esculenta). 


3.3 Technology 
3.3.1 Industries 


3.3.1.1 Dextrin(e) industry — The industry, the object 
of which is to manufacture dextrins. 


3.3.1.2 Dextrin(e) plant — A factory where dextrins are 
produced. 


3.3.1.3 Glucose industry — The industry, the object of 
which is to manufacture starch hydrolysis products. 


3.3.1.4 Glucose plant — Factory for the production of 
D-glucose. 


3.3.1.5 Starch industry — The industry, the object of 
which is to extract starch from starch-bearing materials. 


3.3.1.6 Starch mill — Factory where starch is produced. 
3.3.2 Processes and Manufacturing Terms 


3.3.2.1 Aspiration — Operation carried out in a starch 
mill consisting of the removal of material by a current 
of air. 


3.3.2.2 Bound starch — Starch which is not separable 
from cereal fibre by mechanical means during 
processing, in the presence of water. 


3.3.2.3 Bound starch (in pulp) — Starch present in 
potato pulp (and, by extension, in the residual pulp of 
roots of other plants) not capable of being extracted by 
extra washing. 


3.3.2.4 Brush strainer — Cylindrical wire sieve with 
internal, revolving brushes which keep the screen area 
clean. 


3.3.2.5 Channel separator — Horizontal centrifuge 
furnished with a continuous supply of water during its 
operation. 


3.3.2.6 Concentrated refinery liquor — Trade term 
used in the glucose industry to indicate crude or refined 
liquors resulting from saccharification and having 
undergone one stage of concentration. 


3.3.2.7 Continuous decanter — Horizontal centrifuge 
with cylindrical-conical bowl and screw discharge of 


solids, for the continuous separation of solids from a 
suspension in a liquid. 


3.3.2.8 Converter — Apparatus for the acid and/or 
enzyme liquefaction and saccharification of starch. 


3.3.2.9 Cross-linking — 
cross-linked starch. 


Process of producing 


3.3.2.10 Crystallizer — Tank equipped with devices for 
agitation and temperature control for the crystallization 
of syrup to obtain, for example, dextrose. 


3.3.2.11 Degerming — Operation carried out in a starch 
mill which consists of detaching and separating germ 
from the other constituents of the grains. 


3.3.2.12 Degerming mill — Equipment intended for 
coarse grinding of steeped maize to liberate the germ. 


3.3.2.13 Depolymerization — Reduction in the degree 
of polymerization of the starch or derivatives chains by 
physical, chemical or enzymatic action. 


3.3.2.14 Dextrinization — Process of converting starch 
into dextrines. 


3.3.2.15 Disintegrator — Peg mill in which the pegs 
can be cylindrical, conical or edged. 


3.3.2.16 Drying cylinder; roller dryer — Horizontal 
rotating metallic cylinder, heated internally, intended 
for the gelatinization and/or drying of starch or other 
wet material on the outer surface of the cylinder. 


3.3.2.17 Fine milling — Second milling process of 
the raw material in a starch mill using the wet-milling 
process, with the purpose of disrupting the cellular 
structure and liberating the starch granules. 


3.3.2.18 Flash dryer — Dryer with very rapid action in 
which the wet material is conveyed by the flow of hot 
drying air. 


3.3.2.19 Fluidification — Treatment consisting of 
modifying starch in such a way that the starch paste 
is less viscous than a paste of native starch at the same 
concentration. 


3.3.2.20 Fractionation — Separation of starch, 
into its individual components, that is, amylose and 
amylopectin. 


3.3.2.21 Free starch — Starch which is separable from 
cereal fibre by mechanical means during processing, in 
the presence of water. 


3.3.2.22 Free starch (in pulp) — Starch present in 
potato pulp (and, by extension, in the residual pulp 
of roots of other plants) which is capable of being 
extracted by extra washing. 


3.3.2.23 Fruit water — Juice from the tubers of the 
potato plant. 


3.3.2.24 Gelatinization temperature (range) — 
Temperature range at which aqueous suspensions of 
starch granules pass into the paste form, under specified 
conditions. 


3.3.2.25 Germ cyclone — Hydrocyclone intended 
for the separation of germ from steeped and coarsely 
ground maize in aqueous suspension. 


3.3.2.26 Germ washing — Removal of residual 
starch, and gluten from the separated germs by washing 
with water. 


3.3.2.27 Hydrocyclone — Stationary cylindrical 
conical apparatus for the continuous separation and/or 
concentration by centrifugal force of the solids from a 
suspension introduced tangentially under pressure. 


3.3.2.28 Hydrolysis — More or less pronounced 
depolymerization of the starch molecule by the action 
of water, in the presence of a catalyst (acid or enzyme) 
bringing about a splitting of the glucosidic bonds 
present in the molecule (for example, acid or enzymatic 
hydrolysis). 


3.3.2.29 Jet extractor — Continuous centrifugal 
screening equipment provided with a conical basket 
on a horizontal axis and a system of rotating washing 
nozzles, in which the rejected material is moved by 
centrifugal force along the screen surface. 


3.3.2.30 Jet refiner — Jet extractor in which the 
suspension projected into the conical basket by means 
of a system of rotating nozzles. 


3.3.2.31 Liquefaction — Pronounced fluidification of 
starch leading to a dissolved or soluble form. 


3.3.2.32 Massecuite — Thick mixture of crystals of 
sugars (sucrose, dextrose, etc) and their mother liquors, 
resulting from the crystallization of a sugar syrup. 


3.3.2.33 Mill starch — Aqueous suspension of starch 
and protein, practically free from fibre, formed as an 
intermediate product in the manufacture of starch by 
wet milling. 
NOTE — This term is usually used in the maize and rice starch 
industries. 


3.3.2.34 Modification — Changing the properties 
of native starch by chemical, physical or enzymatic 
methods. 


3.3.2.35 Nozzle centrifuge — Horizontal centrifuge 
with inlet nozzles directed at the periphery of the bowl. 


3.3.2.36 Oil expression — Removal of oil from the 
germ of the grain by mechanical means. 


IS 4287 : 2022 


3.3.2.37 Oil expeller — Press for the extraction of germ 
oil from cereal germs. 


3.3.2.38 Potato rasp — Apparatus consisting of a 
horizontal, revolving drum with longitudinal toothed 
blades used to grate tubers (potato) or roots more or less 
finely to liberate the non-cereal starch granules. 


3.3.2.39 Precoat filter — Rotary vacuum filter covered 
with a filter aid. 


3.3.2.40 Rasped potato — Intermediate product in the 
potato starch mill obtained by the grating of potato 
tubers. 


3.3.2.41 Red water — Liquid extracted from the tubers 
of the potato plant during the first stage of treatment in 
starch manufacturing. 


3.3.2.42 Refinery liquor — Trade term used in the 
glucose industry to describe unconcentrated crude or 
refined liquors arising from the saccharification process. 


3.3.2.43 Reversion products — Saccharides formed in 
the course of hydrolysis of starch by repolymerization 
of D-glucose units. 


3.3.2.44 Rotary vacuum filter — Perforated rotating 
horizontal drum covered with a filtering surface, 
generally of cloth, partially immersed in the suspension 
to be filtered and provided with a system for evacuation. 


3.3.2.45 Rotary dryer — Revolving tube in which the 
product to be dried circulates in contact with hot air or 
hot gas. 


3.3.2.46 Saccharification — Hydrolysis of starch, 
which ultimately results in the formation of D-glucose. 


3.3.2.47 Screen centrifuge — Perforated bowl centrifuge 
often equipped on the inside with a filter cloth. 


3.3.2.48 Screen bend; sieve bend — Static, curved, (bar) 
screen, used for the removal of particles, for example, 
fiber and germ, from suspension in a liquid. 


3.3.2.49 Separator — Solid bowl centrifuge intended 
for the separation and/or continuous concentration of 
solids from a suspension. 


3.3.2.50 Separation — Separation of gluten from starch 
in suspension in water by utilizing the difference in 
density. 


3.3.2.51 Settling tank — Vessel used for the 
concentration and/or purification by sedimentation of 
suspensions of starch. 


3.3.2.52 Settling tables — Slightly inclined trough 
used for the deposition of starch with the elimination of 
protein and/or other lighter impurities. 


IS 4287 : 2022 


3.3.2.53 Solvent extraction — Removal of oil from the 
germ of the grain by means of solvents. 


3.3.2.54 Starch milk — Aqueous suspension of starch 
granules unswollen starch granules. 


NOTE — This term in English refers only to unmodified starch 
(native starch), suspended in water. 


3.3.2.55 Steeping — Operation which consists of 
holding grain intended for the starch mill in an aqueous 
liquid at a given temperature and acidity in order to 
soften it and remove soluble substances from it. 


3.3.2.56 Steeping tank — Tank, generally cylindrical, 
in which the steeping of grains is carried out. 


3.3.2.57 Steepwater — Unconcentrated liquid which 
has been used for steeping maize. 


3.3.2.58 Torrefaction — Dry heating of starch, usually 
in the presence of acids, for the production of dextrins. 


3.3.2.59 Vertical dryer — Dryer with slowly rotating 
discs arranged at different levels, with countercurrent 
flow of the air. 


3.3.2.60 Vibrating screen — Screening equipment with 
a flat sieving surface that oscillates. 


3.3.2.61 Wet milling — Wet process of separation of 
starch from starch-bearing materials. 


3.3.3 Auxiliary Materials 


3.3.3.1 Alpha-amylase — Enzyme, systematic name 
1,4-a-glucan glucanohydrolase, the action of which 
on starch leads to partial depolymerization by random 
hydrolysis of its 1,4-a-glucosidic chains. 


3.3.3.2 Alpha glucosidase; maltase — Enzyme, 
systematic name a-D-glycosideglucohydrolase, which 
hydrolyses a-D-glycosides leading to D-glucose and an 
alcohol. Maltose is hydrolyzed into two molecules of 
D-glucose by scission of the 1,4-a-glucosidic linkage. 


3.3.3.3 Bacterial enzyme — Generic term indicating 
enzymes or enzyme complexes produced by bacteria. 


3.3.3.4 Beta-amylase — Enzyme, systematic name 
1,4-a-D-glucan maltohydrolase which acts on the 
1,4-a-D-glucosidic linkages of starch in such manner 
that maltose units are successively released from the 
non-reducing ends of the chains. 


3.3.3.5 Diastase; malt enzyme — Enzyme complex 
derived from germinating cereals and containing 
amylases. 


3.3.3.6 Fungal enzyme — Generic term indicating 
enzymes or enzyme complexes produced by fungi. 


3.3.3.7 Gluamylase; exo-1, 4-a-glycosidase; 
glucoamylase; amyloglucosidase; y-amylase 
Enzyme, systematic name 1,4-a-D-glucan 


glucohydrolase, generally of mould origin, which 
converts starch completely to D-glucose by the 
successive removal of D-glucose units from the 
non-reducing ends of 1,4-linked starch chains, and by 
hydrolyzing the 1,6-a-branching linkages. 


3.3.3.8 Transglucosidase — Enzyme, the action of 
which on starch hydrolysates results in the formation of 
revision products. 


3.4 Products 
3.4.1 Native Starches 


3.4.1.1 Arrow-root starch — Arrow-root starch is defined 
as under: 


a) Starch from the genus Maranta; and 


b) Industrial product corresponding to 3.4.1.1 (a) 
obtained by wet milling from tuberous roots 
of various species of the genus Maranta and in 
particular of Maranta arundinaces. 


3.4.1.2 Cereal starch — Cereal starch is defined as under: 


a) Starch contained in the grains of various species of 
plant belonging to the cereal family; and 


b) Industrial product corresponding to 3.4.1.2 (a) 
extracted by wet milling from cereal grains. 


3.4.1.3 Crystal starch — Native starch produced in long 
irregular fragments, which may attain several centimeters 
in length. 


NOTE — Crystal starch is generally obtained by the slow drying 
of moist starch cakes wrapped in paper. 


3.4.1.5 Lump starch — Native starch produced in 
irregular fragments, the dimensions of which are about 
1 cm. 


3.4.1.6 Maize starch/Corn starch — Maize starch/corn 
starch is defined as under: 


a) Starch from the species Zea mays; and 


b) Industrial product corresponding to 3.4.1.6 (a) 
obtained by wet milling of certain varieties of the 
species Zea mays. 


3.4.1.7 Manioc or cassava starch or tapioca starch — 
Manioc or cassava starch or tapioca starch is defined as 
under: 
a) Starch from the species Manihot utilissima 
(Manihot esculenta), and 
b) Industrial product corresponding to 3.4.1.7 (a) 
obtained by wet milling from tuberous roots of the 
species Manihot utilissima (Manihot esculenta). 


3.4.1.8 Native starch — Starch as obtained by a 
wet milling process which causes the least possible 
modification or alteration of the product. 


3.4.1.9 Non-cereal starch — Non-cereal starch or 
tapioca starch is defined as under: 


a) Starch contained in plants other than cereals; and 
b) Industrial product, corresponding to 3.4.1.9 (a), 


extracted by wet milling usually from tubers, 
rhizomes or pith. 


3.4.1.10 Pearl starch — Native starch in the form of 
agglomerates of granules. 


3.4.1.11 Potato starch or farina — Potato starch or 
farina is defined as under: 


a) Starch from the species Solanum tuberosum; and 


b) Industrial product corresponding to 3.4.1.11 (a) 
obtained by wet milling from tubers of the species 
Solanum tuberosum. 


3.4.1.12 Powdered starch — Sifted native starch that 
passes completely through a sieve of required size. 
NOTE — Modified starches may also be prepared in the 


powder form, in which the term modified or the term specifying 
the type of modification should always qualify the term pearl. 


3.4.1.13 Rice starch — Rice starch is defined as under: 


a) Starch from various species of the genus Oryza; 
and 


b) Industrial product corresponding to 3.4.1.13 (a) 
obtained by wet milling of certain species of the 
genus Oryza. 


3.4.1.14 Rye starch — Rye starch is defined as under: 
a) Starch from the species Secale cereale; and 


b) Industrial product corresponding to 3.4.1.14 (a) 
obtained by wet milling of certain varieties of the 
species Secale cereale. 


3.4.1.15 Sago starch — Rye starch is defined as under: 


a) Starch from the genera Metroxylon Rottboel and 
Cycas; and 

b) Industrial product corresponding to 3.4.1.15 (a) 
obtained by wet milling from pith, mainly of the 
species Metroxylon sagu Rottboel and Metroxylon 
rumphii Martins and in minor quantity of the 
genus Cycus. 


3.4.1.16 Sorghum starch or milo starch — Sorghum 
starch or milo starch is defined as under: 
a) Starch from various species of the genus Sorghum 
persoon; and 
b) Industrial product corresponding to 3.4.1.16 (a) 
obtained by wet milling of certain species of the 
genus Sorghum persoon. 


IS 4287 : 2022 


3.4.1.17 Sweet potato starch — Sweet potato starch is 
defined as under: 


a) Starch from the species Ipomoea batatas Poiret; 
and 


b) Industrial product corresponding to 3.4.1.17 (a) 
obtained by wet milling from tuberous roots of the 
species Ipomoea batatas Poiret. 


3.4.1.18 Waxy starch; glutinous starch — Starch 
particularly rich in amylopectin obtained from certain 
cereal cultivars. 


NOTE — According to the source, the terms waxy maize 
starch, waxy rice starch, etc may be used. 


3.4.1.19 Wheat starch — Wheat starch is defined as 
under: 


a) Starch from various species of the genus Triticum; 
and 


b) Industrial product corresponding to 3.4.1.19 (a) 
obtained by wet milling of certain species of the 
genus Triticum. 


3.4.2 Modified Starches 


3.4.2.1 Allyl starch — Starch ether in which some or 
all of the available hydroxyl groups of the starch have 
been etherified by ally groups. 


3.4.2.2 Anionic starch — Modified starch containing 
groups capable of conferring on the macromolecule a 
negative charge in aqueous solution under appropriate 
pH conditions. 


3.4.2.3 British gum — A type of dextrin(e), usually 
yellow or brown in colour resulting from the 
dry-roasting of starch, either alone or in the presence of 
added traces of alkali. 


3.4.2.4 Carboxymethyl starch — Starch ether in which 
some or all of the, available hydroxyl groups of the 
starch have been etherified by carboxymethyl groups. 


3.4.2.5 Cationic starch — Modified starch containing 
groups capable of conferring on the macromolecule a 
positive charge in aqueous solution under suitable pH 
conditions. 


3.4.2.6 Cross-linked starch; cross-bonded 
starch — Modified starch in which cross-links between 
macromolecules have been formed by means of 
bifunctional or polyfunctional chemical reagents. 


3.4.2.7 Dextrin(e) — Modified starch prepared from 

starch by heat treatment in the dry state, with or without 

the addition of small quantities of chemical reagents. 
NOTE — The use of the term dextrin(e) alone to designate 


the products resulting from the hydrolytic or enzymatic 
depolymerization of starch is deprecated. 


IS 4287 : 2022 


3.4.2.8 Dialdehyde starch — A product obtained by 
oxidation of starch under specific conditions, generally 
with the aid of periodic acid or periodates, which 
contains a substantial proportion of adjacent aldehyde 
groups on carbon atoms 2 and 3. 


3.4.2.9 Di-starch glycerol — Cross-linked starch 
in which certain starch hydroxyl groups have been 
etherified by glycerol chains, generally by means of 
epichlorohydrin. 


3.4.2.10 Di-starch phosphate — Starch phosphate with 
cross-linking. 


3.4.2.11 Lintner starch — Thin boiling starch (for 
starch paste) used in the laboratory as a colorimetric 
indicator obtained by moderate treatment of starch 
with dilute hydrochloric acid which retains the ability 
to give a blue colour in the presence of iodine. 


3.4.2.12 Modified starch — Native starch treated in 
such a way as to modify one or more of its original 
physical or chemical properties. 


3.4.2.13 Mono-starch phosphate — Starch phosphate 
without cross-linking. 


3.4.2.14 Oxidized starch — Modified starch obtained 
by the oxidation of a native starch. 


3.4.2.15 Pre-gelatinized starch — Modified starch 
obtained by drying a starch paste with or without the 
addition of chemical reagents, and having the property 
of marked swelling on contact with cold water or giving 
a colloidal dispersion. 


3.4.2.16 Sago — Partially gelatinized product in 
the form of granules, pearls or flakes obtained by 
mechanical treatment under the influence of heat from 
sago starch in the presence of water. 


3.4.2.17 Starch acetate — Starch ester in which some 
or all of the available hydroxyl groups of the starch, 
have been esterified by acetyl groups. 


3.4.2.18 Starch adipate — Starch ester in which some 
or all of the available hydroxyl groups of the starch 
have been esterified by adequate groups with or without 
cross-linking. 


3.4.2.19 Starch ester — Modified starch in which some 
or all of the available hydroxyl groups of the starch 
have been esterified. 


3.4.2.20 Starch ether — Modified starch in which some 
or all of the available hydroxyl groups of the starch 
have been etherified. 


3.4.2.21 Starch gel— Aqueous dispersion of gelatinized 
starch with visco-elastic properties. 


3.4.2.22 Starch laurite — Starch ester in which some or 
all of the available hydroxyl groups of the starch have 
been esterified by laurite groups. 


3.4.2.23 Starch nitrate — Starch ester in which some or 
all of the available hydroxyl groups of the starch have 
been esterified by nitrate groups. 


3.4.2.24 Starch phosphate — Starch ester in which 
some or all of the available hydroxyl groups of the 
starch have been esterified by phosphate groups with or 
without cross-linking. 


3.4.2.25 Starch succinate — Starch ester in which 
some or all of the available hydroxyl groups of the 
starch have been esterified by succinate groups with or 
without cross-linking. 


3.4.2.26 Starch sulphate — Starch ester in which some 
or all of the available hydroxyl groups of the starch 
have been esterified by sulphate groups. 


3.4.2.27 Starch xanthate — Starch ester in which some 
or all of the available hydroxyl groups of the starch 
have been esterified by xanthate groups, generally by 
the action of carbon disulphide in an alkaline medium. 


3.4.2.28 Thick-boiling starch — A native starch or 
modified starch with retained or increased viscosity 
according to treatment. 


3.4.2.29 Thin-boiling starch (for starch paste) — 
Modified starch insoluble in cold water, the paste of 
which when warm is more fluid than the paste of native 
starch in equal concentration. 


3.4.2.30 White dextrin(e) — Dextrin(e) closely 
resembling the corresponding native starch in 
whiteness. 


3.4.2.31 Yellow dextrin(e); canary dextrin(e) — A type 
of dextrin(e) produced by dry roasting in the presence 
of a small quantity of acid. 


3.4.3 Hydrolysis Products 


3.4.3.1 Cyclodextrin — Grouping in toroidal form of 
at least 6 anhydroglucose linkages a-1,4 and resulting 
from the action on starch of enzymes produced by 
certain bacteria (such as B. macerans). 


3.4.3.2 Dextrose — D-glucose obtained by the complete 
hydrolysis of a starch followed by purification and 
crystallization. 


NOTE — Dextrose can be obtained either in hydrous or 
monohydrate form. 


3.4.3.3 Dried glucose syrup — Glucose syrup from 
which the water has been partially removed. 


3.4.3.4 Gentiobiose — 1,6-B-glucosido-glucose which 
is formed as a reversion product during the acid 
hydrolysis of starch. 


3.4.3.5 Glucose syrup — Purified concentrated aqueous 
solution of nutritive saccharides obtained from starch. 


3.4.3.6 /somaltose — 1,6-a-glucosido-glucose obtained 
by enzymatic hydrolysis of starch. It is also formed as a 
reversion product during the acid hydrolysis of starch. 


3.4.3.7 Maltodextrin(e) — Product containing a 
significant proportion of maltose prepared by enzymatic 
hydrolysis of starch. 


3.4.3.8 Malto-oligosaccharide — Maltosaccharide 
containing up to about 10 anhydroglucose units. 


3.4.3.9 Maltotetraose — Maltosaccharide containing 
4 anhydroglucose units. 


3.4.3.10 Maltotriose — Maltosaccharide containing 
3 anhydroglucose units. 


3.4.3.11 Solid glucose — Mixture of D-glucose, maltose 
and other polymers of D-Glucose of low molecular 
weight, obtained by nearly complete hydrolysis of 
starch, followed by solidification by crystallization. 


3.4.3.12 Starch hydrolysis — Product obtained 
by acid, enzyme or combined hydrolysis of starch 
consisting of lower molecular mass polysaccharides, 
oligosaccharides and/or monosaccharides. 


3.4.3.13 Starch hydrolysis products — Generic name 
for products such as glucose syrup and dextrose. 


3.4.4 Other Products 


3.4.4.1 Caramel colour — Product obtained exclusively 
by heating edible sugars or amorphous, water-soluble, 
brown coloured product obtained by the controlled 
action of heat on edible sugars in the presence of one or 
more chemical compounds. 


3.4.4.2 Corn steep liquor — Commercial term for 
the viscous liquid obtained by low temperature 
concentration of the liquid which has been used for 
steeping maize. 


3.4.4.3 Devitalized wheat gluten — Industrial product 
consisting of wheat gluten which has irreversibly lost 
its cohesive and elastic properties. 


3.4.4.4 Fiber — Term applied in the starch industry 
to the mainly cellulosic material obtained from husks 
when treated to remove as much as possible of the 
adherent starch. 


3.4.4.5 Germ — Commercial and industrial term used 
by the starch industry to designate the embryo of the 
caryopses. 


IS 4287 : 2022 


3.4.4.6 Germ oil — Oil obtained from the germ of 
certain cereals. 


3.4.4.7 Gluten — Usual name for the water-insoluble 
protein complex extractable from cereal grains. 


3.4.4.8 Hydrol — The mother liquor remaining after 
the removal of the crystals from a dextrose massecuite. 


3.4.4.9 Maize germ cake — Residue left after the 
removal of the oil from maize germ. 


3.4.4.10 Maize gluten — Maize gluten is defined as 
under: 


a) The usual name for the water insoluble protein 
complex from maize; and 


b) Industrial product corresponding to 3.4.4.10 (a) 
obtained by wet milling of maize starch. 


3.4.4.11 Maize gluten feed — The commercial product, 
obtained by the wet milling of maize, containing fiber, 
gluten, starch, and a small amount of oil. 


3.4.4.12 Maize gluten meal — The commercial 
product obtained by the wet milling of maize, with the 
same components as maize gluten feed but richer in 
gluten. 


3.4.4.13 Milo (sorghum) gluten — Milo (sorghum) 
gluten is defined as under: 


a) The usual name for the water insoluble protein 
complex from sorghum; and 


b) Industrial product corresponding to 3.4.4.13 (a) 
obtained by wet milling of sorghum starch. 


3.4.4.14 Moulding starch — Starch, with or without 
small amounts of additives (generally oil or fat) used 
in the confectionery industry as a casting mould for 
deposited goods (for example, fondants, gums, etc). 


3.4.4.15 Potato pulp — By-product from the extraction 
of potato starch, consisting mainly of fragments of cell 
walls and residual starch. 


3.4.4.16 Starch based powdered adhesive — A product 
in the dried form, based on native or modified starch 
and used for adhesive purposes. 


3.4.4.17 Starch derived liquid adhesive — Liquid 
or paste used as adhesive, made from native starch, 
modified starch, or flours. 


3.4.4.18 Rice gluten — Rice gluten is defined as under: 
a) The usual name for the water insoluble protein 
complex from rice; and 
b) Industrial product corresponding to 3.4.4.18 (a) 
obtained by wet milling of rice starch. 
3.4.4.19 Vital wheat gluten — Industrial product 
consisting of wheat gluten and having, in the hydrated 
or rehydrated state, cohesive and elastic properties. 


IS 4287 : 2022 


3.4.4.20 Wheat gluten — Wheat gluten is defined as 
under: 


a) The usual name for the water-insoluble protein 
complex from wheat; and 


b) Industrial product corresponding to 3.4.4.20 (a) 
obtained by wet milling of wheat starch. 


3.4.4.21 Zein — The prolamin of maize and/or 
technical prolamin extracted industrially from maize 
grains soluble in aqueous alcohol. 


3.5 Analytical Terms 


3.5.1 Alkali Numbers — The amount ofalkali (expressed 
in milliliters of 0.1 N sodium hydroxide) consumed by 
a given mass of starch (native or modified) when it is 
treated under defined conditions. 


3.5.2 Cold Water Solubility (Measurement of) — 
Determination of the proportion of a starch (native 
or modified) value passing into solution in cold water 
under defined conditions. 


3.5.3 Colour (Measurement of) — Determination of 
the colour intensity of a starch hydrolysis product by 
following methods: 


a) by comparison with reference standards; and 


b) by measurement of the absorbance using a 
spectrophotometer under defined conditions. 


3.5.4 Colour Stability (Measurement of) — 
Determination of the change in colour of a starch 
hydrolysis product when maintained under defined 
conditions. 


3.5.5 Crude Fiber (Mainly Insoluble Cellulosic 
Material) — Residue of cellulosic origin obtained after 
treatment of the raw materials of the starch industry, 
starches, their derivatives and by-products, under 
defined analytical conditions. 


3.5.6 Dextrose Equivalents (DE) — Reducing power 
of a starch hydrolysate expressed as D-glucose on the 
dry basis. 


3.5.7 Fine Fiber — Fine material mainly cellulosic in 
character pertaining to the original raw material and 
present in the starch. 


3.5.8 lodine Affinity — Measure of the ability of 
starches to absorb iodine by complex formation. 


3.5.9 Maltose Equivalents (ME) — Reducing power of 
a starch hydrolysate expressed as maltose on the dry 
basis. 


3.5.10 Reducing Power (of a Carbohydrate) — Property 
possessed by certain carbohydrates of losing electrons 
because of the presence in the molecules of a carbonyl 
function. This property can be detected, for instance, 
by the reduction of metallic salts in alkaline medium. 
If measurements are carried out under determined 
conditions, the results can be expressed in dextrose 
equivalent value. 


3.5.11 Specks — Spots or marks visible under specified 
conditions of examination of starch. 


3.5.12 Strength (Measurement of) — Determination 
of the resistance to deformation of a starch gel, under 
defined conditions 


3.5.13 Titratable Acidity — The amount of alkali 
(expressed in milliliters of 0.1 N sodium hydroxide) 
necessary to neutralize 10 g of starch (native or 
modified) or starch hydrolysis product under defined 
conditions. 


3.5.14 Water-Binding Capacities (Measurement of) — 
Determination of the amount of water which an 
insoluble starch (native or modified) is able to hold in 
relation to its own mass. 


3.5.15 Whiteness (Measurement of) — Determination 
of the light reflectance of a starch surface compared 
with that of a standard white surface under defined 
conditions. 


IS 4287 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Foodgrains, Allied Products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee, FAD 16 


Organization 


Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Ministry of 
Agriculture, New Delhi 


All India Food Processors’ Association, New Delhi 


Central Food Technological Research Institute 
(CFTRI), Mysore 


Centre of Excellence for Soybean Processing, CIAE, 
Bhopal 


Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering and 
Technology (CIPHET), Ludhiana 


Central Tuber Crop Research Institute (CTCRD, 
Thiruvananthapuram 


Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC), New Delhi 

CONCERT, Chennai 

Confederation of Indian Food Trade and Industry 
(CIFTI)-FICCI, New Delhi 

Confederation of Indian Industries (CH), New Delhi 

Consumer Education & Research Centre, Ahmedabad 

Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 

Consumer Research, Education, Action, Training and 
Empowerment (CREATE), Tamil Nadu 

Defence Food Research Laboratory (DFRL), Mysore 

Directorate General of Supplies and Transport, Delhi 

Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Faridabad 

Directorate of Plant Protection Quarantine and 
Storage, Faridabad 

Food Corporation of India (FCI), New Delhi 

Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, 


New Delhi 


G B Pant University, Food Science Division, Pant 
Nagar 


Representative(s) 


SHRI P. K. SWAIN 
(AGRICULTURE MARKETING) (Chairman) 


SHRI KRISHNA KUMAR JOSHI 
SHRIMATI KAMIA JUNEJA (Alternate) 
Dr M. S. MEERA 
Dr V. B. SASHIKALA (Alternate) 
Dr PUNIT CHANDRA 
Dr S. K. GRI (Alternate) 
HEAD (DIVISION OF TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY) 
Dr D. N. Yapay (Alternate) 
DIRECTOR 
Dr M. S. SANJEEV (Alternate) 
SHRI A. K. MALHOTRA 
SHRI SIDHARTH RatH (Alternate) 
SHRI R. SANTHANAM IAS (RETD) 
SHRI G. SANTHANARAJAN (Alternate) 


Miss PARNA DASGUPTA 
Miss PRIYANKA SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH WHORRA 
SHRI AROMAL JKOSHI (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI DOLLY A. JANI 
Dr ANINDITA Menta (Alternate) 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
Dr M. S. KAmatH (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SURESH KANNA 
SHRI R. PONNAMALAM (Alternate) 


Dr PaL MuruGan M. 
Ms SAKSHI SHARMA (Alternate) 


Co S. C. Josui 
Mas SONALI DUDHANE (Alternate) 


Dy AGRICULTURAL MARKETING ADVISOR 
Smo (STD) (Alternate) 


PLANT PROTECTION ADVISER 
SHRI R. V. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI A. S. ARUNACHALAM 
SHRI SACHIN (Alternate) 


Miss APRAJITA VERMA 


Dr SATISH K. SHARMA 
Dr Sweta Ral (Alternate) 


IS 4287 : 2022 


Organization 


Indian Grain Storage Management and Research 
Institute, Hapur 


Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology 
(IIFPT), Thanjavur 


Indian Institute of Maize Research (IIMR), Ludhiana 
Indian Institute of Packaging (IIP), Delhi 


Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution, New Delhi 


National Institute of Food Technology 
Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM), 
Sonipat 


National Institute of Nutrition (NIN), Hyderabad 


National Rice Research Institute, Cuttack 


National Sugar Institute (NSI), Kanpur 


Protein Foods and Nutrition Development 
Association of India (PFNDAD) 


Roller Flour Millers Federation of India (RFMFI), 
New Delhi 


Vasantdada Sugar Institute (VSI), Pune 


Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority 
(WDRA), New Delhi 


In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
DIRECTOR 
Dr C. ANANDHARAMAKRISHNAN 


Dr R. SAI KUMAR 
Dr DHARAM PAUL CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


SHRI MADHAB CHAKRABORTY 
Dr NILAY PRAMANIK (Alternate) 


Dr SUBHASH GUPTA 
Dr S. C. BANSAL (Alternate) 


Dr ANKUR OJHA 


DR NAVEEN KUMAR R. 


DR AWADHESH KUMAR 
DR (SHRIMATI) PADMINI SWAIN (Alternate) 


DR V. P. SRIVASTAVA 


DR SHATADRU SENGUPTA 
DR JASVIR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI D. V. MALHAN 


Dr Rageev V. DANI 
DR SANJEEV V. PATIL (Alternate) 


DR RADHEY KRISHNA TRIPATHI 


DR S. C. KHURANA 


SHRI I. C. CHADDHA 


SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (FAD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Miss LAVIKA SINGH 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (FAD), BIS 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 16 (16511). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


