UDC

667.633

: 620*113

(First

Reprint

SEPTEMBER

1995 )

IS : 101 ( Part l/Set 1 ) - 1986
xxxxxx ( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard

2007

METHODS OF SAMPLING AND TEST FOR PAINTS, VARNISHES AND RELATED PRODUCTS
PART 1 TESTS ON LIQUID Section ( Third PAINTS 1 ( GENERAL AND PHYSICAL )

Sampling

Revision )

u" .. I
.. $ *

4

1. Scope 1.1 This standard one of a series aims at obtaining being sampled. prior to testing. prescribes methods of sampling for paints, varnishes and related of standard dealing with sampling and testing of these products. uniform samples of convenient size and adequately representative The sample or samples so obtained are suitable for examination It is products. This standard of the product and preparation

{ co u I

a

CJ ,. 2. Types of Products z "0 < f E 2 a 2 ; g u $ Z `2 $ .i d YI ;; 4 e & z 2 a 9 z 2 2.1 The sampling procedures appropriate for depend on the nature and the physical properties may conveniently be distinguished. Type A thinners. Type B Type C -

use with paints, of the products. homogeneous phases,

varnishes and related products The following types of product liquid phase, such as varnishes and

Fluid Fluid

products products

consisting consisting

of a single of two liquid

such as emulsions. with one paints. or more solid

phases.

Fluid products consisting of one or two liquid phases together Such products are normally called `paints' and include `emulsion'

Type D - Viscous products ( which usually consist of one or more solid phases of a liquid phase ) such as putties, mastics, lutes, cements and pigment pastes This type also includes very viscous resinous materials.
Type E -

with small amounts in oil or varnish.

Products

in powder

form.

3. Sampling Equipment 3.1 General - The sampling sampling finished products. a) Mixing b) Taking the product a truly tools in general used for sampling raw materials, Sampling equipment is required for two separate to make it as homogeneous sample. as possible, and may also be used fox operations:

representative

3.2 Materials and Design - All sampling equipment shall be made of material not subject tc deterioration, unaffected by the products being sampled and incapable of contaminating the sample The design of the equipment shall take into account convenience in use and ease of cleaning ( fol example, any grooves, acute internal angles, or areas which are inaccessible or difficult to inspec for cleanness, shall be avoided ). 3.3 Apparatus for Mixing - Broad-bladed stirrers of suitable length container being sampled. Mechanical stirrers may also be used.
the only metal permitted is bronze.

to reach

the

bottom

of the

NOTE-In certain circumstances, when stirring a product of low flash point or where an explosive hazard exists 3.4 Apparatus for Taking Samples
X4.1
I

Sampling

tubes glass or metal ( see Fig.
1986 @

1 ).
1986, IS1 Gr 3

I

Adopted 27 January

I

October

I

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DEIII

110002

IS : 101 ( Part l/Set 1) - 1986

--4All dimensions

5 TO IO

0

in millimetres.

Fro.

1

SUITABLE DESIGNOF SAMPLING TUBE

3.4.2 3.4.3 3.4.4

Small

dip cans. sampling cans, with valve closures, for taking samples at all levels.

Weighted Scoops,

triers or spatulas. New containers of suitable size and with large apertures shall be used.

3.5 Sample Containers These may be:

a) metal containers of which tight metal closures; and

the interior

is not coated

with varnish

and

which

are fitted with

which can be tightly closed with closures b) glass containers Amber glass provides a partial protection against sample. contents can be further shielded, if necessary, by an external ing. 3.6 Labels Suitable labels or other means of marking or identifying

which are not affected by the the action of light and the opaque covering or packag-

samples

shall be probided.

must always be observed. All sampling 3.7 Cleaning of Sampling Equipmtnt - Strict cleanliness After each use, apparatus must be dry and free from residue, so as not to contaminate the sample. the apparatus shall be thoroughly cleaned with the aid, if necessary, of a brush or clean cotton rag, and shall then be rinsed with a suitable solvent. 4. Safety Precautions Many volatile products which are 4.1 A number of hazards may arise in the course of sampling. The flammable or toxic may be present and hazards may arise from sparking or static electricity. samplers must always be informed ( this must be stated on the labels or packaged products ) of the dangers arising from the nature of the products and must handle them with due care, using protective equipment, if required. All statutory regulations concerning safety and hygiene 2 shall be complied with.

1s : 101 ( Part 5. Types 5.1 There of Sampling

l/Set

1 ) - 1986

following

are two stages:

main

types

of sampling,

which

may

be

carried

out

corresponding

to the

4 b)

When the manufacture of the product has been completed but the product manufacturing vessels, or when it is being transferred into the delivery drums, barrels, etc );

is still in the final containers ( cans, containers. agreement premises,

When sampling from the de!ivery containers which may also be bulk transport Such sampling shall take place at the manufacturer's premises unless, by special between the purchaser and the vendor, sampling is permitted at the purchaser's in which case the product after receipt must not have been treated in any way.
of Sampling

6. Methods
6.1 When

the type be applicable.

of sampling

specified

in

5.1 (a)

is required,

the

following

procedures

shall

6.1.1 For @id products ( Types A, B and C ) - When the sample is to be taken directly from the final manufacturing vessel, the product shall first be thoroughly stirred* and the sample taken by means of a suitable weighted sampling can from different levels? in the vessel. When the sample is to be taken in the course of transferring the product into the delivery containers, it shall be made up from small sub-samples taken at regular intervals during the filling process. In the former case, it is important to strain the sample before filling the sample container, using the same procedure as normally used when filling the delivery containers.
61.2 fir viscous or powdery products ( Types D and E ) - The product shall be inspected in the final manufacturing vessel and, if uniform in appearance, the sample shall be taken from various parts of the bulk using a sampling tube, scoop or trier. Alternatively, a number of small samples can be taken at regular intervals during filling of the delivery containers.

6.2 When applicable.

the type of sampling

specified

in 5.1 (b) is required,

the following

procedures

shall

be

is supplied in a bulk container, the 6.2.1 For Jiuid products ( Tjps A, B and C ) - If the product vessel. However, in same procedure applies as in 6.1.1 for sampling from the final manufacturing it is usually necessary to take the absence of a circulating pump or other means of agitation, approximately equal size samples at different levels? in order to obtain a representative sample of the whole. of containers, the total number of 6.2.1.1 If the product is supplied in a consignment It is containers shall be noted and then a selection made at random of the containers for sampling. recommended that approximately d n/2 containers shall be sampled, where n is the total number of shall be chosen for containers in the consignment ( see Table 1 ). Only sound, unopened containers sampling, unless it is desired specifically to examine damaged or opened containers.
TABLE Number of Containers in Consignment ( n ) 1 SAMPLING SCHEME Nomber of Containers to be Sampled 2 3 4 5 G 7 8 9 10 58 containers.

to 10 to 20 21 to 35
36 to 51 71 to 50 90

2 11

to 70

91 to 125 126 to 160 161 to 200 and thereafter one container for every additional

*clear varnishes and similar products in settling tanks shall not be stirred before sampling. ti\n additional safeguard to check the relative densities of samples taken from different levels and if these are not within the agreed tolerances, to continue stirring until the agreed tolerances are met.

3

IS t 101( Part l/Set 1 ) - 1986 The following procedures shall then be adopted: container shall be opened in turn and examined for the water or sovent ) or the of the contents ( for example, presence presence of surface of foreign

a) Each selected skin, separation matter.

b) After completing the removal of any surface skin if present, the stirrer shall be inserted into the container and the extent and type of settling, namely soft, hard or hard-dry, shall The presence or absence- -of a gel shall also be noted, care being taken not to be noted. confuse gelling and thixotropy*.

4

Any settled pigment shall be redispersed with the stirrer and the ease of redispersion noted. shall be inverted and left inverted The closure shall then be replaced securely, the container Finally, the containers shall be shaken and rolled while the other containers are examined. and reincorporation of the pigment, preferably using to effect complete redispersion mechanical means. The containers shall be re-opened and examined for uniformity. Successive stirring, shaking and rolling shall then be cbntinued until the contents are homogeneous, the bottom end of the stirrer being examined for undispersed pigment from time to time during the stirring, The time required to attain uniformity shall be noted.

4

e) When the contents of the containers have become homogeneous, they shall be sampled, using the small dip can to transfer the product to the sample container, which shall be filled SO that there is an ullage ( air-space ) of about 5 percent. The container sampled and the sample container shall be closed and the sample container shall be cleaned on the outside and immediately labelled in accordance with 7.1. are normally supplied in wide-aperture 6.2.2 For viscousproducts ( Type D ) - These products Examine the condition of all the containers and select at random for sampling an containers. appropriate number in accordance with Table 1. Open each of the selected containers, remove any' protective covering and inspect the contents for homogeneity or separation of phases ( for example, phases of oil, solvent or water ). If the product appears homogeneous, or is made so by stirring, take a sample from the whole depth of the product in each selected container, using a suitable metal sampling tube or other suitable equipment, and place it in a suitable sample container which shall be filled so that there is an ullage ( air-space ) of about 5 percent. Close the sample container and label it in accordance with 7.1. 6.2.3 For powdery products ( Type E ) - These products are normally supplied in sacks, paper or plastics bags, drums, barrels or plywood containers. Examine the condition of all the packages and select at random for sampling an appropriate number in accordance with Table 1. Open each of the selected packages and take, from various parts of each package, small portions of the product by means of a suitable sampling instrument and close the packages. Place these portions in a suitable sample container, close the cant ainer, mix the contents thoroughly by shaking, and label in accordance with 7.1. 7. Labelling and Sealing of Samples

7.1 Lobelling - The containers shall be labelled as soon as the samples are taken; the labels shall bear all the necessary information to enable the samples to be identified without dispute. The labels and marking ink used shall be capable of withstanding moisture and any solvents contained in the sample. The label shall not be attached to the stopper, but to the neck or body of the containers. It label: a) The name b) The quality c) The reference of the manufacturer and particulars number code, if necessary, of the consignment; storage tank, barrel, etc; and a description of the product; is recommended that the following particulars, whatever applicable shall be given on the

of the batch, and

d) The dates of manufacture
e) The

of sampling; taken from the consignment;

total number

of samples

*Both thixotroPic former is markedly

thir way.

and gelled Paints and varnishes have a jelly-like consistency, but whereas the con&tcncy of the reduced by stirring or shaking, the consistency of a gelled paint or varnish cannot be reduced in

4

IS : 101 ( Part

l/Set

1 ) - 1986

f) The designation certain number g) The consignor;

and reference number of the sample ( where the samples of selected containers, the latter shall be numbered );

are drawn

from a

h) The place of sampling; j) The name

and

of the sampler. and labelled it shall be sealed in such a breaking the seal.

7.2 Sealing - After a sample container has been closed way that the contents and label cannot be removed without

EXPLANATORY
In the preparation `Paints and Varnishes

NOTE
1512-I 974 ( IS0 ).

of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from IS0 - Sampling' issued by International Organization for Standardization

This standard supersedes 3 of IS : 82-1973 `Method of sampling and test for thinners and solvent and IS : 197-1969 for paints (Jifst revision )`, IS : 85-1950 `Methods of test for oil pastes for paints' `Methods of sampling and test for varnishes and lacquers ( second revision )`.
In reporting

value, `Rules

with this standard, the result of a test or analysis made in accordance observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with for rounding off numerical values ( revtied )`.

if the final IS : 2-1960

It was decided

characteristic Part Part Part Part 1 3 5 6

to bring the revision in eight parts as indicated below, each part covering and each part having several sections dealing with individual test methods: paints paints ( general ( chemical and physical examination ) )

a broad

Tests on liquid Tests on liquid

Part 2 Part 4

Tests on paint film formation Optical tests on paint films Mechanical Durability Environmental Tests tests on paint test on paint films films solids 5 Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India films

Part 7 Part 8

tests on paint and other

for pigments

