WAT Wah IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 
Indian Standard eae EI 


Frater uas wae — feonfdcsr 


MT 3 “Id ae 


Construction Project Management — 
Guidelines 
Part 3 Cost Management 


ICS 03.100.30 


@ BIS 2015 


dia AH sd 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
T$ “Ed, 9 st SR quni, +š feeei-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2015 Price Group 8 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 3) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 


A construction project is an endeavour undertaken by a project team on behalf of owner/client to create a built 
facility suited to the defined functional objectives. From inception to commissioning, the project goes through 
various distinct stages leading to progressive achievement of the project objectives. Each stage involves specific 
inputs, processes (both technical and managerial) and deliverables. Typically, the life cycle of a project from 
commencement to completion involves the following stages: 


a) Project appraisal — Inception, feasibility and strategic planning; 

b) Project development — Project brief development, planning and design, finalization of proposals, 
procurement of strategy, construction documentation including tender drawings, construction drawings, 
specifications, cost estimates, bill of quantities, procurement documents; 

c) Planning for construction — Sequencing of project components, planning tools, resource planning and 
time cost trade off; 


d) Tender action — Open competitive bidding/pre- qualification of agencies, issue of tender documents, 
evaluation of bids, negotiation if required and award of work; 


e) Construction — Execution, monitoring, control, work acceptance ; and 


f) Commissioning and handling over — Contractual closeout, financial closeout, defect liability 
commencement, facility handling over. 


The distinct features of a construction project include the temporary nature of the project team involved, the 
evolutionary process of the project deliverables during project development stages and the unique output as the 
built facility. As a result of these features, unless there is efficient and effective project management, a construction 
project is faced with challenges of uncertainties leading to time over-runs, cost over-runs, changes in project 
parameters, loss of quality and inability to meet the functional objectives. While technical soundness of a proposal 
is an important aspect of a construction project, the management aspects, which involve techno-legal, financial 
and other issues, have also a significant role in the success of a project. Therefore, management functions and 
technical processes in a construction project need to be integrated towards achieving project objectives. Top 
management commitment plays an important role in harmoniously achieving these project objectives. In some of 
the public domain projects, it may be necessary to share relevant information with public at large through 
appropriate means. 


To provide necessary guidance on effective construction project management, a series of standards are being 
developed as part of IS 15883 ‘Guidelines for Construction Project Management’. Part 1 General, of the standard 
since published as IS 15883 (Part 1) : 2009, covers general aspects of overall construction project management. 
This has been followed by publication of other parts as follows: 


Part 2 : 2013 on Time management 

Part 4 : 2015 on Quality management 

Part 5 : 2013 on Health and safety management 
Part 6 : 2015 on Scope management 

Part 8 : 2015 on Risk management 


The other parts of the standard are under preparation which will cover functions such as procurement management, 
communication management, human resource management, sustainability management and integration 
management. 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


Indian Standard 


CONSTRUCTION PROJECT MANAGEMENT — 
GUIDELINES 
PART 3 COST MANAGEMENT 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 3) covers guidelines for cost 
management aspects of construction project 
management. 


1.2 The cost management aspects during the project 
formulation and appraisal stage of the project are not 
covered in this standard. The scope of this standard, 
therefore, covers the stages subseguent to the stage of 
approval (when a decision to implement the project 
including its financing is taken) till commissioning and 
handing over of the project. 


1.3 The provisions of this standard are to be read in 
conjunction with IS 15883 (Part 1). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards: 


IS No. Title 


7337 : 2010 Glossary of terms in project 
management (second revision) 

10400 : 2013 Glossary of terms in inventory 
management (second revision) 

15198 : 2014 Glossary of terms in human resource 


development (first revision) 
Guidelines for construction project 
management: Part 1 General 


15883 (Part 1): 
2009 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 7337, IS 10400 and IS 15198 shall apply. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 Need for Cost Management 


A project is undertaken to create a built facility within 
pre-determined budgeted cost utilizing the planned 
resources. Cost management is an essential component 
of project management and aims to achieve satisfactory 
project cost performance through efficient project 
planning and execution within the budgeted cost. Cost 


management of the project is necessary for the 
following reasons: 


a) It is essential that the project cost is 
determined with reasonable accuracy and the 
project is accomplished within planned time 
frame and resources. 

b) To develop realistic cost estimates to predict 
the likely final cost as it provides the basis 
for project budgetary processes. 

c) Application of cost management on all stages 
of the project. 

d) Cost estimates help determine the project 
feasibility, obtain financial approvals, plan 
project cash flow, provide basis for bid 
evaluations and project durations. 

e) The client’s need for cost management is to 
achieve the creation of the built facility with 
maximum value at economical cost within the 
planned time frame. The contractor’s need for 
the cost management is to organize and 
control the utilization of the resources and 
produce the deliverables within the agreed 
cost and time frame adhering to the quality 
and safety standards. 


4.2 Overview of Cost Management 


Project cost management aims to complete the project 
within the authorized budgeted cost. The cost 
management essentially covers the processes related 
to cost estimation, cost planning and budgeting, and 
cost monitoring and control. These processes are 
applied in all the following stages of the construction 
project: 
a) Pre-construction stage: 
1) Project development, 
2) Planning for construction, and 
3) Tender action. 
b) Construction stage. 
c) Commissioning and handing over stage. 
The bearing of the other project management functions 
related to scope, time, quality, risk, procurement, 
health, safety and environmental aspects are to be 


recognized and duly considered in the cost 
management processes. 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


4.3 Organizational Structure for Cost Management 


4.3.1 The organizational structure and the mechanism 
for the implementation of the cost management 
functions are dependent on the type of procurement 
method adopted and the contractual arrangement 
between the project participants (client, design 
professionals, management consultants and 
contractors) specifying their roles and responsibilities 
and coordination arrangements. 


4.3.2 In the traditional design-bid-build model, two 
project management teams are involved; one dealing 
with the client’s objectives in all the project stages and 
the other managing the contractor’s interests during 
the post-contract award stages. 


4.3.3 As the client is ultimately bearing the project cost, 
the client represented project management team shall 
be primarily responsible for managing the overall cost 
management functions with the main objective of 
keeping the project completion cost within the client’s 
project budget limiting the cost over-runs. 


4.3.4 During the pre-contract project development 
stages, the cost estimation functions are carried out 
through the cost estimators/quantity surveyors and 
managed by the client’s project management team. This 
team shall also be responsible for coordinating the 
value management processes for cost optimization and 
also undertake the cost related bid preparation and 
evaluation processes. 


4.3.5 In some cases, for better collaboration, the cost 
estimation processes are undertaken by the lead design 
consultant as a parallel process along with the design 
development by engaging the cost estimators/quantity 
surveyors as a part of the design team. However, the 
client’s project management team shall closely 
coordinate with the design team to ensure that the cost 
estimates are in tune with the client’s functional 
requirements and the budgetary costs. 


4.3.6 During the post contract award stages, the client’s 
project management team shall be responsible for 
managing cost implied change orders and other cost 
variations so that the costs incurred during project 
execution are in accordance with the planned baseline 
costs. The focus of the contractor’s cost management 
team during this phase shall be on the efficient 
utilization of the resources so that the project 
completion is achieved with the desired markup. 


5 SCOPE OF COST MANAGEMENT 


5.1 General 


The scope of cost management shall cover the effective 
implementation of cost processes with appropriate 
techniques in estimating budgeting and controlling 


costs with the objectives of project completion within 
the approved budgets with authorized variations. 


5.1.1 The cost management processes shall be applied 
in all the project phases as cost is expended in all the 
phases to achieve the expected deliverables in these 
phases. 


5.1.2 A cost management plan shall be established 
based on the nature, objectives and specific 
requirements of the project to detail out the proposed 
cost management methodology specifying the required 
outputs, techniques and deliverables. 


5.1.3 The cost management processes shall be detailed 
out of project scope through the scope statements and 
project work break down structure (WBS). The WBS 
shall form the basis for the cost budgetary allocations 
and assignments of control accounts for the 
components of the WBS for the cost tracking and 
control processes. 


5.1.4 Wherever required, the cost management 
processes shall be integrated with the process of other 
project management functions. The time and cost 
processes shall be aligned for developing cost 
integrated schedules and achieving the project 
completion with the planned time and cost targets. 


5.1.5 While provisions relating to project formulation 
and appraisal stages are not covered in this standard, it 
is to note that during project appraisal phase, the pre- 
design cost estimates are worked out for determining 
the financial feasibility as part of establishing the 
overall project feasibility. 


5.2 During Pre-construction Stage 


5.2.1 The scope of cost management during pre- 
construction process is to identify the various types of 
resource requirements, determine the quantum and 
timing and convert these resource requirements into 
monetary terms of costs for carrying out the project 
activities and estimate the costs of obtaining the 
deliverables. Acceptable levels of contingencies are 
added to account for unanticipated minor variations. 


5.2.2 Selection of project delivery system and contract 
strategy, selection of design professional and 
management consultants are some of the cost influencing 
aspects which are decided in pre-design stage. 


5.2.3 The initial overall cost budget of the project is 
developed under different relevant cost subheads 
amenable for easier cost aggregation and budgetary 
allocations. In addition to the cost of the main building/ 
infrastructure works, the cost shall have the following 
components: 


a) Capital costs for land procurement and its 
development. 


b) Costs for site surveys and geotechnical 
investigations. 

c) Cost of enabling infrastructure works. 

d) Cost of engaging design professionals and 
management consultants. 

e) Fee for approvals by the municipal/ 
development authorities and other statutory 
approvals. 

f) Other costs chargeable to project. 


5.2.4 Initial budgets prepared in the early stages of the 
project are modified and updated with the availability 
of more information in the subsequent project design 
and development stages taking into consideration the 
budgetary constraints. While developing the overall 
budgetary costs, the component-wise target costs are 
also assigned as a part of the cost planning and control 
measures. 


5.2.5 Before the start of work, cost budgets and time 
schedules are integrated to establish the cost baseline 
for the purpose of monitoring and control. 


5.2.6 The cost management processes during the pre- 
construction stage of the project provides greater 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


potential for optimizing the project costs, while during 
construction stage the cost management emphasis is 
more on monitoring and control mode for adherence 
to the budgeted costs. 


5.3 During Construction Stage 


During construction phase, the scope of cost 
management is to monitor and track the cost status for 
updating the project budget with actual costs incurred 
and manage the changes to the cost baseline. The 
processes shall cover the comparison of actual costs 
with budgeted costs analysing the reasons for the 
variations. The scope of cost management in terms of 
cost related processes carried out in different project 
stages are shown in Table 1. 


5.4 During Completion and Handover Phase 


This close out phase shall cover documentation of as 
built costs, risk encountered and processes related to 
financial closure and approvals. Comparison of final 
cost with the original approved cost estimates and 
analysis of reasons of cost variance shall be brought 
out. 


Table 1 Mapping of Cost Related Processes in Project Stages 
(Clause 5.3) 


SI Project Phases Planning and Design Processes Cost Related Processes 
No. 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Preconstruction 
Phase: 
a) Project development 1) Project scope defined i) Initial budgets 


2) 


b) Planning for construction 1) 


Development of project brief 


Engineering surveys and investigations 


Project delivery and contract strategy 
Financing strategy 
Preliminary cost estimates 


2) Conceptual design of alternatives ii) Elemental cost analysis 
3) Preliminary/schematic designs of selected iii) Value engineering 
alternatives iv) Constructability analysis 
4) Submission drawings for local 
bodies/development authorities 
c) Tender action 1) Detailed design and working drawings and i) Detailed cost estimates/bill of quantities 
specifications: ii) Invitation of bids 
i) Architecture iii) Bid evaluation and work award 
ii) Structural iv) Contract agreement 
iii) Services v) Construction schedule 
iv) Development works 
2) Preparation of tender document. 
3) Pre-qualification process 
4) Pre-bid construction schedules 
ii) Construction phase 1) Construction drawings of all related i) Project baseline cost and schedule 
disciplines (architectural, structural, ii) Site mobilization 
services) and site development works iii) Cost monitoring and control 
2) Construction activities and phase completion iv) Authorized revisions to baseline costs and 
schedule 
iii) Completion and handover 1) Testing and commissioning of services i) Documentation of as built actual costs 
phase 2) Contract closure including cost per unit parameter 
3) Handing over ii) Review Elemental costs. 
4) Post utilization evaluation iii) Cost risk encountered and final revised 
project cost and financial approvals 
iv) Preparation of operation and maintenance 


manuals 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


5.5 Value Management and Value Engineering 


Application of value management and value 
engineering methodology is one of the important cost 
management processes. Application of value 
engineering principles on the selected alternatives 
enables the selection of the cost effective proposal with 
maximizing the value at the optimum cost. It is an 
organized approach for providing necessary functions 
at the lowest cost without compromising quality, 
reliability and performance parameters. Although the 
value engineering exercise could benefit the project 
objectives in the entire project life cycle phases, its 
potential for cost savings is maximum during 
preliminary and detailed design and estimation stage. 


5.6 Mapping of Cost Related Processes in Project 
Phases 


Cost related processes are carried out in each of the 
project phases along with the planning and design 
related processes as shown in Table 1. Based on the 
level of information available, project costs are 
progressively developed through different estimation 
methods as close as possible to the final expected costs. 
In the pre-construction phase the cost management 
focus is on the cost reduction/cost optimization 
potential of the project costs. In the tender evaluations 
and work award phase, final project budgetary costs 
are firmed up. Before start of the work, the budgetary 
costs of individual activities/work packages are 
integrated with the project schedule and baseline cost 
profile is established. During construction phase, the 
emphasis is on cost monitoring and control process to 
complete the project within the budgeted costs with 
approved variations for the changes [see 6.4.3.1(f)]. 


6 COST MANAGEMENT 


6.1 Resource Management 
6.1.1 Pre-construction Phase 


Resource management of construction project 
comprises planning, estimation and procurement of 
various types of resources during pre-construction 
stage and control of their utilization during execution 
stage. In the pre-construction stage of the project, 
decisions and procurement processes related to the 
engagement of planning and design professionals and 
management consultants are made by the client 
organization following the established procurement 
procedures and practices depending on the type and 
magnitude of the project. For large magnitude projects, 
criteria like guality and cost based methods are used 
for the selection of planning and design professionals 
and consultants. Selection of construction firm and 
contractors for project execution is an important 
component of resource management and carried out 


during pre-construction process depending upon the 
type of project delivery system and associated contract 
type envisaged for the project implementation. 


6.1.2 Construction Phase 


For the project execution, the physical resources 
required are manpower of different categories, 
construction materials, equipment and other site 
specific infrastructure facilities in terms of water, 
power, roads, communication, security and other 
required facilities, as follows: 


a) Manpower resources — Manpower resources 
under the categories of construction workers 
and technicians shall be planned for their 
quantities, skills and time of requirement 
based on the project details, WBS, time 
schedule and estimates. Resource histograms 
shall be prepared for different categories of 
work force which can be done by using 
standard project management software with 
in-built labour constants. Necessary resource 
levelling shall be carried out to sort out the 
peak demands exceeding the resource 
availability and also to resolve idle labour 
situations by rescheduling certain activities 
within the available floats without delaying 
project completion time. Planning shall be 
done to take care of any situation of non- 
availability of local labour force necessitating 
import from other localities as in case of 
projects in remote locations. 


b) Construction materials — Construction 
materials constitute a major proportion of 
project cost and hence sound material 
management process shall be established as 
a subset of cost management process. Material 
resource management essentially involves 
identification of various categories of material 
requirements, market survey about their 
source of availability, cost and leads involved, 
estimation of total quantities, determining the 
quantum and timing of requirements as per 
project schedule, procurement process from 
suppliers and delivery at site. The site related 
material management processes are storage 
and handling, usage in works, and site 
practices for minimization of wastages and 
prevention of environmental degradation. 


c) Construction equipment — The modern 
construction practices adopt mechanized 
construction through the extensive use of 
construction equipment for various project 
activities for improving the quality and speed 
of construction. Some of the major 
construction equipment usage are the 


equipment for earthwork operations; concrete 
production, transportation, placement and 
compaction; false work and shuttering; pile 
foundations; well foundations; launching of 
girders for bridges diaphragm wall 
constructions; road surfacing; material 
hoisting and handling; and smaller portable 
equipment for individual construction 
activities. During the equipment resource 
planning process, the equipment type and 
production capacities are decided based on 
the project requirements including the site 
constraints, on site availability of the 
equipment and durations of their deployment 
are worked out in relation to project schedule 
and quantum of work involved. For example, 
the capacity of concrete batching plant is 
worked out based on the quantum of concrete 
operations which are levelled considering the 
peak and low demand volumes. In the 
procurement process of eguipment, economic 
considerations of owning and operating costs 
or hiring on rental/lease costs needs to be 
considered. On the whole, the eguipment 
resources should be properly planned and 
deployed for improved speed and quality 
construction at economic costs. 


As part of the site management processes, due attention 
shall be given for the location of the eguipment and 
their onsite maintenance, planning and location of the 
site offices and laboratories, location of the material 
storage and other safety and site protection measures. 


6.2 Cost Estimation 


6.2.1 Approximate Cost Estimation During Concept 
Design Stage 


This shall be done as follows: 


a) 


b) 


During the concept planning and design 
stages workable design solutions, with 
alternative building materials, technology 
options and services systems shall be worked 
out by the respective design disciplines, the 
cost estimation of these alternatives shall be 
determined and a final design scheme selected 
based on the considerations of cost, time and 
other specific project objectives. It is 
recommended to evaluate these alternative 
designs through the application of value 
engineering principles. 

The approximate cost estimation methods 
adopted during this concept stage may be 
analogous estimation technique based on the 
cost data from the past projects. Analogous 
estimation should consider the cost of recent 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


past projects and make adjustments for 
escalation factor for time, location factor and 
other cost influencing factors for the proposed 
project. 


6.2.2 Preliminary Cost Estimation During Scheme 


Design 


This shall be done as follows: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


g) 


h) 


The estimate developed for the final scheme 
design shall cover all the cost components of 
the project and the scope of project envisaged 
shall be firmed up. The exclusions shall also 
be brought out. 


The estimate shall form the basis for 
according of approvals by the client and for 
monitoring of project cost. 


The estimate shall be framed based on the 
schematic designs of all the components. The 
scheme design proposals should be further 
considered through the application of the 
value engineering exercises before proceeding 
with the detailed designs. 


The estimate shall take into consideration all 
the site specific information like, topographic 
survey, geotechnical investigations, 
availability of peripheral services like 
approach roads, water, power, etc. Local 
construction practices and availability of local 
manpower shall also be considered. 


The estimate shall take into account the basic 
cost related information on construction 
materials, manpower costs, machinery and 
other cost influencing parameters. Provision 
shall also be made in the estimate for the likely 
escalation in the cost of materials and 
manpower during the planning and execution 
phase of the project. 


The estimate shall also take into account the 
basic cost related information on construction 
materials, manpower costs, machinery and 
other cost influencing parameters. 


The estimate should bring out all the cost 
drivers that significantly influence the project 
costs. Besides the direct costs the preliminary 
cost estimate shall include cost towards design 
professionals, project management services 
and other specialized services. Project 
approval fee/charges levied by local 
authorities shall be included. Usually separate 
estimates are processed for the land 
acquisition and its security measures. 

The realistic project duration required for the 
pre-construction stage activities, and project 
execution shall be worked out based on the 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


j) 


k) 


magnitude and nature of the project and funds 
availability and incorporated in the 
preliminary project estimate. The project 
procurement strategy along with the type of 
contract envisaged shall also be firmed up in 
this stage. The project time lines with 
specified project durations shall be decided 
with important milestone achievements. 
Realistic time durations should be allocated 
for the pre-construction planning and design 
and tender preparation and other enabling 
activities for the efficient implementation of 
the project execution process. 


Prior to the project cost estimation, 
topographical survey and geotechnical 
investigations should be carried out to provide 
design inputs that would have bearing on the 
project costs. 


Life cycle costing, value engineering and 
constructability analysis should be used to 
optimize the time and cost and improve the 
quality aspects. These techniques not only aim 
to improve the value of the product but also 
to improve the management processes and 
decisions and services. 


Provision may be made for contingencies to 
account for the cost variations which are likely 
to occur but are not identifiable at the time of 
preparation of the estimates (see 6.2.4). 


6.2.2.1 Building projects 


The following which are generally used for preliminary 
cost estimation in case of building projects, may be 


adopted: 


a) 


Floor area/total built-up area method — 
Floor area/total built-up area method using 
unit area costs is commonly used for the 
preliminary cost estimation of the building 
projects. In this method the total built up area 
of the building is determined from the 
architectural drawings and multiplied by the 
unit cost per square meter of similar category 
of constructed buildings available from the 
database of construction costs. 


This method of cost estimation for its 
application should take into account the 
following cost influencing parameters: 


1) Construction technology aspects and 
proposed building specifications In 
accordance with the current code of 
practices like durability aspects, 
earthquake resistance, fire safety, etc; 


2) Foundation systems based on subsurface 
conditions; 


3) Provision of basements and water 
proofing technologies; 


4) Number of storeys and large spans 
Involved: 


5) Mechanized constructions and formwork 
technologies; 


6) Use of sustainability approach for 
building planning, design and 
construction; and 


7) Other costs for specialized items and 
services. 


b) Construction cost index — Construction cost 
index (CCI) serves as an important tool in the 
preparation of the cost estimates of the 
projects. Among the different types of 
construction industry related indices, CCI is 
commonly used as a measure of increase in 
construction costs with reference to a selected 
base year cost index which is usually taken 
as 100. CCI is location specific and its 
calculations takes into account the increase 
in cost of major materials, labour categories 
and equipment usage in the project over the 
corresponding rates of these components in 
the base year considered. The relative 
weightage contribution of these cost 
components is pre-determined based on the 
of project wherein the type and quantum of 
materials, labour and equipment usage 
normally varies. In building projects, these 
weightages also vary based on the materials 
of construction and the structural systems 
adopted. A format for the calculation of 
building cost index and city-wise building cost 
indices are periodically published by 
construction organizations The CCI may be 
used for updating of the preliminary estimates 
prepared based on the available plinth area 
rates of the earlier year to the current cost 
levels. 


c) Elemental cost method — Elemental cost 
estimation is another approach that can be 
used to work out the preliminary cost 
estimates. This approach is more informative 
and along with value engineering technique 
provides opportunities for the consideration 
of alternative design solutions for the building 
elements/components. This method is broadly 
outlined in Annex A. 


6.2.2.2 Infrastructure projects 


The following methods which are generally adopted 
for the preliminary cost estimation of infrastructure 
projects like roads, bridges, water supply, sewerage 


drainage, airports, dockyards, and dams, may be 


adopted: 


a) 


b) 


For road projects, based on the road layouts, 
cross-sectional details and construction 
material specifications, geotechnical 
characteristics worked out in the planning 
process, the parametric cost data in terms of 
cost per unit length or cost per unit surface 
area of the road compiled from the past 
projects with suitable enhancements to cover 
current costs are used to obtain the 
preliminary cost estimates. Improved 
preliminary cost estimation could be made 
based on the approximate quantities of items 
worked out from the preliminary layouts and 
designs could be used with applicable unit 
rates of the items of work. 

For bridge projects, the preliminary cost 
estimation needs to be based on the 
preliminary designs and drawings made 
considering the traffic requirements, site 
constraints, subsurface conditions, etc. The 
approximate quantities of items are worked 
out from the preliminary drawings and costing 
done with available information on the unit 
rate of these items. For the bridge structures, 
elemental costing method is a useful approach 
wherein costing of individual bridge elements 
like foundations, sub-structure, deck 
structure, bearings, approaches, railing, 
drainage, lighting, landscape works, etc, is 
done. As the bridge deck structure constitutes 
a major cost component, cost data on cost per 
unit plan area of the bridge deck obtained 
from the past projects may be useful for the 
preliminary cost estimation. This unit cost 
information related to deck structure is 
dependent on the parameters like span; width 
of the bridge; deck cross-section; structural 
system: material type in terms of steel, 
reinforced concrete, prestressed concrete, 
precast or cast in-situ and concreting 
composite systems, and erection and other 
construction technology aspects. 


For infrastructure services such as water 
supply, sewerage and drainage systems for 
township like projects, database on the cost 
of these services worked out as cost per unit 
area of the site from the past projects could 
be adopted with suitable enhancements for the 
time factors. Such unit area costs depends on 
the parameters like type of developments 
(low-rise, medium or high rise), housing 
layouts, density and site characteristics. For 
more realistic preliminary cost estimation, 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


preliminary layouts and designs of these 
services are worked out to arrive at the 
approximate quantities of the items and with 
the information on current unit rates of these 
items, the preliminary cost estimates are 
worked out. 


6.2.2.3 Other structures 


For other structures like airports, dams, dockyards and 
hydel project costing may be based on per unit costs 
of similar structures where such data is available. 
Where data is not available, approximate quantities 
based on preliminary designs of various components 
may be worked out and cost worked out based on 
prevalent market rates/schedule of rates as available. 


6.2.3 Detailed Cost Estimation Based on Detailed 


Designs 


The detailed cost estimation shall be done as follows: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Detailed cost estimates are prepared based on 
detailed designs. These detailed estimates are 
prepared for trade-wise sub-heads of work. 
The trade-wise bill of quantities (BOQ) is 
prepared based on detailed drawings 
following the Indian Standard methods of 
measurements of the items of work involved. 
The nomenclature of the items of the work 
should be fully described without any 
ambiguity as this forms the basis for the 
payment of bills of executed items in the 
contract document. The item nomenclature 
shall be based on the proposed works 
specifications. 


Schedule of rates and analysis of rate 
documents periodically published by the 
construction organizations providing unit 
rates with item nomenclature are adopted for 
the preparation of the detailed cost estimates 
for building and infrastructure civil, electrical, 
water supply, sanitary and drainage works, 
etc. For bridge and hydro-electric projects 
similar items available in these documents can 
be utilized. For the specialized and other 
project specific non-schedule items detailed 
analysis of rates should be worked out on the 
basis of similar works carried out in the past, 
current market rates or based on any other 
rational basis for the preparation of the 
detailed estimates. 


The bill of quantities of items of work in 
standard measurement units can be prepared 
manually or more efficiently through 
computer aided methods for accuracy and 
speed of preparation. Commercial software 
integrating the detailed drawings with 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


quantity surveying process can be 
advantageously used. These software can also 
used to monitor the as executed quantities in 
relation to the estimated quantities during the 
project execution as a cost tracking and 
controlling process. 


d) The reasonability of detailed estimates can be 
broadly assessed through the methodology of 
elemental cost analysis. In this method, the 
quantity and cost of the building elements 
worked out in the detailed estimates are 
expressed in terms of unit floor area of the 
building and compared with similar quantity 
and cost in similar category of constructed 
buildings. This approach can also be used for 
infrastructure works considering the elements/ 
components of such works. The concept of 
elemental cost analysis for a typical building 
work is given in Annex A. 

e) The main purpose of the detailed cost estimate 
shall be to predict the cost as nearly as possible 
to the expected cost of construction based on 
market condition and hence the detailed 
estimates worked out shall consider the 
prevailing rates of material and labour and 
other market condition. The construction cost 
index may be used to arrive at the percentage 
enhancement to be added to update the 
detailed estimate costs of the projects prepared 
based on the schedule of rates documents of 
the earlier years. 


6.2.4 Cost Contingency 


6.2.4.1 While framing the project cost estimates a 
certain amount of cost contingency shall be added to 
the base estimates to account for the cost variations 
which are likely to occur but are not identifiable at the 
time of preparation of the estimates. Incorporation of 
cost contingency is a cost related risk management 
approach to reduce the cost over-runs to an acceptable 
level. The quantum of the contingency is influenced 
by the project size, complexity, associated level of risks 
and level of information available during different 
stages of the project development. Compared to new 
constructions, repair/rehabilitation/re-modelling works 
and below ground works may involve greater uncertain 
conditions requiring increased contingency provisions. 


6.2.4.2 The project cost contingency shall be 
considered in two components namely, design 
contingency to account for the design changes and the 
construction contingency to cater to the changes during 
the implementation phase like change in site 
conditions. 


6.2.4.3 The traditional approach of providing cost 
contingency is through a fixed percentage of the base 


cost estimate based on the experience on the past 
projects and such percentage is usually 3 to 5 percent 
and this percentage may increase further for projects 
involving greater uncertainties. A more realistic 
determination of project cost contingency can be 
worked out based on probabilistic methods taking into 
consideration the various cost related uncertainties in 
the project. 


6.2.4.4 Estimates may also include the amount for the 
management reserve to be funded for the project. 
Management reserve is an amount of the project budget 
withheld for management control purposes and are 
reserved for unforeseen work that is within scope of 
the project. The management reserve is not included 
in the cost baseline but is part of the overall project 
budget and funding requirements. When an amount of 
management reserve is used to fund unforeseen work, 
the amount of management reserve used is added to 
the cost baseline, thus requiring an approved change 
to the cost baseline. 


6.3 Cost Budgeting 
6.3.1 Costs and Schedule Integration 
It shall be done as follows: 


a) The integration between the detailed project 
costs and project time schedule shall be 
carried out in the cost planning and budgeting 
process before the start of construction. The 
project cost considered at this stage is the 
firmed up budgeted costs of the work 
packages/work items of the accepted tendered 
costs as per contract finalized with the 
successful tenderer. This contract cost may 
vary from the detailed estimate cost developed 
in the estimation stage due to the prevailing 
market conditions. 

b) For the traditional item rate contracts of the 
design-bid-build delivery model, the contract 
cost shall be in the form of trade-wise items 
of work of the work package. For building 
projects, the work packages should include 
civil works; internal plumbing, electrical and 
air conditioning works; site development 
works such as roads, storm water drainage, 
water supply and sewerage work, etc. In case 
of projects like major roads, bridges and 
specialized works, the work packages should 
include the items for relevant trades of these 
projects and the relevant costs for such items. 
For the cost and schedule integration the item 
wise project costs shall be converted into 
project activity costs. The activities shall be 
identified in the scheduling process based on 
work break down structure methodology. This 


process of working out activity costs from the 
items involved in the activities and 
determination of their occurrences in the 
timeline of project schedule is generally 
termed as cost planning process and the output 
of this process is the project baseline cost 
curve and this forms the basis for the cost 
monitoring and control process. The baseline 
cost curve is called as ‘planned value curve’ 
and this is also known as “budgeted cost of 
work as scheduled'. This term is used to 
indicate that each of the project activity is 
assigned with a budgeted cost that needs to 
be monitored and controlled. 


6.3.2 Development of Cost Baseline 


The following information are reguired to develop the 
graphical profile of the cost baseline (planned value 
curve): 


a) Itemized costs of work packages. 


b) Individual activity costs derived based on the 
costs of items involved in the particular 
activity. 

c) Barchart form of project schedule containing 
the project activities with their durations and 
costs. 


d) Information related to the proportion in which 
the activity cost is incurred in the duration of 
the activity since for certain activities the cost 
incurrence may not be in linear proportion 
with time duration. 


e) Cost break-up of activities in terms of its 
components, materials, manpower and 
equipment, etc. 


Once the proportion of the planned costs of the 
individual activities are known in each block of project 
durations (fortnightly or monthly), the summation of 
the monthly or fortnightly planned cost of the project 
shall be obtained. From this, the cumulative as-planned 
costs over the project duration shall be obtained 
forming the project baseline cost projection. The nature 
of this cost curve is usually a flat S-shaped curve 
depending upon the type and characteristics of the 
projects. 


6.4 Cost Monitoring and Control 
6.4.1 General 


Cost monitoring and control shall be exercised on the 
processes and resources utilized in each of the project 
stages. The methods of cost monitoring and control 
may vary depending on the size and characteristics of 
the project and other project requirements. The 
approach should be simple and effective for its 
implementation. Generation of large amount of 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


information may obscure the effectiveness of the 
approach. The approach shall not merely concentrate 
on the past cost occurrences but shall be forward 
looking to forecast the cost trend and provide early 
warnings for timely corrective control actions. The 
appropriate cost monitoring and control methodology 
shall be decided prior to the start of the project with 
the procedures established and documented. 


6.4.2 Cost Monitoring 
Cost monitoring shall involve the following: 


a) It shall involve tracking and comparison of 
the actual cost being incurred during the 
course of project stages with reference to the 
baseline costs budgeted for each of the 
activities in the project stages. Depending 
upon the type, nature, size and complexity of 
the project, the cost monitoring shall be done 
at various prefixed intervals of time and/or at 
specified milestones. 

b) Monitoring of the costs during 
preconstruction, construction and handing 
over stages shall be done by having closer 
watch on the various cost related processes 
as listed out in the Table 1. 

c) During the project development, working out 
a realistic cost budget for the defined project 
scope forms an essential component of cost 
monitoring in this stage. 

d) The appropriate type of project delivery and 
contract type needs to be selected that would 
enable closer cost monitoring processes. 


e) During the planning and design stage, the 
development of cost estimates needs to be 
monitored to adhere to the initial budgeted costs. 


f) Techniques of value management, value 
engineering, constructability analysis, 
elemental cost analysis may be used to carry 
out the cost reviews with the considerations 
for alternative designs, specifications and 
construction processes. 


g) During detailed estimation processes, the 
accuracy in the preparations of the bill of 
quantities with correct item nomenclature 
with workable specifications needs to be 
monitored through review processes to avoid 
variations and changes during the project 
execution. 


h) During construction stage the cost monitoring 
processes to bring out the deviations from the 
budgeted costs may be carried out through 
methods like periodic cost reporting systems, 
variance analysis and cost performance 
measurement techniques. 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


6.4.3 Cost Control 


The cost control processes involve actions that are 
required to control changes/deviations between the 
budgeted costs and the actual costs so that the 
completed costs are within the budgeted costs including 
authorised revisions. 


The techniques of cost monitoring and control broadly 
fall into the following two categories: 


a) 


b) 


Direct cost control of resource utilizations, 
and 

Measurement of cost performance through 
earned value management (EVM). 


6.4.3.1 Direct cost control 


In this approach, the total project cost shall be divided 
into the following cost elements and control is 
exercised on these elements individually on each major 
items/subheads of the work: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Physical progress — It is one of the important 
cost influencing parameters as time delay in 
project execution and handing over would 
result in cost escalation of resources and loss 
of revenue/usage due to non-completion of 
built facility within the stipulated time frame. 
Hence control on physical progress through 
schedule control techniques is an important 
aspect of cost control. 


Manpower control — For each of the work 
items the actual manpower utilizations are 
recorded and compared with the planned 
budgeted values. From these records the item- 
wise actual unit cost (man-hour/man-day) for 
the labour component are arrived and 
controlled to keep within the corresponding 
budgeted costs. These man-power control 
measures are essential for labour intensive 
work items. In major contracts, item-wise 
labour cost component is managed/controlled 
by engaging labour rate contractors on labour 
rates for the unit guantity of work items. 


Material control — As material constitutes 
the major cost component of work items, its 
effective utilization minimizing the wastage 
forms an essential component of direct cost 
control. The actual consumption of materials 
are recorded and compared with the 
theoretical/budgeted reguirements and 
deviations beyond the permissible variations 
are identified and corrective actions taken. 
The excessive material utilization may arise 
due to improper storage, handling and 
incorporation in the work process. Waste 
minimization should be achieved by proper 
material storage, handling and measurement 


10 


d) 


e) 


procedures. Optimum use of materials should 
be planned as a part of design process. 
Techniques of lean construction can be 
adopted for waste minimization strategies. 
Mechanization process integrated with 
material handling could achieve optimum use 
of material resources. 

Equipment control — For work items 
involving equipment, the equipment cost 
component shall be substantial requiring 
effective equipment utilization control. The 
cost of equipment usage per unit quantity of 
work item executed should be recorded and 
monitored in comparison with the 
corresponding budgeted costs towards the 
equipment deployment (for example, cost of 
equipment usage per unit quantity of 
excavation or quantity of concrete produced 
and placed in position). The equipment 
hourly/daily utilization cost are arrived from 
records of capital cost, depreciation value, 
maintenance and repair costs, fuel cost and 
installation operational and demobilization 
costs. The records of daily job wise 
deployment, number of hours worked, repair/ 
idle time should be maintained. As an overall 
cost management strategy, the economics of 
owning or hiring options are to be worked out 
based on capital cost requirements, utilization 
potential and other relevant factors. 
Sub-contractor control — In construction 
contracts, sub-contractors are engaged to 
carryout identified components and/or 
specialized works like dewatering, 
waterproofing, HVAC and other services. 
Proper coordination needs to be ensured to 
make the work-front available for the sub- 
contractors. 


Cost of changes — Cost of changes have 
major role in increasing the project costs over 
the original budgeted costs and hence need 
proper control procedure to deal with such 
cost changes. The changes may arise on 
account of design changes, change of 
construction methods and material 
specifications, additions and substitutions, and 
other reasons. As far as possible, changes 
should be minimized with proper planning 
and design in the pre-construction stage with 
the collection of all relevant information. 
Every proposal for changes involving cost 
implications shall be examined for their 
justification and reasonability and their cost 
and time implications should be approved by 
the competent authority. As a part of the 
contract document, the permissible variations, 


initiation of changes and their control process 
should be established. The changes may be 
initiated by the design department or by the 
field unit depending upon its origination. 
Variations in the quantities of high cost items 
should be examined and controlled. 


Consultants — Professional fees to the design 
and management consultants are treated as 
direct costs and budgeted as part of project 
costs. Quality and cost based selection of 
consultants should be carried out in large 
value consultancy works and such selection 
process should be decided at the pre-design 
phase of the project. Cost management 
functions shall be the part of the project 
management consultancy besides other 
aspects of project management. 


g) 


h) Other costs — Other costs may be on account 
of salary, field and office expenses, site office, 
temporary facilities and utilities, security 
services, equipments and tools, insurances, 


taxes, etc. 
6.4.3.2 Earned value management 


Earned value management (EVM) is a valuable tool 
for the cost and schedule monitoring and control of 
the construction projects. The technique is used as a 
tool for the measurement of current time and cost 
performance and forecast the future outcomes. The 
technique is detailed out in Annex B. 


EVM considers project schedule status and updated 
costs incurred at periodic intervals and provide an 
integrated approach for the measurement of cost and 
schedule performance during the course of project 
implementation. The performances are characterized 
by the variance between the planned performance and 
actual performance. The technique also forecasts the 


11 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


future cost performance based on the current cost trend 
and enables early warning signals for taking corrective 
measures in the event of unfavourable cost trends. 


Implementation of earned value methodology provides 
the following information and enable managerial 
actions in situations of unfavourable cost and time 
performance: 


a) Adherences of the actual costs incurred to the 
budgeted costs and identify the cost over-run 
or under-run. 

b) Adherence of the time progress to the as 

planned schedule and identify the time over- 


runs. 
Over or under utilization of resources. 


9) 
d) Forecasting likely completion cost based on 


observed cost trend. 


In construction contracts, it is valuable to incorporate 
the EVM methodology for monitoring the time 
progress and cost reporting and control processes. The 
limitations of the EVM come from the fact that the 
progress measurement based on the cost expenditures 
may not necessarily be in tune with the value creations. 
Also, the successful implementation of the method 
depends upon the extensive and accurate 
documentation of the periodic costs on various resource 
utilizations to capture the actual cost occurrences in 
relation to the project schedules. However, 
computerized approaches could take care of these 
aspects. 


6.5 Post Construction Review and Documentation 


All project cost documents relating to built cost, as 
built unit area rates, elemental/ component costs and 
cost related risks encountered shall be analyzed and 
preserved for later reference. 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


ANNEXA 
[ Clauses 6.2.2.1(c) and 6.2.3(d) ] 
ELEMENTAL COST ESTIMATION METHOD 


A-1 GENERAL 


Elemental cost estimation approach can be used in the 
early stages of the design process to work out the 
preliminary cost estimates. This approach is considered 
more informative and provides opportunities for the 
consideration of different alternative design solutions 
for the building elements/components. The method is 
broadly outlined in A-2 to A-4. 


A-2 ELEMENTAL CLASSIFICATION 


A-2.1 The elemental classification is fundamental to 
elemental cost estimation and cost analysis. In this 
approach the built facility (buildings, roads, bridges, 
etc) as a finished product is divided into various 
components called elements which usually perform a 
function regardless of its design, specification and 
construction. These elements are usually divided in to 
three or four levels: major group elements, group 
elements, elements and sub-elements. Such 
classification provides a hierarchical frame work of 
division of the entire built facility system into 
distinctive components with the costs. This enables to 
provide a clear picture of the cost allocation between 
the elements of the built facility. The costs of the lower 
level elements are summed to get the costs of the higher 
level elements which in turn are summed up to obtain 
the total cost. 


A-2.2 A typical classification of major group elements 
for a multi-storeyed building is shown in Table 2. 
Further division of one of the major group element 
(structural works) in to lower level elements is shown 
in Table 3. In a similar manner all other major group 
elements can be divided into lower level elements. 


A-3 ELEMENTAL QUANTITIES RATES AND 
ELEMENTAL COSTS 


The quantities of items of work constituting the element 
are worked and with the unit rates of these items the 
elemental cost is determined. These elemental costs 
are expressed as cost per unit of measurement 
applicable to the element. For example, for a wall 
element the elemental cost is expressed as ‘per square- 
metre’ of the wall area. It is useful to express the 
elemental quantities and elemental costs in terms of 
quantity per square-metre and cost per square-metre 
of the gross built-up area of the building. 


The elemental quantities and costs per unit gross built- 
up area of different categories of the building compiled 


12 


Table 2 Major Group Elements in Buildings 
(Clause A-2.2) 


S Building Works Major Group Elements 
No. 
2) G3) 


OD 
i) Structural works a) Super structure 

b) Sub-structure 

a) Envelopes/enclosures 

b) Internal/external finishes 

c) Water proofing 

d) Joinery works 

e) Architectural elements 

a) Electrical systems 

b) Plumbing systems 

c) HVAC systems 

d) Fire protection and fighting 
systems 

e) Security systems 

f) Lifts, escalators and travelators 

g) Other mechanical utilities and 
services 


Civil works 


ii) 


iii) Engineering services 


iv) Interiors a) Interior furnishings 
b) Suspended ceilings 
c) Acoustics 
d) Lighting 
v) External works a) Land development/site grading 


b) Landscaping/horticulture 

c) Storm water drainage/harvesting 
d) Roads/pavements 

e) Water supply 

f) Sewerage 

g) Area/street lighting 

h) Boundary protection 


from the actual quantities and actual costs of the past 
projects are useful in the preliminary estimation of 
subsequent projects. 


A-4 SCHEDULE OF ELEMENTAL RATES AND 
COST ESTIMATION 


Similar to the traditional schedule of rates of items of 
works under different trade-wise sub-heads, the 
schedule of rates of the individual elements per unit 
quantity of the element can be generated by adding 
the cost of the work items constituting the element. 
For example, the unit elemental rate of the internal 
brick masonry partition wall per square metre of the 
wall area is obtained by summing up the cost of the 
work items involved such as masonry work, plastering 
work and painting work in obtaining the finished cost 
of this wall element. Such schedules of elemental rates 
are useful in the cost planning/analysis and comparison 
of the alternative elements for a specified functional 
use. The summation of the cost of all elements 
constituting the building provides the total cost. 


Table 3 Division of Major Group Element into Lower Level Elements (R.C.C. Structural Works) 


(Clause A-2.2) 


SI Major Group Elements Group Elements 
No. 


a) (2) (3) 


i) Superstructure Vertical frames 


Horizontal floors 


ii) Sub-structure Excavation 


Shallow foundations 


Deep foundations 


Basement 


Elements 


(4) 


a) Columns 


b) Shear walls 


a) Beams 


b) Solid slabs 


c) Waffle slabs 


d) Flat slabs 


e) Precast joists/slabs 


a) Earthwork 

b) Dewatering 

c) Shoring/strutting 
d) Sheet piling 

a) Isolated footings 


b) Raft foundations 


c) Grade beams 


a) Piles 


b) Pile caps 


c) Grade beams 


a) Columns/shear walls 


b) Retaining walls 


c) Beams 


d) Slabs 


13 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


Sub-elements/ Components 


(5) 


Concrete 
Reinforcement 
Shuttering 
Concrete 
Reinforcement 
Shuttering 
Concrete 
Reinforcement 
Shuttering 
Concrete 
Reinforcement 
Shuttering 
Concrete 
Reinforcement 
Shuttering 
Concrete 
Reinforcement 
Shuttering 
Concrete 
Reinforcement 
Shuttering 


Concrete 
Reinforcement 
Shuttering 
Concrete 
Reinforcement 
Shuttering 
Concrete 
Reinforcement 
Shuttering 

Pile boring 
Concreting 
Reinforcement 
Shuttering 
Concreting 
Reinforcement 
Shuttering 
Concreting 
Reinforcement 
Shuttering 
Concreting 
Reinforcement 
Shuttering 
Concreting 
Reinforcement 
Shuttering 
Concreting 
Reinforcement 
Shuttering 
Concreting 
Reinforcement 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword and clause 6.4.3.2) 
EARNED VALUE MANAGEMENT (EVM) TECHNIOUE 


B-1 PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS OF 
EARNED VALUE MANAGEMENT (EVM) 
TECHNIQUE 


The parameters of EVM that are used to measure the 
project cost and schedule performance are as shown 
in Fig. 1. These parameters are categorized into four 
groups namely, basic elements, variances, efficiency 
indices and forecasting parameters. Individual 
parameters are defined and explained in the following 
clauses and illustrated graphically in Fig.2. 


B-1.1 Planned Value (PV) 


The first step in the application of EVM methodology 
is to develop the project baseline cost curve called 
planned value curve. It is the plot of cumulative 
budgeted cost of activities (defined in the project work 
breakdown structure) at the periodic intervals (for 
example, monthly) of the project duration. The 
cumulative costs at various project intervals are 
obtained from the month-wise summary of cost 
incurred on the activities. Since this baseline cost curve 


Basic Element 
(data points) 


Variance 
Measurement 


Planned Value 


(PV) 


Cost 
Variance (CV) 


Earned Value 


(EV) (SV) 


Actual Value Variance at 


(AV) 


Schedule Variance 


Completion (VAC) 


is obtained based on the ‘budgeted cost of activities 
and as per planned’ project schedule, this is also termed 
as budgeted cost of work as scheduled (BCWS). 


B-1.2 Earned Value (EV) 


The term earned value (EV) indicates the value of work 
earned and this is obtained as the cumulative values 
of the quantum of the work actually executed in the 
activities multiplied by the corresponding budgeted 
unit costs of the respective activities. The quantum of 
the work executed in the activities at a given point of 
time (report date) could be as per planned quantity or 
at variance from the planned quantity. The earned 
value increases cumulatively as the activities gets 
completed along the project duration. This earned 
value plot is also called budgeted cost of work 
performed (BCWP). 


B-1.3 Actual Cost (AC) 


The actual cumulative cost of activities at a given point 
of time (review date) is obtained from the quantum of 


EVM 


Forecasting 
Parameters 


Efficiency Indices 


Cost Performance 
Index (CPI) 


Budgeted Cost at 
Completion (BAC) 


Schedule 
Performance 
Index (SPI) 


Estimate to 
Complete (ETC) 


To Complete 
Performance 
Index (TCPI) 


Estimate at 


Complete (EAC) 


Fic. 1 PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT PARAMETERS OF EVM 


14 


REPORT DATE 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


ESTIMATE AT 
COMPLETION COST VARIANCE 
BUDGET AT AT COMPLETION 
COMPLETION 
PLANNED VALUE 
| ESTIMATE TO COMPLETE 
E BALANCE WORK 
O 
O 
O 
ü ACTUAL COST 
< COST VARIANCE 
5 | 
= 
D 
O 


TIME DURATION —— 
Fic. 2 EVM PARAMETERS 


work actually executed in the activities multiplied by 
the actual unit costs of the work in respective activities. 
For well controlled project situations, the actual 
quantum of work and their actual unit cost shall adhere 
to the planned quantum of work and their budgeted 
unit cost. Otherwise they may be at variance with 
respect to the planned quantum of work and their 
budgeted unit cost price indicating favourable or 
unfavourable project situations. Major effort in the 
EVM methodology is to continuously compile the 
actual cost from the data collected on the cost of various 
resources utilized (manpower, material, equipment, etc) 
in the activities. The actual cumulative cost curve is 
developed progressively with the completion of 
activities during the course of project implementation. 
This actual cost curve is also termed as actual cost of 
work performed (ACWP). 


B-1.4 Measurement of Variances 
B-1.4.1 Cost Variance (CV) 


The cost performance of the project is measured in 
terms of cost variance which is the difference between 
the earned value and the actual cost of the work carried 
out. 


CV =EV-AC 


Cost variance percentage = [Jan 


15 


When EV and AC are equal, the project is on the 
budgeted cost. A negative and positive value of CV 
indicates the project cost over-run and cost under-run 
respectively. The cost overrun could be on account of 
lower productivity of labour and equipment and over 
consumption or wastage of materials. Negative CV 
could also be attributed to the inaccuracy of the original 
budget costs. Cost variance percentage indicates the 
cost over-run and cost under-run as the percentage of 
earned value. Negative and positive cost variance 
percentage indicates percentage cost over-run and cost 
under-run respectively. 


B-1.5 Cost Performance Index 


B-1.5.1 The cost variances are project specific values. 
However, the cost performance is also expressed as an 
index to serve as common basis for comparison with 
other projects besides usage in forecasting calculations. 
The cost performance Index is expressed as percentage 
to indicate the percentage efficiency of the cost and 
performance. 


B-1.5.2 Cost performance index (CPI) measures the 
value of work completed compared to the actual cost 
incurred on the project and is calculated by dividing 
the earned value by the actual cost. The CPI when 
expressed as percentage, indicates the cost efficiency 
of the work completed. 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


Cost performance index (CPI) = EV/AC 


CPI less than one and more than one indicates cost 
over-run and cost under-run respectively. 


B-1.6 Forecasting Parameters 


EVM methodology provided three basic forecasting 
parameters relating to completion costs. These are 
budgeted cost at completion (BAC), estimate to 
complete (ETC) and estimate at completion (EAC). 


The other parameters derived from the basic parameters 
are: variance at completion (VAC), planned percentage 
complete (PPC), actual percentage complete (APC), 
and to complete cost performance index (TCPI). 


B-1.6.1 Budgeted Cost at Completion (BAC) 


Budgeted cost at completion is the total cumulative 
budgeted cost of all the project activities as per the 
planned schedule. It is the total base line cost and is 
the end value of the planned value curve. 


B-1.6.2 Estimate to Complete (ETC) 


The estimate to complete the balance work may be 
determined in one of the following three approaches 
as per the decision of the project team: 


a) In the first approach, ETC is calculated with 
the consideration that the balance work shall 
be completed with the up to date trend of the 
cost efficiency represented by CPI 

ETC = (BAC - EV)/CPI 

EAC = AC + (BAC —- EV)/CPI 

As CPI = EV/AC, EAC may be written as: 


EAC = BAC/CPI 


b) In the second approach, ETC is calculated 
based on the decision that the balance work 
shall be controlled and completed at the 


original budgeted costs 


ETC = BAC-EV 
EAC = AC +(BAC-EV) 


c) Inthe third approach the cost to complete the 
balance work shall be assessed by working 


out a new cost estimate with revised budgeted 


16 


costs and added to the up to date actual cost 
EAC = AC + (ETC) revised 
B-1.6.3 Estimate at Completion (EAC) 


The forecast of the estimated cost at completion is 
determined by adding to the up to date actual cost (AC) 
the projected cost estimate to complete the balance 
work (ETC). 


EAC is a new revised cost estimate at completion. EAC 
is determined based on the following considerations: 


EAC = AC + ETC 
B-1.6.4 Variance at Completion (VAC) 


The difference between the original baseline budgeted 
cost and estimate at completion is termed as VAC, that 
is, 

VAC = BAC - EAC 
B-1.6.5 Planned Percentage Complete (PPC) 


It is the percentage of work planned to be completed 
as on the reporting date. 


PPC = LSA 
BAC 


B-1.6.6 Actual Percentage Complete (APC) 


It is the percentage of work actually completed as on 
the reporting date 


APC = AC 
BAC 


B-1.6.7 To Complete Cost Performance Index (TCPD) 


TCPI is a planned cost performance index that needs 
to be achieved for the completion of the balance work 
as per the decision of the project team. TCPI can be 
based either on budget cost at completion (BAC) or on 
estimate at completion (EAC). 


TCPI based on BAC = Cee) 
(BAC - AC) 
(BAC - EV) 
TCPI based on EAC = (EAC —AC) ZAC) 


ANNEX C 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


Organization 


In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 


Aecom India Private Limited, Noida 


Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 

Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 

Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, 
New Delhi 

Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Railway Corporation, New Delhi 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Construction Company Limited, New Delhi 
Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 

Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 

M.N. Dastur and Company (P) Limited, Kolkata 
Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, 


Army Headquarters, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, 
New Delhi 


National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Institute of Construction Management and Research, 
Mumbai 


17 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KrisHNAN (Chairman) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR 
Suri S. SREEKUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. PASRICHA 
Suri Sanzay SONI (Alternate) 


DR SHAILESH KUMAR AGRAWAL 
SHRI PANKAJ GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR AcHuAL K. MITTAL 
SHRI AJAY CHAURASIA (Alternate) 


Suri B. B. DHAR 
Suri SANJEEV RASTOGI (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. Swarup 
SHRI RAVI JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


SHRI ASHOK KHURANA 
CHIEF ENGINEER (HQ) (Alternate) 


SHRI DALJEET SINGH 


SHRI JOSE KURIAN 
SHRI VIVEK BANSAL (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 


Suri R. K. Das 
Suri M. D. DESHPANDE (Alternate) 


Suri D. M. KUDTARKAR 
SHRI RAJENDRA SAWHNEY (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN AND MANAGING DIRECTOR 
SHRI RAJEEV CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. SRIVASTAVA 
Suri P. S. CHADHA (Alternate) 


Pror B. BHATTACHARJEE 
DR K. N. Jua (Alternate) 


Suri M. P. NAIDU 
SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


Suri S.K. GUHA 
SHRI GOBINDA PAL CHOUDHURY (Alternate) 


BRIG Manos KUMAR 
CoL M. K. PRASAD (Alternate) 


DR DEVENDRA VERMA 
Suri R. RAJESH (Alternate) 


Suri RAJENDRA CHAUDHARI 
Suri H. K. DHAWAN (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. N. CHOWDHARY (Alternate) 


DR ANIL AGARWAL 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


Organization 


Nirman Vikas Anusandhan Sansthan, Raipur 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 
PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry, New Delhi 
Planning Commission, New Delhi 


PMI Organization Centre Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
RITES Ltd, Gurgaon 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 
Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SANJEEV KASLIWAL 
SHRI AMARJEET SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL KAPOOR 
DR RANJEET MEHTA 
SHRI S. S. GANAPATHY 


SHRIMATI LEENA GUPTE SAMANT 
SHRI TEJAS SURA (Alternate) 


Suri PAWAN CHOUDHARY 
Suri M. D. Josu (Alternate) 


DR V. K. PAUL 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR MITTAL 


LT GEN (RETD) HARI UNIYAL 


Suri O. P. GOEL (Alternate) 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C,Vasant Kunj, DR VANITA AHUJA 
New Delhi) 

In personal capacity (4/1, Technology Apartments, Patparganj, SHRI R. P. LAHIRI 
Delhi) 

In personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, Suri A. K. SHARMA 


Patparganj, Delhi) 
In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


Suri J. Roy CHOWDHURY, Scientist F and Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretaries 
SHRI SANJAY PANT 
Scientist E (Civil Engg), BIS 
and 
Suri S. ARUN KUMAR 
Scientist C (Civil Engg), BIS 


Panel for Construction Project Management, CED 29/P1 


Organization Representative(s) 
In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) Suri P. KrisHNAN (Convener) 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi Suri B. B. DHAR 
Suri SANJEEV RASTOGI (Alternate) 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad SHRI AMAN DEEP 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation 
Development Corporation, New Delhi 
EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai 


Suri JOSE KURIAN 

SHRI VIVEK BANSAL (Alternate) 
Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 

Suri S. MUKHERJEE 


Suri M. P. NAIDU 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi SHRI SATISH UPADHYAY 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi DR V. K. PAUL 
Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida SHRI Manos KUMAR MITTAL 
In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, DR VANITA AHUJA 

New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (E-9, Gaur Green Avenue, Abhay Khand-II, SHRI IFTIKHAR A. DRABU 


Indirapuram, Ghaziabad) 


In personal capacity (C-2/2324, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) SHRI CHANDRA PAL 
In personal capacity (411, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, SHRI KRISHNA KANT 
New Delhi) 


18 


Organization 


In personal capacity (608, Technology Apartment, 
LP. Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, 


Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, 


Patparganj, Delhi) 


IS 15883 (Part 3) : 2015 


Representative(s) 


DR S. N. MANDAL 


Suri A. K. SHARMA 


DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Working Group on Cost Management, CED 29/P1/WG2 


Organization 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, 


Patparganj, Delhi) 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 


In personal capacity (C-2/2324,Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (E-9, Gaur Green Avenue, 
Abhay Khand-I, Indirapuram, Ghaziabad) 


In personal capacity (411, Sector A, Pocket-C, 
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (608, Technology Apartment, 
IP. Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (W-12/34D, Western Avenue, 
Sainik Farms, New Delhi) 


19 


Representative(s) 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM (Convener) 


SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN 
SHRI CHANDRA PAL 


SHRI IFrIKHAR A. DRABU 


Suri KRISHNA KANT 


DR S.N. MANDAL 


Dr ANIL SAWHNEY 


(Continued from second cover) 


This standard (Part 3) on cost management is intended to cover the guidelines on cost management processes 
which are to be carried out during the project phases and for project completion within the approved budgeted 
costs with the authorized variations. The successful project outcome depends on the efficient cost management 
restricting the cost overruns besides the other parameters of adherence to time targets, achieving specified guality 
standards and safety provisions. In situations of improper management of cost aspects, the timely project completion 
and planned utilization of the built facility will get seriously jeopardized due to such cost overruns and resulting 
financial problems. Even the project may abruptly get halted on these accounts. Such adverse situations should 
be avoided by implementing a robust cost management mechanism in all phases of project. 


This standard is organized in the following seguence: at the beginning the need for cost management and scope 
of the cost management processes during pre-construction phases are brought out; then cost management process 
flow through project phases is covered; followed by three essential cost related processes namely, cost estimation, 
cost planning and budgeting, and cost monitoring and control are covered along with the tools and technigues. 
The technigues of cost estimation and analysis through elemental method, and cost monitoring and control 
through earned value method (EVM) are incorporated in detail in Annex B. For improved productivity, speed 
and accuracy, the implementation of cost related technigues using computerized approach with appropriate project 
management software are encouraged. 


The guidelines may be applicable in general in all construction projects. However for smaller projects, the 
applicability of various provisions may be decided appropriately by the parties concerned. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular reguirement of this standard is compiled with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 29 (7906). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


