WaT HT IS 16094 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


sieri — taatea ea 

CST ch WAT ENT HU A 

Wet EX AGA cat Ugtaa4r — 
uniasít fasta 


Hydrometry — Measuring the 
Water Level in a Well Using 
Automated Pressure Transducer 
Methods — Guidelines 


ICS 07.060 


© BIS 2018 


Rds AM equ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF Te, 9 aeee SL Art, ae feeeit-110002 
LL MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2018 Price Group 13 


Ground Water and Related Investigations Sectional Committee, WRD 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Ground 
Water and Related Investigations Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division 
Council. 


Submersible pressure transducers, developed in the early 1960s, have made the collection of water level and 
pressure data much more convenient than former methods. Submersible pressure transducers, when combined 
with electronic data recorders have made it possible to collect continuous or nearly continuous water level or 
pressure data from wells, piezometers, soil-moisture tensiometers, and surface water guages. These more frequent 
measurements have led to an improved understanding of the hydraulic processes in streams, soils, and aquifers. 


In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived form ISO/TR 23211 : 2009 
“‘Hydrometry — Measuring the water level in a well using automated pressure transducer methods’. It describes 
the operational theory behind submersible pressure transducers and provides information about their use in 
hydrologic investigations. 


This standard also incorporates the salient features of digital water level recorders (DWLRs) for guidance which 
are not covered in ISO/TR 23211 : 2009. 


This standard is intended to be a guide to the proper selection, installation, and operation of submersible pressure 
transducers and data loggers for the collection of hydrologic data, primarily for the collection of water level data 
from wells. This standard describes the basic principles, measurement needs, and considerations for operating 
submersible pressure transducers, including a discussion of the systematic errors inherent in their use. Standard 
operational procedures for data collection and data processing, as well as applications of transducers for specific 
types of hydrologic investigations are included. Basic concepts regarding the physics of pressure and the mechanics 
of measuring pressure are presented, along with information on the electronics used to make and record these 
measurements. Guidelines for transducer calibration, proper use, and quality assurance of data also are presented. 
Ground water field applications of pressure transducer systems are discussed, as are common problems that may 
corrupt data, and suggestions for field repairs. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16094 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


HYDROMETRY — MEASURING THE WATER LEVEL 
IN A WELL USING AUTOMATED PRESSURE 
TRANSDUCER METHODS — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard provides information about the 
functional requirements of instrumentation for 
measuring the water level in a well using automated 
pressure transducer methods. 


1.2 This standard provides guidance for the proper 
selection, installation and operation of submersible 
pressure transducers and data loggers for the collection 
of hydrologic data, primarily for the collection of 
water level data from wells. Basic principles, 
measurement needs and considerations for operating 
submersible pressure transducers are described and 
the systematic errors inherent in their use are 
discussed. Standard operational procedures for data 
collection and data processing, as well as applications 
of transducers for specific types of hydrologic 
investigations are included. Basic concepts regarding 
the physics of pressure and the mechanics of 
measuring pressure are presented, along with 
information on the electronics used to make and record 
these measurements. Guidelines for transducer 
calibration, proper use and quality assurance of data 
also are presented. Ground water field applications of 
pressure transducer systems are discussed, as are 
common problems that may corrupt data, along with 
suggestions for field repairs. 


1.3 Annex A provides guidance on the types of 
pressure transducers commonly used for water 
level measurement and the measurement 
uncertainty associated with them. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards : 


IS No. Title 


1191 : 2003 Hydrometric determination — 
Vocabulary and symbols (second 


revision) 


IS No. Title 
15118 : 2002 Measurement of liquid flow in open 
MSO 4373 : channel — Water level measuring 
1995 devices 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 1191 shall apply. 


4 APPLICATIONS OF THE USE OF PRESSURE 
TRANSDUCERS TO GROUND WATER 
RESOURCEINVESTIGATIONS 


4.1 Ground Water Monitoring 


Submersible pressure transducers can be used for 
long-term and short-term applications. This clause 
discusses both applications. In addition, in 4.4, 
information is provided on the technique of reducing 
well-bore storage so that the user can apply this 
technique to reduce the effective diameter of wells 
during slug tests or aquifer tests. 


4.2 Long-Term Monitoring 
4.2.1 General 


Many hydrologic investigations require continual 
monitoring (over periods of weeks to years) of water 
levels in wells. Examples of such studies include 
monitoring water levels for: 


a) indication of earth tides, 

b) indication of earthquakes, 

C) determination of temporal variation in vertical 
or horizontal hydraulic gradients, 

d) determination of timing and magnitude of 
recharge to ground water following 
precipitation events, and 

e) monitoring of pump and treat operations at 
ground water reclamation sites. 


For many studies, even if continual data collection is 
not necessary, it is cost effective to monitor water level 
fluctuations in wells with a sensor rather than using 
human resources to collect discrete measurements. 


Submersible pressure transducers have long been used 


IS 16094 : 2018 


for monitoring water level fluctuations in wells . Buried 
in the soil, these devices also have been used for decades 
to monitor pressure heads. Sensors used in this way have 
historically been called the Casagrande type pressure 
transducers, and are commonly used to monitor pressure 
heads in and around dams. While other automated water 
level sensor systems also can provide continual water 
level data in wells, submersible pressure transducers 
are particularly well suited for some applications. 
Typically small, and requiring little maintenance 
because they are immersed in water, their environmental 
conditions are relatively stable. Some examples of 
applications in which submersible pressure transducers 
are particularly well suited are listed in 4.2.2 to 4.2.10. 


4.2.2. Pressure Range Considerations 


Submersible pressure transducers can be selected to 
monitor a small or large range of expected water level 
conditions. Transducers designed to measure a small 
pressure range can monitor stage changes of 3 m (10 ft) 
or less with a very high degree of resolution and 
accuracy. However, higher range pressure transducers 
can monitor water level changes on the order of 100 m 
(300 ft) with little loss of resolution or accuracy. 
Pressure transducers are well suited when large and 
sometimes rapid stage changes are expected, such as, 
monitoring head changes in Karst terrain, production 
wells, or pressure pulses associated with earthquakes. 


4.2.3 Non-vertical or Irregular Situations 


Submersible pressure transducers can be used in non- 
vertical or irregular wells when other systems cannot 
operate effectively. For a non-vertical well, a properly 
calibrated pressure transducer will indicate changes in 
vertical head in the well, requiring no adjustment to 
the data, whereas data from a float installed in the same 
well would require adjustment to compensate for the 
well's non-vertical orientation. Also, severe 
irregularities or deviations in the bore of a well could 
render acoustic-velocity devices or float mechanisms 
inoperative, while data from a pressure transducer 
would not be affected. 


4.2.4 Severe Environments 


Submersible pressure transducers are well suited for 
data collection in severe environmental conditions, 
such as, arctic or low-latitude desert climates. The 
relative stability of ground water temperature provides 
a much more suitable environment for submersible 
pressure transducers than for sensors that are mounted 
above ground or inside a well but above the water table. 
During freezing conditions, other types of sensors 
mounted to the top of a well can be disabled by freezing 
of water that has condensed on the sensor. Not only is 
the submersible pressure transducer usually not 
exposed to such extreme temperatures, if the water level 


in the well is shallow enough to freeze, the pressure 
transducer can continue to register pressure fluctuations 
below the ice lens. If ice were present in the well, an 
acoustic-velocity system or a float would indicate a 
constant water level. Relic ice lenses still frozen to the 
side of a well can hinder the operation of sensors. 


4.2.5 Flowing Wells 


In flowing artesian wells (wells with potentiometric 
heads above land surface), a submersible pressure 
transducer can provide potentiometric head data. This 
transducer is especially well suited to provide data 
when the potentiometric head fluctuates both above 
and below land surface. If potentiometric head rises to 
the point where a standpipe is impractical, or if heads 
frequently drop below land surface, a submersible 
pressure transducer may be the only practical option 
for providing continuous potentiometric head data. 


4.2.6 Large Depth-to-Water Considerations 


Wells with a depth-to-water greater than 100 m (300 ft) 
present special problems for most submersible pressure 
transducers. Cable or line stretch, thermal expansion, 
vent-tube blockage, and signal loss can introduce 
significant errors in deep wells or where sensors are 
located far from a logging device. It is noted that 
voltage problems caused by lead lengths of up to 
1 500 m (5 000 ft), and blocked vent-tubes, led to 
problems when monitoring water level fluctuations in 
deep wells. Well-bore deviation, a problem common 
to deep wells, is magnified by the depth-to-water. 
Submersible pressure transducer models capable of 
making an analogue to digital conversion before 
transmitting the signal up the well to the data logger 
can overcome many of these problems. 


4.2.7 Small Diameter Situations 


To mitigate problems associated with hydraulic lag 
time, small diameter piezometers commonly are 
installed in wells drilled in geologic materials with low 
hydraulic conductivity. Although other types of sensors 
have been used for monitoring water level fluctuations 
in small diameter wells , most sensors are too large to 
fit inside wells with a diameter much smaller than about 
2.54 cm (1 inch). Vibrating wire pressure transducers 
small enough to fit inside wells as small as 1.27 cm 
(0.5 inch) can provide reliable data when some other 
sensor types cannot. 


4.2.8 Marsh Installations 


Water levels in wells installed in easily compressed 
materials, such as, those in a salt marsh or a fen, can 
be altered by a person walking on the surface so that 
the water levels recorded during site visits are not 
representative of a site’s long-term conditions. 
Frequently, these wells are of small diameter to 


minimize hydraulic lag time associated with low 
hydraulic conductivity materials. Submersible pressure 
transducers have been used to provide unaltered 
hydraulic head data during intervals between site visits. 


4.2.9 Buried Installation 


Submersible pressure transducers have been used to 
monitor pore pressure at earth-filled dams and in slope- 
stability studies. Buried transducers can provide pore- 
pressure data without the aid of a well. Submersible 
pressure transducers were in sandbars to monitor pore- 
pressure fluctuations in response to significant stage 
changes of a river. The sensors were installed in areas 
where wells would not have been feasible because the 
river periodically inundated the sandbar. 


4.2.10 Multiple Zone Measurements 


Submersible pressure transducers are convenient when 
making multiple-zone pressure-head measurements in 
open boreholes containing packers that isolate intervals 
of the borehole. Transducers can be connected to 
threaded tubes that pass through the packers and 
register pressure head of isolated intervals without 
requiring the transducer to be located in those intervals. 
This type of connection can reduce complexity, 
borehole clutter and cost. 


4.2.11 Conclusion 


As shown in the previous discussion, submersible 
pressure transducers are well suited for many 
hydrologic applications, however, their use for long- 
term monitoring of water levels occasionally can lead 
to errors if data are not corroborated. The convenience 
and low maintenance of submersible pressure 
transducers can lead to long intervals between 
calibration checks and overconfidence in the reliability 
of the sensor’s data. If checks on the calibration of 
sensors are not made, data may be erroneous to the 
point of leading to incorrect hydrologic interpretations. 
A study of vertical hydraulic head gradients at a well 
nest showed that uncorrected data from submersible 
pressure transducers resulted in an interpretation of 
reversals in vertical hydraulic head gradients when 
none actually occurred. Linear adjustment of data based 
on monthly check measurements would have led to 
the conclusion that additional water-table fluctuations 
of up to 0.052 m (0.17 ft) occurred when weekly check 
measurements indicated that sensor drift actually was 
responsible for those interpreted water level 
fluctuations. 


Gauge pressure transducers usually are used to measure 
pressure in a water body open to the atmosphere, 
whereas absolute transducers usually are used as 
barometers and in sealed environments, such as, below 
packers. The user may wish to substitute absolute 
transducers for gauge transducers to eliminate the need 


IS 16094 : 2018 


for vented cable, especially to multiple transducers in 
close proximity, connected to one data logger. A 
barometer, which can be an identical inexpensive 
absolute transducer, also must be operated. When using 
an absolute transducer in a gauge transducer 
application, subtract the barometric record from the 
water level record to get submergence. Three redundant 
barometers can be used in conjunction with many 
absolute transducers measuring water levels. Because 
the adjusted record is the difference between two 
records, noise and drift that are not common to both 
transducers may increase by as much as a factor of 
two. 


An absolute transducer can also be used instead of a 
gauge transducer to measure changes in wells in 
aquifers with barometric efficiencies close to 
100 percent. After verifying that the barometric 
efficiency is indeed close to 100 percent, the original 
record from the absolute transducer is acceptable as 
the barometrically adjusted record. 


4.3 Short-Term Monitoring 


Submersible pressure transducers have been used 
extensively for monitoring water level fluctuations 
during single-well and multiple-well aquifer and slug 
tests. Before the use of automated sensors, aquifer tests 
were labour intensive, and early drawdown in the 
pumped well was not easily observed. Similarly, for 
single-well slug tests in sandy material, the early 
portion of the recovery commonly went unrecorded 
simply because it was not possible to get water level 
measurements that were only seconds apart. Using 
submersible pressure transducers has reduced labour 
costs and has provided the opportunity to collect data 
frequently during the early portion of aquifer and slug 
tests. When combined with a programmable data 
logger, the pressure transducer can supply data 
frequently during the early portion of the test and less 
frequently as the test progresses and the recovery rate 
slows. For clean, coarse sand, when the recovery of a 
slug test can be completed in less than half a minute, 
the fast response of many types of submersible pressure 
transducers can allow measurement with a sampling 
interval of half a second or less. 


The pressure transducer used for aquifer tests should 
be capable of reliably measuring the expected range 
of water level fluctuations. For example, for an aquifer 
test, the pressure transducer in the pumped well should 
be capable of monitoring head changes much larger 
than is necessary for transducers installed in 
observation wells, where changes in water level are 
smaller and where greater accuracy may be desired. 
Similarly, for most single-well slug tests, a pressure 
transducer with a small pressure-sensitive range, such 
as, 0 to 34.5 kPa (0 to 5 psi) is adequate. 


IS 16094 : 2018 


4.4 Reducing Well-Bore Storage 


Due to the movement of water from the well into the 
formation, the water level in a well or piezometer can 
lag behind head changes in the geologic formation. 
Typical situations in which this well-bore storage effect 
is most significant include slug tests, early time in 
drawdown or recovery during an aquifer test, and wells 
in low-permeability materials. Only in slug or bailing 
tests, in which a slug or water is rapidly introduced 
into, or withdrawn from, the well is the effect of 
reducing well-bore storage undesirable. In fact, 
analysing the decay of the residual water level in a 
well to determine hydraulic conductivity is the purpose 
of a slug test. 


Packers that seal parts of wells to prevent flow within 
the borehole or to isolate zones for special tests 
sometimes are used to minimize the effects of well- 
bore storage in aquifer tests. Well-bore storage is, in 
effect, an incremental slug test superimposed upon the 
water level fluctuation of interest during the test. An 
inexpensive packer that can be made in the field from 
materials from a hardware store or lumber yard (see 
Fig. 1) encloses the transducer and seals the piezometer. 
The appropriate transducer for this application is an 
absolute device because the transducer is sealed into a 
zone without access to atmospheric reference through 
the well. Drain cleaners that expand to more than 10 cm 
(4 inch) are available; plumbing supply stores carry 
test seals of various kinds that can be made into packers. 
Straddle packers also can be assembled by using 
soldered copper tubing through brass fittings. 


Small water level differences between intervals 
separated by packers in a well can be measured with 
expensive, high-accuracy differential transducers that 
allow water in both ports or they can be measured as 
the difference between outputs of expensive high- 
accuracy absolute transducers. Alternatively, low-cost 
differential transducers that allow water in both ports 
can be used. In one case, pressure differences of 
several millimetres (a fraction of an inch) of water 
were measured between isolated intervals in a well at 
a submergence of more than 55 m (180 ft) using a 
differential transducer with a full-scale range of about 
3 m (10 ft) of water. There was a large zero shift, but 
after establishing a new zero offset, valuable data were 
obtained at the beginning of the pumping period 
inspite of the fact that the pressure from submergence 
exceeded the overpressure specification by a factor 
of four and exceeded the specified range by a factor 
of 17. 


A drop pipe that occupies much of the cross-sectional 
area of a well can be used to reduce storage in a well 
bore (see Fig. 2). Advantages of this design include 
the ability to measure the water levelin the well without 


^ H 
A 2M 
i 
| 
B 1 
IL J 
Ti G aa 
K 
D- 
cy 
e^ 
E74 - 
F A, M 
—— N 
e— O 
Key 
A valve to 6 mm (1/8 inch) pipe fitting for pressure 
testing 


B 6mm (1/8 inch) pipe coupling 
C 6mm (1/8 inch) brass to 6 mm (1/8 inch) male 
connector 


D 6mm (1/8 inch) nylon tubing, extends to surface 
attached to transducer cable with nylon wire ties 


E 6mm(1/8 inch) brass union (nylon ferrules can be 
substituted for brass ferrules) 


F 6mm (1/8 inch) copper tubing 


G fitting is drilled 6 mm (1/8 inch), and 6 mm 
(1/8 inch) copper tubing soldered for pressurizing 
packer gland 


H strain-relief — about 10 wraps of 
polytetrafluoroethylene tape should be used for 
strain-relief to female pipe joints 


I 15 mm (1/2 inch) to 10 mm (3/8 inch) or 6 mm 
(1/4 inch) threaded bushing, if necessary 


J 15 mm (1/2 inch) brass female pipe to 20 mm 
(3/4 inch) male hose fitting 


transducer cable 

drain cleaner packer gland 

hose clamp (brass tip of drain cleaner is removed) 
pressure transducer housing 


vent at transducer plane to prevent capture of air 
bubbles 


OZzETA 


Fic. 1 PACKER BASED ON DRAIN CLEANER 


removing the pipe, and the ability of the well to de-gas. 
For wells deeper than is practical for a standpipe from 
the surface, the pipe can be weighted, sealed at the 
top, and suspended by the transducer cable or a 
stainless-steel cable. To prevent a change in well-bore 
storage with changes in water level, the pipe must 
extend above and below possible water level 
fluctuations. The appropriate transducer for this 
application is a differential or vented device because 
the transducer is in water open to the atmosphere. 


5 PLANNING CONSIDERATIONS FOR 
SENSOR SYSTEMS 


5.1 General 


The type and number of sensors and data recorders 
needed for automated collection of water level data 
depend on the objectives of the study. Determine these 
objectives prior to selecting system components. 
Options are numerous, but once the study objectives 
and needs are clearly determined, the selection of 
appropriate system components will be simplified. 
Some considerations for planning the installation of a 
water level collection system are presented below. For 
many installations, submersible pressure transducers 
may not be needed, nor may they be the most suitable 
water level sensors. In the following subclauses, 
however, submersible pressure transducers are assumed 
to be the preferred water level sensors. 


5.2 Study Duration and System Reliability 


Nearly all submersible pressure transducers are capable 
of providing accurate results for short-term studies 
(such as, aquifer tests or slug tests) but as the study 
duration increases, the chance of sensor failure and 
the amount of zero drift increases. Purchasing more 
expensive sensors, engineered to withstand the added 
demands of long-term deployment, may be necessary. 
Sensor maintenance and recalibration also becomes a 
consideration when designing a long-term data 
collection effort. 


For long-term investigations, the data logger and power 
supply systems need more attention and protection. It 
may be necessary to recondition and recalibrate the 
data logger occasionally or to house it in a dry 
environment to prevent failure of components due to 
long-term exposure to moisture. Sensor cables may 
need to be protected with tubing or pipe to prevent 
long-term damage from ultraviolet radiation, physical 
weathering, exposure to ozone, or vandalism. 


System reliability is among the most important 
considerations when designing a water level monitoring 
system to be operated over a long duration. 
Redundancy, designed into the system so a partial 
failure will not result in complete loss of data, can range 


IS 16094 : 2018 


Key 

A well casing slotted vertically for bolt 

B nut 

C bolt 

D locking cap 

E surface casing, large enough to contain data logger, 


battery and peripherals in sealed box 


drop pipe, drilled at top for bolt, with female adapter 
and fitting of appropriate size at bottom to hold the 
transducer. For deep wells, the drop pipe can be 
fitted with ballast weight, sealed with a strain-relief 
fitting and bushings at the top, and hung using the 
cable. The drop pipe must span the range of water 
level fluctuation to avoid a change in well-bore 
storage with water level fluctuation. 


well 


n 


transducer 
cable 
water table 
cable 


A-7-Tr0 


Fic. 2 Drop PIPE PROTECTION OF A SUBMERGED 
'TRANSDUCER 


from multiple sensors in the same borehole connected 
to one data logger to two or three completely separate 
systems logging water level fluctuations in the same 
well. If a high degree of reliability is important, the 
study should be budgeted to provide early warning of 


IS 16094 : 2018 


system problems and fast access to replacement 
components to minimize down time. 


Many manufacturers use terms such as mean time 
between failure and reliability to present durability 
information on their products. Mean time between 
failures is most commonly defined as the total time 
that a number of sensors operate, divided by the number 
of sensors that fail during the operational period. 
Reliability is the probability that an item will perform 
its intended function for a specified interval under 
stated conditions. Specified interval refers to the length 
of the study or test. Stated conditions refer to the 
operational environment — weather, humidity, 
temperature and electromagnetic interference. Most of 
the time, the specified interval or the stated conditions 
supplied by the manufacturer are not the same as those 
of the hydrologic investigation. Also, reliability 
specifications usually refer to a single component of 
what commonly is a multiple-component system. For 
example, a pressure transducer may have one stated 
reliability and a data logger may have a different stated 
reliability, and the reliability of the combination of the 
two components (the system reliability) will be 
different from either of the reliabilities of the individual 
components. Most of the time, the overall system 
reliability will approximate the reliability of the least- 
reliable component. 


5.3 Required Accuracy 


Systems of pressure transducers, data loggers, cables 
and other supporting equipment used for sensing and 
recording water levels in wells must be sufficiently 
accurate to meet the needs of the project. A water level 
sensing and recording system can be capable of 
performing within a measurement error of -3 mm 
(0.01 ft) for most water level measurement applications. 
This measurement error may not be achievable for the 
case of large changes in water level (for example, during 
aquifer tests). An accuracy of 0.1 percent of the expected 
range in water level fluctuation would then be 
acceptable. Where the depth to water is greater than 
30 m (100 ft), an accuracy of 0.01 percent of the 
estimated depth to water is generally acceptable. In 
summary, the measurement error and accuracy standard 
for most situations are 3 mm (0.01 ft), 0.1 percent of 
range in water level fluctuation, or 0.01 percent of depth 
to water above or below a measuring point, whichever 
is least restrictive. The subject of required accuracy is 
also in accordance with IS 15118. 


While most sensor manufacturers produce devices that 
achieve acceptable accuracy, the added complexities 
of the wiring, data logger, power source and 
environmental variability may unacceptably degrade 
the overall system accuracy. Investigators may want 
to test the overall accuracy by conducting a pilot project 


before investing in a system that may not meet data 
objectives. In some cases, the desired accuracy may 
not be achievable with current technology or within 
budgetary constraints. For example, it is difficult to 
achieve a high level of accuracy with long leads, when 
depths to water are large, or when water level 
fluctuations are large. Stringent accuracy constraints 
require frequent check measurements in the field. 


5.4 Installation Location and Site Accessibility 


If the study site is nearby, then frequent visits to the site 
to download data, perform site maintenance, replace 
failed components, or make accuracy check 
measurements may be reasonable. If, however, the site 
is remote or difficult to access, then the system needs to 
be designed to be operated remotely and contain greater 
redundancy to better ensure uninterrupted collection of 
data. Remote sites may need an enhanced power supply, 
more robust shelters, extra data storage capacity, 
equipment to allow communication with the site and 
transmission of data from the site, two or more transducers 
in a well, and automated checks for sensor drift. 


5.5 System Components and Compatibility 


When designing a data collection system, determine 
which components are necessary and ensure that all of 
the components can communicate properly. Because 
power can be supplied by some data loggers, a short- 
term study might require only a pressure transducer 
connected to a data logger. For a long-term study, 
however, additional components including a power 
supply (batteries, solar panels, voltage regulator), 
additional data storage devices, a shelter or shelters, 
and a data transmission system may be needed. 
Ensuring compatibility between components becomes 
more difficult as the number of components increases. 
For example, some data loggers cannot interpret a 
digital signal from a transducer that makes an analogue- 
to-digital conversion at the sensor. Similarly, the type 
of analogue signal needs to be compatible; if the sensor 
sends an amperage signal, the data logger needs to be 
able to receive an amperage signal. Some pressure 
transducers require a separate measurement of 
temperature in order to correct the transducer output 
for changes in temperature in the well. If a data logger 
is not capable of receiving the temperature signal, the 
overall system accuracy is reduced. The data logger 
must also be able to supply the excitation voltage or 
current required by the sensor. When designing the 
installation, the number of sensors the data logger can 
simultaneously record needs to be considered. 


5.6 Water Quality 


Water quality must be considered when planning an 
installation. If the well will be used for water quality 


sampling, the transducer and cable should be easy to 
clean before installing. Do not use lead or plastic coated 
lead weights to apply tension to the cable. If the well 
is at a contaminated site, consider the possible effects 
of contaminants in the water that may corrode or 
otherwise degrade transducer components. Select 
components that are corrosion resistant and easily 
decontaminated. Some manufacturers make chemical 
resistant transducers of stainless-steel or titanium, and 
polytetrafluoroethylene coated cables. 


5.7 Number of Wells 


For several wells in close proximity — for example, a 
nest of piezometers or multiple wells for a pumping 
test — one data logger that can receive signals from 
several pressure transducers usually is much less 
expensive than dedicating a data logger to each sensor. 
Data retrieval from one data logger also is much 
simpler. Instrumentation of many wells requires many 
pressure transducers, which can become cost- 
prohibitive for some studies. In some situations, it may 
be possible to prioritize the need for continuous water 
level data, and record water levels in key wells with 
pressure transducers and data loggers while manually 
measuring levels in other wells. If the study design 
calls for single, isolated wells to be instrumented, many 
manufacturers offer water level sensing systems that 
allow the pressure transducer, data logger, power 
supply and cabling to be installed inside the well-bore, 
thus protecting the entire system from the weather, 
vandalism, or theft. 


5.8 Well Location, Diameter and Depth 


The setting in which the transducer is installed needs to 
be evaluated prior to installation. Wells installed in areas 
subject to strong electromagnetic fields, such as, near 
generators, motors, pumps, power supplies, or similar 
devices may not be suitable candidates for some types 
of pressure transducers and may require additional 
protection and signal conditioning. Natural occurrences, 
such as, storms, precipitation and lightning likewise can 
affect the transducer and data logger. 


Wells installed in remote locations commonly require 
provision for additional data storage. If site visits are 
infrequent, the data-collection system should be robust, 
may need to contain redundancies, and may need to 
have a data-transmission capability. 


If well diameters are small [less than 5 cm (2 inch)], 
the choice of pressure transducers is limited. For 
example, many wells installed in peat deposits are of 
small diameter to reduce the time lag for pressure 
equilibrium due to the typically low hydraulic 
conductivity of peat. Although some transducers are 
as small as | cm (0.39 inch) in diameter, most strain- 


IS 16094 : 2018 


gauge pressure transducers will not fit down a well 
smaller than 3 cm (1.25 inch) in diameter. The 
investigator may need to choose a different type of 
transducer, such as, a vibrating wire pressure transducer, 
remembering that smaller transducers are usually more 
fragile. 


Wells with a large depth to water present special 
problems for instrumentation. Unusually deep wells, 
where water levels range from tens of feet to several 
hundreds of feet deep, pose many unsolved anomalous 
data problems — spikes, drift, inexplicable rises and 
recessions, lost data — as well as correlation problems 
between manual and continuous data. Pressure 
transducers hung from long cables can be affected by 
cable stretch. The cable also can expand and contract 
with temperature changes, thus raising and lowering 
the transducer in the well and introducing errors into 
the data. The inclination of the well also can introduce 
errors into the data. 


Sensors are susceptible to impact shock damage from 
hitting the sides of the well or being rapidly submerged 
during installation or calibration. Deep wells present 
more opportunities for this kind of mechanical damage. 


Signals can degrade in long cables. The voltage 
attenuation and interference in long cables can cause 
erroneous data to be stored in the data logger. In 
addition to the effects on surface equipment, great 
differences in temperature and humidity between the 
surface and the water level, coupled with dissimilar 
metals, may lead to galvanic effects inducing voltages 
and transient currents that may distort the signal. The 
signal wires and their axially wound shields can act as 
inductive and capacitive circuits, which then may lead 
to ferromagnetic resonant effects, inducing transient 
currents into the signal-bearing channels. One solution 
is to convert the analogue signal to a digital signal at 
the sensor and transmit the digital signal up the sensor 
cable to the data recorder. Another solution is to 
transmit the signal using ac current from 4 to 20 mA 
current-mode transducers. Current-mode signals are 
less susceptible to degradation than the more common 
dc voltage-mode transmissions. 


Vent tubes on long cables have an increased chance of 
becoming clogged simply due to their greater lengths. 
Because of the great depths in some wells, 
environmental conditions may cause a variety of 
problems with both water level measurements and data 
recording. The varying temperature and humidity and 
the atmospheric pressure gradients between the water 
level and land surface may cause vent tubes to become 
congested and ultimately allow moisture to be 
transported down into the sensitive electronic and 
mechanical portions of a pressure transducer. 
Preventing moisture entry is discussed in 7.7. 


IS 16094 : 2018 


Accurate check and calibration measurements are 
much more difficult when the depth to water is great. 
Manual wireline or tape measurement is more difficult 
because of the line stretch caused by weight induced 
tension or temperature induced expansion. These 
problems may call into question the accuracy of the 
data record when it is compared against the manual 
measurements. 


5.9 Data Collection Frequency 


For most water level investigations, the frequency of 
data collection is limited by the data logger and 
memory-storage system. Frequent observations require 
more memory in the data logger or storage devices. 
Commonly, water level data in wells are collected no 
more frequently than hourly. The daily mean of the 
hourly values may be computed by the data logger or 
subsequent database system for the purposes of 
reporting long-term trends. For aquifer-test 
applications, however, the pressure transducer may 
limit data collection frequency. In some situations, 
where recovery from an aquifer test is very rapid, 
observations should be made on the order of every 
0.5 s. Some pressure transducers may take more time 
than that for the output to stabilize following excitation 
of the sensor. Some data loggers store the average of 
measurements taken over a period of several seconds, 
so recorded measurements of rapidly changing water 
levels may lag behind the true water levels. 


5.10 Data Transfer 


Data commonly are stored in a data logger or attached 
storage device, or both. In order to transmit the data 
from the logger to a computer in the office, a direct 
data logger download can be made during a site visit 
or the data can be accessed remotely. Remote access 
can include automated transmission by satellite phone 
line, cell phone, or radio signal; or the data can be stored 
on an on-site computer. The frequency of this 
transmission would depend on the timeliness of the 
data, ranging from the need for immediate 
transmissions to long transmission intervals designed 
to prevent exceeding the data storage capacity of the 
data logger or on-site storage device. Consult the 
manufacturers’ manuals for data transmission 
techniques. 


5.11 Cost 


Most study objectives are compromised to some extent 
by budgetary constraints. Developing a priority of 
goals, and determining the cost of these goals, will 
provide the greatest value for the funding available. 
For example, if accuracy is the main goal, but 
maintaining an uninterrupted data record is a lesser 
priority, a study design could include very high quality 


pressure transducers but no system redundancies. 
Conversely, if maintaining a continuous data record is 
the highest priority, the study may be designed to have 
more than one sensor in each well, multiple data- 
storage systems, and backup power supplies, but use 
less expensive pressure transducers. The availability 
of personnel to service the data collection sites 
commonly is the single most important decision that 
needs to be made when designing a study. If the study 
can afford frequent site visits, the accuracy of data 
and continuity of record nearly always are increased. 


5.12 A typical list of salient features of digital water level 
recorders (DWLRs) is given in Annex B for guidance. 


6 ASSEMBLY, CALIBRATION AND TESTING 


6.1 General 


The user must be familiar with the behaviour of the 
transducer, its installation, its calibration and the 
sources of error in the calibration to ensure that the 
data collected are reliable and reproducible. Depending 
on the accuracy requirements of the study, as discussed 
previously, the user may choose to perform simple field 
checks of the transducer characteristics supplied by 
the manufacturer, or perform more detailed tests on 
individual transducers in the office. Studies requiring 
greater accuracy shall require more extensive testing 
of the transducers. User-assembled transducer systems 
shall require the most extensive testing. 


6.2 Familiarization with Transducer Performance 
6.2.1 Overview 


Users should take time in the office to become familiar 
with new pressure transducers and data loggers, as well 
as with recalibrated transducers, before taking them to 
the field. Failure to do so can result in much wasted 
time in the field. Before submerging the transducer, a 
series of performance tests should be done in the office 
to determine: 


a) effects of temperature on transducer output 
(see 6.2.2), 


b) drift characteristics (see 6.2.3) 
c) hysteresis effects (see 6.2.4) 


d) location of the transducer plane (see 6.2.5), 
and 


e) standpipe effects (see 6.2.6). 
6.2.2. Effects of Temperature on Transducer Output 


To test, connect the transducer to the data logger and 
set the output interval to about 5 to 30 s, depending on 
transducer response time, with output to a computer 
so that numbers, a graph, or both appear on the screen. 
With the sensor upside down, place a few drops of 


silicone oil in the transducer port. Compare transducer 
outputs with the transducer in a normal vertical position 
(as it would be in a well), upside down position, and in 
horizontal position. A fluid mass such as silicone oil 
below the transducer plane gives a highest reading with 
the transducer upside down, an intermediate reading 
sideways, and the lowest reading in normal vertical 
position. Warm and cool the transducer, noting changes 
in output. Vary the excitation voltage over its specified 
range, noting changes in transducer output. Leave the 
transducer to record for a few days at a constant 
temperature, and then leave it to record while the 
temperature fluctuates over a temperature range that 
includes the range of temperatures expected in the field. 
For gauge or differential transducers, the output during 
these tests should not change. 


6.2.3 Drift Characteristics 


The constant temperature test is a test of drift, exclusive 
of temperature effect. 


The variable-temperature test is a test of drift including 
temperature effect. For the variable-temperature test, 
return the transducer temperature to the starting 
temperature and subtract the prorated drift to get the 
residual temperature effect. For an absolute transducer, 
subtract the output of an absolute pressure standard 
from the measurements to get drift and temperature 
effect. Sudden temperature changes applied to a 
transducer (such as, by holding the transducer in your 
hand, or lowering a transducer into a well) may cause 
unusual time-varying changes in output. These changes 
commonly are due to temperature gradients across the 
transducer element or among circuit board components. 


6.2.4 Hysteresis Effects 


Pressure tests to measure hysteresis are relatively easy 
to perform. Apply a vacuum to the transducer and 
release, noting output; then apply positive pressure and 
release, noting output when the output stabilizes. The 
difference between the stabilized outputs is hysteresis. 
Temperature tests for hysteresis can be done in a bath 
of ice and fresh water by warming the transducer and 
putting it in the bath, noting the output; then cooling 
the transducer in a bath of ice and salt water and 
returning it to the bath of ice and fresh water, noting 
the output. Temperature tests for hysteresis are difficult 
to perform on absolute transducers because air pressure 
may have changed by the time the transducer has come 
to thermal equilibrium at the three different 
temperatures. In field installations where the water level 
or temperature fluctuates rapidly, attaining the desired 
accuracy may require correcting the transducer 
readings for hysteresis. 


6.2.5 Location of the Transducer Plane 


An interesting test to perform on differential pressure 


IS 16094 : 2018 


transducers is to apply the full-scale pressure to both 
ports. If the transducers were truly differential, no 
change in output would occur. In fact, the sensing 
element has undergone a volumetric strain from the 
pressure change, and a change in output will occur. In 
silicon strain-gauge transducers, the change in output 
from application of full-scale pressure to both ports 
can be as much as 1 percent of the specified full-scale 
output. This shift is of little consequence in applications 
using high-range transducers. When using low-range 
differential transducers to obtain high resolution water 
level fluctuations, however, the shift caused by 
barometric fluctuations, which can be as much as 
0.183 m (0.6 ft) of water, can produce errors of 
] percent times the ratio of the barometric fluctuation 
to the full-scale output of the transducer. 


6.2.6 Standpipe Effects 


The next set of performance tests is done in the office 
during and after submerging the transducer. If the 
transducer has an obvious port, fill it with water. A 
tiny piece of fine screen with openings smaller than 
0.063 5 mm (0.002 5 inch) glued over the port will 
keep the water in and sand out. Inject water through 
the screen using a disposable insulin syringe, which 
has a very fine needle. The first wet test should be the 
effect of hydration on zero shift. For this test, note the 
pressure in a fixed orientation immediately after filling 
the port with water. 


The next day, note the pressure (after ensuring that the 
port is filled to the same level) in the same orientation. 
Hydration may be noticeable in some transducers that 
contain silicone oil or gel in the sensing element or in 
the port. Hydration does not cause continuing drift, 
but it is necessary to ensure that the transducer is 
hydrated before it is installed to avoid having to subtract 
this small effect from the field data. 


Perform the right-side-up, upside-down, and horizontal 
tests again, comparing the wet outputs with the dry 
outputs. The wet output minus the dry output, in 
pressure units of feet of water, gives the length of the 
port which is used to determine the transducer plane. 
If the port points down, the difference should be 
positive with the transducer upside-down and negative 
with the transducer right-side-up. Immersing the 
transducer in water should give the result of zero output 
when the transducer plane is even with the water 
surface. Another approach to determining the negative- 
standpipe effect is to connect a small-diameter copper 
or stainless-steel tube to the port, fill the tube and port 
with water, and bend the tube around until the tip is 
even with the transducer plane. Determining the 
transducer plane allows the user to become familiar 
with the positive and negative standpipe effects of the 
port. In field operations, if the port is not filled with 


IS 16094 : 2018 


water, it will capture an air bubble. The pressure inside 
the bubble does not increase and decrease linearly with 
water level changes because the bubble's air-water 
interface moves up and down. In addition, the bubble 
will gradually dissolve, producing drift. Pulling the 
transducer out of the water to check zero drift will give 
a negative reading equal to the column of water held 
in capillary tension below the transducer plane. Without 
a screen or small tube, some or all of the water may be 
shaken out, giving irreproducible results for a zero- 
drift check and different subsequent drifts for bubble 
dissolution. Not all transducers exhibit these standpipe 
effects, and the effects may be negative or positive. 
Experimentation and testing, which will determine the 
effects for a particular transducer, should be done in 
the office before going to the field. 


6.3 Linear Transducer Calibration 


A common calibration procedure for pressure 
transducers uses a standpipe to obtain different values 
of submergence and a linear regression or straight line 
fit. The equation is: 


V = a+bP (1) 
where 
V = transducer output, usually, in millivolts; 
P = pressure, in feet of water (see Table 1 for 
pressure-unit conversion factors); 
a = y-axis intercept; and 
b = slope of the best-fit line. 


Equation (1) is solved for P giving: 


2) 


In the calibration procedure, the variables P and V are 
commonly switched, giving: 


P = a'+a'V (3) 
in which a' = 1/b and b' = —a/b from Equation (2). 


This procedure is statistically incorrect because 
independent and dependent variables are not 
interchangeable. As a practical matter, however, when 
the coefficient of determination (7?) is 0.999 9 or higher, 
the coefficients programmed into the data logger are 
identical. 


Linear calibration of submersible pressure transducers 
can be done in the office using a vertical standpipe 
capped on the bottom and kept filled to overflowing 
with water, or in the field using a well. Be sure that no 
air is captured in the pressure port because, as explained 
earlier, the pressure at the diaphragm does not increase 
linearly with an increase in submergence when a bubble 
is present. Ensure that water temperature is constant 
throughout the water column, because density 
stratification in the standpipe will affect the pressure 
readings. 


Calibration in a standpipe is done by inserting and 
withdrawing the transducer while maintaining the 
water level at the top of the pipe. The cable is marked 
and measured from the transducer plane at a minimum 
of five increments over the desired range of 
submergence. The transducer is submerged in the 
standpipe to a mark on the cable, and the distance 
and transducer output are noted. Repeat the procedure 
for all the marks. The linear regression coefficients 
are determined using a hand calculator or a 
spreadsheet program. Enter the coefficients into the 
data logger, and repeat the submergence procedure 


as a final calibration check. For the insertion and 


withdrawal phases, transducer output may not be 
identical for a given submergence depth. This 
difference arises from hysteresis and lack of 
repeatability in positioning the transducer at precisely 
the same depth. Some experimentation is needed to 
determine positioning errors. In a standpipe 
calibration, it may be difficult to maintain or vary the 
temperature of the transducer in a controlled way. The 
transducer may also be calibrated in an observation 
well, as described in 7.8. 


Table 1 Pressure Unit Conversion Factors 
(Clause 6.3 and A-1.3) 


SI No. Multiply FPS” MKS” N/m? Temperature 
Ib/inch? kg/m? (pascal) Specification 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Ib/inch? (psi) 1 1.422 x 10! 6.895 x 10° = 
ii) ft of H,O 4.336 x 107 3.048 x 10? 2.989 x 10° 4°C 
iii) inch of Hg 4.912 x 107 3.453 x 10? 3.377 x 10° 0°C 
iv) mm of Hg 1.934 x 10? 1.359 x 10? 1.333 x 10° 0°C 
v) atmosphere (atm) 1.470 x 10! 1.033 x 10* 1.013 x 10 E 
vi) N/m? (pascal) 1.450 x 10+ 1.020 x 10! 1 = 
vii) bar 1.450 x 10! 1.020 x 10* 1.000 x 10° = 
viii) kg/m? 1.422 x 10! 1 9.807 a 


FPS: foot-pound-second measurement system. 


? MKS: meter-kilogram-second measurement system. One kilogram mass under standard gravitational acceleration. 


10 


6.4 Sources of Error in Linear Calibrations 


The problem with linear regression for calibration of 
silicon strain-gauge pressure transducers is that the 
procedure leaves significant residual errors while 
giving the false appearance of a good fit when the 
calibration points are plotted on the same graph as the 
straight-line fit. In fact, the r? for linear regressions 
can exceed 0.999 99, while errors of as much as 
+ 0.3 percent exist between the calibration points and 
the individual linear-regression equations. Major 
sources of error in linear calibration are thermal effects 
on the transducer and non-linear response of the 
transducer. Different manufacturers’ transducers 
exhibit different curvature and temperature effects in 
their calibrations. The critical test in the calibration 
procedure involves plotting residuals of the calibration 
equation minus the calibration points. When the range 
of that plot is less than the accuracy required by the 
user, the calibration is adequate. 


Thermal effects in a transducer can arise when water 
temperatures change at the transducer. In wells and 
piezometers, geologic features, such as, faults, fractures 
and joints can provide conduits of high hydraulic 
conductivity. If the head varies between these features 
with time, water can flow vertically in the well, 
producing temperature changes. Well screens or gravel 
packs spanning aquifers with intervening confining 
units can allow flow within the borehole in response 
to nearby pumping owing to differences in hydraulic 
conductivity and specific storage between the aquifers. 
For example, a temperature change of 3.4?C (38?F) in 
15 min was observed at a depth of 51 m (167 ft) in an 
alluvial aquifer in response to turning on a pump in a 
nearby well. 


Inadequate or non-existent temperature compensation 
produces thermal effects in pressure transducers. 
Bridge networks in transducers commonly are 
compensated to: 


a) counteract the effects of temperature changes 
of the transducer on the output voltage; 

b) achieve an output voltage very close to zero 
for zero-differential or absolute input; and 

C) pressure, and achieve a selected output voltage 


for full-scale pressure input. 


The compensating networks commonly consist of 
series and parallel resistors, some of which exhibit 
temperature effects opposite to those of the transducer. 
Because a compensated design is a solution for the 
average of a transducer model, and because individual 
transducers vary, a particular design will reduce some 
errors and, in the process, introduce other, smaller 
errors. A compensated design may make it difficult to 
use a transducer below a manufacturer's error 


11 


IS 16094 : 2018 


specifications and may make temperature correction 
by the user much more difficult than uncompensated 
designs. Some manufacturers apply a simple linear shift 
or offset for temperature compensation. Such 
compensation does not usually interfere with user 
determined temperature correction of transducers to 
achieve higher accuracy. 


6.5 Temperature Corrected Transducer Calibration 


A procedure that is more complicated than linear 
calibration, but is entirely manageable, can reduce 
residual error to + 0.03 percent of full-scale output or 
less. The pressure transducers are calibrated at five 
pressures at each of three temperatures in a water bath 
in a Dewar flask, insulated water jug, or wide-mouth 
thermos bottle (see Fig. 3). A calibrated field standard 
(precision transducer) with specified accuracy of 
+ 0.01 percent of the full-scale reading is used with a 
hand pump. These components are connected either 
by plastic tubing and barbed nylon fittings or by 
6.35 mm (0.25 inch) diameter drip irrigation tubing 
and fittings that also distribute pressure to several 
transducers. A data logger collects and stores data from 
several pressure transducers (through differential 
analogue inputs), from the field standard, and from 
several temperature sensors in the water bath (through 
single-ended analogue inputs), transmitting the data 
to a computer screen. 


Immerse a precision thermistor connected to a display 
with a specified accuracy (+0.01°C or +0.02°F) in the 
bath for calibrating the temperature sensors. Immerse 
the transducers in the water bath, allow them to 
equilibrate for about half-an-hour with an occasional 
stir to maintain even temperature distribution, and make 
a set of nearly simultaneous measurements of all the 
sensors for each of five pressures over the pressure 
range of interest. Repeat the measurements at two more 
temperatures, allowing half-an-hour equilibration at 
each temperature. 


Because the field pressure standard is an absolute 
transducer, the calibration is straightforward. It has a 
tare switch for subtracting starting pressure; thus it can 
be used to calibrate differential transducers if the series 
of five pressure measurements is made reasonably 
quickly and the tare value is checked at the end of the 
five measurements. Reset the tare at each new 
temperature before each set of five pressure 
measurements. As a practical matter, atmospheric 
pressure does not change rapidly enough to be a 
problem in calibrating differential transducers, 
although sudden opening of doors (which cause 
changes in barometric pressure) should be avoided 
during a set of nearly simultaneous measurements. 
Note that the standard can be permanently damaged 
by overpressurization. Although some standards have 


IS 16094 : 2018 


Key 

A pressure standard 

B precision thermister display 
C data logger 

D hand vacuum pump 

E  Dewar flask 


Fic. 3 EQUIPMENT USED FOR TEMPERATURE CORRECTED TRANSDUCER CALIBRATION 


a pressure-warning alarm that can be set, it is wise to 
choose a pump that cannot overpressure the standard. 
A bath filled with finely crushed ice and just enough 
de-ionized water to make slush can be within + 0.04°C 
of 0°C. Because of its repeatability and usefulness in 
calibrating transducers for temperature, the ice-water 
bath is a good choice for one of the calibration 
temperatures. Record the output time for each pressure 
manually, along with the readings from the pressure 
standard and precision thermometer, and use them to 
edit the data after they are transferred to a spreadsheet 
program. This calibration procedure produces values 
of voltage for ranges of pressure and temperature. 


Multiple regression is used to determine the calibration 
equation for each pressure transducer. An equation that 
can reduce residual error with respect to the standard 
to +0.03 percent over the calibration range of water 
level fluctuation is: 


V=a+bP+cP?+dT=eT + fTP ...(4) 
where 
V = transducer output, in millivolts; 


12 


P 
T 


— pressure; 


temperature; and 


a, b, c, d, e and f are regression coefficients. 
Solving Equation (4) for pressure gives: 


(fT +b) - 4c(a-- dT * eT? - V) 
2c 


P=-(fT +b)+ 
(5) 


The value of r? using Equations (4) and (5) can exceed 
0.999 999 9. In the spreadsheet, columns P?, T ? and 
TP are generated from the data columns of T and P. 
Multiple regression is then used to generate the 
coefficients a, b, c, d, e and f. The coefficients c, e and 
f of P?, T? and TP are all small, but the removal of any 
of these terms leaves a much larger residual than that 
from Equation (5). If a temperature sensor is installed 
with the pressure transducer or built into its housing, 
Equation (5) can be programmed into a data logger or 
calculated in a spreadsheet to give temperature- 
corrected output. Before removing a group of pressure 
transducers from the calibration equipment, check the 


entire calibration procedure by entering the coefficients 
and checking the temperature-corrected output against 
the output from the pressure standard for representative 
temperatures and pressures. 


The pressure standard and precision thermometer are 
expensive. However, if many transducers are to be 
calibrated or if accuracy of +0.1 percent of full-scale 
or better is required, the convenience and accuracy of 
a pressure standard are well worth the cost. 


7 INSTALLATION 


7.1 General 


For the successful collection of data, the submersible 
transducer and data recording system must be correctly 
installed. This clause provides general guidelines and 
suggestions, including the proper care and handling 
of transducers, considerations for designing shelters 
for equipment, discussion of suspension systems and 
desiccation systems and field procedures for calibrating 
the transducer and optimizing the transducer’s position 
in the well. 


7.2 Care and Handling 


Proper care and handling of a transducer is essential 
to its reliable operation. Most submersible pressure 
transducers come with a factory warranty, with specific 
instructions on necessary maintenance, and with a 
warning about mishandling. Failure to follow the 
instructions and warnings could cause irreparable 
damage to the transducer, void any factory warranty, 
and cause the corruption or loss of valuable data. The 
most common causes of damage are sudden impacts, 
freezing or overheating of the transducer, and sudden, 
extreme pressure changes (water hammer). Improper 
electrical connections also are a common source of 
transducer damage or failure. 


Sharp impacts can break the body of the transducer 
and dislodge or break delicate electronic components. 
Keep the transducer packaged in its original shipping 
container until it is ready to be installed. After removing 
it from the packaging, take precautions to prevent the 
transducer from being dropped. Avoid sharp contact 
with the sides of the well or piezometer casing during 
installation and calibration. Do not over torque a 
transducer when fitting it to an auxiliary threaded 
device such as a counterweight or packer housing. 


Exposure to temperature extremes beyond the 
manufacturer’s design specifications also can damage 
a transducer. Freezing or overheating can damage the 
sensor’s electronics and, in extreme cases, damage its 
waterproofing by causing warping or cracking, 
disintegration or melting of the waterproofing material. 
The severity of damage to the waterproofing material 


13 


IS 16094 : 2018 


of the transducer depends on the methods and materials 
used. Exposure to temperature extremes prior to 
installation can be avoided by storing the transducer 
in a cool, temperature-controlled environment. Most 
transducers come from the manufacturer with 
specifications as to the extremes of the operating 
temperature. The transducers should not be operated 
under, or exposed to, conditions that exceed the design 
limitations. Submersible transducers used to monitor 
changes in water level commonly are designed to 
function in the range of —20 to 50°C (0 to 120°F), 
though transducers operating through a greater range 
of temperature extremes are available. 


Most submersible transducers are designed to monitor 
pressure in a variety of fluids; the specifications may 
state that the transducer can be operated at temperatures 
below 0°C (32°F), but it should be remembered that 
fluids other than water have different freezing points. 
As common sense dictates, transducers submerged in 
water generally cannot be operated at or below freezing 
temperatures because ice crystals will form and damage 
the transducer. This prohibits their use in surface-water 
applications where temperatures can fall below water’s 
freezing point. 


Sudden, extreme changes in pressure also can damage 
a submersible transducer. A common mistake is letting 
a transducer free-fall into the water during installation. 
Instead, gently lower the transducer into the water to 
the desired submergence depth. Be aware that 
transducers installed in wells subjected to frequently 
repeated and significant changes in water levels can 
show signs of wear sooner than usual. This is common 
with vibrating-wire transducers or transducers that use 
a diaphragm, on a long-term basis, to monitor 
observation wells located near pumping centres. 
Frequent, rapid rises and falls in water levels can cause 
the wire or diaphragm to fatigue at an accelerated rate, 
a situation which usually manifests itself in an 
accelerated rate of calibration drift. 


Another common cause of damage to an installed 
transducer is overpressuring. The factory specifications 
commonly list three sets of pressure limitations. The 
first is the calibration range of the sensor. Operating 
the transducer slightly outside of this range will not 
damage it. The second pressure specification is the 
operating range, commonly twice the calibration range 
for silicon strain-gauge transducers. For example, a 
transducer designed for sensing 0 to 34.5 kPa 
(0 to 5 psi) will provide output up to 68.9 kPa (10 psi) 
without damage. However, the transducer calibration 
may not hold for pressures above the specified 
calibration range. The third type of pressure limitation 
is the maximum pressure that a transducer can be 
subjected to before being physically damaged. This 
limit, which varies from one manufacturer or 


IS 16094 : 2018 


transducer design to another, is usually 2 to 6 times 
the calibration range. This equates to 68.9 to 206.8 kPa 
(10 to 30 psi) for a transducer designed to monitor 
0 to 34.5 kPa (0 to 5 psi). If a transducer is subjected 
to pressures exceeding the operating range, but not 
exceeding maximum pressure tolerance, the unit may 
not be damaged, but data can be lost. Once the pressure 
falls to within the operating range, the transducer will 
recommence correct output, because only the output 
range of the electronic components has been exceeded. 
In summary, to minimize damage to a transducer, 
strictly adhere to the manufacturer's specifications for 
care and handling. 


7.3 Shelter 


Data loggers, power systems, data cables from the 
transducers, well casings and other equipment must 
be protected from weather extremes, from damage by 
animals and insects, and from vandalism. It may also 
be necessary to shelter a person servicing the site from 
extreme weather conditions. In addition, equipment for 
some study locations in scenic areas must blend in with 
the local surroundings. All of these factors must be 
considered in designing an equipment shelter. Fig. 4 
shows one type of shelter design. This design can be 
used when there are no requirements for limiting visual 
impact, there is minimal risk of vandalism, and there 
is very little other equipment needing shelter. This 
design mounts directly to the metal casing protecting 
the observation well or wells. The fibreglass 
environmental box provides enough space for one data 
logger, one backup storage module, one 12 V battery, 
one desiccant chamber and one solar panel charger and 
regulator. It does not provide shelter to the servicing 
groundwater scientist. A 2 m by 2 m (6.6 ft by 6.6 ft) 
shelter will provide ample space for equipment and 
personnel. Transducer and logger systems small 
enough to install in the well eliminate the need for 
above-ground shelters and should be considered for 
use in areas where vandalism is a problem. Some data 
loggers are designed to fit on top of the well casing 
but inside the outer metal protective casing, whereas 
others are designed to be suspended in the well, either 
above or below the water level. 


7.4 Power Requirements 


The amount and type of power required to operate a 
pressure-sensing system are specific to the instruments 
used at a given site. The type and number of transducers 
used, the type of recording device and the frequency 
at which the data are recorded all affect the power 
requirements. 


Each type of transducer and each data logger has its 
own power consumption rate, usually expressed in 
milliampare. Transducers, data loggers and other 


14 


Key 

A solar panel 

B shelter with power supply and data logger 
C shelter with vent tube and desiccant 

D well head 


Fic. 4 SHELTER DESIGN FOR A PRESSURE 
TRANSDUCER INSTALLATION 


electronic components also have specified voltage 
ranges for their operation. The user should refer to the 
owner’s manual for an instrument’s power 
requirements. Instrument manufacturers commonly 
have staff available to advise on the best way to 
configure an instrumentation system. Most systems are 
operated using dc, but some sophisticated systems may 
require a combination of dc and ac power. The user- 
defined scan rate and recording frequency of a data 
logger program affect power consumption. Power 
consumption will be greater for installations in which 


the data logger is connected to more than one pressure 
transducer. 


Proper grounding and shielding of the transducer, 
supplemental instruments and data logger will 
minimize errors. Grounding and shielding should 
include protection of the power supply system. A 
wiring diagram illustrating how the sensors are 
connected to the data logger will save time when 
changes occur, and also will allow someone who is 
not familiar with the site to troubleshoot or replace 
equipment. Because data can be lost as a result of poor 
wiring connections, all connections should be checked 
and tightened periodically. Daily temperature 
fluctuations in the instrument shelter can cause terminal 
screws to work loose. 


Rechargeable batteries commonly are used to power 
the instruments. A good practice is to record the voltage 
of the battery or other power supply at regular intervals 
in order to monitor power consumption to help evaluate 
the adequacy and performance of the power-supply 
system. Using batteries minimizes problems caused by 
power outages or surges. When a battery is the primary 
source of power, a solar panel array, or a battery charger 
attached to ac wiring can be used. The power source 
must be compatible with the type of battery used and 
must be adequate for the power consumption 
requirements of the transducer and data logger. For 
systems that have large power consumption rates, ac 
power may be needed as the primary power source. In 
this case, batteries can provide emergency power for 
short periods of time. 


7.5 Hanging Transducers in Wells 


The transducer should be suspended in place in the 
well or piezometer from a stable fixed point called the 
hanging point (see Fig. 5), secured either to the well 
casing itself, to the inside of an instrument shelter, or 
to the protective outer casing of the well. A pressure 
transducer may be suspended by its electrical cable in 
wells where the depth to water is small, but for greater 
depths the electrical cable may expand or contract, 
changing the depth at which the transducer is 
suspended. For deeper installations, or where the 
manufacturer requires it, a suspension system is 
necessary. Where local sediment compaction or 
regional land subsidence is occurring, differential 
movement of the suspension system and the well can 
be a problem if the suspension system is attached to 
an instrument shelf resting on land surface. The 
suspension line must be secured to a point attached to 
the well casing. This will allow the transducer to move 
along with the well casing. One method of attaching 
the cable to the wellhead is to use nylon wire ties or 
stainless-steel hose clamps secured to a hook shaped 
nail designed for electrical conduit. Hose clamps can 


15 


IS 16094 : 2018 


be used with mesh cable clamps for added security. 
Experiment to make sure that pulling on the clamp 
makes the clamp tighter. 


Some transducers come with the suspension cable, vent 
tube and transducer wiring incorporated into a single 
unit. Other transducers need a separate suspension line, 
which can be made of stainless-steel aircraft cable. A 
high-test fishing line, preferably made from plastic- 
coated stainless-steel cable, also works well for this 
purpose. Cable stretch is seldom a problem for 
suspension lengths of less than 100 m (300 ft). A cable 
grip, available from an electrical supply outlet, will 
hold the vent tube and wiring cables in place for either 
type of suspension system. The suspension method is 
necessarily site specific and transducer specific. Secure 
all cables, vent tubes and suspension lines so that they 
do not slip while still permitting the vent tube to be 
open. Mark all cables and suspension lines to help 
determine if there has been any slippage, and to provide 
a way to precisely measure how much slippage has 
occurred. Cable slip can be detected by marking the 
cable with indelible marker or contrasting-colour 
silicone rubber. Reference this mark to a fixed point 
such as the measuring point (MP) for the well. 


An MP mark can be filed or sawed from the outside of 
the casing to just touching the inside edge of the casing. 
Depth to water is measured from this point. Using the 
highest point on the well casing makes surveying the 
elevation of the MP easier. At well heads with pumps, 
concentric casings and other complications, a different 
measuring point may have to be chosen, marked and 
noted. Two considerations are ease of surveying (either 
by global positioning system or by levelling), and the 
ability to precisely align the holding point of the tape 
or electrical sounder. 


Some transducers should be fitted with an appropriate 
ballast weight to counteract the buoyancy of the 
transducer and cables when submerged. An inexpensive 
alternative is to slide stainless-steel nuts and washers 
over the suspension cable, resting them on top of the 
transducer. Washers should have an outside diameter 
of approximately the same dimension as the transducer. 
If a weight is attached below the transducer, the weight 
should be attached with a fine wire securely enough to 
stay on while lowering and raising the transducer, but 
weakly enough so that it would break free and allow 
the transducer to be retrieved, if the weight became 
stuck in the well. It requires some experimentation to 
determine the amount of weight necessary to keep the 
cable taut without breaking any electrical wires. Select 
ballast-weight materials carefully to avoid introducing 
unwanted constituents to the well. Do not use lead or 
plastic-coated lead weights. Even if the well is not 
being currently monitored for water quality 
constituents, it may be in the future. 


IS 16094 : 2018 


Key 

land surface 

hanging depth 

set point 

depth to water below land surface 
depth to water below measuring point 
submergence depth 

submersible transducer 

top of casing 


ronmmoouc 


casing open to aquifer 
pressure port plane 


I measuring point 
J hanging point 

K suspension cable 
L well casing 

M water level 

N 

(0) 


Fic. 5 SUBMERSIBLE TRANSDUCER IN AN OBSERVATION WELL 


Transducers can be hung 100 m (300 ft) in a well using 
just the electrical cable without unwanted stretch in 
the cable and with an analogue signal in the millivolt 
range. Greater depths may be achievable with 
experimentation. Problems to address include, 


a) 


signal degradation from noise in long 
electrical cables; 


b) resistive line loss and changes in line 
resistance with temperature changes in 
excitation leads; and 

c) internal breakage and separation of electrical 


conductors. Conductor breakage can be 
avoided by attaching the electrical cable to a 


stainless-steel cable with wire ties so that the 
electrical cable is initially slightly relaxed and 
will not be under tension when the assembly 
is in the well. 


The principal objective of selecting a submergence 
depth at which to hang a transducer during installation 
is to ensure that water levels do not exceed the 
transducer’s operational range or fall below it during 
the monitoring period. Historical water level 
measurements can be helpful when designing a long- 
term water level monitoring program . The 
determination of expected daily or seasonal extremes 
for a given well is easier if many measurements have 


been made. Thus, the appropriate range for a transducer 
can be selected, and its optimum position estimated. 
To minimize potential for errors and simplify 
subsequent data processing, reposition the transducer 
infrequently. Under ideal conditions, the transducer can 
be hung at a single depth for the entire monitoring 
period, although it may be necessary to reposition a 
transducer once or twice during a season, especially 
when monitoring wells in areas where seasonal ground 
water pumping prevails. In some locations, it is possible 
to have a range in water level of 30 to 60 m (100 to 
200 ft) during a year. A transducer with a large range 
in output may be used; however, measurement 
resolution decreases as the transducer’s range increases. 
In this instance, the data requirements must be 
considered. If high resolution is required, a transducer 
with a smaller range will be needed, thus requiring 
that it can be repositioned more frequently so that the 
water level remains within its range. 


7.6 Measuring System Drift 


As a means of checking system drift, periodically 
measure water levels in the well containing the pressure 
transducer using a steel tape or sounder. Drift is 
calculated by determining the difference between the 
recorded water level and the actual measured water level. 
As discussed in 7.5, this drift includes possible cable 
stretch and slip. The effect of cable stretch and slip can 
be measured by pulling the transducer above the water 
level and making a reading. The difference between the 
offset and the drift is the cable stretch and slip. This test 
requires that the transducer plane and the port not be 
separated vertically, or that some technique be employed 
to alleviate this discrepancy. If the port is below the 
transducer plane, the transducer may measure the 
negative gauge pressure of the water column. If the 
transducer is jostled, some or all of the water may fall 
out of the port, resulting in a smaller magnitude negative 
pressure, which may not be repeatable from test to test. 
If water is lost out the port, a residual error will remain 
after re-submergence until the compressed air bubble 
dissolves. This problem can be alleviated by following 
the procedures described in 6. 


7.7 Desiccation Systems 


For many strain-gauge transducers, it is necessary to 
keep moisture from entering the transducer’s vent tube. 
Connected to the inside of the transducer at the 
diaphragm, the vent tube transmits atmospheric 
pressure changes to the pressure-sensing unit in the 
transducer housing. Because vent tubes also act as 
direct conduits for moisture to contact the transducer’s 
components, an adequate desiccation system is 
necessary to eliminate faulty data and moisture 
damage. Many transducers are supplied with an air 


17 


IS 16094 : 2018 


desiccation system, but because some are inadequate 
for very humid conditions, the person installing and 
maintaining the transducer must ensure that the air 
desiccation system functions properly. An adequate 
desiccation system is essential for obtaining reliable, 
long-term data and for extending the transducer’s life. 
Where conditions are very humid, for a long vent tube, 
or for a large diameter vent tube, it may be necessary 
to install a supplemental desiccant system. Small 
diameter vent tubes are highly susceptible to blockage 
by the accumulation of water droplets in the tube, 
which will cut off or adversely affect the 
communication of atmospheric pressure to the 
transducer, thus causing erroneous data. Eventually, 
these droplets make their way down into the transducer, 
wetting the components and permanently damaging 
the sensor. Because long vent tubes or large diameter 
vent tubes hold a larger volume of air, they require a 
desiccating system of greater capacity. When the 
desiccation system is housed inside a weather proof 
shelter, provisions for communication of changing 
atmospheric pressure must be made by making vent 
holes in the shelter; these can be covered with a flexible 
diaphragm that will allow for the transmission of 
changes in atmospheric pressure to the vent tube and, 
at the same time, provide an impermeable moisture 
barrier. If absolute and sealed-reference transducers 
are used, a desiccation system is not needed because 
these devices have no vent tubes. 


The internal wire bundle can be used as a vent tube to 
depths of more than 30 m (100 ft). The cable can be 
vented below its hanging point in the well by inserting 
into the wire bundle a syringe needle (with the sharp 
tip ground smooth to avoid penetrating any insulated 
internal wires) and sealing the hole with silicone rubber 
cement and electrical tape. A small desiccant pack can 
be put in a 60 ml syringe-bore (after removing the 
plunger), and the plunger end of the syringe can be 
sealed with a partially relaxed, thin plastic glove to 
make a pressure-transmitting, humidity isolating 
chamber. Some experimentation squeezing on the 
glove and noting the change in transducer output will 
be necessary to ensure that both positive and negative 
barometric changes are transmitted down the vent tube 
or wire bundle. If the desiccant chamber is used on a 
transducer cable below the hanging point, seal the end 
of the cable with silicone rubber cement and tape and, 
using a hand pump or syringe plunger, perform a 
vacuum test of the seal integrity. 


7.8 Transducer Field Calibration 


Although most transducers are calibrated at the factory 
and come with the manufacturer’s calibration 
specifications, an individual calibration check should 
still be done in the field as each transducer is installed. 


IS 16094 : 2018 


A field calibration check incorporates the effects of all 
system components and local environmental 
conditions, including water density. In addition, the 
calibration for the transducer's entire pressure range 
should be checked periodically, whenever water level 
measurements show that the calibration is not holding, 
and when the transducer is removed from the well at 
the end of data collection. Perform the calibration after 
installing the instrumentation so that any signal 
alteration that might occur between the transducer and 
the data logger is incorporated. Set the data logger to 
display the transducer readings at as high a resolution 
as possible. 


Calibrate the transducer in the well by submerging it, 
lowering and then raising it by known increments and 
by comparing this incremental distance change with 
the transducer output change. By getting multiple 
readings at each calibration point and by moving the 
transducer up and down in the well, values are obtained 
that will be ‘averaged’ during the regression 
computation, thus minimizing bias associated with 
hysteresis in the system. Use a minimum of five points, 
in each direction, covering the calibration range or the 
operational range of the transducer. Determine the 
effects of pressure hysteresis by taking measurements 
while raising and lowering the transducer through the 
entire operational range. 


Moving the transducer and cable in the water column 
displaces water in the well. Small-diameter wells in 
less-permeable formations are the most prone to having 
water levels altered by displacement. Transducer 
readings should be used for calibration only after the 
water level in the well has stabilized between 
calibration points. The stabilization time will depend 
on the permeability of the geologic formation, and the 
ratio of the transducer and cable diameter to the well's 
diameter. Verify a stable water level with a calibrated 
measuring tape. After stability is attained, take several 
readings (minimum of 3) of the transducer output, then 
move the transducer to the next calibration point and 
repeat the process, again waiting for the water level to 
stabilize. 


Take care to precisely measure the distance the 
transducer is raised and lowered to minimize calibration 
errors caused by errors in distance measurements. Check 
the measuring tape for accuracy. 


Use a standard worksheet, such as shown in Fig. 6, to 
record field calibration data. Some of the positions in 
Fig. 6 have been completed as an example. Note that 
the calibration was not checked for the transducer's 
full range; this is acceptable if the expected water level 
range is less than the range of the transducer or if the 
calibration is being checked for a range of data 
previously recorded. 


18 


Even though the transducer may be able to withstand 
pressures greater than the operating range specified, 
the calibration slope of the instrument may be different 
above its calibration range. If it is expected that the 
calibration range will be exceeded, a separate 
calibration can be made for that range. Preferably, a 
transducer will be selected that is designed to work 
under the extremes of water level fluctuation expected 
for the site, thus avoiding the problem of exceeding 
the calibration range. 


After obtaining the calibration points, a calibration 
equation for the transducer can be easily determined 
by computing a linear regression using any basic 
statistical software package. Because the slope and 
offset of this equation only converts the transducer's 
output into its submergence depth, an additional 
correction must be added to the calibration equation 
to convert submergence depth to depth below land 
surface (DBLS). Obtain this by comparing the 
measured water level, after the transducer is set in its 
final position (set point), with the converted output 
from the transducer (depth below water surface) and 
applying this to the regression equation. The general 
form of a linear calibration equation is y 2 mx — b. The 
final calibration equation is as follows: 


DBLS = S,- MS, + O, (6) 


where 


DBLS = depth to water below land surface datum, in 
units of length; 


Sp — set point distance, in units of length; the 
measured distance below land surface datum 
of the pressure transducer at the time of 
installation; 


M = transducer output, in units of pressure, 
length, or millivolts at a specific time; 


S, = slope of the generalized least-squares 
regression equation, in units/length; and 
O, = offset (zero intercept) in the regression 


equation, in units of length. 


The resulting equation can be applied to the output of 
the transducer either by converting directly to water 
level as DBLS in the data logger at the site or, later, by 
applying the equation as the data is adjusted for the 
database. 


Document all changes to the data logger program, 
and make information available in the field to allow 
on-site determination of the potential for over-ranging 
or water levels falling below the transducer position. 
A preprinted form should include: 


a) 


the altitude of the land surface and measuring 
point; 


IS 16094 : 2018 


Data Processing No. 


Site name:|i.e. site name and location coordinates 


M.P. used:|i.e. measuring point elevation Party: 
Date(mmiddiyyyy):| — — — —  f[Juiandate| —— | 


Measuring Device: |i.e. calibrated steel tape or electric tape 


Transducer Information 
Length: SerialNo| —  ]| Outut| | 
Range: Conversion: 


Calibration marks (Describe mark used on transducer cable for measuring distance moved during calibration process): 


Out-of-waterreading:[ | SetPointreading:| — 1] ScanRate:[| —  ] Reset*[ YIN ] 


Water Distance 

Level |Calibration| Between Total 

(DBLS) Mark Marks Distance | Readings Comments 
0 


ES 
e 
e 


WL rise of 0.04 during calibration 


FiG. 6 EXAMPLE OF CALIBRATION WORKSHEET FOR SUBMERSIBLE TRANSDUCERS 


b) the distances between the measuring pointand Take the field form to the field for data retrieval and 


hanging point, set point, and the hung depth; periodic water level measurements. 

and Calibration-slope checks are possible in the field on a 
c) an inventory of equipment installed at the differential transducer without pulling the transducer 

well. from the well. After removing the desiccant, connect a 


19 


IS 16094 : 2018 


hand pump and pressure standard to the vent tube. 
Apply a vacuum in increments, noting the approximate 
time to stabilize the pressure and the pressure value 
from the data logger. The data logger will exhibit 
increasing pressures that correspond with decreasing 
pressures in the pressure standard. Changes in time to 
stabilization would indicate possible leakage or wiring 
deterioration in the transducer cable. 


7.9 Optimizing Measurement System Performance 


In some cases, an analysis of the individual components 
of the pressure measurement system, either by 
laboratory calibration or by calculation from dc circuit 
analysis, may indicate a total error exceeding the 
desired accuracy of the system. Several procedures can 
be followed to enhance overall system performance 
and reduce the total error to the desired accuracy. These 
include the following: 


a) Use an in-place system calibration to 
simultaneously measure the combined effects 
of the transducer and associated measurement 
equipment. Lower a transducer into a well- 
bore to different submergence depths; an 
example of this technique is described in 7.8. 
b) Before recording the output of the transducer, 
increase the delay time following excitation. 
The output voltage curve of the transducer, 
as a function of time, must be established to 
determine when its output is stable with 


respect to the measurand. 


Calibrate the transducer either at the operating 
temperature or over a controlled temperature 
range so that the data can be adjusted for the 
effects of temperature, which must be 
monitored simultaneously. 

d) Use a constant current instead of voltage to 
excite the transducer. Establish current 
settings which ensure that the voltage across 
the transducer is within specified tolerances 
for the unit. This technique is especially 
advantageous when operating transducers 
over long lead lines. 

Calibrate the transducer over a narrower 
pressure (and temperature) range than its full 
range specification. 


e) 


Calibrate and operate the pressure transducer 
in an overpressure range to enhance its 
sensitivity. 

Calibrate the transducer with the full length 
of its lead wires attached so that the calibration 
will include the resistance of the leads. 
Calibrate the transducer at the excitation 
voltage or current to be used during field data 
collection. 


g) 


20 


h) Calibrate the transducer at a variety of 
temperatures and pressures. Fit a non-linear, 
multiple-parameter (pressure and temperature) 
regression equation (second order or higher 
polynomial) to the data used to convert 
transducer output to an equivalent pressure. 
j) Use one channel of the datalogger to monitor 
a precision wire-round resistor. Use this 
apparent change in resistance to correct for 
offset and drift in the data logger. 

k) Apply power to the transducer for several 
hours (burn-in time) before calibrating and 
using it. 

m) Use proper grounding and shielding 
techniques. 


Because the temperature error commonly is 
predictable, the pressure measurements can be adjusted 
if the temperature is recorded simultaneously. Another 
method of improving system accuracy is to artificially 
control the temperature of the transducer and associated 
measurement equipment by keeping the equipment in 
a heated enclosure maintained at a constant 
temperature. If the ambient temperature can be kept 
unchanged, then this source of error can be eliminated. 


8 DATA COLLECTION 


8.1 General 


Because operating a transducer installation (or 
installations) in the field consists primarily of following 
six interrelated components, an overall field operation 
plan must be developed that integrates all of these 
components: 


a) The optimum frequency of visits to a site 
depends on the type of instrumentation being 
used and the accuracy required in the study. 
The use of data loggers without supplemental 
data storage modules or telemetry can limit 
the length of time between field visits. 

b) The frequency and types of field checks also 
are based on the type of instrumentation being 
used and the needs of the study. 

c) The data-retrieval method and equipment may 
dictate, to some extent, the frequency of visits. 
d) The data-retrieval method depends, somewhat, 
on the instrumentation and study needs. 

e) Field measurements used to verify instrument 
output may dictate the frequency of visits, as 
well as the method and frequency of data 


retrieval. 

Appropriate field documentation is important 
for transducer calibration and calibration 
checks, for recording equipment malfunctions, 


for recording changing site conditions, and for 
data computation. 


After considering these components, and weighing 
their importance, a strategy for field operation can be 
implemented. 


8.2 Frequency of Visits 


Site visits should be scheduled on the basis of the 
study's needs, stability of the transducer, and storage 
limitations of the recording device. For example, for a 
study involving long-term monitoring of ground water 
levels, visits may be routinely scheduled at 4-8 week 
intervals. This visitation frequency will usually provide 
enough verification measurements to document 
transducer drift over time and over a range in water 
level. Visit the site frequently enough so that the 
primary and back-up recording devices will not run 
out of storage memory. On the other hand, a short- 
term study, such as an aquifer test, requires the operator 
to be on-site continuously to make frequent verification 
measurements and instrument checks. 


8.3 Field Checks 


During field site visits, check the instrumentation and 
recording system, and verify the operation of the power 
supply, transducers and other sensors. One simple set 
of checks includes comparing the voltage from the solar 
panel or ac trickle charger to the voltage from the 
regulator to the battery and comparing the voltage of 
the power supply to the voltage present at the 
instrument port on the recording device. Inspect the 
condition of the suspension system, well casing, and 
instrument shelter. If the suspension system shows 
signs of slippage, measure the amount of movement 
of the mark that has occurred and correct the data 
accordingly. Excessive slip can damage the vent tube 
or cable, or both, which can result in faulty or lost data, 
or damage to the transducer. Damage to the well casing 
can cause a change in the measuring point, or may 
indicate possible damage to the transducer or its cable. 
Damage to the shelter that could expose the enclosed 
instrumentation to the weather needs to be repaired as 
soon as possible. 


Observations of land use, or changes in the general 
area of the site can be important for data analysis, 
record computation, and data interpretation. These 
Observations could be notes on land-use changes, 
construction of new wells nearby, notes of flowmeter 
readings from production wells, mention of known 
floods or earthquakes that occurred since the last visit, 
or any other item that might have a bearing on data 
collection. 


8.4 Data Recording and Retrieval 


The study's data needs determine the recording 


21 


IS 16094 : 2018 


frequency for each parameter. Record each parameter 
or nearly simultaneous group of parameters with the 
date and time to prevent many hours of file 
manipulation and editing as well as potential 
misinterpretation of the location of gaps in the data. 
Battery voltage and temperature are valuable ancillary 
data. In some types of data loggers, failure to maintain 
the appropriate battery voltage can cause permanent 
loss of the recorded data or the data logger program. 
Excessive shelter temperature, in particular, adversely 
affects the operation of the data logger and power 


supply. 


Electronic data can be retrieved in several ways, both 
remotely and on-site. Remote retrieval or transmission 
can be accomplished with satellite data collection 
platforms, radio transmitters, and telephone modems. 
Data can be retrieved on-site by using a portable 
computer with data retrieval software, by downloading 
data from a data logger to a back-up storage device, or 
by exchanging a fresh storage device (data storage 
module or data flash card) for the one at the site, or by 
a combination of these techniques. The fact that the 
technology in this area is advancing rapidly precludes 
a detailed discussion of these systems. 


The ground water inspection sheet shown in Fig. 7 was 
designed for multiple well sites and data loggers that 
record multiple channels. Commonly a data logger has 
two types of data storage, temporary and permanent. 
Temporary storage is used when the measuring 
frequency is greater than the recording frequency. For 
example, the data logger may be reading sensor output 
every 5 min, but recording only hourly values. By 
recording both sets of values, the person servicing the 
well can see a more frequently updated transducer 
value for comparison with a measured water level. For 
instance, if water level were changing quickly, an 
hourly reading by the data logger would not be 
adequate for comparison with the actual water level 
measurement made by the field person unless it were 
made just after the hour. Remember that the purpose 
of making a physical measurement is to compare it 
with the sensor output to determine drift or calibration 
corrections. 


The inspection form also contains a place to record 
the raw sensor output from the data logger, as well as 
the value converted to units of measurement (metres, 
feet). A project may have a policy of recording actual 
sensor output (mV, mA, kPa, psi) rather than converting 
the value to a measurement unit in the data logger 
program itself. There are several advantages to this 
policy when troubleshooting system problems, looking 
at sensor performance, and determining whether the 
sensor is within its operating or calibration ranges. This 


IS 16094 : 2018 


Site Name: 


State/Local well Numbers: 


Date (mm/dd/yy:.— / — / — Julian: — / — / — Watch time: — 


Data Logger Information: 


Date(mm/ddyy — /  / Julan —$/  / Time  / Io 


Data Logger Type: Serial No. 

Temporary Storage Values: Time: 
CHi1 |. |. CH2 | J| CH3À O CH4 
CH8 | |. CH9 | 0 CHIO0 | CHII 
CHIS . . CHI6 | 3 3ZCH17 A CHI8 
CH22 CH 23 CH 24 CH25 

Permanent Storage Values: Time: 
CH1 CH 2. CH 3 CH 4. 
CH 8. CH 9. CH 10. CH 11 
CH 15 CH 16 CH 17 CH 18 
CH22 CH 23 CH 24 CH25 


Station ID number: 


Party 


ap > Daylight Atomic (circle) 


Davlight Atomic (circle) 


Daylight Atomic (circle) Data Block No. 


CHS |. . CH6 CH7. 
CH 12 CH 13 CH 14. 
CH 19 CH 20 CH21 
CH 26 CH 27 CH28 


Daylight Atomic (circle) Data Block No. 


CHS 1 CH6 | CH7. 

CH 12. CH 13 CH 14. 

CHi9 /^ 3. CH20 | | -H2l | —. 
CH 26 CH 27 CH28 


Water Level 
below M.P. 


Fic. 7 EXAMPLE OF GROUND WATER TRANSDUCER INSPECTION SHEET 


sheet provides a place to document the sensor output 
and then, using the calibration equation developed for 
the specific transducer, document the associated 
converted value. 


Retrieving data while in the field involves following 
number of steps that are performed in a certain 
order: 


22 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Ensure that the sensors and recording devices 
are operating properly. 

Use field measurements to verify the sensor 
output values. 

Document the visit, all measurements, and 


any problems on a standard ground water 
inspection sheet (see Fig. 7). 


d) Retrieve the data and document the process 
using a field inspection form for data retrieval. 

e) Review the retrieved data by viewing the file 
or plotting the original data. 

f) Recheck the operation of the sensors and 


recording devices prior to departing the site. 
8.5 Verification 


Because verifying the sensor output is crucial to 
determining the validity of recorded data, it must be 
done routinely in the field. Measure ground water levels 
using a steel tape or calibrated electric tape. At a 
minimum, verify the instrument output each time data 
are retrieved at the site, but verification measurements 
also are recommended during visits when data are not 
retrieved. In either case, the verification measurements 
should be compared with the output from the site’s 
instrumentation at the time of the measurement. 
Verification measurements, commonly referred to as 
calibration checks, are necessary for troubleshooting, 
drift determination, and data correction during office 
computation. 


Field verification measurements of ancillary data also 
can be useful in determining data integrity. These data 
might include the output of voltage from the power 
supply, barometric pressure, shelter temperature and 
outside air temperature, all of which should be 
compared with the recorded values. These checks serve 
as an alert to a variety of potential problems and will 
help prevent loss of data or instrument damage. 


8.6 Use with Data Loggers 


Data may be collected in different formats. Some 
hydrologists prefer to collect raw data from the pressure 
transducer and convert the data in the office. Others 
prefer to collect data in a format identical to the units 
used during field calibration checks. Another option is 
to program the data logger to provide water level 
elevations. Whatever the preference, maintaining a 
record of adjustments to the data, whether they occur 
in the data logger program or in the office, is essential. 
Data loggers can be programmed in a multitude of ways 
that allow project specific or site specific data formats. 


8.7 Field Documentation 


Use a field note with a checklist of steps and 
measurements to record all field observations and the 
current data from the data logger. It provides a historical 
record of field activities. 


Keep a log for the site in the instrument shelter. The 
log serves as a troubleshooting aid, as a quick historical 
reference to water level trends and equipment 
problems, and as a long-term record of changes and 
occurrences at the particular site. At each site, keep a 


23 


IS 16094 : 2018 


printed copy of the data logger program being used in 
the instrument shelter. 


In the office, maintain a binder with field information 
similar to that recorded on the site log so that a general 
historical record is available there and can be referred 
to before and after a field trip. Other information to be 
included are site descriptions and road logs, transducer 
ratings, programming instructions, and phone numbers 
and addresses of important contacts. 


8.8 Maintenance 


In addition to data retrieval and field check 
measurements performed upon each field-site visit, 
routine maintenance of the transducer equipment, 
power supply, shelter, site, and well should be 
performed to ensure satisfactory long-term operation. 
Transducer equipment and power supply maintenance 
shall be guided by the manufacturers’ instructions and 
the general concepts outlined in this standard. The 
shelter should be maintained to ensure its functionality 
to protect equipment from adverse weather conditions, 
vandalism, and insect or animal damage. Vegetation at 
the site should be trimmed to maintain easy access and 
to prevent interference with activities. All possible 
precautions should be used to prevent objects and 
material from falling into the well and interfering with 
the operation and retrieval of the down-hole equipment. 


It is possible for encrustation, infilling, or casing 
collapse to, overtime, reduce or completely obstruct the 
hydraulic connection of the well to the aquifer. The 
functionality of this connection needs to be periodically 
tested by pumping the well and observing the water 
level recovery. This may be accomplished qualitatively 
by anticipating a relatively fast recovery or 
quantitatively by using aquifer test methodology with 
parameters that are appropriate for the aquifer at that 
locale to calculate the time for recovery. Water level 
recovery that is slower than that anticipated may indicate 
a connection problem. For normal circumstances, 
testing at 5-year intervals will provide a satisfactory 
assurance of connectivity. 


9 DATA PROCESSING 


9.1 General 


After retrieving the recorded data in the field, the data 
must be processed and loaded into a database. A 
recommended sequence for processing data is: 


a) to archive the raw data, 
b) to convert the data into a usable format, and 
c) toload the formatted data into an appropriate 


database. 


The raw data should be permanently archived prior to 


IS 16094 : 2018 


any alteration of the data set. After the data have been 
loaded into the database, they can be manipulated 
appropriately during the records computation process, 
as described below. 


9.2 Adjustments 


The first step, if necessary, is to convert pressure data 
to water level data. 


The second step is to apply corrections obtained from 
field verification measurements. If the record is faulty 
due to instrumentation or other problems, corrections 
usually cannot be applied. In general, a missing or faulty 
record of ground water level cannot be estimated 
reliably. Three types of corrections can be applied to 
the record: (a) datum corrections; (b) drift corrections; 
and (c) calibration corrections. Use time proration for 
the first two types of corrections. Apply a datum 
correction when a change has occurred to the elevation 
of the measuring point of the well. Keep a level 
summary sheet with the site's permanent file to 
document reference elevation changes. A hung depth 
correction can be applied if the position of the 


24 


transducer changes relative to its original position, due 
either to purposeful or accidental raising or lowering 
of the transducer in the well, or to changes from other 
causes, such as, an earthquake. A drift correction usually 
alinear proration with time — is applied to compensate 
for drift in the transducer's offset calibration. 


9.3 Documentation 


The third and final step of record computation requires 
documenting and explaining in a station analysis how 
all conversion equations and other corrections were 
applied. The station analysis (see Fig. 8), written 
periodically after the final record is produced, should 
be kept with the permanent data file, along with the 
record computations, field notes, archival and data 
conversion notes, data tables, and other pertinent 
information. 


Data processing requires a systematic, well-planned 
process fully integrated with field procedures. The raw 
data must be corrected systematically and consistently, 
and then documented in the station analysis that will 
be included with the permanent record. 


IS 16094 : 2018 


GROUND WATER STATION ANALYSIS 1993 WATER YEAR 
LOCAL NAME: Edwards Site 
STATION: 345 001 117 500 101 O9N/O9W-28A001S 


RECORDS — Ground Water Level, Depth Below Land Surface Datum, in metres 


EQUIPMENT — A Campbell CR-10 datalogger and storage module are used to record and store the data for this site. The water 
level sensor for well 28A1 is a Design Analysis H-300 submersible transducer. The calibrated range for the sensor is 0 to 35 kPa 
(5 psi), and can withstand excessive pressures up to 2 times the factory calibrated range. The equipment is powered by a 12 volt 
battery system charged by a solar panel. The recording equipment is housed in a heavy duty metal shelter. The shelter is insulated 
and ventilated to protect the equipment from high humidity and temperature extremes. The humidity is a result of evaporation from 
the wells as well as from the periodic flooding of the lakebed under the shelter. The shelter was installed about 0.36 m (14 inches) 
above the lakebed on two large wooden beams that are mounted on concrete piers. In addition, there is a tipping bucket rain 
gauge installation about 6 m (20 ft) from the main shelter. The dry air systems for the water level transducers at this site are 
housed in a heavy duty fiberglass instrument box, mounted on a vertical steel pole. The pole is attached to the 200 mm (8 inches) 
diameter steel pipe casing which provides protection for four of the five 50 mm (2 inches) PVC pipes that comprise the nested 
piezometers for this location. The piezometers and transducers are vented to atmospheric pressure. 


WATER LEVEL RECORD — Instrumentation was installed on July 29, 1992. Ground water level record began on July 30, 1992. 
Prior to this date, periodic water level measurements were made. The hourly ground water level record is complete for the entire 
1993 water year. Data is recorded to Pacific Standard Time year round. 


DATUM CORRECTIONS — None needed. Land Surface Datum for this site is 692.23 m (2 271.08 ft). Land Surface Datum was 
obtained from the results of level surveys run during the month of June 1991. 


DRIFT CORRECTIONS — The drift of the transducers’ calibration was corrected by use of the datum corrections option in the 
California District ADAPS data processing system. Corrections were determined on-site by comparing the recorded values with 
a verification measurement of DBLS. Verification measurements were obtained using a calibrated electrical tape. The measurements 
are considered to be reliable within — 0.01 m (0.02 ft). Corrections were applied by time from one measurement to the next. 


Corrections were applied as follows: 


Date Correction in m (ft) Remarks 
09/14/92 —0.02 (-0.05) Last correction of previous year 
10/28/92 *0.01 ( 
12/17/92 —0.03 (- 
01/22/93 (- 
03/11/93 (- 
04/22/93 (- 
(- 
(- 
© 


+0.02 Measurement correction 


06/02/93 
07/15/93 
08/26/93 ES 04 
09/30/93 —0.03 (-4 0. 11) End of year correction, based on the measurement made 10/06/93 


) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 


HYDROLOGIC CONDITIONS — Well 28A001 is one of four nested piezometers and one single piezometer at this location. The 
accompanying piezometers are 28A002, 28A003, 28A004, and 28A005. Ground water levels in well 28A003 and 28A005 are also 
recorded. The other two are measured periodically, and do not have recording equipment. The 28A001 piezometer has a depth of 
230 m (755 ft) and is screened from 224 m (735 ft) to 227 m (745 ft). The water level in this piezometer is affected by pumping from 
production wells located nearby. 


This site is located at Edwards, California, near the southeast end of Rogers Lake playa. The air temperature varies from extreme 
heat in the summer to below freezing temperatures in the winter. A steady, strong wind blows predominantly from the WSW during 
fair weather, but can come from other directions during the passage of storm systems. There are frequent dust storms and 
occasional thunderstorms. This well was drilled specifically for observation purposes. 


CONVERSION EQUATION — An equation was developed and used to convert the raw pressure values to Depth Below Land 
Surface. The equation is applied in the data base, where the data are computed and stored. The following equation, in use at the 
end of last year, was used again this entire year to compute the record of Depth Below Land Surface. 


From October 1, 1992 through the End of the Water Year: DBLS in m = 30.576 3 + (-0.101 97 x kPa) [DBLS in ft = 100.316 + 
(-2.306 67 x psi)] 


The equation was determined by applying a multiplier that converts the psi output into feet of water above the transducer, then 
adding an offset which corresponds with the water level measurement and transducer output at the time of installation and 
calibration of the transducer. The data collected at the time of transducer installation and calibration was affected substantially by 
displacement of the water column in the piezometer while the transducer was raised and lowered. Therefore, the incremental 
calibration data were not used in obtaining the conversion equation shown above. 


WATER LEVEL SUMMARY — Ten ground water level measurements were made this year. Nine of the ten measurements had 
corresponding readings of transducer output noted. Measurements were made using a calibrated steel tape, or calibrated electric 
tape. Minimum depth to water surface measured was 28.09 m (92.15 ft) below land surface datum on March 11, 1993. Maximum 
depth to water surface was 29.06 m (95.34 ft) below land surface datum on October 6, 1992. Recorded minimum and maximum 
were 27.96 m (91.72 ft) and 29.11 m (95.49 ft) on March 14 and September 15, respectively. Water levels and other pertinent well 
information are stored in the database. 


REMARKS — Record is considered good. Purpose of record is to obtain data for ongoing geohydrologic studies being conducted 
at Edwards, California. 


Fic. 8 EXAMPLE OF A GROUND WATER RECORD STATION ANALYSIS 


25 


IS 16094 : 2018 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 1.3 ) 


PRESSURE TRANSDUCERS — CHARACTERIZATION, COMMON 
PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS 


A-1 PRESSURE 
CHARACTERIZATION 


TRANSDUCER 


A-1.1 General 


Pressure transducers are characterized by their 
mechanical and electrical transduction elements, the 
performance specifications of the transducer, and the 
interaction of the transducer with the other components 
of the measuring system (such as, the power supply 
and data logger). 


A-1.2 Types of Pressure Measurements 
A-1.2.1 Absolute Pressure 


Absolute pressure is measured in reference to a vacuum 
or Zero pressure. Pressure at sea level is | atmosphere, 
101.3 kPa, or 14.70 psi. Pressures measured by an 
absolute pressure transducer are always positive 
because these devices are referenced to a perfect 
vacuum in which absolute pressure is zero. Zero 
referencing is accomplished by completely evacuating 
and sealing the interior or reference side of the 
transducer. 


A-1.2.2 Gauge Pressure 


Gauge pressure is measured in reference to atmospheric 
pressure at mean sea level. Pressures measured by a 
gauge pressure transducer are positive for pressures 
greater than sea level pressure and negative for pressure 


less than sea level pressure. Thus, atmospheric pressure 
measurements above sea level datum are negative 
because atmospheric pressure decreases with altitude. 
Sea level referencing is accomplished by sealing the 
interior or reference side of the transducer to 
atmospheric pressure at sea level. The term gauge 
pressure is sometimes used to describe pressure 
measurements referenced to ambient atmospheric 
pressure other than to sea level. The relation between 
absolute pressure and gauge pressure is given in Fig. 9. 


A-1.2.3 Differential Pressure 


Differential pressure is measured with respect to a 
varying pressure reference, such as, ambient 
atmospheric pressure or some other pressure source 
that is, allowed to vary independently of the primary 
measurement. Pressure transducers constructed in 
this manner actually sense the difference between two 
independent pressure sources simultaneously. The 
output of the differential pressure transducer is 
proportional to the pressure difference between the two 
independent sources. Pressure measurements made 
with open-ended manometers or vented submersible 
pressure transducers are examples of differential 
measurements. 


A-1.2.4 Sealed Reference Pressure 


Sealed reference pressure is measured with respect to 
a sealed reference pressure other than atmospheric 


| Positive gauge pressure 


0 kPa g = 101.325 kPa a 
(0 psig = 14.7 psia) 


J Positive absolute pressure 


Atmospheric pressure at 


sea level 


, Negative gauge pressure 


Positive absolute pressure 


0kPaa 
(0 psia) 


Perfect vacuum — 
absolute zero pressure 


kPa g = gauge pressure in kilopascals 
kPa a - absolute pressure in kilopascals 
(psig = gauge pressure in pounds per square inch) 


(psia = absolute pressure in pounds per square inch) 


Fic. 9 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN ABSOLUTE PRESSURE AND GAUGE PRESSURE 


pressure at sea level. A sealed reference pressure is 
created by evacuating (pressuring down) or pressuring 
up the interior or reference side of the transducer to a 
prescribed absolute pressure. Because the sealed 
reference side contains a constant volume of gas, the 
transducer must be maintained at a constant 
temperature to avoid changes in the reference pressure. 


A-1.3 Common Pressure Units Used in Hydrology 


Pressure unit conversion factors commonly used in 
hydrology are listed in Table 1. Take care when 
applying these conversion factors. Pressure expressed 
in terms of mercury (Hg) or water (HO), for example, 
depends on the specific gravity or density of the fluid, 
which is temperature dependent. In the case of water, 
the effects of total dissolved solids and suspended solids 
(turbidity) on density also must be considered when 
quoting pressure head in terms of length. 


A-1.4 Basic Types of Transducers for Measuring 
Pressure 


A-1.4.1 General 


A transducer is a device that converts energy from one 
form to another. Electrical pressure transducers, which 
measure changes in pressure, consist of a mechanical 
transduction element or force-summing device coupled 
to an electrical transduction element, which is 
connected to a display or recording device or both. 
There are two types of electrical transduction elements: 
active and passive. Electrical transduction elements that 
convert pressure-induced mechanical changes directly 
to an electrical signal are referred to as active 
transducers. Passive transducers require an external 
excitation that causes the transducers to respond to 
pressure-induced mechanical changes. The electrical 
transduction element converts mechanical energy into 
electrical energy and the force-summing device or 
mechanical transduction element converts gas or liquid 
energy into mechanical energy. 


Many types of pressure transducers consist only of 
mechanical transduction elements. Open ended and 
closed ended manometers, barometers that record 
changes in the height of a column of liquid in response 
to some external pressure change, and spring-loaded 
pressure-sensing devices are examples of mechanical 
transducers. 


Electrical pressure transducers are classified primarily 
on the electrical principle or method of electrical 
transduction involved in their operation. Different 
electrical transduction elements can be coupled to a 
variety of force-summing devices. Some 
combinations work better than others, depending on 
the application and measurement needs. Commonly 
used types of force-summing devices are illustrated 
in Fig. 10. A piezoelectric pressure transducer 


27 


IS 16094 : 2018 


incorporating a diaphragm in the housing is illustrated 
in Fig. 11. 


Electrical pressure transducers using force-summing 
devices are described in A-1.4.2 to A-1.4.7. The most 
common of the many types of pressure transducer is 
the strain-gauge pressure transducer. 


A-1.4.2 Piezoelectric Transducer 


The piezoelectric transducer is an example of a self- 
generating or active pressure transducer. The design 
of this type of transducer is based on the ability of 
certain crystals (quartz, tourmaline, Rochelle salt, or 
ammonium dihydrogen phosphate) and ceramic 
materials (barium-titanate or lead zirconate-titanite) to 
generate an electrical charge or voltage when 
mechanically stressed. The crystal geometry of these 
materials is oriented to provide maximum piezoelectric 
response in one direction and minimal response in other 
directions. The transducer develops a voltage 
proportional to the change in pressure. These 
transducers cannot be calibrated using normal static- 
pressure calibration techniques. This type of transducer 
is used to measure rapidly fluctuating pressures. 


A-1.4.3 Capacitive Transducer 


A capacitive transducer employs a diaphragm 
positioned between two fixed metal plates (see Fig. 12). 
In some designs, the metal plates are fixed to either 
side of the diaphragm; deflection of the diaphragm 
changes the capacitive coupling between the diaphragm 
and the metal plates. In other designs, the metal plates 
are isolated from the moving diaphragm; deflection of 
the diaphragm causes a change in the capacitive 
coupling between the two metal plates. An alternating 
current (ac) signal across the plates can be used to sense 
the change in capacitance. 


A-1.4.4 Inductive and Reluctive Transducers 


In an inductive transducer, pressure induced 
displacements of a diaphragm cause a change in the 
self-inductance of a single coil. In a reluctive 
transducer, displacements occur in the magnetic 
coupling between a pair of coils. An inductive 
transducer is active and operates on the principle that 
the relative motion between a conductor and a magnetic 
field induces a voltage in the conductor (see Fig. 13). 
Because the pressure induced electrical output signal 
requires relative motion, the inductive design is limited 
to dynamic measurements. 


In a reluctive transducer, displacements occur in the 
magnetic coupling between a pair of coils. A reluctive 
transducer is passive and requires external ac excitation 
of a pair of coils. It operates on the principle that the 
magnetic coupling between the two coils is affected 
by the displacement of a pressure-driven conductor 


IS 16094 : 2018 


C 

e. diu A Se 
—— "^ | = E. jM w Pea M 

( C > 

"LÀ. E 


i 


(g) (h) 


Key 
P pressure 
M motion 
(a) Flat diaphragm 
(b) Corrugated diaphragm 
(c) Capsule 


4 
N 
| 
| J 
AE 
p 
m, 
"WWW lcd 
{| i A 
E ty yf 
WU | 


" 
f 
| 
L) 
TU } } 


(i) 


d) Bellows 

e) Straight tube 

f) C-Shaped bourdon tube 
g) Twisted bourdon tube 
h) Helical bourdon tube 

i) Spiral bourdon tube 


Fic. 10 EXAMPLES OF DIFFERENT TYPES or FORCE-SUMMING DEVICES 


located in the magnetic field between the two coils. 
The conductor is either connected to a force-summing 
device or is itself a force-summing device. Two basic 
designs have evolved (see Figures 13 and 14). 


A-1.4.5 Potentiometric Transducer 


The potentiometric pressure transducer consists of a 
movable contact driven by an active force-summing 
device (see Fig. 15). The movable contact, or wiper, 
travels across a resistive element that may be a wire 
wound coil, a carbon ribbon, or a deposited conductive 
film. The motion of the wiper across the resistive 


28 


element causes a change in the resistance selected by 
the wiper. The change in resistance produces an electric 
signal (either a change in voltage or current), that is, 
proportional to the mechanical displacement of the 
wiper. This type of transducer may be excited using 
either ac or dc. 


A-1.4.6 Vibrating Wire and Vibrating Cylinder 
Transducers 


Vibrating wire (see Fig. 16) and vibrating cylinder 
(see Fig. 17) transducers use a vibrating element, either 
a fine wire or a cylinder that forms a portion of one leg 


Key 
A lead wire 
B disc 
C nut 


IS 16094 : 2018 


D housing 
E crystal 
F | diaphragm 


Fic. 11 PIEZOELECTRIC PRESSURE TRANSDUCER USING A DIAPHRAGM AS A FORCE-SUMMING DEVICE 


Key 
A insulated standoffs 
B pressure bellows 
C diaphragm 


D 
E 


capacitor plates 
pressure port 


Fic. 12 CAPACITIVE PRESSURE TRANSDUCER USING A BELLOWS AS A FORCE-SUMMING DEVICE 


of a Wheatstone bridge circuit. The vibrating element 
is located in a magnetic field with one end of the 
element attached to a diaphragm or other type of force- 
summing device. Current flowing through the vibrating 
element causes the element to move in the magnetic 
field, which in turn induces a current in the element. 
The resulting voltage, amplified and fed back to the 


29 


vibrating element, sustains the oscillations at the 
element’s resonating frequency. The resonating 
frequency of the vibrating element is controlled by the 
tension exerted on the wire or cylinder by a diaphragm 
or other force-summing device. Vibrating wire 
transducers can be installed in small diameter [1.27 cm 
(0.5 inch)] wells, and because they produce ac signals, 


IS 16094 : 2018 


Key 
P pressure B diaphragm 
A coil L, C coil L, 


Fic. 13 INDUCTIVE (ACTIVE) PRESSURE TRANSDUCER USING A DIAPHRAGM AS A FORCE-SUMMING DEVICE 


Key 

A pressure E additional coil-core set (optional) 
B twisted bourdon tube F  coilL, 

C coil L, G magnetic ‘ʻE’ core 

D armature 


Fic. 14 RELUCTIVE (PASSIVE) PRESSURE TRANSDUCER USING A BOURDON TUBE 
AS A FoRCE-SUMMING DEVICE 


they can be used on long wires with little signal a resistive transducer, is by far the most widely used 
degradation. type of pressure transducer. Its electrical transduction 


A-1.4.7 Strain Gauge Transducer elements operate on the principle that the electrical 


resistance of a wire is proportional to its strain-induced 
A-1.4.7.1 General 


length. The strain gauge transducer uses the gauge 
The strain gauge transducer, sometimes referred to as factor property of the strain element to convert a 


30 


IS 16094 : 2018 


Me 
Mp 
i | ] 
| R, R, s 
C= + 
=$ p XB i 
n ld 
| S 
| \ 
A 


Key 

A  resistance-measuring bridge circuit 

B measurement proportional to pressure 
C bridge power supply 

D moveable arm of pressure element 


displacement 

wiper or movable contact 

resistance that varies with movement of D 
R,, R, known resistances 


E 
F 
Ry 
R 


4) 


Fic. 15 PoTENTIOMETRIC PRESSURE TRANSDUCER AND RESISTANCE MEASURING CIRCUIT 


mechanical displacement into a change in the electrical 
resistance of a circuit. The gauge factor (Fo), defined 
as the unit change in resistance (R) per unit change in 
length (L), is expressed as: 


_ AR/R 
o ALIL (AL) 
Product specification sheets rarely provide gauge 
factors. Instead, they commonly express pressure- 
transducer sensitivity as the voltage signal output ratio 
per unit of pressure change: AV/V per unit of pressure 
change. 


A-1.4.7.2 Classes of strain gauge transducers 
A-1.4.7.2.1 Unbonded strain gauge transducers 


There are basically two classes of strain gauge 
transducers: unbonded and bonded. 


The unbonded strain gauge uses a strain-sensitive wire 
(or wires) with one end fixed and the other end attached 
to a movable element. Strain, induced on the wire by 
the displacement of the movable element, produces a 
change in resistance proportional to the displacement 


31 


of the movable element. The basic design of this type 
of transducer is given in Fig. 18. 


A-1.4.7.2.2 Bonded strain gauge transducers 


Bonded strain gauge transducers (see Fig. 19) can be 
grouped into, 


a) those that require an adhesive to fix the gauge 
to the pressure sensing element (metal foil and 
strain sensitive wires); and 

b) those attached to the strain sensing element 


by techniques that effectively make the strain 

gauge an integral part of the strain sensing 

element (thin film and semiconductor). 
Metal foil and strain sensitive wires commonly are 
mounted on a secondary sensing element, which acts 
as the deforming member to produce the strain sensed 
by the strain gauge. 


Thin film and semiconductor strain gauges typically 
are mounted directly on the pressure sensing element. 


Metal foil strain gauges consist of wire or foil ribbon 
coated with a thin layer of insulation and cemented to 
the strain sensing element. Distortion of the strain 
sensing element is communicated by the bonding 


IS 16094 : 2018 


A 
Key 
A  vibrating wire 
B magnets 
C taut magnetic wire 
D pressure sensing diaphragm 
E  accarrier and frequency detector electronics 
F output 


Fic. 16 VIBRATING WIRE PRESSURE TRANSDUCER 


material directly to the wire or foil filaments. Increasing 
the length of the gauge reduces the cross-sectional area 
of the conductor and increases the conductor's 
resistance, causing a change in voltage proportional to 
the pressure change across the output leads. 


Thin film strain gauges employ a metal substrate on 
which are deposited thin films as an insulation layer 
and a resistor layer, using either a vacuum deposition 
or sputtering process. The strain gauge is either masked 
onto or etched into the thin film resistor layer, making 
the gauge an integral component of the strain sensing 
element. The strain gauge can be deposited directly 
onto sensing elements of any configuration, such as, 
diaphragms, beams, or tubes. 


Semiconductor strain gauges are similar to the thin film 
strain gauges in that the strain gauge circuit is an 
integral part of the strain member. In integrated silicon 
strain gauge pressure transducers, the strain elements 
are diffused directly into the pressure sensing element, 


32 


Key 


A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 


Fic. 17 VIBRATING CYLINDER PRESSURE TRANSDUCER 


frequency signal-pressure 
magnetic pick-up coil 
vibrating cylinder element 
magnetic drive coil 
evacuated reference space 
outer protective cylinder 
pressure inlet 


becoming automically bonded to the sensing member. 
Because silicon is virtually 100 percent elastic to the 
breaking point, this type of transducer exhibits very 
little hysteresis. Because gauge factors in these types 
are in some cases more than 50 times greater than those 
of wire gauges, signal output is high, which commonly 
eliminates the need for signal amplification. 


The Wheatstone bridge is one of the most common 
bridge configurations for strain gauge pressure 
transducers. In its simplest form, the basic Wheatstone 
bridge consists of four resistors arrayed to form a closed 
loop, a pair of sensing leads, and a pair of excitation 
leads. The bridge is affixed to a pressure sensitive 
diaphragm or substrate. Pressure changes distort the 
substrate or diaphragm and cause the resistance of the 
bridge to change in response to strain induced on its 
resistors. In some designs, all bridge elements may be 
active, while in other designs only one element may 
be active. 


Md 


A F 
Key 
A electrically insulated pins 
B  strain-sensitive wires 
C  moveable armature 
D applied pressure 
E clamped elastic element 
F fixed frame 


Fic. 18 UNBONDED STRAIN GAUGE 


Variations on the basic configuration of the Wheatstone 
bridge are referred to as compensated Wheatstone 
bridges. These variations include additional resistor 
circuits, diodes, and circuit components designed to 
provide various types of compensation functions or 
signal enhancement capabilities, such as, zeroing, shunt 
calibration, temperature compensation, and sensitivity 
adjustments (see Fig. 20). 


The strain gauge bridge may be excited by either a 
constant voltage or a constant current, depending on 
the application and the excitation method used for 
calibration. There are advantages to each method. 


A-1.4.7.3 Voltage 


Most manufacturers provide calibrations and 
transducer specifications using voltage as the mode of 
excitation. The length of the lead-wire (and hence its 
resistance) needs to be considered when selecting a 
transducer for a remote application. Short leads usually 
do not create significant measurement problems 
because the voltage loss on the excitation lead is small 
as a percent of the total excitation signal. The resistance 
of the lead increases as its length increases. The 
resistance of metric 8-gauge (AWG 20-gauge) annealed 
copper wire is approximately 0.033 Q/m (0.01 Q/ft). 
A transducer operated using a long wire lead should 
be calibrated with the lead attached. With a long lead, 


33 


IS 16094 : 2018 


N 


"v 


>D 
" SF 
ELA 


k- 


Key 

neutral axis 

terminal wire 

foil pattern 

insulating layer and bonding cement 
structure undergoing strain 


mootuzcn 


Fic. 19 BONDED STRAIN GAUGE 


the voltage drop that develops across the sensing circuit 
is reduced in proportion to the resistance of the lead; 
the output signal will be reduced accordingly. 


A-1.4.7.4 Current 


Some transducers can be calibrated and operated using 
a constant current to supply excitation to the 
measurement bridge. The advantage of a constant 
current excitation is that the effects of lead-wire 
resistance can be eliminated and the necessity of 
calibrating each unit with the lead-wires attached can 
be avoided. Delivering a constant current to the device 
is achieved by allowing the voltage across the output 
leads to seek the necessary potential (within prescribed 
limits) required to make the current equal to the 
calibrated current setting. A current-generating source 
with the capability to regulate the voltage drop across 
the input leads is required to provide a constant current. 
Because current is controlled at the input end of the 
circuit, the same current will be present across the 
sensing circuit, provided there are no current leaks or 
shorts in the measuring circuit. 


A-1.5 Understanding Pressure Transducer 
Specifications 


Selection of a pressure transducer requires careful 
review of the literature from prospective vendors. 


IS 16094 : 2018 


Rsa 
+A Vve 
* 
t 
R ZA sS R 
S 46 30 
3^4 
s ; N 
La t R, 
y TN 
a `> 
N k 
kh. XN R 
3 Y - SA 
ove 

Key 
A excitation 
B output 
Rep sensitivity adjustment 
Ron zero balance adjustment 


Ry + 
VA. (a) A 
@ B 
+ 
3) B 
Ry 
^ f e. D A 
Rsc compensation for thermal sensitivity shift 
Roc compensation for thermal zero shift 
R,toR, resistance 


Fic. 20 ELECTRICAL SCHEMATIC OF A COMPENSATED WHEATSTONE BRIDGE 


Comparing instrument specifications is a difficult and 
time-consuming process. Vendors commonly specify 
different sets of parameters and, typically, it is not clear 
which definitions are being applied to properly interpret 
a stated specification. Confidence levels are rarely 
specified and reporting specifications vary from one 
manufacturer to another. When in doubt, the vendor 
or manufacturer should be consulted for clarification 
and additional information. When selecting a pressure 
transducer, carefully consider the specifications of the 
instruments that will be used to excite and measure 
the output of the pressure transducer. These 
components of the measuring system may be the 
limiting factor in meeting overall performance 
objectives. An analysis of the circuits may be helpful 
in selecting these instruments. The input and output 
characteristics of the transducer must be compatible 
with the excitation and recording system used. Terms 
frequently used to describe the performance 
characteristics of pressure transducers, such as, drift, 
error, error band, resolution, hysteresis and time 
constant are given in Figures 21 to 29. 


Drift, an undesired change in output over a period of 
time that is not a function of the measurand, is normally 
specified as a change in zero (zero drift) over time and 
a change in sensitivity (sensitivity drift) over time. Zero 
drift is given in Fig. 21 as the vertical shift in the 
intersection of the best-fit straight line between the 
initial calibration and the later calibration. The 
sensitivity drift is shown by the difference in slope of 
the best-fit straight line between the initial calibration 


34 


and the later calibration, where the initial calibration 
curve, adjusted for zero drift, is shown as the dashed 
line. 


Error, the algebraic difference between the indicated 
value and the true value of the measurand, can be zero, 
span, or non-linear error (see Notes). 


NOTES 
1. Zero error is constant throughout the range of true values 


of the measurand (see Fig. 22). 


2. Span error is an error that changes linearly with the value 
of the measurand (see Fig. 23). 


3. Non-linear errors change as a non-linear function of the 
value of the measurand (see Fig. 24). 


The error band is the band of maximum deviation of 
output values from a specified calibration curve or 
reference line. The sum of all the defined errors causes 
the measured values to differ from the true values. The 
measured values will fall within the error band, as 
shown in Fig. 25. 


Hysteresis is the maximum difference in output, at any 
measurand value within the specified range, when the 
value is approached first with an increasing and then 
with a decreasing measurand. Expressed in percent of 
full-scale output, it is usually described in terms of 
maximum hysteresis in the output, as illustrated 
in Fig. 26. 


The resolution of a measurement system is the smallest 
change in the measurand that can be measured or 
detected in the output reading. The ability to detect 
significant differences in output can be due to the 


construction of the transducer, noise in the system, or 
the numerical resolution of a digital data logger. The 
definition of resolution is illustrated in Fig. 27. 


The sensitivity of the transducer or system is the ratio 
of the change in transducer output (Aq,) to a change in 
the measurand (Aq;). Sensitivity may either be constant, 
in which case Aq//Aq; will vary linearly over the 
operational range of the transducer [see Fig. 28 (a)] or 
can vary non-linearly [see Fig. 28 (b)], in which case 
the sensitivity is commonly defined as a linear 
approximation for short segments of the curve. 


The time constant is the length of time required for the 
output of a transducer to rise to 63 percent of its final 
value as a result of a step change in the measurand, as 
shown in Fig. 29. The time constant of a transducer is 
analogous to the time constant of an electrical circuit, 
in which the time constant is the time required for a 
capacitor charging through a resistor to reach 
63 percent of the applied voltage. 


A-2 COMMON PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS 


A-2.1 General 


Submersible pressure transducers generally require 
minimal maintenance, but problems can arise if they 
are not checked periodically. The following is a list of 
common problems and some suggested solutions to 
these problems. Occasionally, a problem can be solved 
only by replacing the transducer, but more commonly 
problems can be corrected in the field. 


TRANSDUCER OUTPUT 


IS 16094 : 2018 


A-2.2 Leakage 


Failure of submerged transducers commonly is caused 
by water leaking into the housing. Transducer leakage 
can appear in the data as an unexplained step or as 
measurements that cease, move out of range, or 
fluctuate wildly. Techniques to prevent leakage include 
the use of welded seals, O-ring seals, potted electronics 
and soldered contacts, sealed strain-relief fittings, and 
rubberized boots covering connections between the 
cable and the transducer's housing. Any of these 
components, however, can fail. Multiple layers of 
waterproofing, which can be user-tested, can prevent 
leakage, failure, and lost data (see Fig. 30). A double 
housing with an intervening chamber can be left 
pressurized so that if leakage occurs, dry air leaks into 
the water. Pressurize the chamber only slightly above 
the anticipated water pressure to prevent rupturing the 
seals. The chamber with strain-reliefs shown in Fig. 31 
has been tested to a pressure of 35 m (115 ft) of water. 
In practice, the residual air pressure sometimes decays, 
allowing a small amount of leakage into the chamber. 
The inner housing then prevents that small amount of 
water from penetrating to the transducer. Chambers 
have been used without any leakage for more than five 
years. During one application in which two commercial 
transducers failed after only one month each in service, 
encasing the third commercial transducer in just the 
inner chamber produced 14 years of trouble-free data. 


Commercial vented transducer cable must commonly 
be spliced. A waterproof splice can be made using 


Key 

A best-fit straight line at initial calibration 
B sensitivity drift 

C total error due to drift 


MEASURAND 


D  best-fit straight line at later calibration 
E zero drift 
F best-fit straight line after zero drift 


Fic. 21 ILLUSTRATION OF ZERO DRIFT AND SENSITIVITY 


35 


IS 16094 : 2018 


Pd Pt 
B—. 7 " 
Es a P. - 
u jJ A i 
d Ps E di T e 
t Mt Jr lh 
^ yea a^ 
uj “ A Na 
z - E PN SX 
2 2i ao s 
Z ae GI t- A 
ni t di "d Pd 
= | T d a 
e ze Tra 
"d ur 
L7 md - 
TRUE VALUE 
Key 
A error caused by zero B  best-fit straight line 


Fic. 22 ILLUSTRATION OF ZERO ERROR 


PN a ox 

"a “ 2 E 
= " RT 
=) P d 
" a 

S = a " 
a A * 22 S eai 
S € 2 a 
Ps -——— 
e p di y wj a \ 
4 oar P -— A 
ni P d P di m _ 
-— auro s uer 
» a 

fe 
1 pe 
TRUE VALUE 
Key 
A error caused by span B best-fit straight line 


Fic. 23 ILLUSTRATION OF SPAN ERROR 


strain reliefs and PVC pipe fittings (see Fig. 31). 
Connect the vent tubes with tubing of about the same 
diameter so that the cavity does not act as a pressure 
accumulator, restricting transmission of barometric 
pressure changes. For added security, the cable splice 
can be doubled in the same way as the pressurized 
housing shown in Fig. 30. Besides their primary 
functions of reducing well-bore storage, the drain- 
cleaner packer (see Fig. 1) and the drop pipe (see Fig. 2) 
both act as additional waterproof housings for pressure 
transducers. In waterproofing transducers, user 
experimentation and testing are essential. Providing 
additional waterproofing can greatly reduce the 
incidence of lost data. 


36 


A-2.3 Open and Short Circuits 


The most frequent problems encountered when 
collecting water level data with a pressure transducer 
and data logger include open and short circuits. An 
open circuit can result in data floating erratically or 
resting at zero or the offset value. A short commonly 
results in data values that indicate an over-range 
condition for the data logger. Solutions are to check 
the connections of the wires to the data logger wiring 
panel (where shorts most commonly occur) and to 
check the wire for cuts, kinks, and abrasions. Tinning 
leads reduces the chances of short circuits from 
unattached wire strands and also prevents or reduces 
noise. Find short circuits by testing the resistance 


Key 
A 


Key 
A 


Key 
A 


D VALUE 


3 


MEASURE 


Error caused by 


TRANSDU CER OUTPUT 


IS 16094 : 2018 


x E Á 
"E C "P 
"di Te NS 
; 7 X 
P d P". us AA 
/ e Y "o 
^ di T dd A 


m - e 
TRUE VALUE 
non-linearity 
Fic. 24 ILLUSTRATION OF NON-LINEAR ERROR 
F Fl 
A A 
» X 
"d 
" d Ò Mi xX | 
"p + p 
Fut a tas 
WO a í 
» A T v i 
e E $ T 
f f ç$ 7 di 
p T d . P 4d 
FAI A 
Y a 
Á 4 K, 
Fa "d \ 
% A 
Va Ju rm 
MEASURAND 
band of uncertainty from all defined sources B  best-fit straight line from which error is determined 


output hysteresis 


Fic. 25 ILLUSTRATION OF ERROR BAND 


B maximum input hysteresis 


Fic. 26 ILLUSTRATION OF HYSTERESIS 


37 


IS 16094 : 2018 


5 B ; 
5 
E 
A 
= à A 
El | - = 
e| " 
> 
PRESSURE INPUT 
Key 
A resolution B minimum measurable difference in output 
Fic. 27 ILLUSTRATION OF RESOLUTION 
ą (a) 
[ 9^ 
ral 
= P | 
= a | Aq 
H E. A = o 
E a Aq. | Aq, 
e 
P AH, |] 
purum int m im qm qm tmt iem 
INPUT ( &,) 
(a) Constant Sensitivity 
S eed 
y P d 
E | 
E 
z | 
P 
L OR 
INPUT (q ) 
(b) Variable Sensitivity 
Key 
A sensitivity q; input 
q, Output 


Fic. 28 ILLLUSTRATION OF SENSITIVITY 


38 


IS 16094 : 2018 


Key 

A time constant 
B electrical output 
X final value 


C 
D 


pressure input 
time 


Fic. 29 ILLUSTRATION OF TIME CONSTANT 


between the drain or ground wire and each excitation 
and sensing lead. When resistance is not infinite, there 
is a short. Find open circuits by measuring the 
resistance across the excitation lead pair and the sensing 
lead pair. It should be equal to the resistance across 
the bridge to which the lead or excitation pair is 
attached, commonly about 100 Q for metal strain gauge 
transducers and 1 000 to 5 000 Q for silicon strain 
gauge transducers. 


A-2.4 Grounding Problems 


Excessive levels of noise in the data sometimes can be 
attributed to one or more loose ground wires. Securely 
attach ground wires to either a ground terminal on the 
data logger, or to a grounding rod. Take care to maintain 
only one ground in order to avoid problems with 
ground loops, which could result in considerable noise. 
In some applications, the pressure transducer and data 
logger are not grounded, in which case the installation 
is termed a floating system. In this situation, connect 
ground wires only to the ground terminal on the data 
logger. 


A-2.5 Diaphragm Failure 


Failure of the pressure transducer diaphragm 
commonly is caused by transmission of pressure waves 
through the water column, sometimes referred to as 
water hammer. Strong pressure waves can severely 
overpressure the transducer and rupture the diaphragm, 
resulting in sudden loss of data. The diaphragm also 
can fail if the transducer is dropped onto a hard surface, 
or if it is rapidly dropped to the water surface while 
lowering the device inside a well. Water freezing in 
the transducer can likewise rupture the diaphragm. 
Diaphragm failure requires replacing the transducer. 


39 


A-2.6 Power Supply Failure 


An interruption of the power supply to most 
submersible pressure transducers will result in the 
output changing to zero or to the offset value entered 
into the data logger. The solution is to resupply power 
to the transducer. Commonly, if power to the data 
logger is lost, data already collected and stored in 
random access memory (RAM) in the data logger are 
lost. No additional data will be collected until power 
is restored and the data-collection program is 
re-entered. A partial remedy is to install a back-up data- 
storage device or to use a data logger with a non-volatile 
memory, to retain data already recorded as well as the 
data logger program. A charging system (solar or AC 
trickle) can help prevent power loss. 


A-2.7 Data Logger Channel Failure 


The internal circuitry in the data logger fails 
infrequently. However, this problem is difficult to 
diagnose because an open circuit in the wiring between 
the data logger and the transducer can have the same 
effect on the data. If a channel in the data logger fails, 
output values drift erratically. Occasionally, the data 
logger averages this erratic drift to a value similar to 
the expected value, making the failure difficult to notice. 
One solution is to reconnect the sensor to a different, 
but still functioning, channel on the data logger; another 
is to replace the data logger. Occasionally the problem 
is created by contaminants (such as, oil, water, or 
perspiration) that create shorts between data logger 
channels, in which case a solution is to disassemble 
and clean the wiring panel on the data logger. 


The data logger’s wiring panel also can become 
corroded after extended operation in humid conditions. 


IS 16094 : 2018 


9 


Ion mM 


J 


PVC male adapter, slip bushings to 15 mm 
(1/2 inch), 15 to 8 mm (1/2 to 1/4 inch) female 
thread bushing installed backwards 

If the transducer has an open vent tube, it is 
important to connect it directly to the vent tube in 
the cable or with tubing of about the same diameter 
to avoid a large-volume accumulator across which 
pressure changes would be attenuated. 

PVC female adapter and slip bushings to 15 mm 
(1/2 inch) female threads 

8.334 mm (21/64 inch) hole drilled and tapped 
valve for leak testing and final pressurization 
vented cable to surface and datalogger 

strain relief 

15 mm (1/2 inch) to 10 mm (3/8 inch) threaded 
bushing for 6 to 7 mm (0.125 to 0.275 inch) cable; 
about 10 wraps of polytetrafluoroethylene tape 
should be used for strain relief to female pipe joints 
threaded 25 mm (1 inch) to 15 mm (1/2 inch) bell 
reducer for 25 mm (1 inch) transducer, 15 mm 
(1/2 inch) coupling for 18 mm (11/16 inch) transducer 
ferrules for transducer 


Fic. 30 PRESSURIZED HOUSING FOR PRESSURE 


TRANSDUCER 


Corrosion can cause an intermittent open circuit 
between the wire and the wiring panel, causing 
intermittent periods of erroneous data. The solution 


40 


AE-— E 


Key 
A  15to 10 mm (1/2 to 3/8 inch) threaded bushing for 
6 to 7 mm (0.125 to 0.275 inch) cable 


B  15to 10 mm (1/2 to 3/8 inch) threaded bushing for 
6 to 7 mm (0.125 to 0.275 inch) cable 


C strain release 

D 15 mm (1/2 inch) female adapter 

E 15mm (1/2 inch) PVC pipe 
NOTE — About 10 wraps of plumbing tape should be used 
between the strain relief and female pipe joints. The vent tube 
in the vented cable should be connected by tubing of about the 


same diameter to prevent the cavity from becoming a pressure 
accumulator. 


Fic. 31 HOUSING FOR CABLE SPLICES 


requires cleaning the connections, and changing the 
environment in which the data logger is housed. 
Operation in a drier environment (for example, 
enclosing the data logger in a low-humidity container 
or frequently replacing the desiccant) prevents 
corrosion-related problems. Fumes released from a 
battery enclosed in the data logger’s housing also can 
cause corrosion. To avoid this problem, house the 
battery in a separate location from the data logger. 


A-2.8 Voltage Surges 


Voltage surges (transients) can cause a multitude of 
problems, ranging from alteration of the data logger 
program or alteration of the data logger clock to complete 
failure of the data logger and pressure transducer. A 
transient current from a nearby lightning strike can 
corrupt data without harming either the data logger or 
the pressure transducer. One solution is to turn off the 
data logger, resupply power, and then re-enter the 
program, but proper grounding will solve most problems 
associated with transient voltage surges. A direct 
lightning strike, however, will probably destroy both data 
logger and the pressure transducer. Voltage surges 
coming through AC power lines or telephone lines can 
damage or destroy the transducer, the data logger and 
other connected electronic equipment. Surge protection 
devices usually are placed between these incoming lines 
and the data logger, but they are not normally used 
between the transducer and the data logger. 


A-2.9 Faulty Shielding 


Faulty shielding can allow electromagnetic coupling 
to corrupt the signal from the sensor to the data logger. 
Occasionally this is caused by cuts or kinks in the 
transducer cable, but more frequently by long, exposed, 
unshielded wire near the data logger. These long wires 
increase the signal noise sent to the data logger. One 
solution is to minimize the length of unshielded wire. 
A second solution is to change the program in the data 
logger to increase the signal or the excitation from the 
data logger, effectively increasing the signal-to-noise 
ratio. A third solution is to increase signal integration 
time during the measurement cycle. 


41 


IS 16094 : 2018 


A-2.10 Over-Range Problems 


An over-range problem develops when the signal is 
increased beyond the anticipated maximum value. 
Many data loggers can be programmed to accept 
different ranges of sensor output. Sensor output rising 
beyond the anticipated maximum output programmed 
into the data logger creates an over-range situation. 
Over-range problems also can occur from submerging 
the pressure transducer too deeply (overpressuring), 
so that the transducer is subjected to pressures 
exceeding its maximum. Even if the pressure 
transducer is situated correctly, unexpected extreme 
water level rises can exceed the anticipated maximum 
value. 


Occasionally data loggers are not capable of measuring 
the entire voltage range that a transducer can output, 
thereby reducing the range of water level measurements 
that can be sensed. Possible solutions are to reprogram 
the data logger to accept a wider range of output from 
the transducer or to program the data logger to 
simultaneously log output from the transducer on 
multiple input ranges during the same measurement 
scan. The later solution retains resolution while 
increasing the range of input signal. 


Solutions to overpressure problems are to raise the 
pressure transducer or to use a different model of 
transducer capable of measuring a wider range of 
pressure fluctuations. In some cases, it may be possible 
to continue operating the transducer as long as the 
overpressure is not too extreme. When using this 
solution, the investigator should extend the calibration 
range to include these overpressure conditions. 


IS 16094 : 2018 


B-1 The DWLR unit, accessories to measure water level 
data at specified intervals and downloading data from 


Salient Features 


NI 
No. 


i) 


ii) 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 5.12 ) 


SALIENT FEATURES OF DIGITAL WATER LEVEL RECORDERS (DWLRs) 


Pressure Sensor 


DWLR site to uploading the same to office desktop 
should work in an integrated manner. 


Requirements 


Sensor type 


Vented gauge pressure sensor 


Measuring range 


Overall accuracy 


0 - 70m (water column) 


For different ground water applications different overall accuracy is 
specified as follows: 


a) 0 - 25m (water column) : 25 mm or better 
b) 0 - 50m (water column) : 50 mm or better 
c) 0 - 70m (water column) : 70 mm or better 
0.1 percent full scale (including sensor and data logger). The 
pressure readings should be fully temperature and pressure 
compensated over the entire operating range 


Temperature coefficient 
Reproducibility 


«0.01 percent full scale/degree centigrade (on water level reading) 
0.05 percent full scale 


Long-term stability 


0.1 percent full scale and ensure long-term stability without any field 
calibration requirements 


Burst pressure 


>3 times of full scale 


Overload pressure 

(maximum pressure, sensor 
should sustain without effect 
on calibration upon return to 
rated measuring range) 


2 times of full scale 


Over voltage protection 
Data Logger 


Resolution of measurement 


May be provided on power supply lines 


12-bit AD converter or better 


Measuring interval and 


measuring modes 


] minute one reading to 24h one reading as per need in linear 
sampling mode, should have selectable (i) linear, (ii) logarithmic, 
and (iii) event measuring modes 

< 30 min after submersion 


Settling up time 
Recording capacity 


Power supply 


Non-volatile flash data storage of more than 200 000 data points 
(minimum) 

Non-volatile memor 

Should be equipped with lithium or alkaline battery pack, in standard 
size, like AA, C or 0 size option of an external battery pack that can 
provide operational life more than 2 years may be preferred 


Batteries may be kept inside a separate enclosure, above the 
maximum water level or inside the data logger enclosure. However, 
they shall be easily replaceable 

The communication hardware between DWLR and Palmtop/Laptop PC 
shall be suitable for the specified cable lengths and communication. 


Communication interface 
Built in clock 


Displayed time resolution 


+ 2 min/year 
ls 


Over voltage protection 


Should include lightening, over voltage and surge protection 


42 


Sl 
No. 


iii) 


iv) 


Salient Features 


Enclosure for Pressure Sensor 
and Data Logger 


Dimensions 

Material 

Operating temperature 
Humidit 

Cable 


Data Retrieval System (DRS) 
Entry /Display/Readability 


Software 


IS 16094 : 2018 


Requirements 


Data logger should be concealed into a single tubular enclosure 
which is waterproof and corrosion proof 


Outer diameter: < 50 mm, length <500 mm 

Titanium or stainless steel and should be corrosion proof 

Up to 50° C 

100 percent 

The cable shall have following features 

a) Strength members for good longitudinal stability of cable 

b) Incorporated vent tube for barometric air pressure compensation 
of the vented gauge pressure sensors 

c) A moisture blocking system based on a hydrophobic filter and 
desiccator, to prevent condensation of water in the vent tube and 
in the sensor. The desiccant shall be replaceable 

d) The desiccant capacity should be adequate for atleast 6 months of 
unattended operations under the worst environmental conditions. 
For each instrument, two desiccant replacement should be part of 
the delivery 

e) Cable screen to be connected to the data logger ground terminal 
to minimize electrical interference 

f) A cable suspension bracket allowing the DWLR to be adjusted to 
the required depth, in a stable and reproducible manner 

g) The cable and contacts should be fixed or quick connect 

h) Corrosion and moisture free as the equipment has to work under 
water condition 

j Cable should have good flexibility 

k) The electrical wires should have sufficient conductivity to allow 
for extension of the cable to up to 150 m without degrading 
accuracy, stability and data communication 


Pocket PC/ Laptop 


The unit should have a colour screen/display should be easily 

readable in field conditions 

a) Windows based software for instrument control and display of 
downloaded data in tabular and graphical presentation form 

b) The DWLR should include a software for downloading data from 
DWLR and exporting the same to desktop PC in MS office 
formats 


Power supply 


All batteries associated with the DRS, that is, the batteries for 
normal operation and the back-up batteries, should be easily 
replaceable by the local operator ideally using lithium or alkaline 
batteries 


43 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 03 (0505). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


