( Reaffirmed 2006 )

iS I 8691 - 1986

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR MIRROR STEREOSCOPE

( First Revision )
Optical and Mathematical Instruments Sectional Committee, EDC 36
Chairman DR R. HARDAYNATH Members DR 0. P. NIJ~AWAN ( Alternate to Dr R. Hardaynath ) The Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi LT-GEN K. L. KHOSLA Survey of India, Dehra Dun COL ( DR ) M. G. A~UR SRRI S. P. ROY ( kikernate ) Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical COL M. S. BOPARAI Service, Ministry of Defence National Instruments Ltd, Calcutta SHRI J. CIIOU~.HURI SHRI A. K. GEOSHAL ( Alter/m/e ) Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ) SHRI M. M. GUPTA Ministry of Defence BRIG H. LAL COL N. MOUDQAL ( Afternote ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI D. B. MALIE New Delhi SARI MOIIANJEET SINQH ( Alternate ) Chief Hydrographer to the Government of India, CDR G. D. BHATT ' Dehra Dun Central Scientific Instruments Organization DRE.K. MURTHY ( CSIR ), Chandigarh Dn A. K. A~ARWAL ( Alternate ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Machilipatnam SHRI C. NARAYANA RAO SHRI A. M. JOSE ( Alternate ) Laboratory ( CSIR ), Physical SHRI P. N. PUNTAMBEKAR National New Delhi SHRI RAM PRASAD ( Alternate ) All India Instrument Manufacturers' and Dealers' SHRI J. K. SONEJA Association, Bombay SHRI C. L. BAT~A (Alternate) Ministry of Defence LT-COL A~UN KUB~AR MAJ J. L. YADAV ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) 0 Copyright BUREAU OF INDIAN 1987 STANDARDS RePresenting Ministry of Defence, Dehra Dun

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 8691 - 1986
( Confind from page Members SHRI H. C. VERM&
SERI K. G. PURANQ ( Alfernate
SHRI

1)
Representing Associated Instrument Ltd. New Delhi ) Manufacturers' Small (India) Scale Pvt

M. K. VERMA

Development Commissioner, tries, New Delhi Director General,

Indus-

SHRI K. S. LAMBA ( Alternate
SERI S.~HANDRASEKHARAN,

)

Director

( Mech Engg )

BIS ( Ex-oficio

Member )

Secretary SHRI S. K; PTJRI Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ), BIS

Surveying Instruments
Convener
COL ( DR ) M. G. ARUR

Subcommittee,

EDC 36 : 3

Survey of India,

Dehra Dun

Members SHRI S. P. ROY [Alternate to Co1 ( Dr ) M. G. Arur ]
LT-GEN K. L. KL~OSLA &RI S. K. GUPTA SHRI R. M. SOBTI ( Alternate ) SHRI M. C. TYA~I SHRI S. S. RAWAT ( Alternate )

The Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI )

SERI P. C. JAIN

CDR J. J. VAFAVI DR J. PRASAD SHRI RAM SINQH ( Alternate ) SHRI C. NARAYANA RAO SHRI A. M. JOSE ( Alternate )
SHRI D. B. MALIK

National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi Indian Navy Central Scientific Instruments Organization ( CSIR ), Chandigarh Bharat Electronics Ltd, Machilipatnam Development,
and Surveys,

Directorate General of Technical New Delhi SHRI MOHANJEET SINC+H ( Alternate ) of Land Records Directorate SHRI P. K. DATTA
Calcutta Ministry of Defence

LT-COL ARUN KWKAR ( EME ) MAJ J. L. YADAV ( Alternate ) National Instruments Ltd, Calcutta SHRI A. SEN~UPTA SHRI K. CHAKRABARTI ( Alternate 1 Quality Marked Goods Manufacturers Co-operaSHRI S. K. GAUTAM tive Association, Roorkee SHRI M. R. BHARADWAJ ( Alternnte ) Lawrence & Mayo ( India ) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI J. MENDONSA SHRI R. R. RAJA~OPALAN ( Alternate )

2

IS : 8691- 1986

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR MIRROR STEREOSCOPE

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 18 November 1986, after the draft finalized by the Optical and Mathematical Instruments SectionalCommittee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Mirror stereoscope is a portable tion of stereo/aerial photographs. instrument for stereoscopic examina-

In this revision the 0.3 This standard was originally published in 1978. clauses pertaining to parallax bar ( stereometer ) have been deleted. The been covered in requirements of parallax bar ( stereometer ) have IS : 11445-1985*. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressbe rounded off in accordance with ing the result of a test, shall IS : Z-19601_. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard
mirror stereoscope. 2. TERMINOLOGY

covers

the

general

and

functional

requirements

of a

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, given in IS : 1399-1959$ shall apply.

the

following

definitions

and those

2.1.1 Stereoscopic V&ion - The observation of an object or objects under conditions which present a different image to each eye to produce a solid or three dimensional effect.
*Specification for parallax bar ( stereometer ). tRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). $Glossary of terms used in optical technology.

3

IS : 8691 - 1986
2.1.2 StereogramlStereograph - A pair of photographs or transparencies with record of two images of an object from two different angles which may be fused stereoscopically to show the object in relief or three dimensions. 2.1.3 Stereoscope .- An instrument which reveals the contours and presents a solid or three dimensional view of the object. in relief

2.1.4 Stereoscopic Aquity - The ability of eyes to resolve and see as such the objects which are at varying distances from the observer. 2.,1.5 Fusion of Images - Merging `generally images of the same object in a pair of stereograph single object in relief. by stereoscope' of two so as to form a distinct

2.1.6 Binocular Parallax ( Dijcrential Parallactic Angle ) - The difference in the angle subtended at the two eyes of a person by two different objects situated in space. This enables perception in depth. optical 2.1.7 Binocular - Two telescopes of identical joined together to form a single instrument which presents magnified stereoscopic view of the objects. 3. GENERAL characteristics to both eyes a

REQUIREMENTS

( see Fig. 1 ) shall have a rigid main frame to which shall be rigidly fixed the reflector frames. The reflector frames shall have carrying handles. The reflector frames shall carry four foldable legs. The legs shall have rubber cushion pads. One of front legs shall be adjustable to make the stereoscope stable on a not perfectly plain surface. The mirror surfaces shall be inclined at 45" to horizontal and symmetrically disposed. The prism housings shall be rigidly fixed to the frame. Two magnifying lenses shall be provided in mounting so that they may be swung by knobs between the mirrors and the prisms for viewing at magnification 1.2 x and may be swung out for direct viewing or viewing with binocular viewer. 3.2 The binocular viewer shall be a detachable unit. Its locating rod ( see Fig. 2 ) shall have flats machinedover it on opposite sides at an angle of 45" to the base of the binocular viewer. The boss on the stereoscope ( see Fig. 2 ) shall have a vertical slit through which the locating rod may be inserted. For direct viewing or viewing at magnification I.2 x the binocular viewer may be swung/away from the examiner and shall rest on rubber pads on the frame. For the binocular viewing the positioning pins ( see Fig. 2 ) on the base of the binocular shall sit on the recessed flat seat of the main frame. In this position the binocular viewer eyepieces shall be inclined at 45" to the horizontal. The ocular distance shall be adjustable preferably with the help of a knob and the movable plates 4

3.1 The mirror stereoscope

IS:8691

- 1986

( see Fig. 1 ) of the binocular shall move in dovetailed grooves. The movable plates shall be connected to pins on the rotatable disc ( SPI Fig. 2 ) such that the two plates shall move towards or away from each other simultaneously and symmetrically. A scale mounted on top of the binocular viewer base plate shall indicate the interocular distance in mm, mark on or edge of one of the moving plates being used as a pointer. 3.3 Materials
3.3.1 The optical glass used for the optics shall conform to the requirements of IS : 1400-1960*.

3.3.2 Optical IS : 988- 1959T.

components

used shall

conform

to the requirements

of

3.3.3 The materials used for the manufacture shall be strong but light in weight, of good quality and defects.

of mechanical parts and free from flaws

3.3.4 Lubricants, greases, lutings, comments, paints used shall be of approved quality and shall be suitable for operation in the temperature range of -10" to +55"C and 95 percent relative humidity. 3.3.5 Unpainted steel components and metal parts likely to corrode due to electrolytic reaction between contacting dissimilar metals shall be chromium-plated. 4. FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS and field of view
Minimum Field of View

4.1 The mirror stereoscope shall provide magnification as given below:
Magnijication

a) Direct viewing b) With built-in magnifier c) With binocular viewer d) With optional additional binocular viewer

l-2 x, n!f;n 3 x, Min 6 x or 8x

180 x 200 mm 175 mm diameter
70 mm diameter

35 mm diameter or 26 mm diameter

The distance between centres of field of view under different magnifications shall not be more than 20 percent of the radius of the field of view at higher magnification. The magnification shall be marked on the built-in magnifier and the binocular viewer.
*Specification for optical glass. tGeneral requirements for optical components.

5

LOCATING

ROD

ECTOR

FRAME

FIG. 2

NOMENCLATURE OF MIRROR STEREOSCOPE

1S:8691-

1986

4.2 The binocular viewer shall be detachable type which may also be swung away from the examiner when not required. The binocular viewer shall be so located that there is no side play and it shall rest in a stable position on the main frame of the stereoscope. 4.3 The binocular viewer eyepieces shall be provided with minimum adjustable interocular range of 56 to 74 mm. A scale shall be provided preferably on the right side of binocular to indicate interocular setting in 2 mm divisions. 4.4 The optical axes of the binocular eyepieces shall be parallel. They shall not converge more than six minutes or diverge more than two minutes and the dipvergence shall also be restricted to two m.inutes.
NOTE Dipvergence is divergence perpendicular to ocular base of binocular.

4.5 The exit pupil diameter of the binocular viewer shall be 3 to 4 mm and its position shall not be less than 15 mm from the eyepiece glass surface. 4.6 Dioptric settings up to f 5 dioptres shall be provided in binocular eyepieces. The dioptric scale provided on the eyepieces shall not differ from actual value at any position by more than l/2 D. 4.7 The mirror shall have aluminium coating on the front surface and shall conform to the requirements of IS : 9514-1980" and shall also have protective coating over the aluminium reflecting surface. 4.8 The mirrors shall be inclined 45" to the horizontal and symmetrically placed with respect to a common central axis. 4.9 The disposition 250 mm separation 4.10 The mirror shall be

of the mirror shall be such as to give not less than between identical points on a pair of stereographs. and the reflecting prism surface shall be parallel. to the base only one of a shall be shall be

surface

4.11 The optical axis of the instrument shall be perpendicular for stereophotographs within one degree. 4.12 Each half of the instrument pair of stereographs. shall allow the eye to see

4.13 The magnification from the two halves of the instrument equal within & 2 percent and both parts of the stereoscope balanced to make good stereoscopic fusion.

4.14 The axial transmission of white light through the stereoscope shall not be less than 60 percent and transmission values of the two halves shall not vary by more than 5 percent. *Specification for front surface aluminized mirrors.

8

IS : 8691 - 1986
4.15 The central the field of view. area of good image quality shall not be less than 213 of

binocular viewers shall 4.16 The variation in focussing when changing not be beyond & 0.5 dioptre if additional binocular viewer of 6 X or 8 X is provided. 4.17 The reorientation to low shall be: of images when changing magnification from high

a) Shift perpendicular b) Rotation

to base line

<; l/M mm where M is magnification, and < 0.5 degree shall be rigid eyepieces or and shall changing

4.18 The stereoscope, when erected on its legs, be stable against vibration when adjusting magnifications.

4.19 The motion of moving parts of stereoscope shall be correctly constrained and yet smooth. The position set shall not shift on its own accord. The workmanship and finish shall correspond to a precision measuring instrument. 4.20 The instrument be protected against 5. PERFORMANCE shall withstand use in field conditions dust, humidity and fungus. TESTS and so shall

5.1 Magnification of the Built-in Magnifier-By looking with one eye through the stereoscope and with the other eye directly on the table, an object of size 1 cm under the stereoscope may be marked or copied with a pencil on a sheet of paper as seen simultaneously by the other eye. If the distance between the unaided eye and the paper is `X' cm, and copied length `)I' cm, then the magnification is 25/XY. 5.2 Optical Axis Angle with Perpendicular on Print ( see Fig. 3 ) By swinging the apex of the right angle triangle ( set square ) or a trisquare to and fro, the observation as to whether the line of sight coincides with the side of the set square shall be made. Measurements shall be made for both X and Y direction. The angle between the perpendicuIar and the optical axis may be calculated as tan-r ( distance between centre of observed area and perpendicular/height of apex of set square ) . 5.3 The Binocular Viewer - This shall be IS : 3113-19654 and IS : 2754-19647.
tGenera1 requirements for optical instrument.

tested

in

accordance

with

*Specification for prismatic binoculars for common use. *

9

IS t 8691 - 1986
EYE

BINOCULAR

VIEWER

FIG. 3

TEST FOR OPTICAL AXIS ANQLE WITH PERPENDICULARON PRINT tests shall be conducted:

5.4 Symmetry

-

The following

a) With a large set square, the 45" angles of the mirrors are measurable. Use a plastic set square, preferably a coloured one, and do not touch the mirror surfaces. Estimate the distance between the plastic edge and its mirror image. The distance shall be small and constant ( see Fig. 4 ).

FLAT

SURFACE CK PARALLELISM

FIG. 4

TEST FORSYMMETRY

b)

Parallelism of [the Mirror and Prism Surfaces for the Two HalvesPut the stereoscope on its side on the edge of the table. Get the sunshine into the large mirrors and measure the distance between the two images of the sun, which are formed by the two pin holes. This separation shall he equal to the separation between the two pin holes ( see Fig. 5 ). Image Tilt and Parallelism of the ImagesThe images of a plumb line formed by the two halves of the optical system shall be vertical within 1" and parallel within 0.5'.

4

FROM

FIG. 5

TEST FOR PARALLELISM OF MIRROR AND PRISMSURFACES FOR Two HALVES

5.5 Concentricity - The concentricity of fields of view udder different magnifications may be determined by drawing the fields of view and determining their centres. The distance between the centres shall not be more than 20 percent of radius of the field of view at higher magnification. While drawing on a sheet of paper under the stereoscope the observation shall be under normal condition without eye strain. 6. MARKING 6.1 Each stereoscope trade-mark. shall be marked with the manufacturer's name or

11

ii4 : 8641 - I9M 6.1.1 The instrument
may also be marked with the Standard Mark.

NOTE-The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereThe Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys under. the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which Standard marked is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the further safeguard. Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards,

7. PACKING

AND PACKAGING
protective plastic surface. Protective cover which plastic cap so

7.1 The

mirrors shall be provided with shall not touch or rub against the mirror shall also be provided over the eyepieces. 7.2 The stereoscope shall that there is no possibility

be suitably packed of any deterioration

for storage and transit or damage in transit.

7.3 The package shall be marked with the description of contents and with standard symbol for indicating fragile contents according to IS : 1260 ( Part 2 )-1973* together with the legend `HANDLE WITH CARE' and also the symbol for `RIGHT-WAY UP'.

*Pictorial markings (first reuision ) .

for handling

and lahelling

of goods:

Part

2 General

goods

12

