IS 10386

( Part 5 ) : 1992

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

SAFETY CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART 5 ELECTRICAL ASPECTS

UDC

627.81~05 : 621.311 : 614.8

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Groop 4 ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

Mimh

1992

Safety in Construction, Committee, RVD 21

~Operation

and

Maintenance

of

River

Valley

Projects

Sectional

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. With large scale increase in construction activity of river valIeys projects, the number of major accidents have increased. The degree of safety achieved in project constructions has a direct bearing on the amount of effort expended to avoid accidents by those who control the conditions and practices on the project. There are a number of aspects that need to be kept in mind when the safety norms of an To this end, various aspects that need consideration, entire river valley project are envisaged. from the viewpoint of safety, are dealt with in various parts of this standard. This part covers the safety aspects to be kept in view during work on or around electrical installations and those electrical aspects that are to be kept in mind from the viewpoint of safety as well. The guidelines given in this standard are generalized and indicative in nature, given Each project may have its own safety guidance of the concerned project engineers. which need to be identified and taken care of accordingly. Further, in addition to those guidelines the instructions issued by the suppliers of various equipment should be adhered to. for the hazards general strictly

AI1 electrical installations should, however, be designed so as to conform to the requirements of the Indian Electricity Supply Rules, 1956. The model code for safe operation and maintenance of generating stations and The manual on layout of substations of the Central Electricity Board. The requirements of codes prepared by lo-cal electricity boards and any other reports issued by the Ministry of Energy as well as other statutory requirements should also be adhered to. The requirements given in this standard are a supplement to these.

IS 10386 ( Part 5 ) : 1992

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART 1 SCOPE 5 ELECTRICAL ASPECTS

This part lays down the safety requirements covering indoor/outdoor electrical installations of generating stations, tunnels, electrical stores, including generators, stations, pumping breakers, isolators, transformers, current translightning transformers, potential formers, arrestors, motors, storage betteries,illumination systems, pumps, cranes and hoists, etc. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed below are necessary adjuncts to this standard:
IS No. Title Code of practice

equipment and damage it, or endanger themselves. Necessary provisions should also be made for stopping stray animals and cattle from coming into the vicinity of electrical installations. 4 -GROUNDING 4.1 All non-current carrying parts/structures, electrical materials, appliances, tools, equipment, conduits, transformer enclosures, etc, should be effectively grounded. Parts of structures which might be expected to collect high static charge, such as towers and outlet pipes, should likewise be grounded. As a special precaution against accumulation of static charge on metals, floors and equipment in oilstorage rooms, or where explosive gases are to be used or may accumulate, these should be grounded. The power outlets and switches in these rooms should be fully enclosed in spark/ explosion-proof chambers far as practicable. All exposed switches and all other exposed and energized electrical installations should be so located as to avoid the possibility of simultaneous contact with them and with pipes, plumbing, or other connections to the ground. Manually operated remote-controlled disconnect-switch handles should be pigtailed to the grounded structure. The grounding of all electrical equipment should conform to relevant Indian standards. Design of the grounding materials/electrodes should be dcne so as to limit the step and touch potentials within safety limits. 5 DE-ENERGIZING POWER LINES

2190 : 1979

for selection installation and maintenance of portable first aid fire extinguishers ( second revision ) Application guide for insulation coordination (first revision ) Code of practice for provision and maintenance of water supplies ~for fire fighting Code of practice and maintenance hydrant systems for provision of external CONTACT

3716 : 1978
9668 : 1990

13039 : 1991

3 PREVENTK)N

OF ACCIDENTAL

3.1 All exposed electrical installations either because of location or otherwise should be so guarded that dangerous contact by persons will not be possible. Step bolts on structural steel tower columns should be placed such that their use will not bring a person into the vicinity of electrical conductors, transformers or switch boxes that may be installed on the face of a tower, adjacent to the step bolts. Sufficient clearance should be provided in the design of substations, switch-yards and transformer yards so that vehicles moving around and about high voltage equipment will not come in contact with

5.1 Provision should be made for de-energizing power lines and other installations and also grounding the same when maintenance and repair work is to be done, except where it is contemplated that hot-line tools are to be used. Keys of locks, electrical interlocks on all chambers, cubicles or switchgear should be retained with senior authorized persons and other keys with the operator on duty 1

IS 10386 ( Part 5 ) : 1992 or the person working party. incharge of the concerned

b) For isolating and de-engergizing

5.2 Proper clearance procedure of obtaining permit to work on various electrical installations as given in `The model code for safe operation generating stations' and maintenance of of Central Electrical Board should be followed. 6 SUB-STATIONS 6.1 Minimum and sectional clearances as given in IS 3716 : 1978 should be maintained in the substations. 6.1.1 Where adequate ground clearance cannot be provided in sub-stations, fences, guards, or other means of protection should be provided. In sub-stations and transformer decks, sufficient clearance should be provided for the safe operation of service vehicles without damage to the instaIled equipment or exposing maintenance and repair men to hazards. 6.1.2 Barriers in stations, cutting off access to enclosures within the station chambers, cubicles or cells containing high and/or extra high should normally be kept voltage apparatus locked. No person except an authorized person or person acting under his immediate supervision should have access to any enclosure, cubicle or cell in which a live chamber, conductor is exposed. 6.2 Overhead Lines Ground clearance for over head lines across streets or along streets and other structures should be as given in Chapter 8 of `The Indian Electricity Rules'. 7 GENERATORS 7.1 Insulation of large generators should be of epoxy based resin, mica, glass, thermosetting or any other material which is non combustible, flame retarding and self extinguishing. Fire protection systems with carbon dioxide may not be advisable in underground installations. Use of water spray for fire protection of generators may be considered in such cases. 7.2 For working on generators procedure should be adopted: the following

generators, the generator main disconnecting switch, the neutral disconnecting switch, generator potential transformer switches or fuses and switches connecting unit auxiliary transformer should be opened. generator windings or on directly coupled the circuits transformer generator generator should be at rest ( unless permission has been given by the senior authorized person ). Whilst the generator is on run, the field circuit should be opened/isolated and locked out and the inlet-valve controlling supply to the prime mover should be locked in the closed position. control should be rendered inoperative before taking up any maintenance work. work in the generator and its enclosure all its tire protection features should be rendered inoperative. brought near live electromagnets passed over the energized machine. or

Cl Before any work is carried out on the

d) All remote operational e) Before undertaking

f 1 Metal rods, bars or strips should not be

8 TRANSFORMERS 8.1 All transformers should be fenced or protected to prevent persons coming in contact with terminals or buses. Suitable fencing and curbs should be provided for transformer vaults located in galleries of dams and rooms/buildings, to prevent posible personal contact. Such equipment should be installed out-side a plant building, wherever possible, especially if oil filled transformers are in use. As far as possible, in the case of underground power houses transformers should be located in a separate cavern. If the transformers are installed in the power house, these would normallv be in a separate gallery, every transformer should be housed in separate cubicles, formed by fire protection walls. Suitable ducts for removal of fou1 gases, smoke, and fumes in the event of fire should be provided. Oil soaking pits should be provided for collecting spilIed oil. Use of dry inside powerhouses type of transformers tunneIs etc, should be recommended as far ai possible, to avoid fire hazards. Adequate clearances as prescribed in `Indian Electricity Rules' should be provided. A permit to work or sanction for test should be obtained for all work on transformers and proper procedure as laid down in The Code for Safe 2

a) A permit-to-work or sanction should be obtained for all work/test on generatorsand generator-transformer circuits as per normal clearance procedures given in Annex A.

IS 10386 ( Part 5 ) : 1992 Operation, and maintenance of Generating Stations' ( Central Electricity Board 1. 9 ACCESS TO CONTROLS
9.1 Switches

15 STORAGE BATTERIES 15.1 Isolation All stationary storage batteries using acid or alkali as electrolyte, consisting of cells connected in series with a nominal voltage of 50 Volts or more should be installed in separate rooms. The room should be provided with an exhaust fan and running water with a wash basin. Outside the room acid resistant paint should be used to reduce the corrosive effect of acid fumes. 15.2 Caution Smoking, or the use of open flames, or of tools which may generate sparks, shouId be avoided except when cells are not actively gassing and when prior ventilation has been ample. Sparks from frictional or static electricity should be avoided as they may ignite the gas, if discharged close to its source, as at the vent of a scaled type cell during overcharging. The electrolyte of storage batteries and spray containing electrolyte are somewhat corrosive, particularly when concentrated by evaporation, and contact with body or clothing should be prevented. 16 LIGHTNING
ARRESTORS 16.1 No work should be done on a lightning arrestor unless it is disconnected from the live circuit and earthed at both the line and aground terminals.

and other control devices should be located and arranged so as to be readily accessible for safe operation. Platforms should be built, wherever necessary, to provide access to switches. Adequate space should be provided to operate and service equipment so that unnecessary, uncomfortable or hazardous positions during normal operations are not needed.
10 OUTLETS 10.1 Flush type floor level receptacles should be used to obviate tripping hazards. Electrical outlets in all permanent installations, where power tools are used, should be of the type which provide a ground connection for the tool. Tools specified for operation at such installations should also be provided with ground wire and a three-way or four-way plug as the case may be. 11 CONDUITS 11.1 Lengthy runs of cable conduits should terminate in such a manner so as to preclude the possibility of water condensing therein and dripping on equipment. .

12 BUS-BARS 12.1 Generator bus leads, terminating in a mesh or screen covered box on the side of a generator, with which personnel frequently come in contact, should be totally enclosed when so situated, and when live parts are within a short distance of such a covering. 12.2 Buses on main control potential should *be provided guards or insulatmg tape. 13 ASSEMBLY PEDESTALS boards of high with protective

16.2 Tanks of electrolyte or shields of oxide films of lighting arrestors should never be touched when the arrestors are energized. 16.3 High voltage and extra high voltage lightning arrestors, where accessible, should be provided with suitable screens or fences against possible contact while the arrestors are alive. The gate of the screens should be kept locked and the key should be with the operator on duty. 17 FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE FIGHTING

13.1 Pedestals for generator rotor assembly and transformer untanking pits should be recessed in floors with removable flush covers, protective guards and hand rails, etc. 14 SWITCHES 14.1 Electrical switches controlling moving of dangerous equipment should be equipped with locking devices so they can be locked in the <open' position. 3

17.1 The details of construction and provision of fit-c extinguishing systems and fire fighting equipments should be according to Part 9 of this standard.
17.2 The provision

of water supply should be madt: according to 1s 9668 : 1990 and external hydrants should be according to the provisions of IS 13039 : 1991. 17.3 Periodic training classes should be held to ensure that all regular employees are familiar with the following: a) Common fire hazards, techniques of fire prevention and fire fighting;

IS 10386 ( Part 5 ) : 1992

b) Use of various equipment; c) Location of equipment;

types and

of fire fire

safety fighting and

exits

d) Precautions against electric inhalation of toxic gases;

shock

e) Operations to be carried out in case of fire involving electrical equipment, or in the vicinity thereof; 17.4 Precautions to prevent common types Of electrical equipment fires are briefly given below: Electrical equipment should be installed, operated and maintained properly and in a manner so as to eliminate sparks due to poor contacts in switches and fittings, wires, crossed worn out insulation, of switches carrying large opening currents etc. electrical b) Metal parts of oil tanks, equipment and buildings `etc' should be adequately bonded and grounded to prevent fires by lightning and static electricity.

Power supply to the pumps shouId be reliable and to achieve this pumps should be supplied from at Ieast two power sources employing a carefully designed interlocking scheme. The control panel for drainage and dewatering pumps should be located at higher elevations to avoid flooding. Water proof cables should be used for submersible pumps. 18.2 Pumping plants can be dangerous because of the electrical equipment installed there. In order to protect persons from getting hurt, it is good practice to place fences around all unhoused pumping plants. These fences also serve to protect the installed equipment from being tampered with. The protection of persons from hazards of open hatches, slippery floors, trash rack decks and other danger spots also needs to be kept in view and appropriate measures taken.
19 POWER DRIVEN MACHINERY

a>

c>Flammable
4

gases or materials should not be stored near electrical equipment. lamps should not be by or laid on, combustible over to

this classification includes wood working machinery such as a bench saws, jointers, band saws, jig saws and lathes; metal working machinery such as lathes, punch presses, drill shapers, drilling machines, milling machines and grinding wheels; and other similar machinery. driven machinery and portable tools should be provided with special insulated power transmission cables having water proof connections, and should have three wire extensions and three-way plugs and outlets, one of which connects the non-current carrying parts of the motors and the frame to the ground. Tools provided with two-way outlets should also be grounded. Where stationery machinery such as bench saws, jointers and drill presses are driven by individual motors, ~the motors and frames should like wise be grounded.
19.3 If required electrical equipment operating on 110 volts or 24 volts may be used with measures as decided by the engineer in charge. 19.2 All electrically

19.1 As used herein,

Electrical surrounded materials.

17.4.1 Motors should be equipped with current and under voltage protection prevent excessive heating.

17.4.2 Battery rooms should have no loose connections and there should be no sparking devices for example bells, buzzers, relays, fuses or switches in the room. Smoking should be prohibited and rubbish and other combustibles should not be allowed to accumulate in battery rooms and near electrical plants and machinery. 17.4.3 Type of fires and the equipment to be used for extinguishing them are given in IS 2190 J 1979.
18 PUMPING PLANTS

20 CRANES AND HOISTS
20.1 All

case of Power Stations provision of suitable and reliable drainage and dewatering pumps of adequate capacity, ( it is advisable to provide 100 percent spare pumping capacity ) capable of running under the most adverse conditions should be made. Discharge pipes from equipment to be drained should be directly connected to headers going to the sump. Capacity of sump and pump should be adequate to ensure reliability of operation.
4

18.1 In

cranes and hoists should have a minimum safety factor of 5, and qhould never be used to handle loads in excess of their designed capacity. They should be equipped with proper safety devices and braking equipment, which should be capable of effectively braking a weight at least one and one-half times the full rated load. Provisions should be made in the design, so that loads of all types can be lowered with the power on and the motor in gear.

IS 10386 ( Part 5 ) : 1992

20.2 Capacity name plate should be attached to all cranes and hoists and should clearly indicate the safe load in tonnes. 20.3 The design should provide for sufficient number of full ways of cable on the drums of cranes and hoists. 20.4 Electrical controls and switches should be placed in access ways to remote-controlled elevated cranes to ensure that the crane busbar, etc. are de-energised before the equipment can be reached for servicing. It is recommended that each controller in an overhead travelling crane cab, or cage, be equipped with a mechanical lockout suitable to hold a padlock. Design specifications should also contain provisions for clearly labelling or marking all electrical switches and controls. Limit switches automatic power shutoffs should be and provided in the design for all bridge cranes. 20.5 All elevators, hoists and lifts should be designed with safety devices to prevent dropping of cages or loads, in case of equipment or power failure, and the entrances to shafts should be guarded by gates or doors that are closed and locked automatically when the car or cage leaves a floor. Elevator escape hatches should be designed for easy removal. The outside, stationary door on each floor of theelevator shaft should be so designed that it may be opened manually from inside the shaft, in the event of the elevator being stalled between floors. 21 FIRST AID AND RESUSCITATION
21.1 Project

b! Where patient is in contact with a live

switch off conductor or equipment, current at once before removal of the patient. If this cannot be done and the patient is in contact with low voltage apparatus, pull him off by using rubber gloves, if handy, or by his coat or shirt, or any dry cloth, bag, newspaper or dry rope. If the patient is in contact with high voltage apparatus, he should be handled only with a high voltage operating rod or a piece of perfectly dry wood or rope, care being taken to have at least one metre of wood or rope between the hands of the man and any live metal. shock extinguish sparks, if any, and if breathing has stopped begin artificial respiration without delay, even if the person appears to be dead. The doctor should be called immediately.
IN THE POWER HOUSE

C) In case of electric

22 LIGHTING
22.1 In addition

to normal lighting in the power house emergency lighting from D. C. storage batteries should also be provided. Sufficient provision should be made in the capacity of the battery on this account so that whenever station A. C. supply for lighting fails, D. C. lighting supply is automatically switched on and continuous lighting is maintained in the power house. Portable dry or rechargeable battery operated lamps for emergency use may also be used where necessary. 22.2 Use of fluorescent lamps is preferred due to their high efficiency. Protective guards around all lighting points in the vicinity of likely working zones is also essential. 23 VENTILATION and enclosures should be adequately ventilated to ensure adequate number of air changes as prescribed in the relevant standards. 23.2 Ventilation fans, etc. 24 PREVENTIVE EARTHQUAKES may be forced MEASURES or induced AGAINST by
23.1 Various buildings

authorities

should

provide

the at

following: Adequate first aid arrangements a> various places of work.

b) First

aid kits to the working

parties.

C) Arrangement
in rendering

and incentives for training of first aid to its employees.

4 Instructional

charts for artificial respiration and other first aid should be conspicuous places. displayed at Telephone numbers of nearest Doctor/ Ambulance service should also be prominently displayed.

21.2 First aid personnel should cultivate a methodical, re~gular and natural approach to be able to render skilled assistance. The guidelines given below should also be kept in mind:

a) Remove

the patient from the source of injury viz electric conductor, water, moving machinery etc. 5

24.1 All electri~cal plant and equipment should be designed according to relevant Indian Standards to withstand earthquake intensity of the project site. Anchor bolts for moving equipment such as transformers and cranes, etc. should be provided with a clamping arrangement to avoid accidental movement.

IS 10386 ( Part 5 ) : 1992 24.2 As a prevention

against damage to the civil structures and electrical installations, designs should be comprehensive after taking into account the maximum probability and intensity of earthquakes in the area. In this connection relevant Indian Standards may be consulted. 25 EMERGENCY POWER SUPPLY

26 WORKSHOP WELDING

MACHINERY

AND

26.1 All electrical machines like lathes and drilling machines should be properly provided with guards to avoid any accidents. 26.2 Field machinery, like stone employing belt transmission systems provided with protective guards. crushers, should be

25.1 Arrangements of power supply for essential services such as dewatering, operation of head gates, illumination and ventilation of important and hazardous areas etc, should have adequate alternative stand by power sources such as diesel/fossil fuel operated generating sets, etc.

26.3 Extensive welding is done in projects. Suitable safety appliances like goggles, hand gloves, etc, should be used by the welders. Welding accessories like cutting torches, cables, nozzles, etc, should be inspected periodically and kept in good condition.

ANNEX

A

[ Clause 6.2 (i) ]
CLEARANCE PROCEDURE

A-l GENERAL PROVISIONS A-l.1 The clearance procedure is intended meet the following principal requirements relation to potentially dangerous jobs: to in

b) Appointment

4 Protection of men at work; b) Protection of equipment; and cl Designation of abnormal conditions.
A-I.2 The requirements given in A-l.1 are to be achieved by providing safe working conditions, essential information and guidance to the men at work, checking arrangements to ensure reliability of the highest order, etc, through the use of the following:

4 d)

Authorized of Senior person( s ) for controlling the issue and cancellation of clearances under various conditions and safe and expeditious execution of work thereunder, their relations with `power controllers', etc; Appointment of authorized person(s) for work on various types of jobs; and Copies of these instructions should be displayed in the office of the Senior Authorized person, control room and appended to this code, in so far as may be required for reference of the persons concerned.

a) Permit-to-work; b) Sanction for test; cl Station guarantee; d) Self-protection tag; and
Danger e> notices.
A-l.3

Clearance procedure is equally applicable to electrical and mechanical processes. The undertaking should issue instructions

A-l.4

on electrical A-I.5 For switching operations apparatus the following conditions should be observed: a) Switches used in isolating apparatus for giving clearance should have contacts that are visible or the positions of which can be positively determined by inspection. All phases of such switches, irrespective of the type, should be inspected to make sure that they all open;

for: a) Making applicable such portions of the provisions of this section as apply to their work; 6

b) If

electrically operated or remote mechanically operated switches are used, they should be locked or blocked open or a portion of the mechanism should be removed to prevent accidental closure;

IS 10386 ( Part 5 ) : 1992 e) Switching operations in unattended stations and line sectionalising voints for purposes of clearance should se done by persons specifically authorized for this purpose. A-l.1 that: ?erson taking clearance should ensure

a) 411 electrical apparatus are treated b)

d) Particulars

of all switching operations and transactions connected therewith should be recorded in the station log or the registers maintained for this purpose. should ensure

alive by the persons under his charge until a specific clearance has been issued; I'he area covered by the clearance is made safe for working and proper danger notices have been placed on switches and/or the controlling points concerned;

A-l.6 that:

Persons issuing clearance

c) Vhere a possibility

a) Clearance is issued only for the actual work on electrical apparatus or mechanical equipment; is issued in the name of the b) Clearance persons under whose supervision the work is intended to be carried out. In case the nature of the work requires personal supervision of the Senior Authorized Person, a clearance be issued by him only. the electrical c) Before issuing a clearance apparatus or mechanical equipment, as the case may be, is made entirely safe for working and danger notices are attached at appropriate places and in a conspicuous manner. d) The person taking clearance understands the particulars of the work to be done as well as particulars of the operations carried out ( including those of earthing arrangements ) to make the working safe and the extent of the area safe for working; or mechanical e) The electrical apparatus equipment covered by the clearance has been duly surrendered and cancelled; of clearance ( for example f) Particulars type, serial No., time of issue and cancellation ) are recorded in the station log or a register to be kept for this purpose; g) Before going off duty they formally handover records relating to clearances issued by the them, indicating clearly the clearances remaining unsurrendered. The Senior ,4uthorized Person and the operator taking over should correspondingly acknowledge the records and the information as above and make sure that they have a clear understanding of the situation in each case.

of hazard exists in the vicinity of the work site, the boundaries of the area safe for working are clearly marked and persons other than the members of the working party or those specifically authorized by the Senior Authorized Person are not allowed to enter hazardous positions of the work site; work on the electrical apparatus or mechanical equipment covered by the clearance, understand the extent of the area safe for working: in the vicinity of the work site, one of the members of his party to be appointed as a safety man and it should be his duty to maintain a continuous watch over the workmen and to issue warnings of any unsafe conditions which he observes; of the working party should check, in the presence of another person, by means of approved devices or visual inspection whether the line or equipment concerned is de-energised and efIectively earthed; The safety measures, as above, continue to be in force until the work is completed or suspended ( for example earthing arrangements should not be removed ); of the work the ( i ) material, tools, etc, and ( ii ) persons under his control are immediately removed and made clear of the equipment under clearance; clearance is surrendered for cancellation to the issuing officer immediately after the action referred to under ( h ) above is completed; operation of the equipment or the line have been made, this should be clearly brought to the notice of the o.%cer issuing the clearance while surrendering the clearance;

d) All persons under his control who are to

4 In cases where the work involves hazards

f) Before starting work the person in charge

g)

h) On completion

j) The

k> Where any changes which may affect the

7

IS 10386 ( Part 5 ) : 1992

m) If due to any circumstances the clearance cannot be surrendered by its holder within the period originally estimated, the fact should be immediately brought to the n.otice of the officer issuing the clearance; n) Where possible the person surrendering the clearance should initial the log entry. A-2 PERMIT
TO WORK

adequately earthed and caution notices are attached at appropriate places;

b) In the case of mechanical equipment, the

A-2.1 Permit-to-work is a means to make known to persons undertaking construction, repair or maintenance what jobs exactly electrical apparatus or mechanical equipment have been made safe to work on, description of the job, special precautions, if any, for safety of workmen on the job, etc. It ensures safe working conditions until it is surrendered. For forms showing permit-to-work on electrical apparatus or mechanical equipment `The Model Code for Safe Operation and Maintenance of Generating Stations' of Central Electricity Board should be referred to. A.2.2 No construction, repair or maintenance work on, or in the proximity of High Tension or Extra High Tension apparatus or mechanical equipment where technical knowledge or experience is required to avoid danger, should be carried out unless a permitito-work on the prescribed forms has been issued by the Senior Authorized Person to the Authorized Person. A-2.3 In cases, where the work is to be carried out on major units of plant and equipment, or care in the work requires extraordinary supervision of the work, the permit should be used with the approval of the station superintendent, and in cases where the station superintendent is the Senior Authorized Person himself, the permit should be issued with the approval of the Engineer-in-Charge of the undertaking. A-2.3.1 The person issuing a permit-to-worlc should ensure that the apparatus/equipment is made perfectly safe to work on as follows: a) In the case of electrical apparatus the isolation is complete, the meta parts are

isolation is complete and condition rendered safe ( for example by opening proper valves, gates, etc. to reduce the equipment to atmospheric pressue; removal of poisonous, suffocating or explosive gases; application of brakes and blocks; allowing temperature to come down; as the case may be ), and caution notices are attached at appropriate places; and of the above conditions is essential until the permit is surrendered and cancelled.

cl Maintenance

should be prepared in duplicate. The first copy of the permit should be handed over to the person-in-charge of the work ( also known as permit holder ) and the second copy should be retained by, or forwarded to, the operator or any other person-in-charge of operations. Permit books should be treated as important records. The sheets and the books themselves should be serially numbered. No page should be detached or used for any but bonaflde work. If any paper is advertantly detached, a dated and initialed statement should be placed there and then recorded in the book by person concerned. A-2.5 The permit holder should be responsible for identifying the isolated and de-energised circuits in the case of work on multi-circuit lines or on singIe circuit lines situated close together. A-2.6 After surrender of the permit to the person issuing the permit, the original copy, duly completed shouId be forwarded by him to the Station Superintendent for information and record and the second copy should be retained in the records of the Senior Authorized Person. Provided, where the Station superintendent is the Senior Authorized person himself, the original copy should be forwarded to the Engineer-in-charge of the undertaking.

A-2.4 Permits

I

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and Standard marked products are also continuously checked by operated by the producer. Details of conditions under BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

1

Bureau of Indian Standard BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Adi, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of 81s. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Director Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS. Revision uf Indian Standards if Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in on this Indian Standard may br possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. RVD 21 ( 3873 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Telephones t 331 01 31, 331 13 75

New Delhi 110002 Telegrams i Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone I 331 01 13 75 31 37 86 62 53 38 43 235 02 16

Regional Offices

1

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme V-XIM, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western Branches : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C. 1. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS
: Manakalaya,

160036 600113

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 6 32 92 95 BOMBAY 400093 : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India

