( Reaffirmed 2003 )

1Sr5069-1982

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO METHODS OF MECHANICAL TESTING OF METALS

( First Revision )
Methods
Chairman
SHRI P. K. CEAKRAVARTY

of Physical

Tests Sectional

Committee,
Representing

SMDC

3

The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur M. N. Dastur & Co ( P ) Ltd, Calcutta National Test House, Calcutta Usha Martin Black ( Wire Ropes ) Ltd, Calcutta ) Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta Associated Instrument Manufacturers' Pvt Ltd, New Delhi ( India )

Soar J. N. BEATTACHARJEE SERI K. L. BARUI ( Alternate ) DR A. CHAKRABORTY SHRI H. MAHESWARY ( Alternate SHRI K. K. CEERIAN SHRI PANKAJ DE ( Alternate ) SHRI 0. P. CaWoH

Members SH~I SUJIT KUMAR BAFJU

SHRI V. N. NANDA ( Alternate) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI M. K. DAS GUPTA Ministry of Railways DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( MET )-2 ASSISTANT DIRECTOR CMET 1, ( Alternate ) Directorate of Technical Development and ProSHBI K. G. GARB, duction c Air ). New Delhi SHRI P. RA~HO~HA~~RAO( Alternate) Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI S. A. HAQUE SHRI A. S. WALIA ( Alternate ) Blue Star Ltd, Bombay SERI S. B. IDNANI SHRI A. L. CEADHA ( Alkrnate ) Fuel Instruments & Engineers Pvt Ltd, SHRI S. V. KULKA~NI Ichalkaranji SHRI J, V. KULKARNt ( Alternate ) The Indian Tube Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI M. C. KUMARASWAMY SHRI D. DUT~A ( Alternate ) Avery India Ltd, Calcutta SERI K. S. LAKSRMINARAYAN SHRI R. D. SHARMA ( Altmnab ) ( Continued on page 2 )

I
INDIAN

@ Copyright
STANDARDS

1982 INSTITUTION

I

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

1s : 5069 - 1982
( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Representing

Members

SHRI S. R. MAZUMDAR Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI M. P. MITTAL Bharat Steel Tubes Ltd, Ganaur SHEI KANWALJIT SINQH AEOFZA ( Alternate ) San1 R. A. PADMANAWAN Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ) , Durgapur SHRI M. PRA~AD Steel Authoritv of India Ltd. Ranchi SHRI K. BISHNOI ( Alternate ) SHRI S. RADHAKRISHNAN National Aeronautical Laboratory ( CSIR ), Bangalore DR V. SRINIVASAN ( Alternatc ) SHRI J. RAMESAM Ministrylof Defence ( R & D ) SHRI I. N. BHATIA ( Alternate ) DR V. RAO National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), Jamshedpur DR D. J. CHAKRAVARTI( Altemute ) SHRI R. N. SAHA Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi SHRI S. K. PANDEY ( Alternate ) Ministrv of Defence ( DGOF) SHRI D. N. SARKAR SHRI A. K. CHATTERJEE I ' \ Alternate1 Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI F. C. SHARMA Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay SHRI H. K. TANEJA SHRI V. N. PANDY (Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd, Bokaro Steel Ltd, SHRI S. G. TUDEEARE Bokaro SRRI J. C. ERRY ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&io Member) SHRTC. R. RAMA RAO, Director ( Strut & Met ) Secretary SHRI S. K. GUPTA Assistant Director ( Metals ), IS1

IS I 5060 - 1982

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO METHODS OF MECHANICAL TESTING OF METALS

(First Revision)
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 18 April 1982, after the draft finalized by rhe Methods of Physical Tests Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 This standard was first published in 1969. In this revision, SI units have been adopted ,and definitions of a number of new terms incorporated. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard defines the various methods of mechanical testing of metals. terms commonly used in the

1.1.1 The terms covered relate to tension, compression, shear, torsion, bend, hardness, impact, cupping, fatigue, creep and fracture toughness testing of metallic materials. 2. GENERAL 2.1 Calibration - The process of determining the characteristic relationship between the values of the physical quantity applied to the instrument and the corresponding positions of the index. 2.2 Ductility - The ability of a material to deform plastically before fracture. It is usually evaluated by (a) comparing values of the elongation and/or the reduction of area of the specimen in tensile tests; (b) the depth of cup in the cupping tests; or (c) the internal diameter and angle of bend in the bend tests.

IS t 5069

- 1982

2.3 Elasticity - The property of the material by virtue of which it tends to recover its original size and shape on removal of applied stress, not exceeding its elastic limit. 2.4 Elasticity ( Elastic ) Limits - The greatest stress which a material is capable of sustaining without any permanent strain remaining upon complete release of the stress. 2.5 Flexural Strength to bending. Flexural strength is the resistance of a material

2.6 Flexural Test - A test performed on a test piece from a material by subjecting it to a transverse loading under a given condition in a testing machine and noting the deflection produced at any desired point on the test piece and the corresponding load. 2.7 Flexure - The bending characteristic transverse load is called flexure. of a material subjected to

2.8 Hooke's Law - This law states that stress is proportional The law holds good up to the proportional limit.

to strain.

2.9 Malleability - The property of metals and alloys to plastically deform under compression ( pressing, hammering, rolling etc ) without rupture. 2.10 Mechanical Properties - The properties of a material that reveal its elastic and inelastic behaviours when force is applied, thereby indiFor example, modulus cating its suitability for mechanical applications. of elasticity, tensile strength, hardness, fatigue limit etc. 2.11 Mechanical Testing the mechanical properties. The procedure followed for determining

2.12 Nil Ductility Transition Temperature - The maximum temperature where a standard drop weight specimen breaks into two pieces. 2.13 Proportional Limit - The stress at which the strain just ceases to be proportional to the applied stress. 2.14 R-ratio ( Plastic strain ratio ) - It is the ratio of the true strain that has occurred in a width direction ` w ' perpendicular to the direction of applied stress and in the plane of the sheet, to the concomitant true strain in the thickness direction ` t `, 2.15 Resilience unloading. The amount of energy per unit volume released upon

4,.

1s : 5069 - 1982 2.16 Strain - A measure of change in size or shape of a body with reference to its original shape or size, as a result of the applied force. Strain is a non-dimensional quantity frequently expressed in centimetres per centimetre.
NOTE 1 - Strain may be either linear ( tensile strain or compressive strain ) or angular ( shear strain ). NOTE 2 - Linear thermal expansion per unit length, sometimes called ` thermal strain ' is not considered as strain in mechanical testing.

2.16.1 Elastic Strain - The change per unit dimension due to within the elastic range, with recovery of the original dimensions release of load, given the time. 2.16.2 Linear Strain due to the force applied. The change per unit length strain parallel strain in of a linear

stress upon

dimension

2.16.2.1 Axial strain axis of the specimen.

The linear

to the longitudinal transverse ( per-

2.16.2.2 Transverse strain - The linear pendicular ) to the axis of the specimen.

2.16.3 Plastic Strain or Permanent Strain - The change per unit dimension due to applied stress that does not disappear or will remain after removal of applied stress. 2.16.4 Shear or Angular Strain - The tangent of the angle lines originally drawn perpendicular to two parallel lines under the action of a force. For small' strains, as equal. The aforementioned this angle in radian definition Shear where strain is made and its tangent of rotation of on the body, may be taken

clear from Fig. 1.

= tan 0 = $

e=

shear

angle, displacement between under shear force, and lines drawn originally on the

a = linear

h = distance body.

the parallel

5

lSr5069-1982
SHEAR
`

FORCE

-

I

I i

:

h

f-

SHEAR

FORCE

FIG. 1

SHEAR OR ANGULAR STRAIN

2.16.5 Total True, Strain ( True, .Natural or Logarithmic Strain ) - The natural logarithm of the ratio of length at the moment of observation to the original gauge length. 2.166 True Strain length at the beginning 2.17 Stress The ratio of increase of the deformation. in length to the instantaneous

Expressed

as force per unit area.

cross 2.17.1 Fracture Stress - The true normal stress on the minimum It usually applies to the sectional area at the beginning of fracture. tension test of un-notched specimens. stress computed by simple 2.17.2 Nominal Stress - The formula ignoring stress-raisers and disregarding plastic flow. elasticity

of stress acting 2.17.3 Normal Stress - The stress or the component ptrpendicular to a given plane. Normal stress may either be a tensile stress or a compressive stress depending on the direction of the force. normal stresses on three 2.17.4 Princifial Stresses - The perpendicular planes on which there are no shear stresses. 2.17.5 Residual Stress - The stress present external force or thermal gradient. 2.17.6 Shear Stress which the forces act. The stress component in a body tangential mutually

that is free from to the plane on

IS t 5069 1982
l

2.17.7 Torsional Stress resulting from twisting.

The

shear stress of ~a transverse cross-section

2.17.8 True Stress - The axial stress in tension or compression calculated on the basis of the instantaneous cross-sectional area instead of the original area. 2.M Stress-Strain Diagram - A diagram similar to the load-extensi.on curve but plotted with corresponding value of stress, as ordinate and strain, as abscissa. 2.19 Transverse Test - A test generally applied to brittle materials like cast iron, by subjecting a suitable test piece of the material to transverse loads when held between two horizontal supports ( mandrels ) in a testing machine. 2.20 Verification - The process of testing an instrument for the purpose The assessment is to deterof assessing the errors of pointer indications. mine whether an instrument conforms to the stipulations laid down. 3. TENSION, COMPRESSION, SHEAR AND TORSION TESTING The load at which the specimen

3.1 Breaking Load or Final Load fractures ( see Fig. 2 ).

FIG. 2
3.2

LOAD-ELONGATION

DIAGRAM

Cohesive Strength - The hypothetical stress in an un-notched causing tensile fracture without plastic deformation

bar

3.3 Compression Strength - The maximum compressive stress that a material is capable of developing, based on original area of cross-section.
NOTE

fracture, which do pressive regarded

-- In the case of materials which fail in compression by a shattering the compressive strength has a definite value. In the case of materials not fail in compression by shattering fracture, the value obtained for comstrength is an arbitrary one based on the degree of distortion that is as indicating complete failure of the material.

7

IS : 5069 - 1982 3.4 Elastic Constants - Modulus of elasticity either in tension or compression (E) or in shear (G); bulk modulus (K); and Poisson's ratio (u). These are related by: a) l+a= $-, and 2a ).

b) E = 3K ( 1 -

after fracture 3.5 Elongation - The increase in gauge length measured of the specimen within the gauge length. It is usually expressed as a percentage of the original gauge length. 3.5.1 Percentage of Permanent Elongation - The permanent variation in the gauge length of a tensile test piece after removal of the prescribed stress expressed as a percentage of the original gauge length. 3.5.2 Uniform Elongation - The elongation upper yield point and the tensile strength. 3.5.3 Yield Point Elongation ciable elongation which occurs increase. 3.6 Extensometer strain. A device which occurs between the

Beyond the upper yield point, the apprebefore the load again resumes a steady for measuring the extension or linear

portion 3.7 Extensometer Gauge Length - The length of the parallel of the test piece used for the measurement of extension using an extensometer. This gauge length may differ from the original gauge length of the specimen. or prismatic 3.8 Gauge Length - The prescribed part of the cylindrical portion of the test piece on which elongation is measured at any moment during the test. Following distinction is made between original and final gauge lengths: a) Original gauge length is the gauge length before the test piece is strained. b) Final gauge length is the gauge length after the test piece has fractured and the fractured parts are carefully fitted together as nearly as a single piece. 3.9 Maximum Load - The maximum withstood during the test ( see Fig. 2 ). 3.10 Modulus of Elasticity below the proportional limit: a) Young's modulus (E) load which the test piece has

The ratio of stress to corresponding is the modulus in tension

strain

or compression.

IS : So63 - 1982 b) Rigidity modulus resulting modulus or modulus (G) is the modulus from shear stress, of transverse elasticity or shear corresponding to shear strain

c) Bulk modulus (K) is the modulus corresponding to the volumetric strain resulting from three mutually perpendicular and equal direct stresses.
NOTE - The stress-strain relationship of many metals does not conform to Hooke's law throughout the elastic range and deviates from it even at stresses well below the elastic limit. For such metals the slope of either the tangent to the stress-strain curve at specified point, the secant drawn from the origin to any specified point on the stress-strain curve or the chord connecting any two specified points on the stress-strain curve is usually taken to be the modulus of elasticity. In these cases the modulus is correspondingly designated as tangent, secant, or chord modulus with the indication of stress or stresses.

3.11 Modulus of Rupture torsion tests.

The nominal

stress at fracture The bending

in bend moment

or at

3.11.1 Modulus of Rupture in Bending ( Sb ) the fracture divided by the section modulus:
Sb= T

MC

where
M = The
C

I

maximum bending moment computed from maximum load and original moment arm, the initial distance from the neutral axis to the extreme = fib re where the failure occurs, and = the initial moment of inertia of cross-section about the neutral axis. The torque at the fracture

3.11.2 Moduhs of Rupture in Torsion ( S, ) divided by the polar section modulus: sg= where
T =

9

the maximum the original

twisting

moment, and of the original cross-section.

J =

f=

outer radius,

the polar moment

of inertia

limit in tension or compression or shear NOTE - When the proportional is exceeded the modulus of rupture in bending or torsion is greater than the corresponding actual maximum tensile or compressive or shear stress in the extreme fibre, independent of the effect of stress concentration near the points of application of load or torque.

9

IS : 5069 - 1982 3.12 N-Value ( Work cient ) - The n-value Hardening Exponent/Strain Hardening

approximates

to a measure

of the stretch

Coeffiforming

capability

of material.
or Waisting - A form or shape of the localized reduction in a ductile metal under tension before fracture.

3.13 Necking

in cross-section
3.14 Notch -

occurring

A slot or groove of specified characteristics cut in a test piece to break it at the desired section.

intentionally

3.15 Notch

Rupture Ductility ( Notch Ductility ) - Notch rupture ductility of a notched tensile test is the percentage reduction in area of the specimen in the plane of failure at the root of the notch.

in strength of the 3.16 Notch Sensitiveness - A measure of reduction metal caused by the presence of notch resulting in stress concentration. The strength may be tensile, impact or cyclic ( dynamic )
3.17 Notch Sharpness -

notch used on the tensile diameter of the specimen
3.18 Notch Strength

A term used to describe the severity of the It is expressed as the ratio of the test specimen. at the notch to twice the notch root radius.
- The to that

Ratio

fracture a notched specimen.

specimen,

ratio of nominal stress required to required to fracture an un-notched

3.19 Notch Tensile

( or Creep ) Testing

-

A test for determining

influence of a surface notch upon the properties conducted as a tensile or as creep test.
3.20 Percentage Reduction of Area -

of a material.

the It may be

change in the area of cross-section section, expressed as a percentage.

during

The ratio of the maximum test to the original area of cross-

The smallest cross-section may be measured at or after fracture as specified. The term, percentage reduction of area, generally, refers to that after fracture.
3.21 Permanent Sizt -

removal

of the applied

The plastic deformation load ( see Fig. 3 ). IO

which

persists

after

the

IS:

5069 - 1982

A

.

STRESS AT s PERMANENT g SET LIMIT G

L PERMANENT SET

FIN. 3

PERMANENT SET MEASUREMENT

3.22 Poisson's Ratio ( u ) - The absolute value of the ratio of the transverse strain to the corresponding axial strain in a body subjected to uniaxial stress, usually within the elastic range. 3.23 Proof Stress ( Non-proportional Elongation ) ( R, ) - The stress at which the non-proportional elongation amounts to a specified percentage of original gauge length. The proof stress which refers to the stress for a non-proportional elongation or a permanent set is usually specified by 0.1 or 0.2 or 0.5 percent of original gauge length. It is conventionally The proof stress in the case of indicated by R, O-1 or R, 0.2 or R, 0.5. non-proportional elongation is derived from the stress-strain diagram ( see Fig. 4 ).

PERMANENT ELONGATION

FIG. 4

PROOF STRESS BY NON-PROPORTIONAL ELONGATION

IS : 5069 - 1982 3.24 Proof Stress ( Total Elongation ) or Proof Stress Underload ( Rt ) - The stress corresponding to a specified percentage of the original

gauge length which is a made-up of the combined elastic and inelastic elongations ( see Fig. 5 ). ( Usually indicated by the symbol Rt with total elongation suffixed, for example, Rt 0.5 ). The value obtained by total elongation method would only be equivalent to R, if suitable allowance is made for the measurement of elastic extension. 3.25 Shear Force - A type of force which causes or tends to cause two contiguous parts of the body to slide relative to each other in a direction parallel to their plane of contact. 3.26 Shear Fracture - A mode of fracture in crystalline materials resulting from the movement along cleavage planes which are preferentially oriented in the direction of the shear stress.

c
t b-----mjTOTAL ELONGATION

FIG.~

PROOF STRESSBYTOTAL ELONGATION
in the load in distance

3.27 Shear Strength - The stress required to produce fracture plane of cross-section, acted on by the shear force. 3.28 Tensile Strength - The stress corresponding a tension test ( see Fig. 2 ) . to maximum

3.29 Torque - The product of force and the perpendicular from its line of application to the axis about which it acts.

3.30 Torsional Movement - The algebraic sum of the couples or the moments of the external forces about the axis of twist or both.
12

IS : 5069- 1982
3.31 Yield Point - The first stress in a material, usually less than the maximum attainable stress, at which an increase in strain results without an increase in stress ( see Fig. 2 ). If there is a decrease in the stress after yielding a distinction is made between upper and lower yield points.

3.31.1 Apparent Yield Stress - In tests where a stress-strain diagram is not obtained, the value of stress determined from the load at which a lag/hesitation or drop of the pointer is first observed. The load taken is the maximum, usually recorded by the slave pointer during yield extension. 3.31.2 Lower Tield Stress ( R,L ) - In tests where a stress-strain diagram is obtained, the lowest value of stress measured during plastic deformation at yield, ignoring any initial transient effects occurring. 3.31.3 Upper Yield Stress ( R,H) - In tests where a stress-strain diagram is obtained, the value of stress measured at the commencement of plastic deformation at yield, or the value of stress measured at the first peak obtained during yielding even when that peak is equal to or less than any subsequent peaks observed during plastic deformation at yield. 4. HARDNESS
TESTING

hardness test using cali4.1 Brine11 Hardness Test - An indentation brated machines to force a hard steel ball, under specified conditions of load and time, into the surface of the material under test and to measure the diameter of the resulting impression after release of the load. 4.1.1 Brine11 Hardness Number ( HB ) - A number related to the area of the permanent impression made by ball indenter of the specified size pressed into the surface of the material under a specified load. The surface area of the impression is determined from the mean diameter of the rim Brine11 hardness number is of the impression and the ball diameter. calculated from the formula:
HB = 0.102 x

F

:+-1/&d*)
where
F = test load in Newton, d =

D = diameter of ball in millimetres, and mean diameter of the impression in millimetres.

usually 4.2 Hardness - The resistance of metal to plastic deformation, by indentation. However, the term may also refer to stiffness, or temper or to resistance to scratching, abrasion or cutting. Indentation hardness may be measured by various hardness tests, such as Brinell, Rockwell and Vickers. 13

IS : 5069 - 1982
4.3 Indentation Hardness - A number related to the area or to the depth of the impression made by an indenter of fixed geometry under 3 known static load. The term c indentation hardness ' has no quantitative meaning, except in terms of a particular test in which the area and shape of the indenter, the identing load and other conditions of test are specified. 4.4 Knoop Hardness Test - An indentation hardness test using calibrated machines to force into the surface of the material under test, a rhombic based diamond pyramid indenter of specified edge angles, under stipulated conditions and to measure the long diagonal after removal of the load. 4.4.1 Icnoop Hardness .Number ( HK) - A number related to the applied load and to the projected area of the permanent impression made by 3 rhombic based diamond pyramid indenter ( of included edge angles of 172"30' and 13O"O' ) derived from the formula:

HIT=
where

0.102 P O-070 28 d=

applied load in Newton, and P ZZ= d = long diagonal of the impression In reporting be stated. Knoop hardness numbers,

in millimetres. the test load should always

using 4.5 Micro Hardness Tests - These tests are usually conducted metallurgical microscopes or special purpose instruments under loads less than 1 kg normally in the range of 15 to 500 g, indenter being the Advantage standard Vicker's diamond pyramid or the Knoop indenter. of this method is that the hardness of individual constituents of a microstructure may be measured. 4.6 Poldi Hardness Tester - A portable hardness tester consisting of a holder, carrying a 10 mm diameter steel ball fitted to alide along a square The ball is placed on the surface of the steel bar of known hardness. component to be tested and the bracket carrying the bar and ball is given a smart hammer blow, which makes a simultaneous indentation of the ball on both the standard bar and the work-piece, by virture of the ball strapped between the two. A comparison of the diameters of the indentations as per the following relationship gives a measure of the hardness, HB, of the component:

HB ( component

) = HB (standard

bar ) x

D y 2/D= - d$ -___ .~ D - 2/Da - dC=

14

18:5069-1982
where D = diameter d,, = diameter d, = diameter of ball indenter of the impression of the impression ( usually 10 mm ); bar used; and

on standard

on the component.

hardness test using 4.7 Rockwell Hardness Test - An indentation calibrated machines to force a diamond cone indenter or a hard steel ball under specified conditions into the surface of the material under test in two operations ( preliminary and total loads ) and to measure the difference in depth of the impression under the specified load condition. 4.7.1 Rockwell Hardness Number ( HR ) - A number derived from the net increase in the depth of impression as the load on an indenter is increased from fixed preliminary load to total load and then returned to the preliminary load. Indenters for the Rockwell test include steel balls of several specified diameters and a diamond cone indenter having an included angle of 120" with a spherical tip of a radius of 0.200 mm. Rockwell hardness numbers are always quoted for a scale symbol representing the indenter, the load and the dial used, 4.8 Rockwell Superficial Hardness Test - This test is made on a machine similar to that used for Rockwell hardness tests but differs as to preliminary load and total load. One point of hardness of regular Rockwell corresponds to 2 microns, while in superficial, it corresponds to 1 micron. 4.8.1 Rockwell Superjcial Hardness Number - A number derived from the net increase in the depth of impression as the load on an indenter is increased from the fixed preliminary load to a total load and then returned to the preliminary load. Identers of the Rockwell superficial test include steel balls of several specified diameters and the diamond cone indenter of an included angle of 120" with a spherical tip of 0 200 mm radius. Rockwell superficial hardness numbers are always quoted with a scale number representing the indenter, the load and the dial used. test, wherein the loss of kinetic 4.9 Scleroscope Test - A hardness caused by the energy of a falling ( tup `, resulting from the indentation impact of the ` tup ' on the metal sample, is indicated by the height of rebound. 15

IS t 5069 - 1982 hardness test using Hardness Test - An indentation calibrated machines to force a square based diamond pyramid indenter having specified face angles into the surface of the specimen under a predetermined load and to measure the diagonals of the resulting impression after release of the load.
4.10 Vickers

4.10.1 Vickers Hardness Number ( HV) - The Vickers Hardness Number is proportional to the quotient of the load in Newtons applied to a square based diamond pyramid indenter of included face angles of 136", by the surface area of the impression in square millimetres calculated from the Vickers hardness number is measured diagonals of the impression. calculated from the formula: 136" 0.102 x 2F Sin 2
HV= d= r! 0'1891 F/d2

where
F = d 3

applied load in Newtons, and arithmetic mean millimetres. of the diagonals of the impression in

5. BEND TESTING
5.1 Angle of Bend -

The angle through which the specimen is bent.

5.2 Bend Test - A test performed to indicate the ductility and soudness of metallic materials by bending a standard test piece over a specified angle, a round a pin or mandrel of a specified diameter in a testing machine and noting the behaviour of the material during and after bending process. The ductility is judged by non-cracking material under the conditions of test. The following four general methods used for bending: ( or otherwise ) of the

types of bend tests are the recognized

a) b)

Free Bend - The Bend obtained by applying force at the ends of a specimen without any application of force at the point of maximum bending. Guided Bend - The bend obtained by using a plunger to force the specimen into a die in order to produce the desired contour of the outside and inside surfaces of the specimen.

Cl Semi-guided
directly

Bend - The to the specimen

bend obtained by applying a force in the portion specified. In order to

IS t 5069 - 1962 obtain this, the specimen is either held at one end or forced When the specimen is supporaround a pin or around an edge. In ted at the ends, it is bent by a force applied in the middle. certain cases, the bend may be started in this manner and finished in the manner of a free bend. when a specimen is d) Wrap-around Bend - The bend obtained wrapped around a cylindrical mandrel in a closed helix. of a member subjected to 5.3 Bending Moment - At any section bending, is the algebraic sum of couples or moments of all external forces, or both, acting on one side. or tool used in making guided, 5.4 Mandrel or Pin - The plunger semi-guided or wrap-around bend tests by the application of bending force in the inner surface of the bend. 5.5 Radius of Bend bend specimen. 6. CREEP TESTING part of strain of a metal or alloy when 6.1 Creep - The time dependent stressed below its yield point or proportional limit. Its effect is more marked at elevated temperatures, and therefore, is important in the case of metals and alloys for high temperature uses. 6.1.1 Primary Creep rate ( see Fig. 6 ). 6.1.2 Secondary Creep The exhaustion stage of creep at a diminishing rate. rate, The minimum radius of the inside surface of the

The stable stage of creep

at a constant

6.1.3 Tertiary Creep - The final stage of creep at an accelerating preceding fracture ( see Fig. 6 ).
FRACTURE

j---+L PRIMARY FIG.

SECONDARV CREEP

CREEP

6

STAQES OFCREEP 17

IS ; 5069 - 1982 6.2 Creep Ductility - Creep ductility is indicated by the elongation at rupture of a creep specimen. 6.3 Creep Limit - The maximum stress which a metal or an alloy can withstand indefinitely without deforming faster than at a specified strain rate. 6.4 Creep Recovery - The time dependent portion of the decrease in strain following unloading of a creep specimen. 6.5 Creep Rupture or Stress Rupture Strength - The stress that shall cause fracture at a constant temperature in a given time. 6.6 Creep Strength - The constant nominal stress that will bring about a specified quantity of creep in a given time or creep rate at constant temperature. 6.7 Dynamic Creep - Creep that occur under conditior!s of fluctuating load or fluctuating temperature. 6.8 Initial or Instantaneous Stress - In a relaxation test is the stress enduring at the instant the specimen reaches the desired strain level. 6.9 Instantaneous Recovery - The decrease in strain occurring immediately upon unloading a creep specimen, before any creep recovery takes place. 6.10 Instantaneous Strain - The strain occurring immediately upon loading a creep specimen before the commencement of creep. 6.11 Percentage of Total Plastic Strain - The total plastic extension of the gauge length inclusive of any plastic extension during loading, expressed as a percentage of the original gauge length ( see Fig. 7 ).
INITIAL PLASTIC STRAIN7

INCREASING WITH TIME AT CONSTANT

STRAIN

-

Fxo. 7

TOTAL PLASTIC STRAININ CREEP 18

SS: 5069- 1982
6.12 Rate of Creep 6.13 Rupture parallel length The slope of the creep time curve at a given time. within the in a

fracture of the test piece - The complete under constant load and constant temperature. decrease

- The time dependent 6.14 Stress Relaxation member subjected to creep at a constant strain. 6.15 Time to Rupture and test load, between the test piece.

in stress

- The total time elapsed at the test temperature the commencement of the test and the rupture of

7. FATIGUE TESTING in the fatigue 7.1 Coaxing ( or Understressing ) - An improvement behaviour of a material as a result of initial cyclic stressing below the normal fatigue limit and then subjected gradually to the desired stress range. Apparently due to strain ageing effects, it may double the number of reversals to failure in the case of steels stressed above their normal fatigue limit. 7.2 Corrosion Fatigue The fatigue aggravated by corrosion.

7.3 Cumulative Damage Law stress ranges and frequencies, successive application of stress on the sum of damage ratios ( cycle

c+=

- In a fatigue test employing various sometimes with rest periods between a single specimen, failure occurs when ratios ) attains unity, that is 1.

where n = humber J'V= average It is also known of cycles at stress S actually number of cycles to failure damage law ' or ( Miner's performed, and at the stress S. law `.

as <linear

7.4 Cycle Ratio - The ratio of the number of cycles ( n ) of stress applied to a specimen ( or structure ), to the number of cycles to failure ( N) at the same stress, that is, n/N. of the ` used-up ' life of the material 7.5 Damage Ratio - An indication subjected to a number of stress reversals at stress ranges above the fatigue It is, usually, reckoned by the ratio of the difference betweeen the limit. fatigue life (Jv) of the material at the particular stress stepped-off from the S-N curve and the number of reversals ( n ) actually endured, to the
JV-?l

fatigue

life (N),

that is, N

.

19

1s : 5069 - 1982
of the material to absorb the 7.6 Damping Capacity - The ability energy of vibration or cyclic stressing by internal friction resulting in the conversion of mechanical energy into heat energy. leading to fracture under repeated or 7.7 Fatigue - A phenomenon fluctuating or cyclic stresses below the tensile strength of the material. Fatigue fractures are progressive starting as minute cracks developing under the action of fluctuating stresses. 7.8 Fatigue Life - The number of cycles of stress that can be sustained prior to failure of a specified nature for a stated stress condition. stress below which a 7.9 Fatigue or Endurance Limit - The maximum material can presumably endure an infinite number of stress cycles. If the stress is not completely reversed, the value of the mean stress or the minimum stress, or the stress ratio, should be mentioned ( seeFig. 8 ). 7.10 Fatigue or Endurance Ratio - The ratio of the fatigue limit to the tensile strength. For steels, it is of the order of 0.5 ( extreme values lying between 0.35 to 0.60 up to 1500 MPa. ) 7.11 Fatigue Range or Range of Stress - The between maximum and minimum stress, that is, S,,, algebraic - Smrll difference

*

I
FIG. 8

N - No.OF

CYCLES

iLOGARITHMIC)-

ENDURANCE LIMIT FROM S-NCURVE will

7.12 Fatigue Strength - The limiting stress below which a material withstand a specified number of cycles of stress without fracture.

7.13 Fatigue Testing - The testing of material or component under cyclic stressing ( fluctuating or alternating ) with its maximum below the ultimate tensile strength of the material. 7.14 Maximum Stress the stress cycle ( tensile negative ). ( ,S,,, ) - The highest algebraic stress value in stress considered positive and compressive stress

20

IS t 5069 - 1982 7.15 Mean Stress or Steady Component of Stress ( S, ) - The algebraic mean between the maximum and minimum stress in one cycle, that is: s,Gil,, + &ml -~ 2

7.16 Minimum Stress ( Smin) - Th e st ress having the lowest algebraic value in the cycle ( tensile stress considered positive and compressive stress negative ). 7.17 Overstressing - The damage to fatigue properties by cycling for a time at a stress above the fatigue limit. of a material

of the fatigue life deter7.18 Scatter of Fatigue Data - The variability mined at a constant stress amplitude influenced by such causes as surface condition, type of mounting, axiality of stress, the type of testing machine used, the hetrogeneity of the material and the like. It is the general observation that scatter is wider: a) on smoothly polished specimens mens. . b) on high-strength materials ( such hardened aluminium alloys and materials ( such as mild steel and c) at lower stress amplitudes. 7.19 Stress Amplitude ( or Variable Component of Stress ) ( S, ) One-half of the fatigue range of stress, that is: rather than on notched speci-

as high tensile the like ) rather copper ); and

steel and agethan on soft

7.20 Stress Cycle - The mode of application 9B ) in fatigue testing and may be of: a) stress alternating between positive

of stress ( see Fig. 9A and limits; and

and negative

b) stress completely reversed, alternating between equal tension compression values, with zero as the mean stress; and c) stress pulsating or fluctuating, zero and a maximum. that is, regularly varying

between

7.21 S/N ( Wohler ) Curve ( Stress-Number of Cycles Curve ) The most common, method of representing the fatigue test results by plotting the number of cycles to failure as abscissa and stress amplitude as ordinate, using the logarithmic scale for the number of cycles ( see Fig, 8 ).

21

IS : 5069 - 1982
/LOAD CKLEq

TIME sin s ~~~ maximum 9A Stress-Time mean stress stress

stress amplitude s, SM~% minimum stress

Curve to Indicate

Various

Stresses

in Stress

Cycles

x z
Sm<Sat Sm'Sa

t

c

s,nJ= 0

_ !

_

-&-$J
Sm=Sa

Sm>Sa

SmfSa

_ A

qP$Qp,

% -FLUCTUATING CGMPRESS,GN-j--

ALTERNATING

.--+--fLu!&!~$G

-

Alternating Fluctuating

stress: Stress varies from positive stress: Stress varies from positive range. 9B Types FIG. of Cyclic

to negative to iero

through

zero. to zero over a

or from negative

Stresses

9

STRESSES

22

IS

t So69 - 1982

7.22 Stress Ratio - The algebraic ratio of two specified stress values in a stress cycle. The two commonly used ratios are; (a) the ratio of the amplitude of the alternating stress to the mean stress; and (b) the ratio of minimum to maximum stress. 7.23 Thermal Fatigue - The fatigue failure as a result of repeated or fluctuating thermal stresses. 8. IMPACT TESTING

8.1 Brittleness - A tendency to fracture without appreciable deformation. It may be indicated in impact tests by low values or by very low percentage reduction of area in the tensile test. 8.2 Charpy Test - A pendulum type single blow impact test, in which the specimen ( usually notched ) is supported at both ends, as a simple beam, and broken by a falling pendulum on the face opposite to and immediately behind the notch. The energy absorbed, as determined by the subsequent rise of pendulum, is a measure of impact strength or notch toughness and is expressed in joules. 8.3 Impact Test - The test to determine the behaviour of materials when subjected to high rates of ( sudden ) loading, usually in bending, It measures the energy absorbed in breaking the tension or torsion. specimen by a smgle blow or impact. The results of impact tests have limited application, and only afford an indication of the behaviour of the material with a notch subjected to a sudden blow or impact. amount of energy required 8.4 Impact Strength/Impact Energy -The to fracture a `material usually measured by means of an Izod test or Charpy test. 8.5 Izod Impact Test - A pendulum type single blow impact test in which the specimen. usually notched, is fixed at one end and broken by a falling pendulum. The energy absorbed as measured by the subsequent rise of the pendulum in a measure of impact strength or notch toughness. The impact strength is expressed in joules. 8.6 Notch - A slot or groove of specified characteristics intentionally in a test piece so as to concentrate the stresses ( see also 3.14 ). cut

8.7 Notch Brittleness - The susceptibility of a material to a brittle fracture at points of stress concentration. For example, in a notch tensile test if notch strength is less than the tensile strength, it is said to be ` notch brittle `, otherwise c notch ductile `. 23

IS : 5069 - 1982
8.8 Notched Bar Test - Bend tests in which a bar, notched on to one side, is bent with the notch in tension. The rate of bending may be slow or rapid ( as from a blow ) and with many variants. The different tests are Charpy, Izod, Pellini Drop-weight, etc.

8.9 Notch Sensitivity - A notch measure of the reduction in strength of a metal caused by a notch or in effect, stress concentration. Such ` strength ' may be in static tensile, bend or ( dynamic ) fatigue or impact ( see also 3.19 ).
8.10 Notch Toughness - The high resistance of material to fracture under suddenly applied loads at any stress raiser, such as notch.

8.11 Toughness - The ability of a material to absorb energy and deform plastically before fracture. It is usually measured by tph:n;:E; absorbed in a notched impact test like Izod and Charpy tests. under the stress-strain curve in a tensile test is also a measure of the toughness and as such, is proportional to the combined effects of tensile strength and ductility. 8.12 Transition Temperature - Temperature in a range in which the change from ductile to brittle fracture occurs in a notched bar impact test. 9. CUPPING
9.1 Cupping

TEST at fracture, in the

Number - The depth of impression cupping test, usually expressed in millimetres.

9.2 Cupping Test - A mechanical test used to determine the ductility and drawing properties of sheet metal. It consists in measuring the maximum depth of bulge ( or cup ) which can be formed before fracture. 9.3 Erichsen Test - A cupping test to measure the suitability of material for deep drawing. A 20-mm diameter ball is forced into a sheet of material through the centre of a pair of ` annuli ' used to lightly clamp the sheet. The dome is forced into the sheet. Its height before cracking and the extent of surface roughening as a result of grain coarsening determine the suitability or otherwise of the material for different forming operations.
18. FRACTURE

TOUGHNESS

TEST

10.1 Crystallographic Cleavage - The separation of a crystal along a relative to the three dimensional crystal plane of fixed orientation, structure, within which separation process causing the newly formed surfaces to move away from one another, in directions containing major components of motion perpendicular to the fixed plane.

24

18 t 5069 - 1982
IQ.2 Plane-strain Fracture Toughness ( KZC ) - It is the material toughness property measured in terms of the stress intensity factor and is defined as the resistance to crack propagation in the presence of a notch.

10.3 Stress Intensity Factor ( KZ) - A measure of the stress field intensity near the tip of an ideal crack in a linear elastic medium when deformed so that the crack faces are displaced apart, normal to the crack plane. KI is directly proportional to applied load and depends on specimen geometry.

INTERNATIONAL
Base
Units Quanfify Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary Quantify Plane angle Solid angle Units Units

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

(SI

UNITS)

Unif metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

Symbol m kg : K cd

Unit radian steradian

Symbol rad sr

Derived

Quanfify Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress

Unit newton joule watt weber tesia hertz siemens volt Pascal

Symbol N J W Wb T HZ S V Pa I 1 N = 1 kg.m/G J = 1 N.m 1 J/s 1 V.s 1 Wb/ms I c/s (s-1) 1 A/V 1 W/A 1 N/ml

1 w = 1 Wb = 1 f = 1 Hz = 1 S = 1 v = 1 Pa =

