IS 10242

( Part 4 ) : 1992

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS IN SHIPS
PART 4 INSTALLATION INSTALLATION AND TEST OF CO~MPLETED - SPECIFICATION

UDC

629'12'066

: 621'316'174

0

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Match

1992

Price Group 7

Electrical

Equipment

and Installations

in Ships Sectional Committee,

ETD 26

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Electrical Equipment and Installaticns in Ships Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. This standard ( Part 4 ) has been prepared to cover the requirements applicable to the installation of electrical equipment for use in ships and to the testirg of the complete installaticn. This standard ( Part 4 > is one of the series of Electrical Installations in Ships. This series of Indian Standards on electrical installations in ships consists of the following parts: Part Part Part Part 1 General, 2 System design, 3 Equipment, 4 Installation and test of completed installation, Special features. shall be read in conjunction with the other parts mentioned above.

and

Part 5

This part of the standard

In the preparation of this standard assistance has been taken from IEC Publication 92-401 ( 1980) Electrical Installations in Ships: Part 401 Installation and test of completed installation, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rev&d)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 18242 ( Part 4 ) : 1992

Indian Standard

ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS IN SHIPS
PART 4 INSTALLATION INSTALLATION AND TEST OF COMPLETED - SPECIFICATION SECTION 2 EARTHING

1 SCOPE
1.1 This standard ( Part 4 ) is applicable to the installation of electrical equipment for use in ships and to the testing of the complete installation.

4 PARTS FOR WHICH

EARTHING

IS

REQUIRED 4.1 Unless specifically exempted in the following exemptions, all accessible metal parts of the electrical installation, other than current-carrying accessible parts, shall be earthed. Exemptions:

2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards adjuncts to this standard:
IS No.

are necessary

Title

2148 : 1981

Flameproof enclosures for electrical apparatus ( second
revision )

a) Lamp caps; b) Shades, reflectors and guards,

supported on lampholders or luminaires constructed in, non-conducting of, or shrouded material;

5571 : 1979

selection of Guide for for equipment electrical areas hazardous ( first
revision )

4 Metal parts on, or screws in or through,

9596 : 1981

i0242 ( Part 1 / Set 1 ) : 1982

General requirements and classification of tests for micro-circuits Electrical installations in ships: Part 1 General, SecI and tion 1 Definitions general requirements Electrical installations in ships: Part 2 System design, Section 1 General Electrical installations in ships: Part 3 Equipment, Section 1 Generators and motors
1 DEFINlTlONS

4

4 f)

10242 ( Part 2/ Set 1 ) : 1982 10242 ( Part 31 Set 1 ) : 1983

non-conducting material, which are separated by such material from currentcarrying parts, and from earthed noncurrent-carrying parts; Portable appliances having double and/or reinforced insulation [see IS 10242 ( Part l/Set 1 ) : 1982 ] provided that the appliances conform with recognized safety requirements; Bearing housings which are insulated in order to prevent circulation of current in the bearings; Clips for tluorescent lighting tube; supplied at safety voltage of IS 10242 (Part l/Set 1 ) :

g) Apparatus T;;; 2.ll: h) Cable clips.

SECTION

3 DEFINITIONS
3.1 Earth Continuity Conductor

NOTE -Consideration shall be given to the earthing of the non-current carrying parts which are not accessible but which under fault conditions might become live and hence constitute a fire hazard, such as a metal junction-box mounted on a wooden panel.

connecting to each other or to the earthing lead those parts For example, it may which have to be earthed. be in whole or in part the metal conduit or the metal sheath of the cables, or the special earth continuity conductor of a cable or flexible cord incorporating such a conductor. 3.2 Earthing Lead A conductor by which the connection the metal hull of the ship. is made to

A wire, cable or other conductor

4.2 To minimize shock from high-frequency voltage induced by the radio transmitter, handles, hand-rails, etc, of metal on the bridge or upper decks shall be in good electrical connection with the hull of superstructure.
also Indian Standard on Electromagnetic compatibility of electrical and electronic installations in ships ( under prepurafion ).

NOTE-See

4.3 Secondary windings formers shall be earthed.
1

of

instrument

trans-

IS 10242 ( Part 4 ):1992 5 METHODS
OF EARTHING 6.3 Metal parts of portable appliances, other than current-carrying parts and parts exempted in 4.1, shall be earthed by means of an earthcontinuity conductor in the flexible cable or cord, which complies with Table 1 and which is earthed for example through the associated plug and socket-outlet. 6.4 Under no circumstances shall the lead sheathing of cables are relied upon as the stile means for earthing. 7 EARTHED DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS

5.0 Accessible non-current-carrying metal parts not exempted under 4.1 shall be earthed as described below. 5.1 Metal frames or enclosures of apparatus may be fixed to, and in metallic contact with the ship's structure, provided that the surfaces in contact are clean and free from rust, scale or paint when installed and are firmly bolted together. Alternatively, they may be connected to the hull by a connection complying with 6 and 8. A lead cable sheath shall not be solely upon for this purpose. relied of of

5.2 For requirements concernirg earthing metal coverings of cables and earthing mechanical protection of cables, see 37. 6 EARTHING CONNECTIONS

7.1 The system earthing connection in an earthed distribution system, in which the earthing connection does not normally carry current, shall conform with the recommendation of 6 except that the upper limit of 64 mms does not
apply ( see Table 1, item 3.3 ). 7.2 The system earthing of earthed

6.1 Every earthing connection shall be of copper or other corrosion-resistant material and shall be securely installed and protected where necessary against damage and also, where necessary, against galvanic corrosion. 6.2 The nominal cross-sectional area copper earthing connection &all be not is required in Table 1. Every other connection shall have a conductance ihan that specified for a copper connections. Table 1 of every less than earthing not less earthing

distribution systems shall be effected by means independent of any earthing arrangements of non-currentcarrying parts.

8 C~ONNECTION TO THE SHIP'S STRUCTURE 8.1 Every connection of an earth-continuity conductor or earthing lead to the ship's structure shall be made in an accessible position, and shall be secured by a screw of brass or other corrosion-resistant material of diameter not less than 6 mm which shall be used for this purpose only. In all circumstances care shall be taken

Sizes of Earth-Continuity Conductors and Earthing Connections ( Clauses 6.2, 6.3, 7.1 and 37.2 )
Cross-Sectional

Type of Earthing Connection (1) Earth-continuity conductor in flexible cable or flexible cord
corporated in fixed cable

Associated CurrentCarrying Conductor
(2)

Area of

Minimum Cross-Sectional

Earthing Connection
(3)

Area of

Copper

j)

Any
Any

Same as current-carrying conductor up to and including 16 mm* or one-half above 16 mm2 but at least 16 mm%
For cables having on insulated earth-cant inuity conductor: A cross-section equal to the main conductors up to and including 16 mm* but minimum 1.5 mm* A cross-section not less than 50 percent of the cross-section of the main conductor when the latter is more than 16 mm*, but at least 16 mm* For cables with a bare earth wire in direct contact with the lead sheath: Cross-section of main Earthing conductor conductor 1 to 2.5 mm' 1 mmp 4t06mma 1.5 mms Same as current-carrying conductor subject to minimum of l-5 mm' for stranded earthing connection, or 3 mm* for unstrandcd earthing connection One-half the cross-sectional area of the currentcarrying conductor, subject to a minimum of 3 mm* 64 mm*

ii) Earth-continuity conductor in-

iii)

Separate fixed a earthing conductor

a) Not exceeding 3 mm'

b) Exceeding 3 mm* not exceeding 125 mm' c) Exceeding 125 mm'

2

IS 10242 (Part

4 ) : 1992

to ensure bright metallic surfaces at the contact areas immediately before the screw is tightened.
9 ALUMINIUM 9.1 Methods SUPERSTRUCTURES

12 PASSAGE-WAYS

SWITCH-GEAR ASSEMBLIES

IN FRONT OF AND CONTROL-GEAR

of securing aluminium superstructures to th.e steel hull of a ship often includ: insulation to prevent galvanic corrosion between these materials. In such case, a separate bonding connection should be provided between superstructure and hull which should be made in such a manner that galvanic corrosion is avoided and the points of connection mly be readily inspected.
NOTE - Indian Standard on Electromagnetic Compatibility of Electrical and Electronic lnstallations in Ships ( under preparatiori ).

12.1 An unobstructed passage-way not less than 1 m wide extending from the furthest projection shall b: provided in front of any assembly or where not practicable due clearance must be given for withdrawal type equipment and th:ir maintainability.
NOTE - The unobstructed paxage-wlv may be reduced subject to agrezmznt by thz appropriate authority.

13 SPACE AT THE REAR AND PASSAGEWAY 13.1 When a spnce is provided at the rear of switchgear and controlgcar assemblies, it shall ba ample to permit maintenance and in general shall be not less than 0'6 m except that the width may be reduced to 0'5 m, where there are stiffeners and frames. For nominal voltages exceeding 500 V, it is recommended to increase this space. Passage-ways behind main and emergency switchboards shall be of amale height and mly be provided at each end with an access door fitted with an externnl lock which can at all times be opened from the interior. The access doors shall carry a permanent and prominent indication of the maximum voltage. 14 POSITION TANKS RELATIVE TO PIPES AND

30 SINGLE WIRE SYSTEMS

WITH HULL

RETURN
10.1 Where hull return systems are permitted, all final sub-circuits shall consist of two insulated wires, the hull return being achieved by connecting Xo the hull one of the busbars of the distribution board from which they originate.

Earth wires shall be in accessible locations to permit their ready examination and to enable their disconnection for the testing of insulation. In dc hull return systems, all cables inside the magnetic compass zone shall be arranged in a bupolar manner, that is, the outgoing and the returning wire shall be arranged in one cable or be directly side by side. Depending on the current of the respective circuit, this shall apply to the following spherical radii around the magnetic compass, except where a steel bulkhead or deck intervences.
Current (A) Spherical Radius (m) 5

up to 10 Over 10 Up to 50 Over 50

7 9

For radio telegraph installations or other ,essential radio apparatus including directionfinders, the manufacturer's data are valid. SECTION 3 SWITCHGEAR AND CONTROLGEAR ASSEMBLIES
MATS

11 INSULATING

11.1 When the voltage exceeds the safety voltage specified in 2.18 of 1S 10242 ( Part l/Set 1 ) : 1982 an insulated mat, grating or deck of impregnated wood shall be provided in front deck mounted of switchgear and controlgear assemblies and also at the rear if access from the rear is required. The insulated mats, grating or deck shall be oil-resistant and non-slip.

14.1 In addition to complying with the appropriate requirements of IS 10242 ( Part l/ Set 1 ) : 1982 all switchgear and controlgear assemblies shall be so installed that no pipes or tanks are above them within the same space and at their rear. Whdre this is unavoidable, pipes shall be continuous and without any flanged and bolted connections in such locations. In cases other than main switch boards when it is absolutely unmanageable to provide the continuous pipes provision of drip tray covers above electrical starters control panels, etc., shall be resorted to avoid damage from leakage subject to agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. As far as possible pipes carrying hot gas or liquid shall not pass adjacent to switch boards/panel boards/control In case it is inevitable pipe gear assembly. carrying hot gas or liquid passing adjacent to switchboards/panel boards/control gear assembly shall be properly insulated so that no heat is transferred to these electrical equipment. 15 POSITION OF SECTION DISTRIBUTION BOARDS AND

15.1 In accommodation spaces where open= type assemblies are surrounded by combustible material, a fire barrier of incombustible material shall be provided. 3

j8 10242 ( Part 4 ) : 1992 SECTJON 4 TRANSFORMERS heat energy, such as resistors banks steam pipes and engine exhaust pipes. 17.3 Semiconductor convertor stacks or semiconductor components shall be mounted in such a manner that they may be removed from equipment without dismantling the complete unit. 17.4 For liquid-immersed-type convertors, the same installation precautions as specified in 16 for liquid-cooled transformers apply.
SECTION 6 ACCUMULATOR ( STORAGE ) BATTERIES 18 LOCATION

M INSTALLATION AND LOCATION 16.1 Transformers shall be installed in wellventilated compartments, accessible only to authorized personnel except that air-cooled transformers provided with means of protection against accidental contact with live parts need not be installed in special compartments. 16.2 Liquid-immersed transformers shall be housed in a metallie compartment having adequate means for the drainage of liquid leakage. When flammable liquid such as oil is used, the space where the transformer is located shall be protected by an automatic fire-extinguishing system. 16.3 Suitable arrangements shall be provided for cooling and containing all the liquid which might escape from the damaged tank. Contamination of bilges is to be precluded by the provision of suitable drip-trays or save-alls. 16.4 Transformers and their connection shall be protected against such as mechanical damage, condensation and corrosion as may reasonably be expected. -16.5 Main transformer shall be located in such a way that adequate space shall be available ( between bulk head and transformers and between transformers themselves ) for attending to connection to terminal boxes and routine maintenance/repaid jobs. 16.6 Whenever a spare transformer is installed for main transformer, the arrangement shall be in such a way that the spare transformer shall be ready for use and connecting up in case of failure of one of the working units. Necessary instructions/diagrams shall be displayed in the compartment to this effect.
SECTION 5 SEMICONDUCTOR CQNVERTORS

18.1 Batteries shall be located where they are not exposed to excessive heat, or extreme cold, spray, steam or other conditions which would impair performance or accelerate deteriorations. Batteries for emergency service, including emergency diesel-engine starting, shall be located where they are protected as far as practicable from damage caused by collision, fire or other casualty ( in accordance with the International Convention for Safety of Life at Sea ). Batteries shall be located in such a way that no harm may be done to surrounding appliances by the vapours generated. 18.2 Batteries connected to a charging device shall be installed dependent on the output power of the device ( calculated from the maximum obtainable charging current and the nominal voltage of the battery ) as follows: a) Power more than 2 kW, in a room assigned to batteries only or if a room is not available, in a suitable well-ventilated locker on deck;

b) Power between 0'2 kW and 2 kW, as above,

17 INSTALLATION AND LOCATION convertor 17.1 Semiconductor stacks or equipment shall be installed in such a manner that the circulation of air to and from the stacks, associated equipment or enclosures ( if any ) is not impeded and that the temperature of the cooling~inlet air to convertor stacks does not exceed the ambient temperature for which the stacks are specified. Naturaly air-cooled cabinets shall be designed with sufficient ventilating openings, or with sufficient radiating surface in the case of totaly enclosed convertor equipment to operate within allowable temperature limits. 17.2 Convertor stacks and associated equipment shall not be mounted near sources of radiant 4

may be installed in a box or locker in some suitable space, or if protected from falling objects, in the machinery space or in a similar well-ventilated compartment; and

c) Power less than 0'2 kW as above, but may also be installed open, if protected from falling objects, or in a battery box in any suitable space ( see also 23 ). 18.3 Starter batteries shall be located as close as practicable to the engine served, to limit voltage drop in cables at the high current required. 18.4 Batteries (unless of the hermetically sealed type ) shall not be placed in sleeping quarters. 18.5 Lead-acid shall not be compartment. batteries and alkaline batteries placed in the same battery

IS 10242 ( Part 4 1 : 1992

18.6 A danger notice shall be permanently secured to doors or covers of battery compartments, lockers and boxes, indicating that a naked light or smoking in these rooms or in their vicinity is prohibited. 19 ACCESS
19.1 Batteries

lining of electrolyte resistant material. The lining shall be watertight and carried up to at least 75 mm on all sides. Lining shall have a minimum thickness of 1'S mm if of lead sheet, and of 0'8 mm if of steel. Exterior surfaces of metal shelves should at least an electrolyte-resistant coating. have

shall be arranged to permit ready access for replacing, inspecting, testing, replenishing and cleaning.
INSTAL-LATION COMPARTMENTS IN

20 ELECTRICAL
BATTERY 10.1 Cables

21.3 Deck boxes and battery boxes shall be made of non-corrosive materials sh?ll b: lined alternative in accordance with the above m:thods. Boxes for small batteries shall be lined to a depth of 75 mm consistant with the methods described above. 21.4 Materials used for coating and lining shall not be likely to emit vapours detrimental to the batteries. 22 FIXING AND SUPPORTS
22.1 Batteries shall

with the exception of those appertaining to the bzttery or the battery compartment lighting, should as far as possible, not be installed in the battery~compartments. If however, such an installation is necessary the cables shall have a protective covering resistant to the vapours developed by the electrolyte or shall be otherwise protected against these vapours. 20.2 Lighting equipment should be in accordance with Table 5 of IS 10242 ( Part 2/Set 1 ) : 1982. 20.3 Electrical Eqnipment in Battery Spaces Switches, fuses and other electrical equipment liable to cause an arc should not normally be Where such installed in battery compartments. equipment is necessary for operational reasons, the equipment should be certified for group II C gases and temperature class Tl in accordance IS 5571 : 1979 with IS 2148 : 198~1 and respectively. 20.4 It is recommended that an isolating (earth ) switch may be installed on the connection leading to earth terminal for the protection of the battery in the event of short-circuiting. 21 PROTECTION
21.1 The AGAINST CORROSION

be securely checked, with wood blocks or the equivalent, to prevent movement. The trays shallbe arranged to give access of air to them from all sides. The isolating supports shall b: non-absorbent to the electrolyte. 23 VENTILATION

23.1 All rooms, lockers and box:s for storage batteries shall be arranged and/or ventilated to avoid accumulation of flamxble gas. Particular attention shall bc given to the fact that the gas emitted is lighter than air and will tend to accumulate in any pockets at the top of the space. When batteries are arranged in two or more tiers, all shelves shall have not less than 50 mm space, front and back, for circulation of air. 23.2 Natural ventilation may be employed if ducts can -be run directly from the top of the room or locker to the open air above, with no part of the duct more than 45" from the vertical. These ducts shall not contain appliances ( for example for barring flames ) which may impede the free passage of air or gas m:xtures. Where lockers are provided for batteries, the duct shall terminate not less than 0'9 m above the top of the battery enclosure. If natural ventilation is impracticable or insufficient, mechanical exhaust ventilation shall be provided with exhaust at the top of the room. Adequate openings, whether connected to ducts or not for air inlets shall be provided near the floor of battery rooms or the bottom of lockers or boxes. 23.3 In every case the quantity expelled shall be at least equal to: Q= llO.I.n where Q = zyu;tity
,

interior of battery compartments including crates, trays, boxes, shelves and other structural parts therein shall be protected against the deteriorating effect of the electrolyte by: a) electrolyte-resistant coating, or b) lining of electrolyte-resistant material, for example, lead sheet for lead-acid, steel for alkaline batteries. Alternatively, the floor of battery compartments may be lined with electrolyte-resistant material spanning the entire floor. The lining shall be watertight and carried up to at least 150 mm on all sides. Walls and deck-heads of battery compartments shall be protected with electrolyteresistant coating. 21.2 Interior surface of metal shelves for lead cells, whether or not grouped in crates or trays, or for alkaline batteries, shall be protected by a

of the

air

of expelled

air

in litresmper

5

1610242

( Part 4 ) : 1992

I = maximum current delivered by the changing equipment during gas formation, but not less than one-quarter of charging the maximum obtainable current in amperes; and n = number of cells in series. 23.4 Rooms, lockers and boxes for batteries connected to a charging device with a power output according to lg.2 shell be ventilated as follows:

25 DISCHARGE LAMP LUMINAIRES VOLTAGE ABOVE250 V 25.1 General

OF

Discharge lamps operating at voltages above 250 V should be used only in fixed luminaires. Discharge lamp installations should, where practicable, be provided with durable and suitable notices bearing the inscription.

4 Power more than 2 kW, according to 23.2
and 23.3 above, preferably by mechanical exhaust, independent of ventilation system for other spaces; Power between 0'2 kW and 2 kW, according to 23.2 and 23.3 above, except for batteries located open in the engine room or in a similar well ventilated compartment; openings near the top of gas; and to permit escape 25.2 Protection of Live Parts All live parts of discharge lamp luminaires shall be so designed, placed and installed that they cannot be touched accidentally or inadvertently, the creepage distance along the surface of the glass tube being taken into consideration. 25.3 Wiring Installation Bare metal conductors or cables, neither metalsheathed nor armoured, should be properly supported and separated according to the voltage but cot less than 20 mm from other conductors, cables or earthed metalwork and should be covered by a suitable protection. Where otherwise not readily identifiable, cables or their protective covering, shall be distinguished by tabs or labels marked "DANGER" securely attached at intervals not greater than 1'5 m. The letters shall be red on a white background, and shall be not less 10 mm high.`j 25.4 Earthing All non-current-carrying metallic parts of the installation shall be effectively earthed. It is, however, not always necessary to earth metallic clips or clamps used in positions remote from terminals to support discharge lamps but it may be found desirable to earth such clips or claps in order to reduce interference with radio reception ( see also Section 2 Earthing ). 25.5 SwRitches Each discharge lamp luminaire or installation shall be provided with a multipole ( all poles ) disconnecting switch in an accessible location. Such switch shall be clearly marked and the warning notice shall be placed nearby. 6
WARNING

b)

4 Power less than 0'2 kW, boxes require

J

d) Deck boxes may be naturally ventilated. Natural ventilation by means of aduct of ample dimensions, terminating at least 1'25 m above in a goose-neck, mushroomhead or the equivalent will be sufficient. Holes/suitable openings for air inlet should be provided on at least two opposite sides of the box. For degree of protection see Table IS 10242 ( Part 2/Set 1 ) : 1982. 5 of

23.5 Fans of eccumulator compartments shall be so constructed and be of a materials such as to rerdcr sparking impossible in the event of the impeller touching the fan casing. Steel or aluminium impellers shall not be used. 23.6 Ducts shzll be made of a corrosionresisting material or their interior surfaces shall be painted with corr.osion-resistant paint. 23.7 Any fan motor associated with a duct used to exhaust the air from an accumulator space shall be placed external to the duct. Adequate means shall be provided to prevent entrance of gas irto the motor. The duct shall be arranged to discharge into the open air.
SECTION 7 LUMINAIRES

24 DEGREE OF PROTECTION

24.1 Depending on their lucation, luminaires shall be as a minimum have the degree of protection given in Table 5 of IS 10242 ( Part21 Set 1 ) : 1982. Luminaires likely to be -exposed to more than ordinary risk of mechanical damage shall be such damage or be of protected against specially robust construction.

IS 10242 ( Part 4 ) : 1992

Switches or other current-interrupting devices shall not be installed in the secondary circuit of transformers. 26 SEARCHLIGHTS AND ARC LAMPS

26.1 Disconnection of every searchlight or arc lamp shall be by a multiple ( all poles > disconnecting switch. If a series resistor is used with an arc lamp, the disconnecting switch should be so placed in the supply circuit that both the series resistor and the arc lamp are disconnected when the switch is in the "Off" position. 27 EMERGENCY LIGHTING

water. Cables shall, as far as possible to remote from sources of heat such as boilers, hot pipes, resistors, etc, and protected from avoidable Where installation risks of mechanical damage. of cables near sources of heat cannot be avoided, and where there is consequently a risk of damage to the cables by heat, suitable shields should be installed, or other precautions to avoid overheating should be taken, for example, use of special ventilation, installation of heat insulation materials, or use of special heat-resisting cables. 32.3 Cables shall not be installed across expansion joints. If, however, it is unavoidable, a loop of cable having a length proportional to the expansion of the joint should be provided. The minimum internal radius of the loop during operation shall never be less than twelve times the external diameter of the cable. 32.4 In the construction of cable-runs, account should be taken of the need for protection against destructive pests or rodents. 32.5 When cables are installed in bunches and the risk of fire propagation is high, special installation precautions shall be taken to prevent fire propagation regardless of whether or not any or all of the cables are declared flame-retardant. 32.6 Cables having insulating materials with -different maximum permissible conductor temperatures ( see Table 6 of IS 10242 ( Part 21 Set 1) : 1982 shall not be bunched in a common clip, gland, conduit, trunking or duct. When this is impracticable, the cables shall be so selected that no cable reaches a temperature higher than its rating. 32.7 Cables having a protective covering which may damage the covering of more vulnerable cables shall not be bunched with the latter in a common clip, gland, trunking or duct. 33.8 Cables having a bare metallic sheath or braid or armour shall be installed in such a way that galvanic corrosion by contact with other metals is prevented. 32.9 Cables for safety voltages shall not be bunched together with or run through the same piprs as cables for voltages above 500 V. Cables for voltages up to 1 k~V shall not be bunched together with or run through the same pipes as cables for higher voltages. 33 CABLE-RUNS FOR ESSENT-IAL AND EMERGENCY SERVICES 33.1 In case of essential electrical equipment for which it is mandatory to have at least two supplies, for example, streering gear installations, the supply and any associated control cables shall follow different routes, which shall be separated both vertically and horizontally as far ad practicable. 33.2 Where it is required to divide a ship into fire zones ( such as is generally the case on
7

27.1 Emergency lights shall be marked for easy identification ( see also IS 9596 : 1981 `Emergency lighting units' ).
SECTION 8 HEATING AND APPLIANCES COOKING

28 GUARDING MATERIALS

OF COMBUST-IBLE

28.1 All combustible materials in the vicinity of heating and cooking appliances shall be protected by suitable incombustible and thermal insulating materials. 29 POSITION SWITCHGEAR OF CONTROLGEAR AND

29.1 The position of fuses, switches and other control elements fitted in 01 near appliances shall be such that they will not be subject to temperatures above that for which they are designed and they shall be accessible for inspection, for example, through separate covers. 30 MOUNTING APPLIANCES OF SPACE-HEATING

30.1 Space-heating appliances shall be so mounted that there will be no risk of dangerous heating of the deck or bulkhead or other surroundings. 31 COMBUSTIBLE GASES AND DUST

31.1 In positions ~where combustible gases or dust are likely to accumulate, heating appliances capable of igniting them shall not be installed.
SECTION 9 CABLES

32 CABLE-RUNS-GENERAL

32.1 Cable-runs shall be selected so as to be as far as possible straight and accessible. 32.2 Cable-runs shall be selected so as to avoid action from condensed moisture or dripping

IS 10242 ( Part 4 ) : 1992 passenger ships >, cable-runs shall be so arranged that a fire in any main vertical fire zone will not interfere with essential services in any other such zone. This is met if main and emergency cables passing through any zone are separated both vertically and horizontally as widely as is practicable. 33.3 Cables and emergency power, tions or signals -routed clear of spaces and their risk areas, except those spaces. wiring serving essential or lighting, internal communicashall so far as practicable be galleys laundries, machinery casings and other high fire for supplying equipment in example in holds, storage spaces, cargo spaces, tank tops, open decks subject to seas, etc, cables shall be protected by metal casing, trunking or conduits, even when armoured, if the ship's structure or attached parts do not afford sufficient protection for the cables. 36.3 Metal casing used for mechanical protection of cables shall be effectively protected against corrosion. 37 EARTHING OF METAL COVERINGS AND OF MECHANICAL PROTECTION OF CABLES ( see 5 ) 37.1 All metal coverings of cables shall be electrically connected to the metal hull of the ship at both ends, except m so far as the provisions given in 46.2.1 apply. Single-point earthing is admitted for final subcircuits ( at the supply end ) and in those installations ( control and instrumentation cables, mineral-insulated cables, intrinsically safe circuits, control circuits, etc ) where it is required for technical or security reasons, if any. 37.2 Earthing connections shall be carried out with conductors having cross-sectional areas ( see Table 1 ) related to the current ratings of the cables, or by equivalent means, such as metal clamps gripping the metal covering of the cable and connected to the metal hull of the ship. The metal covering of cables may be earthed by means of glands intended for the purpose and so designed as to ensure an effective earth connection. The glands shall be firmly attached to, and in effective electrical contact with, a metal structure earthed in accordance with these standards. 37.3 The electrical continuity of all metal coverings throughout the length of the cables, particularly at joints and tappings shall be ensured. 37.4 The lead of lead-sheathed cables shall never be used as the sole means of earthing non-current carrying parts ( see 6 ). 37.5 Metal casings, pipes and conduits or trunking shall be effectively earthed. 37.6 Conduits may be earthed by being screwed into a metal enclosure, or by nuts on both sides of the wall of a metallic enclosure, provided the surfaces in contact are clean and free from rust, scale or paint and that the enclosure is in accordance with these recommendations on earthing. The connection shall be painted immediately after assembly in order to inhibit corrosion. 37.7 Cable sheaths and armour, and conduit, may be earthed by means lot clamps or clip of corrosion-resistant metal makingeffective contact with sheath or armour and earthed metal. 8

Where possible they shall be run in such a manner as to preclude their being rendered unserviceable by heating of the bulkheads that may be caused by a fire in an adjacent space. In respect of the prevention of fire damage to cables, special attention should be given to the protection of main cable routes for essential circuits as, for example, between machinery spaces and the navigation bridge area. 34 CABLE INSTALLATION METHODS RELATION TO ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE IN

34.1 In order to avoid as much as possible the effects of unwanted electromagnetic interference, the indications given in Indian Standard on Electromagnetic compatibility of electrical and electronic installations in ships ( under preparation ) shall be taken into consideration. This might be of particular importance for the installation of cables in the vicinity of radio equipment and for the installation of cables belonging to sensitive electronic control and monitoring systems. 35 CABLES FOR SUBMERSIBLE PERMANENTLY INSTALLED BILGEPUMPS 35.1 Cables and their connection to submersible, bilge-pumps shall be permanently installed capable of operating under a heat of water equal to their distance below the bulkhead deck. The cables shall be impervious-sheathed and armoured and shall be installed in continuous lengths from above the bulkhead to the motor terminals and shall enter the air bell from the bottom. 36 MECHANICAL PROTECTION

36.1 In situations where there could be a risk of mechanical damage, cables shall be enclosed in suitable conduits or casings, unless the cable covering ( for example armour or sheath ) provides adequate mechanical protection. 36.2 In situations where there would be an exceptional risk of mechanical damage, for

IS 10242 ( Part 4 ) : 1992 37.8 All joints in metal conduits and ducts and in metallic sheath of cables used for earth continuity shall be souldly made and protected, where necessary, against corrosion. 38 RADIUS OF BEND 38.1 The internal radius of bend for the installation of cables shall be chosen according to the type of cable as recommended by the manufacturer and, shall be not less than the figures given in Table 2. Bending Radii Overall Cable Construction _--__-h____.--7 Diameter of Cable Outer Insulation Covering (D) Table 2 Minimum Internal Bending Radius ( Times Overall Diameter D) (4) 6 4 6 6 chloride, etc ) may be used. Requirements concerning the characteristics of the material are under consideration. 39.5 When cables are fixed by means of clip o r straps referred to in 39.4 and these cables are not laid on top of horizontal cable trays or cable supports, suitable metal clips or saddles shall be added at-regular distances ( for example l m to 2 m ) in order to prevent the release of cables during a fire. This also applies to the fixing of non-metallic conduits or pipes. NOTE - This clause does not necessarily apPlY in the case of cable-runs with only one or a few cables with small diameter -for the connection of a lumioaire, alarm transducer, etc. 40 CABLES PENETRATING AND DECKS BULKHEADS

(2) (1) Therrannodplastic Metal-sheathed armoured or braided elastomeric Other finishes Mineral 39 FIXING Hard metalsheathed

(3) Any <25 mm r25 mm Any

and 40.1 Penetration of watertight decks bulkheads shall be effected in a watertight Either individual stuffed glands or manner. boxes containing several cables and filled with a flame-retardant packing may be used for this purpose. Whichever type of cable is used, the glands or boxes and the packing shall be such that the assembly complies with a gland-watertightness test under consideration. NOTE -Care should be taken in choosing packiogs, to avoid cables being adversely affected ( for example, by high temperature arising from the pouring of the compound, chemical reaction, etc ). 40.2 Cables passing through decks shall be protected to a suitable height above the deck. 40.3 If cables have to pass through nonwatertight bulkheads and generally through holes drilled in sheets of structural steel, these holds shall be fitted ( if necessary in order to avoid damage to cables) with glands or bushings of any suitable material. The choice of the materials for glands and bushings shall be such that there is no risk of corrosion or damage to the cables or to the ship's materials. 40.4 Vertical trunking for electrical cables shall be so constructed as not to afford passage of fire from one between-deck or compartment to another.
.

39.1 With the exception of cables for portable appliances and of those installed in pipes, . conduits, trunkings or special casings, cables shall be fixed by means of clips, saddles or straps of suitable flame-retardant material, and having a surface area so large and shaped that the cables remain tight without their coverings being damaged. 39.2 The distances between supports shall be suitably chosen according to the type of cable and the probability of vibration, and shall not exceed 40 cm; for a horizontal cable-run where the cables are laid on cable supports in the form of tray plates, separate support brackets or hanger ladders, the spacing between the fixing poir;ts may be up to 90 cm, provided that there are supports with maximum spacing as specified above. This exemption shall not apply to cable-runs long weather decks, when the cablerun is arranged so that the cables can be subjected to forces by water washing over the deck. In the case of vertical runs. the distance between supports may be increased to 50 cm.

40.5 Penetration of decks and bulkheads, which are required to have some degree of fire integrity, NOTE - The above given distances between cable shall be so affected as to ensure that the required supports are not necessarily adequate for single- degree of fire integrity is not impaired, The c,ore cables. special type of deck/bulkhead boxes, transit devices, or pourable materials utilized in this 39.3 The supports and the corresponding connection~shall be of approved type. accessories shall be robust and shall be -of corrosion-resistant material or suitably treated 41 CABLES IN METALLIC PIPES OF before erection to resist corrosion. CONDUITS OR TRUNKING 41.1 When cables are installed in metal pipes, conduits or trunking, the following precautions
-9

39.4 Cable clips or straps made from a material other than metal ( such as polyamide, polyvinyl

k3 10242 ( Part 4 ) : 1992 shall be observed ( see also 32.6 and 32.7 for bunching of cables ). 41.2 The pipes, conduits or trunking shall be suitably smooth on the interior and protected against corrosion. 41.3 The pipes of conduits or trunkings shall have their ends shaped or bushed in such a way as not to damage the cable covering. Further whenever electric cables are laid on wtather deck in a-conduit or pipe or trunking, the same are to be ssaled with a suitable watertight compound at both the ends of cable pipe, etc, to avoid entry of water into machinery or forecastle spaces. 41.4 The pipes or conduits or trunking shall have such internal dimensions and radii of bend as will permit the easy drawing in and out of the cables which they are to contain; the internal radii of bend shall not be less than those permitted for cables ( see 38 ) and for pipes exceeding 63 mm external diameter, not less than twice the external diameter of the pipe. 49.5 Pipes, conduits and trunking shall be so arranged that water cannot accumulate inside them ( account being taken of possible condensation ). Drain holes with plugs are to be provided in the cable ( draw ) boxes installed for connecting horizontal cable pipes or conduits or trunking laid along side weather deck to avoid accumulation of water inside. 41.6 The space factor ( ratio of the sum of the cross-sectional areas corresponding to the external diameters of the cables to the internal cross-sectional areas of the pipe or conduit or trunking ) shall not be greater than 0`4. 41.7 If necessary, ventilating openings shall be provided, proferably at the highest and lowest points, so as to permit air circulation and to obviate the possibility of water accumulating at any part of the pipe or conduit run. This may be done only if the fire risk will not be increased thereby. 41.8 Drawing of lead-sheathed cables without any covering into pipes, conduits or trunking is to be avoided. 41.9 If there is reasonto fear that a pipe may break because of its length, appropriate expansion joints shall be provided. This may be the case when cable pipes are fitted along weather decks. 41.10 Where cables are to be drawn into pipes or conduits or trunking, draw boxes should be installed where necessary in order to ensure that the cables are not damaged during installation. 42 CABLES IN NON-METALLIC PIPES, CONDUITS, TRUNKING., DUCTS OR CAPPINGS AND CASINGS 42.0 Cables may be installed in non-metallic pipes, conduits, trunking, ducts or cappings 10 and casings either on surface or concealed behind toilings or plnelling, provided the following precautions are observed. 42-I All cables flame-retardant. or inru!ste.i wiring shall be

42.2 If the fixing of clpping is by m:ans of screw3 they shall b: of non-rl_t;ting mlterizI arranged so as not to damage th: cables. The capping shall b: resdily accessible. 42.3 N3n-m:tallic pip:s, conduits, trunkings, ducts or cappings and clsing; shill b: flimeretardant in accordance with IS 10242 ( Part I/ ' Set 1 ) : 1982. 42.4 Cables shall be fixed if uccessary with clips as described in 39. 42.5 The precautions r:commend:d in 32.6 and 32.7 should be observed also for iust~llztion in non-metallic casings. 43 CABLES IN STORE R03MS When it is necessary to install cables in store rooms, they are to b: adequately protected against mechanical damage. 43 CABLES IN REFRIGERATION SPACES

44.1 Cables to be installed in refrigzration spaces shall include an impervious she ith and shall be protected against mechanical damage. Cables insulated or sheathed with polyvinyl chloride shall not be used in refrigerated spices unless the relevant polyvinyl chloride compounds are appropriate to the low temperature expected. If the armour is made of non-corrosionresisting mnterial, it shall be protected against corrosion by a moisture-resisting and lawtemperature resisting covering. 44.2 Cables installed in refrigeration spaces shall not be covered by thermal insulation. They shall be secured to perforated tray plates ( made for instance of galvaniz:d steel ) or other suitab!e supports which shall be so placed as to leave a space between the back of the plates and the face of the refrigeration space. If a cable has thermoplastic or elastomeric extruded sheath, it may be placed directly on the face of the refrigeration spzce. The casual use of cables as a means of suspension shall be obviated by the provision of guards surrounding the cables. Care shall be taken to avoid the possibility of galvanic action if the refrigzration space has an aluminium facing. 44.3 If the cables pass through the thermal insulation of the compartments, they shall do SO at right angles, in tubes provided with entries of material protected against oxidation. -

IS 10242 ( Part 4 ) : 1992 45 TENSILE STRESS

45.1 Cables shall be so installed that the tensile

stress applied to them either by reason of their own weight or for any other reason, is minimised. 49.2 These precautions are particularly important for cables of small cross-section and for cables on vertical runs, or in vertical pipes. These cables shall be suitably supported. The maximum allowab!e value, in N/mm2 of the mechanical stress on the conductor is under consideration. 46 SPECIAL
CORE

plate or gland, so made that there is no magnetic material between the cables, and the clearance between the cables and the magnetic matarial shall be not less than 75 mm, unless the cables belonging to the same ac circuit are installed in trefoil formation. 46.2.6 In order to equalize to some degree the impedance of three-phase circuits of considerable length consisting of single-core cables of a conductor cross-section of 185 mm2 or over, a transposition of the phases shall be effected at intervals not exceeding 15 m. Alternatively, the cables may be installed in trefoil formation. The above precautions are, however, not necessary when the length of the run is less than 30 m. 46.2.7 In circuits involving several single-core cables in parallel per phase, all cables shall follow the same route and have the same crosssectional area. Further, the cables p:rtaining to the same phase shall be as far as practicable alternated with those of the other phases so that unequal division of the current is avoided. For instance, in the case of two cables per phase, correct disposition are: 1 233 21 or 123 and not 1 122 33 or 123 123 321 47 CABLE ENDS 47.1 Where mechanical clamps are not used, the ends of all cable conductors shall be fitted with soldering sockets or compression-type sockets of sufficient size to contain all the strands of the conductor. Where soldering is adopted corrosive fluxes shall not be used. 47.2 All protective coverings should be removed for at lea.st 13 mm from the ends of the insulation but not more than necessary. For mineral-insulated cables ( see 47.8 ). 47.3 Cables socket and connecting terminals shall be of such design and dimensions that the maximum current likely to flow through them will not produce heat which would be injurious to the insulation. In general, the temperature shall not exceed that allowed for the cable in relation to the insulation. 47.4 In the case of cables with a supplementary insulating belt beneath the protective sheath, at the ends where the belt has been removed, an additional insulation shall be added at the points where the insulation of each core enter or may enter, into a contact with earthed metal. 47;5 The fixing of conductors in terminals, at joints and at tappings shall withstand the thermal and dynamic effects of short-circuit currents. 47.6 When required, for identification. 11 cable ends shall be marked

PRECAUTIORS
Forces

FOR SINGLE-

CABLES

46.1 Electrodynamic

In order to guard against the effects of electrodynamic forces developing on the occurrence of a short circuit, single-core cables shall be firmly fixed, using supports of strength adequate to withstand forces corresponding to the values of prospective short-circuit currents. 46.2 Single-Core
Cables for AC Wiring

AC wiring shall be carried out as far as possible, in twin or multicore cables. When, however, it is necessary to use single-core cables for circuits rated in excess of 20 A, the following precautions should be observed. 462.1 The cables shall either be non-armoured or they shall be armoured with non-magnetic material. In order to avoid current loops, the metallic screen shall be earthed at one point only. 462.2 Conductors belonging to the same circuit shall be contained within the same pipe, conduit or trunking, or the clamps which fix them should include all the phases, unless they are made of non-magnetic material. 46.2.3 In the installing of two, three or four single-core cables forming respectively singlephase circuits. three-phase circuits, or threephase and neutral circuits, the cables shall as far as possible be in contact with one another. In every case, the distance measured between the external covering of two adjacent cables shall be not greater than one cable diameter. 46.2.4 When single-core cables having a current rating greater than 256A shall be installed near a steel bulkhead, the clearance between the cables and the bulkhead shall be at least 50 mm, unless the cables belonging to the same as circuit are installed in trefoil formation. 46.2.5 Magnetic material shall not be used between single core cables of a group. Where cables pass through steel plates, all the conductors of the same circuit shall pass through a

IS 10242 ( Part 4 ) : 1992 47.7 The ends of mineral-insulated

cables shall be prepared in accordance with instructions issued by the manufacturers of these%cables. 47.8 Cables not having a moisture-resistant insulation ( for example mineral-insulated ) shall have their ends effectively sealed against ingress of moisture. 48 JOINTS AND TAPPINGS CIRCUIT ) ( BRANCH

48.1 Cable runs shall not normally include joints. If, in the case of repair or sectional construction of the ship, a joint is necessary, the joint shall be of such a type that electrical continuity, insulation, mechanical strength and protection, earthing and fire-resisting of flameretardant characteristics are not less than those required for the cables. 48.2 Tappings ( branch circuits ) shall be made in suitable boxes, of such design that the conductors remain suitably insulated and protected from atmospheric action, and fitted with terminals or busbars of dimensions appropriate to the current rating. 48.3 Joints and tappings shall be clearly marked to identify the cable(s) and core(s). 49 JOINT
BOXES

having a section not less than 75 mm* which shall be riveted with copper rivets or fastened with copper clamps to a suitable copper spike not less than 12 mm -in diameter, projecting at least 150 mm above the top of the mast. 51.1.1 Where tape is used, the lower end of the tape shall terminate at the point at which the shrouds leave the mast, and shall be clamped to a copper rope having a section not less than 75 mm2. 51.1.1.1 The copper rope shsll be led down the shrouds and shall be securely clamped to a copper plate not less than 0'2 m2 in area, fixed well below the lightload waterline and attached to the ships's side in such a manner that it shall remain immersed under all conditions of heel. 52 WOODEN SHIPS WITH STEEL MASTS 52.1 In wooden and composit ships fitted with steel masts shall be connected to a copper plate in accordance with 50, the copper rope being securely attached to and in good electrical contact with the mast or above the point at which the shrouds leave the mast. 53 STEEL SHIPS WITH WOODEN MASTS'

49.1 Live parts shall be mounted on durable flame-retardant moisture-resistant material, of permanently high dielectric strength and high insulation resistance.

53.1 In steel ships fitted with wooden ~masts, the ligbtn~ing conductors shall be composed of copper tape or rope terminating in a spike, as set forth in 30. At the lower end, this copper tape or rope shall be securely clamped to the nearest metal forming part of the hull of the ship. 54 INSTALLATfON DETAILS

49.2 The live parts shall be so arranged by suitable spacing or shielding with flameretardant insulating material, that short circuits cannot readily occur between conductors of different polarity or between conductors and earthed metal. 49.3 Joint boxes shall be made of flameJoint boxes shall be clearly retardant material. identified defining their function and voltage. 49.4 Cables for safety voltages shall preferably not terminate in the same joint box as cables for higher voltages, Cables for voltages up to 1 kV shall not terminate in the same joint box as cables for higher voltages. SECTION
50 SHIPS

54.1 Lighting conductors shall be run as straight as possible, and sharp bends in the conductors shall be avoided. All clamps used shall be of brass or copper, preferably of the serrated contact type, and effectively locked. No connection shall be dependent on a soldered joint. 55 RESISTANCE 55.1 The resistance of the lightning conductor measured between the masthead and the point on the earth plate or hull to which the lightning conductor is connected shall not exceed 0'02 a. 56 EARTHING IN DRY DOCK

10

LIGHTNING

CONDUCTORS

REQUIRING CONDUCTORS

LIGHTNING

50.1 Lightning conductors shall be fitted to each mast of all wooden, composite and steel ships having wooden masts or topmasts. They need not be fitted to steel masts in steel ships. 51 SJZE OF CONDUCTORS
51.1 In wooden and composite

56.1 Suitable means shall be provided to enable ships when in dry dock, or on a slipway, to have their lightning conductors or steel hulls connected to an efficient earth on shore.
SECTION 57 GENERAL 57.1 After the electrical 11 TESTS OF COMPLETED INSTALLATION

ships fitted with wooden masts, the lightning conductors shall be composed of continuous copper tape or rope

installation is complete and before the ship is placed in commission, the

12

IS 10242 ( Part 4')-: 1992

entire electrical equipment shall be tested. Such tests are intended to indicate the general condition of the installation at the time of completion, satisfactory test results do not in themselves necessarily ensure that the installation is satisfactory in all respects. 58 INSULATION TESTING INSTRUMENTS

62 SWITCHGEAR

58.1 It is recommended that insulation resistance be measured by self-contained instruments such as a direct-reading ohmmeter of the generator type, applying a voltage of at least 500 V. When an insulation test is made on a circuit incorporating capacitors of a total capacitance exceeding 2 pF, an insulation tester of the constant-voltage type shall be used in order to ensure that accurate test readings are obtained. 59 SWITCHBOARDS, AND DISTRIBUTION SECTION BOARDS BOARDS

shall be loaded as nearly as practicable to its working load in order to ensure that no overheating takes place owing to faulty connections or incorrect rating. Switches and circuit-breakers shall be op:rated on load to test their suitability and to demonstrate that the operation of over-current, under voltage and reverse-current or rzversz-power protective devices is electrically and mechanically satisfactory. 63 INSULATION RESISTANCE GENERATORS AND MOTORS
63.1 The insulation

62.1 All switchgear

OF

59.1 Bedore switchboards, section boards and distribution boards are put into service, their insulation resistance shall be not less than 1 Mn measured between each busbar and earth and between each insulated busbar and the busbar connected to the other pole or poles. This test shall be made with circuit-breakers and switches open and all fuselinks for pilot lamps, earth fault indicating -lamps, voltmeters, etc, removed and voltage coils temporarily disconnected. 60 LIGHTING
AND POWER CIRCUITS

resistance of generators and motors shall be measured in warm condition immediately after running with normal load. The results obtained depend not only on the characteristics of the insulation materials and on the way in which they are applied, but also on the test conditions. It is therefore necessary that the obtained values be completed by recording these conditions, particularly those concerning the ambient temperature and the degree of humidity at the moment of the test. 64 LIGHTING, EQUIPMENT HEATING AND GALLEY

64.1 All electrical devices and circuits shall be tested under operating conditions to ensure that they are suitable and satisfactory for their purp~oses. 65 VOLTAGE DROP

60.1 A test for insulation

resistance between all insulated poles and earth and, where practicable, between poles, shall be applied to all permanent wiring. Jt is not considered practicable to specify minimum values for insulation resistance as these will depend on climatic conditions at the time of the test? but a minimum value of 1 Ma shall be obtainable under average conditions. The installation may be subdivided to any desired extent and appliances may be disconnected if initial tests give results lower than that indicated above. 61 GENERATORS
61.1 All generating

65.1 When it is considered that the voltage of a consuming device may be unduly low, test shall be taken to verify that the allowable voltage drop has not been exceeded [ see IS 10242 ( Part 2/Set 1 ) : 19821. 66 COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

66.1 Each communication system shall be thoroughly tested to determine its suitability and to verify its specified functioning. 66.1.1 Particular attention shall be paid to the testing of the operation of the ship's essential electric communication systems, which include mechanical engine-order telegraphs, docking telegraphs, etc, and similar signal or alarm systems and fire-detection systems.

sets shall be run at rated .load for a duration sufficient to demonstrate electrical characteristics, that commutation, overspeed strips, governing range of excitation 67 INTERNAL COMMUNICATION control, lubrication and absence of vibration CIRCUITS are satisfactory. If sets are intended to operate in parallel, they shall be tested over a range of 67.1 Each circuit operating at a voltage of 55 V and above shall have an insulation resistance loading sufficient to demonstrate that load between conductor and between each conductor sharing and parallel operation are satisfactory. Voltage and speed regulation when load is and earth of not less than 1 MG. For circuits and taken off shall be operating at voltages below 55 V, the insulation suddenly throivn satisfactory ( see IS 10242 ( Part 3/Set 1 ) : shall be not less than one-third MD. If necessary, any or all appliances connected to the 1983 1. 13

IS 10242 ( Part 4 ) : 1992 circuit may be disconnected being made. 68 EARTHING 68.1 Tests shall be made to verify that all earth-continuity conductors and earthing leads are connected to the frames of apparatus and to the hull, and that in socket-outlets having earthing contacts, these are connected to earth. 69 REQUlREMENTS OF INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS ON SAFETY OF LI%E AT SEA 69.1 Equipment installed to implement the International conventions in force shall be specially tested to ensure that all requirements have been met. Where operation is required to be maintained from emergency sources, correct functioning from and by sudh emergency supply shall be tested and the duration of emergency supply, where specified, shall also be tested. 70 TESTS AFTER COMMISSIONING while the test is equipment and cables for purpose of detecting in the early stages the possible development of physical deterioration or changes. The values of insulation resistance will afford useful indications as to whether or not the apparatus or circuit shall be kept in service, and timely action will tend to prevent failures in service. 70.1.1 The best indication as to whether deterioration has taken place is a comparison of the observed insulation resistance with previously recorded values, The change from the last measured values is far more significant than the absolute value of the resistance. For the comparison of values, it is also important to know the condition of the machine and climatic conditions at the time of testing, that is, whether the machine or apparatus was hot or cold, the the and whether temperature cooling-air atmosphere was dry or humid. 70.2 Any significant facts such as `cables detached', `machine recently cleaned or blown cut', `brushes lifted', etc, shall be recorded. Dirty, oily or wet conditions are frequently the cause of low insulation-resistance readings on cables or apparatus which are otherwise sound. Any large and abrupt decrease in insulation resistance shall be regarded as serious and worthy of further investigation and all defects thus discovered shall be made without loss of time.

70.1 Constant maintenance of electrical equipment and circuits so that the physical condition of the installation is kept as nearly as possible in its initial integrity is of the utmost importance. It is strongly recommended that periodic testing and inspection be made of all

14

Standard Mark The use of t~he Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and~supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under-the Bmcau of Indian Standards Act, I936 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are issued from possession of the to BIS giving the are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent following reference :

Dot : No. E-l-D 26 ( 3063 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/l4 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDEGARH
: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75

37 86 62 53 38 43 235 0216 6 32 92 95

160036 600113

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India

