WAT WAH IS 16351 : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


wah E A rer cere & 
Ula tera wets + Heat” 


om fear amena feast Ufsparati 
cat Ach WaT 


Geosynthetics — Standard Practice 
for Laboratory Immersion 
Procedures for Evaluating the 
Chemical Resistance of 
Geosynthetics to Liquids 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2015 


ada AMA AR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
® HAF HAT, 9 SERRA WAL HM, ae feeeit-110002 
a rch a MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2015 Price Group 3 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16351 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — STANDARD PRACTICE FOR 

LABORATORY IMMERSION PROCEDURES FOR 

EVALUATING THE CHEMICAL RESISTANCE OF 
GEOSYNTHETICS TO LIQUIDS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers laboratory immersion procedures 
for the testing of geosynthetics for chemical resistance 
to liquid wastes, prepared chemical solutions, and 
leachates derived from solid wastes. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards. 


IS No. Title 
13321 (Part 1): Glossary of terms for geosynthetics: 
1992 Part 1 Terms used in materials and 
properties. 
SP 45 : 2014 Handbook on glossary of textile 
terms 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions those 
given in SP 45 and 1813321 (Part 1) shall apply. 


4 PRINCIPLE 


Geosynthetic material is used widely for many 
geotechnical, environmental applications where it is 
subjected to harsh environmental condition and it 
comes in contact with the hazardous liquids which 
contain chemicals that can hamper the properties of 
geosynthetic material. In view of this, test describes 
the method to find out the resistance of geosynthetic 
material to the liquid wastes, prepared chemical 
solutions, and leachates derived from solid wastes. 


5 APPARATUS 


5.1 Exposure Tank, for containment of the solution 
and test material. The tank shall be chemically resistant 
and impermeable to the solution being used. Stainless 
steel or glass is recommended. Glass should not be 
used with strongly basic solutions. 


5.2. Exposure Tank Lid, for sealing the tank. In order 
to prevent the loss of volatile components of interest, 
the tank shall be capable of being sealed with a 
chemically resistant material. 


5.3 Unless otherwise specified, agreed upon, or 
required, provisions shall be made for maintaining 
ambient atmospheric pressure in the tank. Using a 
reflex condenser open to the air, a pressure relief valve 
or any method allowing the movement of gas to relieve 
pressure while minimizing changes in the chemical 
composition of the test solution is acceptable. The 
purpose of this feature of the equipment is to prevent 
pressure build-up in an exposure tank from the 
generation of gases by chemical reactions or biological 
activity. 


5.4 Pressurized tanks that maintain a constant pressure 
may be used as an alternative to 5.3 when the 
maintenance of a pressure other than ambient 
atmospheric pressure is specified, agreed upon, or 
required. 


5.5 Temperature Control Equipment, to maintain 
the immersion solution at the specified temperature. 
Options that have worked well are the following: (a) a 
hot water bath to contain the exposure tank; (b) a 
heating coil wrapped around the tank, or a hot plate 
used in conjunction with a thermostat and 
thermocouple; and (c) a room controlled at the 
exposure temperature for storing the tank. Placing a 
heating coil directly in the exposure solution is not 
recommended since corrosion may affect the coil, and 
chemical reactions that may not otherwise occur may 
occur on a hot coil. 


5.6 Stirrer, if required, for mixing the solution. 
Magnetically moved stirring bars and mechanical 
stirrers entering the tank through the lid will both work, 
depending on the temperature control procedure. 


6 REAGENTS AND MATERIALS 


6.1 Immersion Solution — The solutions potentially 
used with this practice have large differences in origin. 
The user of this standard shall determine the correct 
solution for use in the particular application. Liquid 


IS 16351 : 2015 


wastes, leachates collected from existing installations, 
leachates made from solid wastes, synthetic leachates 
made from laboratory chemicals, standard chemical 
solutions, and reference fuels and oils are some of the 
possibilities. 


7 PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMEN 


7.1 Samples of the geosynthetic(s) to be immersed 
should be taken in a manner appropriate for the 
particular material. It is essential that all of the material 
immersed, as well as the unexposed material to be 
tested, have physical properties that are as similar as 
possible. Refer to the section on sampling in the 
applicable standard for the chemical resistance of the 
specific geosynthetic to be tested. 


8 PROCEDURE 


8.1 Tank Preparation 


Clean the tank and lid thoroughly prior to introduction 
of the sample or liquid. Use distilled or deionized water 
for the final rinse of the cleaning procedure. 


8.2 Sample Exposure 


Hold the geosynthetic material to be immersed in place 
in the exposure container in such a way that contact 
with the container and other sheets of material is limited 
as much as possible. 


8.2.1 Do not immerse different types of geosynthetic 
materials in the same immersion vessel. 


8.2.2 Add the liquid to the tank with the test samples 
in place. The liquid shall cover the samples completely. 


8.2.3 If the liquid is placed in the tank at ambient 
temperature and heated subsequently to an elevated 
immersion temperature, the liquid will expand to a 
greater volume. This can result in the volume of the 
liquid exceeding the capacity of the tank and thus a 
spill of hazardous materials. Expansion of the liquid 
should be anticipated and procedures prepared for the 
containment of excess liquid. 


8.3 Sealing the Tanks 


Unless otherwise specified, agreed upon, or required, 
seal the exposure tanks with no air if the solution 
contains volatile organics or if the solution to be in 
contact with the geosynthetic will exist in the field 
under buried conditions. The pressure inside the tank 
shall be the same as that outside the tank. 


8.4 Do not seal the exposure tanks and leave an air 
space equal to 10 + 2 percent of the volume of the 
exposure tank if there are no volatile organics in the 
solution and the geosynthetic will be used under free 
air exchange conditions in the field. If the tank is not 


sealed, the solution shall be monitored closely for 
volume changes due to evaporation or water 
absorption. Evaporation shall be minimized as much 
as possible. Replace evaporated water with distilled 
or deionized water. Keep a record of the volume of 
water added and the date water was added. If the 
solution picks up moisture, store the tank in a low- 
humidity environment to eliminate the problem. 


8.5 Stirring the Solution 


Stirring the immersion liquid is required unless 
evidence can be offered that stirring is not necessary 
to maintain a homogeneous solution. By keeping the 
solution circulating slowly, fresh solution is constantly 
passing over the surface of the geosynthetic, thereby 
preventing a stagnant layer of reacted or used liquid 
from existing around the geosynthetic and thus 
stratification or settling of chemical constituents. 


8.5.1 If the immersion liquid consists of two separate 
immiscible liquids, and if the volume of the lesser of 
the two liquids constitutes a significant portion of the 
solution (greater than | percent), two separate 
immersions should be conducted with the two liquids, 
if it is possible to collect enough of the lesser solution 
to perform the immersion. 


8.6 Immersion Temperatures 


Recommended standard temperatures are 27°C and 
50°C. Higher temperatures may affect the synthetic 
material adversely in a manner that would not occur at 
the lower temperatures. Immersion at temperatures 
above 50°C is not recommended unless the material is 
to be used at higher temperatures. Maintain the 
temperature of the exposure tanks within 2°C of the 
selected immersion temperature. 


8.7 Test Period Selection 


In addition to testing the unexposed geosynthetic 
material, conduct testing after four immersion periods. 
Immerse sufficient material for the planned immersion 
periods plus two additional periods. Testing after more 
than four periods may be necessary, if warranted by 
changes observed in the material, or if additional data 
are necessary due to erratic or inconclusive results. 


8.8 In the absence of other specifications or user 
requirements, the standard immersion periods are 1, 
2, 3, and 4 months. 


8.9 Maintaining Solution Chemistry 


If it is suspected that trace amounts of chemicals may 
be depleted from the liquid, or that the chemical nature 
of the liquid changes with time, it is recommended 
that the immersion liquid be replaced with fresh 
solution after each test period. If the liquid is to be 


replaced periodically, it is important that the fresh 
liquid be from the same source as the original liquid 
and that the fresh liquid be as similar to the original 
liquid as possible. 


9 REPORT 
The report shall include the following: 


a) State that the tests were performed as directed 
in this test method. Describe the material(s) 
or products(s) sampled and the method of 
sampling used. 


b) Report the following information for each 
sample: 
1) Description of the origin and chemical 
character of the immersion liquid. 


2) 
3) 
4) 


5) 


6) 


7) 


8) 
9) 


IS 16351 : 2015 


Results of the centrifuging, if performed. 
Composition of the tanks and lids. 
Manner in which the tanks were sealed 
(tightly or not). 

If the tanks were not sealed, a record of 
the level of the liquids and any water or 
chemical additions. 


Whether the liquid was changed after 
each test period. If not, the basis of the 
decision. 

If the liquids were stirred, approximate 
speed and size of the stirring device. 
Immersion temperatures. 

Whether an unacceptable deviation from 
the allowed temperature range occurred. 


IS 16351 : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TX 30 


Organization 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


Business Coordination House, New Delhi 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


CIDCO, Mumbai 
Coir Board, Kochi 


Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 


E. I. Dupont India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Manufacture Association, Kolkatta 
Jaya Shree Textiles, Hooghly 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 
Maharashtra Maritime Board, Mumbai 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Supreme Nonwovens Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. N. Desai (Chairman) 
Suri V. K. Pati (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR GUPTA 
SHRIMATI RITIKA Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


SHRI NRIPENDRA KUMAR 
Suri MANISH Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr U. S. SARMA 
Suri M. Kumaraswamy PiLLAY (Alternate) 


Dr SwAPAN GHOSH 
Suri K. R. Gupta (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 


Suri R. GANESH 
SHRIMATI VEDIKA Kapoor (Alternate) 


Suri S. Masoop Husain 
Suri Ravi BHUSHAN Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
Suri S. J. Curtnis (Alternate) 


Suri L. V. ASHARA 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri KousHik Das (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI PAWAN SHARMA 


Suri Y. K. KusuMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri R. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. P. SincH (Alternate) 


Suri T. SANYAL 
Suri A. K. KHASTAGIR (Alternate) 


Suri AJAY PANDIT 
Suri M. BALUCHAMY (Alternate) 


Dr SANJEEV K. VERMA 
SHRI HARINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. VERMA 
Suri V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH BAGLI (Alternate) 


Suri C. K. CHAUDHURI 
Suri C. K. Jain (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANOI 
Dr SauraBu Vyas (Alternate) 


Organization 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai 


Urja Products Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 
Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16351 : 2015 


Representative(s) 


Dr MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI Sudam (Alternate) 


SHRI JANAK NANAVATY 
Suri S. P. BORKAR 


SHRI PRABHAKAR Rar, Scientist “E” and Head (TXD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Suri J. K. GUPTA 


Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (1124). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


