ттт AI IS 5903 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


Te faer & fer aren ferui 


Әк fem agpi 
(Yel YRI ) 


Recommendation for Safety 
Devices for Gas Cylinders 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 23.060.40; 23.030.20 


© BIS 2014 


ma AM em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
ө HAF чая, 9 четте WAL At, Чї feeeit-110002 
ade as МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2014 Price Group 6 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard has been prepared to provide guidance on the requirements of safety devices used for gas cylinders/ 
gas cylinder valves. This standard was first published in 1970. This revision has been taken to align with latest 
International standards and statutory requirements. 


Manufacture, possession and use of any gas when contained in cylinders in a compressed or liquefied state are 
regulated under the Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004 of the Government of India. This standard has been prepared in 
consultation and agreement with the statutory authorities under these rules. 


Whilst all essential requirements have been set out in considerable details, other requirements are purposely left 
out to permit a reasonable degree of latitude to designers and users. 


In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following: 


a) A.S. 2613 : 2005 ‘Safety devices for gas cylinders’. 

b) CGAS-1.1 : 2007 ‘Safety relief device standards: Part 1 Cylinders for compressed gases’ Compressed 
Gas Association, U.S.A. 

c) EN 13953 : 2003 ‘Pressure relief valves for transportable refillable cylinders for liquefied petroleum 
gas (LPG)’. 


Where provision is made in this standard for certain details to be settled by agreement between the purchaser and 
the manufacturer, it shall be understood that, where applicable, such details are subject also to agreement by the 
statutory authorities. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5903 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


RECOMMENDATION FOR SAFETY DEVICES FOR 
GAS CYLINDERS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers requirements for the design, 
construction, testing and certification of safety devices 
for gas cylinders. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Approach Channel — The passage or passages 
through which gas must pass from the cylinder to reach 
the operating parts of the safety device. 


2.2 Bursting Disc — An operating part of a safety 
device in the form of a disc, usually of metal and which 
is so held as to close the safety device channel under 
normal conditions. The disc is intended to burst at a 
predetermined pressure to permit the escape of gas. 


NOTE — Such discs are generally flat, preformed, reinforced, 
or grooved types. Disc may be protected by coating or 
membrane. 


2.3 Combination Bursting Disc Fusible Plug — A 
bursting disc in combination with a low melting point 
fusible metal, intended to allow the disc bursting at its 
predetermined bursting pressure when the temperature 
also is high enough to cause yielding or melting of the 
fusible metal. The burst disc faces the gas contact. 


2.4 Discharge Channel — The passage or passages 
beyond the operating parts through which gas must 
pass to reach the atmosphere exclusive of any piping 
attached to the outlet of the device. 


2.5 Flow Capacity — The capacity in cubic metre 
per minute of free air discharged at the required flow 
rate pressure. 


2.6 Flow Rating Pressure —The pressure at which a 
safety device is rated for flow capacity. 


2.7 Free Air or Free Gas — Air or gas measured at 
normal atmospheric pressure and temperature of 15°C. 


2.8 Fusible Plug — An operating part in the form of 
a plug filled with suitable unused low melting point 


material, usually a metal alloy, which closes the safety 
device channel under normal conditions and is intended 
to yield or melt at a predetermined temperature to 
permit the escape of gas. 

NOTE — Material once melted or heated for any purpose other 


than immediately filling in the fusible plug shall be scrapped 
and not used for filling the plugs. 


2.9 Liquefied Gas — A gas that may be liquefied by 
pressure at —10°C but will be completely vapourized 
when in equilibrium with normal atmosphere pressure 
(760 mm Hg) at 17.5°C which valve shall be increased 
to 30°C for toxic gases. 


2.10 Operating Part — The part that normally closes 
the safety discharge channel but when moved from this 
position as a result of the action of heat or pressure or 
a combination of the two, permits escape of gas from 
the cylinder. 


2.11 Permanent Gas — A gas whose critical 
temperature is below —10°C that is to say a gas which 
can not be liquefied under any pressure at a temperature 
above -10?C. 


2.12 PopAction — Rapid opening of the valve sealing 
element to achieve full lift, resulting from an increase 
of inlet pressure creating a sudden increase in force 
and compression of the spring (see Fig. 1). 


2.13 Pressure Opening — The orifice against which 
the busting disc functions. 


2.14 Pressure-relief Valve — A safety device 
containing an operating part that is held normally in a 
position closing the safety device channel by spring 
force and is intended to open and to close at 
predetermined pressures. 


2.15 Rated Bursting Pressure (of a Bursting 
Disc) — The maximum pressure at which the disc is 
designed to burst at the rated temperature when in 
contact with the pressure opening for which it was 
designed. 


2.16 Rated Temperature (of a Bursting Disc) — The 
temperature at which a bursting disc is designed to burst 


IS 5903 : 2014 


when the rated bursting pressure is applied to the disc 
and when it is in contact with the pressure opening for 
which it was designed. Unless otherwise specified and 
stated, it is to be taken as room temperature. 


2.17 Reinforced Fusible Plug — A fusible plug 
consisting of a core of suitable material having a 
comparatively high yield temperature surrounded by 
a low melting point fusible metal of the required yield 
temperature. 


2.18 Resealing Pressure — The value of decreasing 
pressure at which leakage ceases through a water seal 
of not over 102 mm water column or other equivalent 
leakage detection method on the outlet of the pressure 
relief valve, after the device is subjected to a pressure 
above the start to discharge pressure but below the flow 
rating pressure. 


2.19 Safety Device — A device intended to prevent 
rupture of a cylinder under abnormal conditions of 
exposure. 

NOTE — The term as used herein includes the approach 


channel, the operating parts, and the discharge channel (see 
2.1, 2.5 and 2.11). 


2.20 Safety Device Channel — The channel through 
which gas released by operation of the device must 


F 
| 
1 

Key 

1 — Re-Seat Pressure 

3 — Pop Action 

P— Pressure 

F — Flow 


N 
о — 
A— 


pass from the cylinder to the atmosphere exclusive of 
any piping attached to the inlet or outlet of the device. 


2.21 Set Pressure (of a Pressure-relief Valve) — The 
minimum pressure at which a pressure-relief valve is 
set to start-to-release (see 6.1.4). 


2.22 Start-to-Release Pressure (of a Pressure-relief 
Valve) — The pressure at which the first bubble 
appears through a water seal of not over 100 mm on 
the outlet of the pressure-relief valve (see 7.5). The 
leakage rate shall not be more than 4 N-mm"/s. 


2.23 Test Pressure of the Cylinder — The internal 
pressure required for hydraulic stretch or hydraulic 
pressure test of the cylinder. 


2.24 Type Test — A test applied to a representative 
sample of each design or modification, of a safety 
device to establish the adequacy of the design or 
modification (see 7). 


2.25 Yield Temperature (of a Fusible Plug) — The 
temperature at which the fusible metal or alloy will 
yield. 


2.26 Operating Pressure of the Cylinder — 
Pneumatic test pressure of the cylinder is the operating 
(working) pressure of the cylinder. 


2 — Start to Discharge Pressure 
4 — Flow Rating Pressure 


Fic. 1 TERMs Оѕер wrrH LPG SAFETY VALVE 


3 TYPES OF SAFETY DEVICES 
3.1 Types of Safety Devices 


Types of safety devices covered by this standard are 
designated as follows. 


3.1.1 Type BD 
Burst disc with respect to rated pressure. 
3.1.2 Type FP, 


Fusible plug or reinforced fusible plug utilizing a 
fusible alloy with yield temperature not over 77°C, nor 
less than 69°C (74°C nominal). 


3.1.3 Type FP, 


Fusible plug or reinforced fusible plug utilizing a 
fusible alloy with yield temperature not over 104?C, 
nor less than 98°C (100°C nominal). 


3.1.4 Type FP, 


Fusible plug or reinforced fusible plug utilizing a 
fusible alloy with yield temperature not over 135?C, 
nor less than 115?C (125?C nominal). 


3.1.5 Type BD/FP, 


Combination bursting disc/fusible plug, utilizing 
fusible alloy with yield temperature not over 77?C, nor 
less than 69?C (74?C nominal). 


3.1.6 Type BD/FP, 


Combination bursting disc/fusible plug, utilizing 
fusible alloy with yield temperature not over 104?C, 
nor less than 98°C (100°C nominal). 


3.1.7 Type BD/FP, 


Combination bursting disc/fusible plug, utilizing 
fusible alloy with yield temperature not over 135?C, 
nor less than 115?C (125?C nominal). 


3.1.8 Type PRV 
Pressure-relief valve. 
3.1.9 Type PRV/FP 


Combination pressure-relief valve/fusible plug. 


4 INFORMATION TO BE SPECIFIED BY THE 
PURCHASER 


The purchaser in his enquiry and order shall supply 
sufficient information to fully identify the fitting 
required including, where appropriate, the following: 
a) Name of gas for use with safety device; 
b) Type of safety device (see 3); 


с) Set pressure in kgf/cm? (gauge) (for pressure- 
relief valves); 


IS 5903 : 2014 


d) Nominal yield temperature, °C (for fusible 
plugs) (see 3); 

e) Flow capacity; 

f) Intended application; and 

g) Rated bursting pressure of the disc. 


5 FIELD OF APPLICATION 


Cylinders containing obnoxious or poisonous gases 
shall not be provided with any safety device. Some of 
these gases are listed below: 


Carbon monoxide 


Anhydrous hydrogen 
chloride 


Anhydrous hydrogen 
bromide 


Anhydrous hydrogen 
fluoride 


Sulphur dioxide 
Chlorine 
Methylamine 
Hydrocynic acid 
Cyanogen 
Fluorine 


Methyl bromide 


Nitrogen peroxide 


Nitrosyl chloride 


Boron trifluoride 


Town gas 
Hydrogen sulphide 
Carbonyl chloride 
Nitrogen tetroxide 
Cyanogen chloride 


Carbon oxychloride 


Carbonyl chloride 
(phosgene) 


6 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 


6.1 Specific Requirements 
6.1.1 All Safety Devices 


In addition to the requirements for the specific type of 
safety device given in 6.1.2 to 6.1.5, the following 
general requirements shall apply: 


a) The material, design and construction of a 
safety device shall be such that there will be 
no significant change in the functioning of 
the device and no serious corrosion or 
deterioration of the materials, due to service 
conditions within the period between 
replacements. The chemical and physical 
properties of the materials shall be uniform 
and suitable for the requirements of the part 
manufactured therefrom; 

b) Methods of manufacture, inspection and tests 
shall conform to best practices in order to 
attain satisfactory performance of the safety 
devices; and 

c) The design, material and location of safety 
devices shall have been proved to be suitable 
for the intended service gas service. 


IS 5903 : 2014 


6.1.2 Bursting Discs 


When a bursting disc is used with a compressed gas 
cylinder, the bursting pressure of the disc, when tested 
at a temperature of 65°C in accordance with 7.2.2, shall 
not exceed the minimum required test pressure of the 
cylinder for which the device is intended. 


6.1.3 Combination Bursting Disc/Fusible Plug 


In combination bursting disc/fusible plug device, the 
fusible metal shall be in the discharge side of the 
bursting disc. The fusible metal shall not be used in 
place of a gasket to seal the disc against leakage around 
the edges. Gaskets, if used shall be of material which 
will not deteriorate when in contact with the gas to be 
contained at the maximum temperature specified for 
the fusible metal. The bursting disc shall be in contact 
(without any gasket) with the pressure opening. 


6.1.4 Pressure-relief Valves 


(0.8 x Test pressure of cylinder) < set to release pressure 
(SRP) < (0.9 x Test pressure of cylinder) 


Resealing pressure = 0.8 x SRP 
Flow rating pressure = 1.2 x SRP 


6.1.4.1 The design of the pressure-relief valve shall 
be such that the valve will have direct communication 
with the vapour/gas space of the cylinder when in 
normal use and the possibility of unauthorized 
adjustment shall be minimized. 


6.2 Flow Capacity of Safety Devices 
6.2.1 General 


The flow capacity of each design and modification 
thereof of all types of safety devices shall be 
determined from the relevant formula given in 6.2.2 
to 6.2.5 by an actual flow test in accordance with 7.1.1. 


6.2.2 Safety Devices for Use with Non-liquefied Gas 
(Except Pressure-relief Valves) 


The minimum required flow capacity of safety devices, 
except pressure-relief valves, for installation in non- 
insulated cylinders for non-liquefied gas shall be 
calculated by the following formula: 


Q = 0.574 W, 
where 


О, = flow capacity at 7 kgf/cm? (absolute) in m3/h 
of free air, and 


W.- water capacity of the cylinder in litres, which 
in any case shall not be taken as less than 10 
litres. 

NOTE — The above formula expresses flow capacity 


requirements equal to 70 percent of that which will discharge 
through a perfect orifice (having 0.15 mm? area for each litre 
of water capacity of the cylinder). 


6.2.3 Safety Devices for Use with Liquefied Gas 
(Except Pressure-relief Valves) 


The minimum required flow capacity of safety devices, 
except pressure-relief valves, for installation in non- 
insulated cylinders for liquefied gas shall be calculated 
by the following formula: 


О = 1.148 W, 
where 

О, = flow capacity at 7 kgf/cm? (absolute) in m?/ 
h of free air, and 

W.= water capacity of the cylinder in litres, which 
in any case shall not be taken as less than 10 
litres. 

NOTE — The above formula expresses flow capacity 


requirements equal to 35 percent of that which will discharge 
through a perfect orifice (having 0.15 mm! area for each litre 
of water capacity of the cylinder). 


6.2.4 Safety Devices for Use with Non-liquefied Gas 
(Pressure-relief Valves only) 


The minimum required flow capacity of pressure-relief 
valves, for installation in non-insulated cylinders for 
non-liquefied gas shall be calculated by the following 
formula: 


О = 0.082 PW. 
where 

Q, = flow capacity in m*/h of free air, 

P = flow capacity pressure in kgf/cm? (absolute), 
and 

W, = water capacity of the cylinder in litres, which 
in any case shall not be taken as less than 5 
litres. 


6.2.5 Safety Devices for Use with Liquefied Gas 
(Pressure-relief Valves only) 


The minimum required flow capacity of pressure-relief 
valves for installation in non-insulated cylinders for 
liquefied gas shall be calculated by the following 
formula: 


Q,= 0.164 PW, 
where 

Q, - flow capacity in m?/h of free air, 

P = flow rating pressure in kgf/cm? (absolute), 
and 

W. = water capacity of the cylinder in litres, which 
in any case shall not be taken as less than 5 
litres. 


6.3 Piping for Safety Devices 


Where fittings and piping are used on either the 
upstream or downstream side or both of a safety device 


or devices, the passages shall be so designed that the 
flow capacity of the safety device will not get reduced 
below the capacity required for the cylinder on which 
the safety device assembly is installed, nor to the extent 
that the operation of the device could get impaired. 
Fittings, piping and method of attachment shall be 
designed to withstand normal handling and the 
pressures developed when the device or devices 
function. 


6.4 Shut-off Device Prohibited 


No shut-off device, other than that which may be built 
into the safety device itself, shall be installed in either 
the approach channel or the discharge channel. Dust 
caps, if installed on down stream side, shall blow away 
at a pressure not more than 2 kgf/cm? (g). 


6.5 Identification and Marking 


If the performance of safety devices is not to be 
jeopardized by improper service practices, certain 
safeguards or guidelines in regard to identification and 
marking are essential. The aim, in general, is to make 
it possible to identify the manufacturer of the devices 
and to have the main replaceable parts so identified or 
coded that it may be readily determined, usually by 
reference to manufacturers published data, if parts are 
intended to function together, what operating pressure 
range or temperature range they will provide for, and 
whether they have adequate flow capacity for the 
cylinder with which they are to be employed. In 
particular, it is pointed out that bursting discs can be 
applied only against pressure openings for which they 
are specifically designed. For example, some 
manufacturers may be employing sharp pressure 
opening contours while others may be employing 
rounded or other shaped contours. Because of these 
contour variations, an interchange of discs will give 
widely different bursting pressures, even though the 
same diameter may be employed for the bursting 
pressure opening. In addition, variation in diameter for 
the pressure opening will give still wider variation in 
bursting pressure if discs are interchanged improperly. 


NOTE — Disc or housing shall be marked/identified. 


6.5.1 All Safety Devices 


6.5.1.1 In addition to the specific requirements for the 
type of safety devices given in 6.5.2 to 6.5.5, all 
uninstalled safety devices shall be identified by 
impressing on metal where practicable, or alternatively, 
by firmly affixing an identification tag (which may be 
removed at the time of installation) showing: 


a) The manufacturer's name or trade-mark; 
b) Type number; 
c) Batch identification; and 


IS 5903 : 2014 


d) Pressure, flow capacity, and/or temperature 
rating, as applicable. 


6.5.1.2 Where knowledge of the date of manufacture 
is necessary for proper maintenance of a safety device, 
the month and year of manufacture shall be marked 
on the device (for PRV only). 


6.5.1.3 Where there is insufficient room for marking 
the full information, identification required may be 
coded in which case the code designation shall be 
determined from the data provided by the 
manufacturer. 


6.5.2 Individual Components of Bursting Disc 
Assemblies 


When bursting discs and pressure opening parts are 
designed to be replaced as components, they shall be 
marked to indicate the rated bursting pressure (with 
the proper mating part), the flow capacity and the 
manufacturer. 


NOTES — The following are suggested methods of marking: 


1 Permanent and legible marking to identify the rated bursting 
pressure or identifying part number, on the part containing the 
pressure opening. 


2 Ink, or otherwise mark, the number on the bursting disc, or 
apply other code mark, to facilitate determination of bursting 
pressure range and proper mating parts. 


6.5.2.1 To fit bursting disc plug, torque shall be applied 
as per manufacturers specification. 


6.5.3 Fusible Plugs 


Fusible plugs shall be externally marked to indicate 
yield temperature rating and flow capacity. 


6.5.4 Pressure-relief Valve 
Pressure-relief valves shall be marked to indicate: 


a) The set pressure for which the valve is ‘set to 
start to release’ 


b) The flow rating pressure in kgf/cm? gauge at 
which the flow capacity of the valve is 
determined; and 


c) The flow capacity in cm/min of free air. 
6.5.5 Combination Safety Devices 


When bursting discs and pressure opening parts are 
combined in factory, assembled safety devices designed 
to be replaced as a unit, the assembly shall be externally 
marked to indicate pressure rating, flow capacity and 
yield temperature rating (where applicable). 


NOTE — Examples of these are: 

1 Bursting disc assemblies (BD), 

2 Combination bursting disc/fusible plug (BD/FP, or BD/FP, 
or BD/FP,), and 


3 Combination pressure-relief valve/fusible plug (PRV/FP, or 
PRV/FP, or PRV/FP,). 


IS 5903 : 2014 


7 ACCEPTANCE 
REQUIREMENTS 


AND APPROVAL 


7.1 General Requirements 
7.1.1 Type Test 


Only those safety devices which have complied with the 
requirements of 7.1.2 and the requirements for the 
specific type of safety device shall be accepted as meeting 
the requirements. Such devices may then be identified 
by the relevant type designation specified in 3.1. 


7.1.2 Flow Capacity Test (for All Safety Devices) 
7.1.2.1 General 


The flow capacity of each design and modification 
thereof of all types of safety devices shall be tested in 
accordance with 7.1.2.3. The form to be used for such 
submission shall be as given in Annex A. 


7.1.2.2 Number of samples for test 


Three samples of each size of each device 
representative of standard production shall be tested 
in accordance with 7.1.2.3. 


7.1.2.3 Test procedure 
Each sample device shall be tested as follows: 


a) The device shall be completely assembled 
from the inlet of the approach channel to the 
exit of the discharge channel in the manner 
normally assembled for use. 


b) Each device shall be caused to operate by 
either pressure or by temperature or by a 
combination of such effects which shall not 
exceed the maximum temperature and 
pressure for which it was designed. 

c) Air or gas shall be supplied to the safety 
device through a supply pipe provided with a 
pressure gauge and a thermometer for 
indicating and recording the pressure and 
temperature of the supply. Observations shall 
be made and recorded after steady flow 
conditions have been established. Test 
conditions need not be the same as the 
conditions under which the device is expected 
to function in service, but the following limits 
shall be met. The inlet pressure of the air or 
gas supplied to the safety device shall be not 
less than 7 kgf/cm? (absolute), except that the 
flow capacity of a pressure-relief valve shall 
be made at the flow rating pressure. 

d) After pressure testing and without cleaning, 
removal of parts, or reconditioning; each 
safety device shall be subjected to an actual 
flow test wherein the amount of air or gas 
released by the device is measured. 


e) Where fusible plugs are being flow capacity 
tested, the fusible alloy shall be removed from 
the orifice by heating the plug above the 
melting point of the fusible alloy. 


7.1.2.4 Requirements 


The average capacity of the three devices tested shall 
be recorded as the flow capacity. The design of the 
device shall be considered acceptable provided the 
capacities of the three sample devices fall within 
10 percent of the highest capacity recorded. 


7.2 Specific Requirements for Bursting Discs 
7.2.1 Number of Samples for Test 


From every production batch of completed discs of 
the same size and made from the same roll of foil, or 
from every batch of disc holders as appropriate, the 
number of discs shown in Table 1 shall be selected at 
random for testing (see 7.2.4). 


7.2.2 Bursting Test for Discs 
7.2.2.1 Procedure 


Each sample disc shall be mounted in a proper holder 
with a pressure opening having dimensions identical 
with that in the device in which it is to be used, and 
submitted to a bursting test using any suitable fluid at 
a specified temperature. The test pressure may be raised 
rapidly to 85 percent of the rated bursting pressure, 
held there for at least 30 s, and thereafter shall be raised 
at a rate of not in excess of 7 kgf/cm? (gauge) per minute 
until the disc bursts. The actual bursting pressure shall 
not be in excess of the rated bursting pressure and not 
less than 90 percent of the rated bursting pressure. If 
the actual bursting pressure of each sample is not within 
the limits prescribed above, the entire production batch 
of bursting discs shall be rejected unless a retest is 
carried out in accordance with 7.2.2.2. 


The determination of rated bursting pressure may be 
carried out at room temperature, provided that the 


Table 1 Number of Discs or Holders to be Tested 
(Clauses 7.2.1 and 7.2.3.1) 


SI Batch Size (Number) Number to be 
No. Tested 
a) 2) (3) 
i) 3 Up to and including 8 2 
ii) 9 Up to and including 15 
iii) 16 Up to and including 30 4 
iv) 31 Up to and including 100 6 
v) 101 Up to and including 250 8 
vi) 251 Up to and including 1 000 10 
vii) 1 001 Up to and including 10 000 25 


NOTE — Where the number of discs and/or holders in the 
batch exceeds 101, the number to be tested should include 5 
from the first 100 manufactured in the batch. 


relationship between bursting pressure and temperature 
is established by test for type of material used. 


7.2.2.2 Retests 


If the manufacturer so desires, he may subject double 
the original number of discs selected at random from 
the same batch to an identical test. If all of these 
additional discs meet the requirements, the remaining 
discs in the batch shall be acceptable. If any of the 
additional discs fails, the entire batch shall be rejected. 


7.2.3 Bursting Test for Holders 
7.2.3.1 Procedure 


The sample holders selected in accordance with Table 
1 shall be assembled with bursting discs taken from 
the batch accepted by the tests in 7.2.2 and the assembly 
subjected to the bursting test specified in 7.2.2. The 
actual bursting pressure shall not be in excess of the 
rated bursting pressure and not less than 85 percent of 
the rated bursting pressure of the disc. If the actual 
bursting pressure is not within the above limits, the 
entire production batch of bursting discs holders shall 
be rejected unless a retest is carried out in accordance 
with 7.2.3.2. 


The tests may be carried out at room temperature 
provided that the relationship between bursting 
pressure and temperature is established by test for type 
of material used. 


7.2.3.2 Retests 


If the manufacturer so desires, he may subject double 
the original number of holders selected at random from 
the same batch to an identical test. If all of these 
additional holders meet the requirements, the 
remaining holders in the batch shall be acceptable; if 
any of the additional holders fails, the entire batch shall 
be rejected. 


7.2.4 Bursting Test for Combined Disc and Holder 
7.2.4.1 Procedure 


As an alternative to the testing of individual 
components (see 7.2.2 and 7.2.3), bursting discs and 
holders may be tested as an assembly. Assemblies so 
tested shall meet the following requirements: 


a) The actual bursting pressure shall be within 
the range prescribed but if no range is 
prescribed in that case shall not be in excess 
of the rated bursting pressure and shall not be 
less than 85 percent of the rated bursting 
pressure of the disc; and 

b) If the actual bursting pressure is not within 
limits prescribed in (a), the entire production 
batch of assemblies shall be rejected unless a 
retest is carried out in accordance with 7.2.4.2. 


IS 5903 : 2014 


Alternatively, the individual components may 
be retested in accordance with 7.2.2.2 and 
7.2.3.2. 


7.2.4.2 Retests 


If the manufacturer so desires, double the original 
number of assemblies selected at random from the same 
batch shall be subjected to an identical test. If all of 
these additional assemblies meet the requirements, the 
remaining assemblies in the batch shall be accepted. If 
any of the additional assemblies fails, the entire batch 
shall be rejected. 


7.3 Specific Requirements for Fusible Plugs 
7.3.1 Test of Fusible Alloy 


For each production batch, a laboratory control test of 
fusible alloy shall be made. The following procedure 
is recommended: 


a) Twosticks of the fusible alloy shall be selected 
at random from each batch; 


b) Atest sample shall consist of a piece 51 mm 
long and of approximately 6.5 mm diameter 
cut from each stick. Each sample shall be 
suspended horizontally on suitable supports 
spaced 25 mm apart and presenting knife 
edges to the sample so that the ends of the 
sample will overhang the knife edges by 
12.5 mm. The supported samples shall be 
immersed in a glycerin bath not closer than 5 
mm to the bottom of the container. This batch 
shall be suspended in and controlled by an 
outer glycerine bath; 

c) Two samples from the same stick shall be 
tested at one time. A thermometer (bulb 
immersion) shall be inserted into the batch 
between and closely adjacent to the samples 
so that the bulb will be completely immersed 
at the same level as the samples. The bath 
temperature shall be raised at a rate not in 
excess of 3?C/min; and 

d) The yield temperature shall be taken as that 
temperature at which the second of the four 
ends of the samples loses its rigidity and 
drops. 


NOTE — The test outlined above has been found to be a 
satisfactory laboratory control test for determining the yield 
temperature of fusible alloys. While this test is recommended, 
equivalent tests using samples of different dimensions and 
different rates of heat rise are permissible provided that they 
yield reproducible results. 


7.3.2, Extrusion and Yield Temperature Test of Fusible 
Plugs or Reinforced Fusible Plugs 


7.3.2.1 General 


Plugs selected in accordance with 7.3.2.2 shall be 


IS 5903 : 2014 


installed in a test rig which will simulate actual 
conditions of installation in a cylinder and tested in 
accordance with 7.3.2.3 and 7.3.2.4. 


7.3.2.2. Number of samples for test 


From every production batch of completed fusible 
plugs of the same size, made from the same batch of 
fusible alloy (see 7.3.1), the number of plugs shown in 
Table 2 shall be selected at random. 


Table 2 Number of Plugs to be Tested 
(Clause 7.3.2.2) 


SI No. Batch Size (Number) Number to be 
Tested 

а) (2) (3) 
i) 3 Up to and including 8 2 
ii) 9 Up to and including 15 3 
iii) 16 Up to and including 30 4 
iv) 31 Up to and including 100 6 
v) 101 Up to and including 250 8 
vi) 251 Up to and including 1 000 10 
vii) 1 001 Up to and including 10 000 25 


7.3.2.3 Test to determine resistance to extrusion 


Each sample shall be subjected to a maximum working 
temperature of 55?C for 24 h with a pressure equal to 
130 percent of working pressure of a valve (cylinder). 
No leakage or visible extrusion of material shall be 
evident upon examination of the end exposed to 
atmospheric pressure. 


7.3.2.4 Test for determination of the yield temperature 
of a fusible plug (see 3) 


Each sample shall be tested for determination of the 
yield temperature, as follows: 


a) The samples shall be subjected to an air 
pressure of not less than 0.2 kgf/cm? (gauge) 
applied to the end normally exposed to the 
contents of the cylinder. While subjected to 
this pressure the samples shall be immersed 
in a gycerine-water bath, at a temperature in 
the range of 3?C immediately below the 
minimum yield temperature, and held in that 
temperature range for 10 min. The 
temperature of the bath shall then be raised at 
a rate not exceeding 3?C/min during which 
the pressure may be increased to not more 
than 3.5 kgf/cm? (gauge). When the 
temperature of the bath reaches the point 
where material is extruded sufficiently to 
produce leakage of air from all sample plugs 
the temperature of the bath should be recorded 
as the yield temperature of the plugs. It shall 
be within the temperature limits specified in 
3 for that particular type of fusible plug; and 


b) As an alternative method, these plugs, after 
passing the test at a temperature in the range 
of 3°C immediately below the minimum yield 
temperature, may at once be immersed in 
another bath held at a temperature not 
exceeding the maximum yield temperature 
specified in 3 for that particular type of fusible 
plug. If air leakage occurs from all sample 
plugs for 5 min at that temperature, the 
requirements shall be considered to have been 
met. 


NOTES 


1 Variation in temperature within the liquid bath in which the 
plug is immersed for either test (a) or (b) shall be kept to a 
minimum by stirring while making the tests. 


2 It is recommended that, for safety reasons, a restricting orifice 
be installed in the air supply line to restrict flow when 
conducting this test. 


7.3.2.5 Rejection 


If any of the samples fails to meet the requirements 
of 7.3.2.3 and 7.3.2.4, the entire batch of plugs shall 
be rejected unless a retest is carried out in accordance 
with 7.3.2.6. 


7.3.2.6 Retests 


If the manufacturer so desires, double the original 
number of samples, selected at random from the same 
batch shall be subjected to an identical test. If all of 
these additional plugs meet the requirements, the 
remaining plugs of the batch shall be acceptable; if 
any of the additional plugs fails, the entire batch shall 
be rejected. 


7.4 Specific Requirements for Combination 
Bursting Disc/Fusible Plug Safety Devices 


7.4.1 Number of Samples for Test 


The production of combination bursting disc/fusible 
plug devices of any one rated bursting pressure and 
any one yield temperature on any one day shall be 
considered a production batch. Two representative 
assembled devices shall be selected at random from 
every production batch and tested to the requirements 
of 7.4.2 and 7.4.3 or 7.4.4. 


7.4.2. Yield Temperature Test (see 3) 


Each assembled device shall be subjected to a pressure 
of 70 to 75 percent of the rated bursting pressure of 
the bursting disc used, using a suitable fluid and while 
under this pressure shall be immersed in a liquid bath 
held at a temperature not less than 3?C below the 
minimum yield temperature of the fusible alloy for at 
least 10 min. The fusible alloy shall not show evidence 
of melting. The temperature of the bath shall then be 
raised at a rate not exceeding 3?C/min without 
appreciable change in pressure. When the maximum 


yield temperature of the fusible alloy is reached the 
fusible alloy shall have melted. 


7.4.3 Bursting Test 


The bursting disc shall then be tested in accordance 
with the requirements of 7.2.2. The device may be 
removed from the bath for this test. 


7.4.4 Alternative Tests 


As an alternative to tests in 7.4.2 and 7.4.3, the bursting 
disc and fusible alloy may be tested separately to 
requirements of 7.2.2 and 7.3.2 respectively, provided 
that the design of the device is such as to allow for the 
separation of the parts and the separate tests. 


7.4.5 Rejection 


If any of the samples fails to meet the requirements 
specified in 7.4.2 and 7.4.3 or 7.4.4 the entire batch 
shall be rejected unless a retest is carried out in 
accordance with 7.4.6. 


7.4.6 Retests 


If the manufacturer so desires, double the original 
number of samples selected at random from the same 
batch shall be subjected to an identical test. If all of 
these additional devices meet the requirements, the 
remaining safety devices in the batch represented by 
the samples are acceptable; otherwise the entire batch 
shall be rejected. 


7.5 Specific Requirements for Pressure-relief Valves 


Every pressure-relief valve shall be subjected to an air 
or gas pressure test to determine the following, in the 
sequence indicated: 


a) The results of the 3 start-to-discharge tests 
(see 7.3) on each valve shall be within 5 
percent of the arithmetic average. The start- 
to-discharge pressure shall be within +15 
percent of the nominal set pressure; 


b) That the pressure to hold the pressure-relief 
valve fully opened is not greater than the flow 
rating pressures. A flow capacity test on a 
safety valve is to be conducted at a flow rating 
pressure of 120 percent of the maximum set 
pressure or otherwise to be agreed between 
purchaser and manufacturer; and 


IS 5903 : 2014 


c) The re-seal pressure shall not be less than 70 
percent of the minimal set pressure and in any 
case not less than the maximum operating 
pressure of the cylinder. 


7.6 Reworked Devices 


Rejected safety devices or components may be 
reworked provided they are subjected to such additional 
tests as are required to ensure compliance with all the 
requirements of this standard. 

NOTE — The material of the two sticks of the fusible alloy 


once tested as per 7.3.1 shall be scrapped and not to be used 
for filling the plugs. 


8 PERIODIC 
MAINTENANCE 


INSPECTION AND 


8.1 General Requirements 


Safety devices in service shall be maintained in reliable 
operating condition by observing the following 
minimum requirements: 


a) Exercising care in handling and storage to 
avoid damage to the cylinder and connected 
components; 

b) Handling and storage to prevent plugging of 
openings by the accumulation of extraneous 
matter, such as paint and dirt; 

c) The replacement of damaged or 
malfunctioning assemblies by serviceable 
safety devices; and 

d) Ensuring that all repairs are executed by 
approved technical personnel. 

NOTE — Only replacement parts or assemblies provided by 


the manufacturer shall be used unless the advisability of 
interchange is proved by adequate tests. 


8.2 Routine Checks of Safety Devices 


Each time a compressed gas cylinder is received at a 
point for refilling, all safety devices shall be examined 
for corrosion, damage, plugging of the discharge 
channel and extrusion of fusible alloy. In case of doubt 
regarding the suitability of the safety device, the 
cylinder shall not be filled until it is equipped with a 
suitable device. 


IS 5903 : 2014 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 7.1.2.1) 
APPLICATION FORM FOR APPROVAL OF SAFETY DEVICE 


Report №. a 7] "Рае: С] 
Manufacturer; (OO 
ма — — — — SENA 
Catalogue or Мемо — — — — aaa 
DrawingNo.[ — J]Pate of Drawing & Latest Revision [| ^ —  ] 
Safety Device Type[  — ]see 3.1 

Set Ргеѕѕше:  — — ] kgf/cm’ (gauge) 

Flow Rating Pressure: [| — — — — — — ]kgf/cm" (absolute) 

Yield Temperature: [| [( ^ ^ C 

Rated Bursting Pressure: [7 — — ] kgf/cm? (absolute) 


Chemical Name of Gas: — — — — — — — ——————————————————————————————] 
О Liquefied 


О Non-liquefied 


Commercial Name of Gas, if any: (= 
Percentage of Components for Mixed Gases: Г] 
Specification and Service/Test Pressure of Cylinder(s)| ^ ^ ^  —  — — —] 


to be used 


Maximum Container Size for which approvalisrequested[ —  — ^ ^ — NSN 


in litres of Water Capacity of the cylinder: 


Minimum Required Flow mYhofAir (OO 
Actual Flow m?/h of Air at 15 °C and Base Pressure of one ССС] 


normal atmosphere (absolute) (see 7.1.2.1): 


Test Conducted by: г л 


(Signature) 
NAME: 
DESIGNATION: 


IS 5903 : 2014 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Limited, Allahabad 


BOC India Limited, Kolkata 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Ltd, Kolkata 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Ltd, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Limited, Surat 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Praxair India Ltd, Bangalore 


Research and Development Establishment (Engineers), Pune 


Sakha Engineers Private Limited, New Delhi 
SICGIL India Ltd, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (ARAD, New Delhi 


Steel Authority of India Limited, Salem 


Steel Authority of India Limited, Ranchi 


Supreme Cylinders Limited, Delhi 


Tata Motors Limited, Pune 


11 


Representative(s) 


Suri T. R. Tuomas (Chairman) 
Suni D. K. Gurra (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate ) 


Suri VisuNU. D. SONAWANE 
Suri SANJAY PHULLI (Alternate ) 


SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 
Suri Р. G. CHoupuury (Alternate) 


SHRI K. MANOHARAN 
SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri А. К. KHAMKAR (Alternate) 


Suri М. SELVAKUMAR 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR SHARAN 
Suri S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN К. PANDEY 
Suri UswaL BHANDARI (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA К. GARG 
Suri NIKHILESh К. Ganc (Alternate) 


Suri SATISH KABRA 
Suri S. СорАГАІАН (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. Dey 
Suri S. B. Boma (Alternate) 


Suri О.У. MANNUR 
SHRIMATI КАКОВ1 MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAGHUNATH KULAI 
Suri ARUN Nayak (Alternate) 


Suri Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. SARAN (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
Suri К. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI MILAN SARKAR 
Suri ARINDAM Das (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJIT S. Кони 


SHRI FAROOQUE DADABHOY 
Suri К. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


Suri К. К. GANDHI 
SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR Karn (Alternate) 


Suri М. PRABAKARAN 
Suri N. К. Vuayavarcia (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
Dr B. K. Jua (Alternate) 


Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


IS 5903 : 2014 


Organization 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


Representative(s) 


Suri Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri К. BEHAN! (Alternate) 


Dn S. S. TuiPsE 
Suri S. D. RARIKAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. К. JAIN 
Suri Амо) Jain (Alternate) 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


Trans Valves (India) Private Limited, Hyderabad 


Suri S. К. SARVATE 
Suri S. J. Vispute (Alternate) 


Vanaz Engineers Limited, Pune 


In personal capacity (Menon & Patel, 14/1, Mile, Mathura Road, Suri EBRAHIM M. PATEL 


Faridabad) 


In personal capacity (303, Shantikunj, Pandav Bunglows Lane Suri L. D. THAKKAR 


Athwalines, Surat) 


BIS Directorate General Suri J. A SippiQui, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MED) 


[Representing Directorate General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI VISHAL TOMER 


Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Composition of Low Pressure Gas Cylinders Sub-committee, MED 16:2 


Organization 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Bhiwadi Cylinders Private Limited, New Delhi 


Hindalco Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Ideal Engineers Private Limited, Hyderabad 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


J. R. Fabricators Limited, Halol 


Jindal Stainless Limited, Hisar 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


Sahuwala Cylinders (P) Limited, Visakhapatnam 
Shri Shakti Cylinders Private Limited, Hyderabad 


Shiv Energy India Limited, Hyderabad 
Steel Authority of India Limited, Salem 


Supreme Cylinders Limited, Delhi 
Tata Steel Limited, Jamshedpur 


In personal capacity (Menon & Patel, 14/1, Mile, Mathura Road, 


Faridabad) 


12 


Representative(s) 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Convener) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


Suri VisuNU. D. SONAWANE 
Sun SANJAY PHULLI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANVINDER SINGH 
SHRI RAJNEESH CHorna (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 
Suri S. Devaposs (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
Suni DEEPAK Kaera (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR SHARAN 
Suri S. M. RAMBHAaL (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHWIN H. MEHTA 
Suri S. SEsH Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri L. C. JAIN 
SHRI PRAVAIN Сов. (Alternate) 


Suri О.У. MANNUR 
SHRIMATI КАВОВІ MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
Suri К. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


Suri T. К. THOMAS 
Suri D. К. Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri S. S. S. KrisHNA REDDY 


Suri D. V. RAJA SEKHAR 
Suri Younus GEELANI (Alternate) 


Suri R. R. Ray 


SHRI М. PRABAKARAN 
Suri №. К. VuavAvanalA (Alternate) 


Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


SHRI SUDIPTO SARKAR 
Dr А. N. Buaaar (Alternate) 


Suri EBRAHIM M. PATEL 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (1125). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 С1ЇЛ. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : С.Л. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


Amendment No. 1 to IS 5903 : 2014 

where 

О, = flow capacity at 7 kgf/cm? (absolute) in m*/h of free air, and’ 
(Page 4, clause 6.2.4, formula) — Substitute 

‘О, = 0.001 378 PW, 

where 

О, = flow capacity at 7 kgf/cm’ (absolute) in m*/min of free air, and’ 

for 

*Q, = 0.082 PW, 

where 

О, = flow capacity at 7 kgf/cm? (absolute) in m’/h of free air, and’ 
(Page 4, clause 6.2.5, formula) — Substitute 

‘Qa = 0.002 73 PW, 

where 

О, = flow capacity at 7 kgf/cm? (absolute) in m*/min of free air, and’ 

for 

‘Qa = 0.164 PW, 

where 

О, = flow capacity at 7 kgf/cm? (absolute) in m’/h of free air, and’ 
[Page 5, clause 6.5.4 (c)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 

с) The flow capacity in m’/min of free air.’ 


2 


Amendment No. 1 to IS 5903 : 2014 
(Page 8, clause 7.4.2, last sentence) — Substitute ‘yielded’ for ‘melted’. 
(Page 9, clause 7.4.4) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 
‘7.4.4 Alternative Tests 
As an alternative to tests in 7.4.2 and 7.4.3, the bursting disc and fusible alloy 
shall be tested separately to requirements of 7.3.2 and 7.2.2 respectively, 
provided that the design of the device is such as to allow for the separation of 
the parts and the separate tests.’ 


(Page 10, Annex A, 3.1.4, line 21) — Substitute ‘m?/min’ for *m"/h' 


(Page 10, Annex A, 3.1.4, line 22) — Substitute ‘m*/min’ for ‘m*/h’ 


(MED 16) 
Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


