( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 9080 ( Part IV ) - 1981

Indian Standard
SAFETY REQUIREMENTS IN ELECTRO-HEAT INSTALLATIONS
PART IV PARTICULAR RE-QUlREMENTS ARC FURNACE INSTALLATIONS
Industrial Electra-heating Equipment ETDC 61 Sectional

FOR

Committee,

Chairman SHRI S. K.
MAZUMDER

Representing Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur

Members SH~I A. K. BISWAS ( Alt#smate to Shri S. K. Mazumder ) Steel Furnace Association of India, New Delhi SHRI S. N. AQA~WAL M. N. Dastur & Company ( P ) Ltd, Calcutta Sam S. K. BHATTACHARJI SHRI T. K. GHO~E ( Alfcrnafe ) Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Vadodara SHRI R. M. CEANDWANI SHRI P. S. SHARMA ( A&mate ) Engineering Projects ( India ) Ltd, New Delhi SHRI KAUSEAL GOEL SHRI M. M. PRASAD ( Alternate ) Graphite India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI A. K. JAIN SHRI J. K. A~ARWAL ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SERI G. L. KESWANI New Delhi SHRI D. D. RAJDEN ( Alternate ) Metallurgical & Engineering Consultants ( India ) SHRI 0. N. KRISHNAN Ltd, Ranchi Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI J. C. MADAN SHRI A. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) Westerwork Projects Ltd, Bombay SERI H. T. MAXHIJANI SHRI L. C. CHANDI ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. K. MUKEERJEE SHRI SUJIT DAS ( Altsrnafe ) Bharat Machine Building Plant, Heavy Engineering SHRI P. X. MUKEOPADHYA Corporation, Ranchi Ordnance Factories Directorate General of SHRI M. K. NAIR ( Ministry of Defence ), Calcutta ( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN

@ Copyright 1981 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian CoPyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act

IS t9080( Part IV ) - 1981 ( Continuadfrom
SHRI

page 1 ) R#p?asenting

M6rnb.w

Indian Furnace Company Ltd, Bombay P. A. PATEL SHRIM. PURANDHAR ( Altcmats~) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Secunderabad Da RAVIXD~AREDDY Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, SERIM. SHANKRALINGAM New Delhi SHBIR. V. NARAYANAN ( &mats ) The General Electric Co o 1India Ltd, Calcutta SHRIY. P. VATSA SHRIS. M. BANERJEE ( Altarnate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&i0 Msmbrr ) SHRI S. P. SA~HDEV, Director ( Elec tech ) KM G. M. JOSEPH Assistant Director ( Elec tech ), IS1

2

IS : 9080 ( Part IV ) - 1981

Lndian Standard
SAFETY REQUIREMENTS IN ELECTRO-HEAT INSTALLATIONS
PART IV PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS ARC FURNACE INSTALLATIONS FOR

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard ( Part IV ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 13 January 1981, after the draft finalized by the Industrial Electra-heating Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 This part dealing with particular safety requirements for direct arc furnaces and submerged arc furnaces forms Part IV of the series. The other parts of this standard are: Part Part Set I II 1 General Particular ment Protection Protection requirements requirements in direct in indirect for resistance heating heating heating installations installations and nitrite and frenitrate equip-

resistance resistance

Set 2 Set 3 Set 4 Part III

Protection in potassium bath furnaces Protection in installations other similar products Particular requirements quency induction furnace

and sodium

used for drying for mains installations and

varnishes medium

assistance has been derived from IEC 0.3 In preparing this standard, Publication 519-4(1977) ` Safety in electro-heat installations: Part IV Particular requirements for arc furnace installations ' issued by International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement ofthis standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, off in accordance expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded The number of significant places retained in the with IS : 2-1960*. rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( reoisrd
).

IS : 9080 ( Part IV ) - 1981 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part IV ) covers the safety requirements of arc furnace installations, for example, direct arc furnaces and submerged arc furnaces. I.2 This standard also applies to that part of the installation which is situated on the output side of the furnace feeding transformer. This part of the installation comprises: the furnace itself, its foundation and structure, its electric equipment from the low voltage terminals of the transformer to the electrodes, the operating and control apparatus of the furnaces and all other equipment inherent in the utilization of the furnace. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, ( part I )-1979* shall apply. 3. CONSTRUCTION AND the definitions given in IS : 9080

INSTALLATION

DETAILS

3.1 Electrodes and Their Auxiliaries 3.1.1 The electrode holding structure shall be insulated from the drive mechanism and from the furnace frame. The frame and the drive machanism shall be earthed through the supporting frame if the latter ensures a satisfactory low earth resistance. 3.1.2 The electrode-moving system switches and end-of-travel stops. shall be provided with limit

3.1.3 The electrode guide system, if independent of the contact plates ( in particular for submerged arc furnaces ), shall be of the kind which locks the electrode with its holder when the guide system is not being operated. 3.4 Furnace Shells and Roof 3.2.1 The metal-clad shells shall be earthed either directly or by connecting them to the metal support which is also earthed, provided the earth resistance is low enough. 3.2.2 Tilting-type shells shall be provided with limit switches of devices at both ends of the travel ( this clause is not applicable for hydraulic tilting systems employing cylinders with restricted travel length ).
*Safety requirements in clcctro-heat installations: Part I General requirements.

4

IS : 9080 ( Part IV ) - 1981 3.2.3 Furnaces with a rotating and tilting shell shall be equipped with an interlocking system to prevent operation of she tilting device of the shell if the pouring spout is not its appropriate position.
3.2.4 Basket-loaded furnaces shall embody a mechanism which, at the locks the controlling device of .end of the swing-aside roof movement, the roof displacement in its final position. 3.2.5 The rotating and displacement devices of the shell and of the roof shall be interlocked with the electrode moving system to ensure that these movements are possible only when the electrode columns are in their upper position. 3.2.6 For furnaces provided with an induction charge mixer, interlocks should be applied which will allow only for the switching-on of its electric supply when the charge window of the furnace has been closed, the roof covering completely the furnace shell and the electrodes Taised. 3.2.7 Access to the super-structures of a furnace shall be possible only after the operation of appropriate devices to switch-off ~power ( for instance, the opening of a door or lifting of a bar causing the switch-off of the furnace and to maintain it out of operation ). A warning .notice ` Entry forbidden - Furnace alive ' should be provided. However, in certain particular cases, for example, when working on self-sintering electrodes of submerged arc furnaces it might be necessary to have access to the super-structures whilst the furnace is in operation. Under these conditions, the requirements of 16.2 of IS : 9080 ( Part I )1979* should be met. 3.2.8 The state of the furnace ( switched on or switched -indicated by lamps so situated as to be visible to personnel work areas. off) shall be located in the

3.2.9 When tilting the furnace in the direction of the casting shop, indication by optical and acoustic devices should be given, these respective signals being clearly seen within the casting shop itself. 3.2.10 Electrode economizers, which may be water-cooled, shall have retaining chains or a system to prevent them from falling into the charge should the arc furnace roof collapse ( in all cases, these systems shall be electrically insulated from earth ). 3.2.11 Furnaces shall be provided with a mechanism in the case of electrical supply interruption.
*Safety requirements in elcctro-heat installations:

to lift electrodes

Part I General requirements.

5

IS : 9080 ( Part 3.3 Loading

IV ) - 1981 and Casting in contact with the \

Tapping

3.3.1 The part of the taphole piercing electrode operator shall be suitably electrically insulated.

3.3.2 Operators required to handle tools or any metallic instruments in contact with live parts shall be electrically insulated from both the tool and earth by suitable garments, for example, gloves and shoes. being an integral component of the 3.3.3 The loading machines, furnace installation, should be earthed or suitably electrically insulated. In the latter case, the personnel responsible for the operation shall be informed accordingly. When using loading devices independent of the furnace installation, ( for example, loading tractors on rubber wheels ), protective devices and precise operation regulations should be foreseen to eliminate any hazard for personnel entrusted with the servicing of these devices. 3.4 Installation Requirements in the tapping area shall be avoided. any water away from the tapping area

3.4.1 The presence of water Measures shall be taken to drain in the event of a leakage.

NOTE - This requirement is not applicable to furnaces for special use. In this case, special safety provisions shall be observed in order to avoid explosion hazard.

3.4.2 The various parts of the furnace requiring supervision and maintenance ( electrical insulation, electrode carriers, economizers, servomotors, etc ) shall be readily accessible by means of fixed ladders, All workplaces above platforms, catwalks and other fixed~installations. ground shall be provided with railings. 3.4.3 Casting pits near the furnace intended for during pouring of the molten metal shall be so built free inner space for ladle-handling; they shall also railings or be closed by covers when not in use. water shall be ensured. receiving the ladies as to provide ample be surrounded by The evacuation of

3.4.4 Where pressurized gas storage tanks are installed in the vicinity of a furnace, provision shall also be made to protect them against possible overheating, electric discharges and splashing of incandescent substances. Similar safety precautions shall be taken for portable containers under~pressure ( carboys, etc ). 3.4.5 When a key is used for switching on power to the furnace, removal shall be possible only when in the switch-off position. 6 its

IS : 9080 ( Port

IV ) - 1981

3.4.6 The switching-off of the furnace by means of push-buttons shall be possible from the operator's work area, whereas the switching,on shall be possible only from the main control panel located in the control room of the furnace. 3.4.7 It should be possible to switch on the furnace up to 15" tilted angle ( both in forward and backward directions ) for operational Interlocks should be provided for making it impossible to tilt xeasons. the furnace with power on beyond 15". 3.4.8 Earthing of a furnace shall be separated from other earthings ,existing installations in the same building. of

3.4.9 The electrodes may be positioned manually in order to clear the tips of metal surface before tilting the furnace by seeing through the :slag-door.
NOTE 1 - In the case of installations of furnaces for duplexing, interlocks are to be positioned so as to allow forward tilting of the furnace up to a maximum of 15~ with power switched on. NOTE 2 - Interlocks are to be positioned to allow back tilting the furnace up to 15' maximum with power switched on. ( slagging off) or

4. OPERATION 4.1 The furnace operators shall wear suitable protective clothing and have at their disposal suitable means of protection for performing the various furnace operations, such as insulated shoes ( woodensoled clogs ,or rubber-soled shoes without metal nails ), helmets, heat-protecting masks, aprons, insulated gloves, blue-tinted goggles, insulated gangplanks of such dimensions as to permit the performance of the relevant operations in complete safety.
is drawn to the necessity of ensuring, in certain cases, NOTE -Attention protection against noise by appropriate measures ( helmets, etc ) being made available for personnel servicing the arc furnaces.

4.2 During the fitting and welding of the casings of self-baking electrodes, the loading of the electrode paste and the fitting of the electrodes, the operators shall be suitably insulated from the ground and earthed structures and shall be positioned in a safety area. It should be ensured that the operators and the tools they use ( for instance, welding devices ) can come into contact only with a single electrode at a time. If such precautions cannot be complied with, extending of electrodes must be carried out with electric power to the furnace switched off. 4.3 If slipping of the electrodes ( unclamping and reclamping of the contact plates and of the guide-channels ) is carried out by hand, this should preferably be done with electric power to the furnace switched

7

IS : 9080 ( Part IV ) - 1981
off; however, if the current cannot be switched off, the operation shall be carried out only by operators provided with insulated shoes, gloves and tools, preferably under conditions specified in 4.2. 4.4 The operation of stirring with steel rabbles and the manipulatiqn of the oxygen lance used for decarburizing the bath shall be carried out by operators wearing insulated shoes and gloves OS they should otherwise be electrically insulated from earth. When the deslagging is carried out under rabbles manipulated `by hand from the outside, adequately electrically insulated from earth. It metal handle of the rabble on the metal structure voltage by means of the operators shall be is advisable to rest the of the furnace.

4.5 The shut-off devices of the oxygen supply pipe-line ( taps or valves ) for decarburizing the bath shall be so located as to be readily accessible to the operator in charge of the process and to be protected against splashes of molten metal or slag at the time of blowing oxygen. All the joints of the oxygen pipe-line shall be well sealed. 4.6 If the perforation of the tapping-hole is carried out electrically or by means of metal tools ( pipe or rabbles ) with voltage applied to the furnace, this shall be done only by operators wearing electrically insulated shoes and gloves and/or other protection devices as required. 4.7 The control of forward and back tilting of the furnace is to be such as to avoid spillage of the charge when pouring and deslagging. 4.8 Access to the furnace to authorized personnel. with power switched on shall be permitted only

4.9 Personnel shall be warned against gaining access to the ~area under shell and flexible cables by means of a barrier or the furnace platform, warning notices. 4.10 Before loosening the contact plates, it is necessary to make sure that the top clamping of the electrode is effective ( when using, for example, Wisdom ribbons or friction brakes ). 5. MAINTENANCE

5.1 When servicing the furnace ( hearth or walls ), suitable safety precautions shall be taken to prevent the electrodes from dropping into the shell due to the electrode holder falling or to a fault connection between the electrode holder and the electrode. 5.2 The operators responsible for flushing the cooling furnace ( for instance, with a hydrochloric acid ~adequately protected ( rr;bber gloves, clear goggles sides, etc ). 8 water pipes of the solution ) shall be closed around the

IS : 9080 ( Part IV ) - 1981 6. SPECIAL ELECTRICAL 6.1 When carrying out electric HAZARDS

welding of the electrical secondary connections, access to the arc furnace transformer primary connections shall not be possible, since by energizing the secondary connections a high voltage shall also be produced on the primary connections. 6.2 For arc furnaces other than submerged arc furnaces, when examining or working on the secondary circuits of current transformers and connected instruments and control devices, the terminals of such current transformer secondaries shall be short-circuited and earthed.
submerged arc furna~ccs, this requirement is not applicable when NOTE -For extending the self-sintering electrodes, as electric power to the furnace is switched on. Nevertheless, this requirement is applicable when examining or working on the secondary of the transformer when electric power to the submerged arc furnace is switched off.

INDIAN ON INDUSTRIAL IS: 1885 (Part 1885 ( Part 8992-1978 9021.1978 9029-1978 9050-1979

STANDARDS

ELECTRO-HEATING

EQUIPMENT .

LI/Sec heating,

1 )-1979 Section

Electrotechnical 1 General terms

vocabulary:

Part Part

LI LI

Industrial Industrial

elcctroclectro-

LI/Scc 2 )-I979 heating, Section Test methods General Methods Nominal threaded

Electrotechnical vocabulary: 2 Resistance heating furnaces with

for induction

submerged

channels equipment

test conditions

for industrial furnaces

electro-heating with metallic

of tests for batch

heating

resistors with

dimensions of cylindrical machined graphite electrodes sockets and connecting pins for use in electric arc furnaces requirements in electro-heat installations: Part

9080 ( Part I )-I979 Safety requirements 9080 ( Part

I General Part II 1 Protec-

II/Set 1 )-1979 Safety Particular requirements tion in direct resistance III )-1979 Safety cular requirements installations

requirements in electro-heat installations: for resistance heating equipment, Section heating installations

9080 ( Part

requirements for mains

in electro-heat installations: Part III Partiand medium frequency induction furnace

