NAT HIAF IS 17728 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


ale qartà — aut in ugfa å 
Ian & few sea ua UrefisaTzAT 
(TA. St. U.S) Y fata ares 
Aa ve qua sitt faste — farse 


Agro Textiles — High Density 
Polyethylene (HDPE) Laminated 
Woven Lay Flat Tube and Fittings for 
use in Rain Irrigation 
System — Specification 


ICS 59.080.99 


O BIS 2021 


anda Ar ST 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR YI, 9 SEERNE TH AI, ag faset — 110002 


Ma SS MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2021 Price Group 10 


Technical Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee, TXD 35 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted bv the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized bv the Technical 
Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textiles Division Council. 


Water resources have been diminishing day-by-day. There is an urgent need to conserve and retain whatever water 
resources that we have. In order to retain and wisely use the limited water resources, rain irrigation system was 
developed and by this vegetable crops like tomato, brinjal, cabbage, capsicum etc. could be grown by using the 
optimal quantity of water. 


Rain irrigation system provides continuous distribution of water from perforated lay flat tube with 180° angle 
covering, provides uniform distribution and 100 percent humidity and fast capability to irrigate the field with 
drizzle like rain. Rain irrigation system is widely used for closely spaced crops like onion, vegetable crops, leafy 
vegetables etc. This system is comparatively less in weight, flexible and easy to maintain and also helps in water 
saving as compared to other irrigation systems. 


Supply of saline water through the rain irrigation shall be avoided which may result in blocking of the holes of 
perforated lay flat tube. This irrigation is most effective for crop height up to 75 cm after which effectiveness is 
reduced. Irrigation of crops, with some foliar diseases which multiplies in high humidity at a particular stage, shall 
be avoided with rain irrigation system. 


The installation guidelines for HDPE laminated woven lay flat tube and its fittings for use in rain irrigation system 
are given in Annex K for information only. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex L. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17728 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


AGRO TEXTILES — HIGH DENSITY POLYETHYLENE 
(HDPE) LAMINATED WOVEN LAY FLAT 
TUBE AND FITTINGS FOR USE IN RAIN IRRIGATION 
SYSTEM — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes constructional, performance 
and other requirements for high density polyethylene 
(HDPE) laminated woven lay flat tube and their fittings 
for use in rain irrigation system. 
NOTE — This standard applies to high density polyethylene 
(HDPE) laminated woven lay flat tube for use in rain irrigation 
system. These tubes are laser perforated to replicate the rain 
effect when used for irrigation of horticulture and agriculture 
crops. This standard also applies to the fittings used for 
connecting these perforated lay flat tubes. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Coefficient of Distribution Uniformity, CDU — 
Uniformity of water application rate, depth or amount, 
ata given pressure and at a particular spacing, expressed 
as a percentage. 


3.2 Collector — Receptacle into which the water 
discharged by the perforated lay flat tube is deposited 
during the test for distance of throw. 


NOTE — The perforated lay flat tube while in operation in the 
rain irrigation system is generally termed as rain pipe. 


3.3 Distance of Throw — Farthest distance measured, 
while the perforated lay flat tube operates normally, 
from the perforated lay flat tube's centre line to the 
point at which the perforated lay flat tube deposits 
water at the minimum rate of 0.25 mm/h. 


3.4 Effective Distance of Coverage — Twice the one 
side of throw. 


3.5 Maximum Working Pressure (P ) — Highest 


working pressure declared by the manufacturer, 
measured near the base of the perforated lay flat tube. 


3.6 Minimum Working Pressure (P,. ) — Lowest 
working pressure declared by the manufacturer, 
measured near the base of the perforated lay flat tube. 


3.7 Nominal Diameter — Conventional numerical 
designation used to indicate the size of perforated lay 
flat tube and approximately equal to the inside diameter 
of the pipe in millimetres. 


3.8 Nominal Flowrate — Quantity of water per unit of 
time discharged by perforated lay flat tube with a specific 
clear length and certain holes at ambient temperature at 
the test pressure declared by the manufacturer in the 
manufacturer’s data sheets. 


3.9 Nominal Working Pressure — Numerical 
designation used for reference purposes related to the 
mechanical characteristics of the perforated lay flat 
tube and corresponding to the continuous working 
pressure, expressed in kg/cm? which can be sustained 
with water at 27 °C. 


3.10 Overlapping Distribution System — If the 
maximum throw distance of water from one perforated 
lay flat tube meets the other parallel laid perforated lay 
flat tube, then the arrangement is called as overlapping 
distribution system (see Note). The schematic diagram 
showing the overlapping distribution system is given 
in Fig. 1. 

NOTE — In overlapping distribution system, the distance 


between the parallel laid perforated lay flat tubes is generally 
kept at the value of maximum throw distance. 


3.11 Range of Working Pressure — Pressure range 
between the minimum working pressure, Pmin and 
the maximum working pressure, Pmax, declared by 
the manufacturer as the pressure range in which the 
perforated lay flat tube operates effectively. 


3.12 Single Line Distribution System — If the 
maximum throw distance of water from one perforated 
lay flat tube does not cross or partially touches the 
maximum throw of water of the other parallel laid 


IS 17728 : 2021 


perforated lav flat tube then the arrangement is called 
as single line distribution svstem (see Note). The 
schematic diagram showing the single line distribution 
svstem is given in Fig. 2. 

NOTE — In single line distribution svstem, the distance 


between the parallel laid perforated lay flat tubes is generally 
kept at two times the value of maximum throw distance. 


3.13 Test Pressure — Water pressure within the range 
of declared working pressure (see 3.11) used for the 
testing. 


3.14 Wind Speed — Average wind speed at the test 
site during the test of distribution uniformitv of the 
perforated lav flat tube. 


SUB MAIN L 


y 
PERFORATED LAY FLAT TUBE 


(RAIN PIPE) 


FIG. 1 OVERLAPPING DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 


SUB MAIN LINE 


PERFORATED LAY FLAT TUBE 
(RAIN PIPE) 


FIG. 2 SINGLE LINE DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 


2 


4 MATERIALS 


4.1 HDPE Tapes 


Tapes shall be manufactured from HDPE granules 
(see IS 6192), which shall be UV stabilized bv adding 
suitable UV stabilizer and/or carbon black. The tape, 
if manufactured bv using carbon black shall contain 
minimum 2.5 percent of carbon black by mass with 
satisfactory dispersion when tested as per IS 2530. The 
width of the tape used in the fabric shall be 2.0 mm 
minimum and linear density of the tape shall be 77.7 Tex 
(700 Denier) minimum. 


4.2 HDPE Fabric 


Lay flat tube for use in rain irrigation system shall 
be manufactured from suitable HDPE woven fabric. 
The HDPE woven fabric shall have minimum of 
39 tapes/dm in warp and weft direction. 


5 MANUFACTURE 


5.1 Lamination 


The fabric used to manufacture lay flat tubes for use in 
rain Irrigation system shall be laminated with the low 
density polyethylene (LDPE) or suitable combination 
of LDPE and linear low density polyethylene (LLDPE) 
melt of coating grade on each side and the coating 
shall be UV stabilized by incorporating UV stabilizer 
and/or carbon black. The film, if manufactured by 
using carbon black, shall contain minimum 2.5 percent 
of carbon black by mass with satisfactory dispersion 
when tested as per IS 2530. 


5.2 A suitable multi-layer laminated fabric with 
adequate number of layers shall be produced using 
a combination of HDPE fabric and layers of coating 
film. If required, a LDPE liner of adequate thickness 
may also be incorporated in the manufacturing of 
multi-layer laminated fabric. The LDPE liner shall be 
manufactured from virgin polyethylene resins which 
shall be UV stabilized by adding suitable UV stabilizer. 
The minimum coating thickness shall be 35 microns. 
The layers of HDPE fabric/liner used to manufacture 
lay flat tubes for use in rain irrigation system shall be 
joined by sandwich lamination. The minimum thickness 
of the sandwich lamination shall be 40 microns. The 
coating/sandwich lamination thickness shall be 
measured at a pressure of 2 + 0.01 kPa by method A of 
IS 13162 (Part 3). 


5.3 The multi-layer laminated HDPE woven fabric 
is formed in to lay flat tube for use in rain irrigation 


IS 17728 : 2021 


system of the required inside diameter using a heat 
sealing/polymer welding/polymer sealing process 
keeping the minimum overlap as specified in Table 1. 
Table 1 Internal Diameter and its Tolerance and 
Minimum Overlap of Lay Flat Tubes 


( Clauses 5.3 and 6.1 ) 


SI No. Nominal Tolerance Overlap 
Internal on Nominal Min 
Diameter Diameter 
mm mm mm 
(00) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 32 £ 1.5 18 
ii) 40 £ 1.5 20 


5.4 Perforation/hole on Lav Flat Tube 


The perforations shall be engraved in zig-zag pattern 
on lav flat tube for use in rain irrigation svstem bv a 
suitable laser engraving machine. The internal diameter 
of the hole when measured with a conical needle shall be 
such that perforated lay flat tube meets the requirement 
of coefficient of distribution uniformity (CDU) 
(see 6.9.1) and throw distance (see 6.9.2). Diameter of 
10 consecutive holes shall be measured and the average 
of 10 values shall be reported. Average diameter of 
hole shall not vary from the declared diameter by 
+ 0.04 mm. Hole to hole distance, and the distance 
between edge of the lay flat tube and outer edge of the 
nearest hole, shall be such that perforated lay flat tube 
meets the requirement of CDU and throw distance and 
shall be measured for 10 consecutive holes and the 
average of 10 values shall be reported. Average hole 
centre to hole centre distance, and the average distance 
between edge of the lay flat tube and outer edge of the 
nearest hole shall not vary from the declared values 
by + 3 mm. The schematic diagram showing the hole 
pattern on the perforated lay flat tube is given in Fig. 3. 


6 REQUIREMENTS 


The HDPE laminated woven fabric used to manufacture 
lay flat tube for use in rain irrigation system shall meet 
the requirements given in Table 2. 


6.1 Internal Diameter 


The inside diameter of the perforated lay flat tube 
for use in rain irrigation system shall be as given in 
Table 1. The internal diameter shall be measured by a 
suitable conical plug gauge and shall conform to the 
tolerance specified in Table 1. 


IS 17728 : 2021 


Kev 
] Internal diameter of perforated lay flat tube 3 Hole to hole distance 


2 Hole distance from edge 4 Internal diameter of hole 


FIG. 3 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM SHOWING THE HOLE PATTERN ON THE PERFORATED LAY FLAT TUBE 


Table 2 Requirements of HDPE Laminated Woven Fabric 


(Clause 6 ) 


SI No. Characteristic Reguirement Method of Test, Ref to 
d) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Mass, g/m?, Min 260 IS 1964 
11) Breaking strength on 5 cm x 20 cm strip before 1200 (Warp) IS 1969 (Part 1) 
UV exposure, N, Min 900 (Weft) 
111) Elongation at break, percent 15 to 25 IS 1969 (Part 1) 


iv) Retention of breaking strength after UV exposure 85 percent of original actual value (fabric) 
of 500 h, N, Min 


v) Abrasion resistance Loss in breaking strength shall not be more 
than 15 percent 


vi) Trapezoid tear strength, N, Min 


a) Warp 100 
b) Weft 100 
vii) Puncture strength, N, Min 300 
viii) Accelerated ageing test for 72 hat 70 + 1 °C Loss in breaking strength shall not be more 


than 15 percent 


ix) Cold cracking resistance test at —5 °C No specimen shall damage or broken 


4 


Annex B 


IS 14714 


IS 14293 


Annex C 


IS 7016 (Part 8) 
(Oven method) 


Annex E 


6.2 Workmanship 


The perforated lav flat tube for use in rain irrigation 
svstem shall be free from dirt, knots, lumps, 
irregularities of the tape and other visible defects. 


6.3 Hvdrostatic Burst Pressure Test (Without 
perforation) 


A test length of lay flat tube for rain irrigation system 
(without perforation), one metre clear of fittings when 
subjected to an internal hydrostatic pressure shall not 
burst or show leakage before a pressure as specified in 
column 3 of Table 3 is reached. 


Table 3 Burst Pressure of Lay Flat Tubes for Use in 
Rain Irrigation System 


( Clause 6.3 ) 


SI No. Nominal Internal Minimum Burst 
Diameter Pressure, 
mm kg/cm? 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) 32 2.6 
11) 40 2.6 


6.3.1 Procedure 


Connect the test specimen to the hydrostatic pressure 
line and completely fill with water by bleeding all air 
from the free end of the lay flat tube through a petcock 
or valve. The hydrostatic pressure shall be applied at 
a uniform rate of increase by means of a hand pump, 
hydraulic pump or accumulator. Raise the pressure to 
the minimum required burst pressure in not less than 
15 s and not more than 30 s. Inspect the lay flat tube 
during pressurization and record the maximum pressure 
reached. 


6.4 Length 


The standard length of the perforated lay flat tube for 
rain irrigation system shall be 30 m with a tolerance of 
+5 percent. No negative tolerance shall be permitted. 
Lay flat tube for rain irrigation system may also be 
supplied in any other length along with applicable 
tolerance as agreed to between the buyer and the seller. 


6.5 Kink Test 


Connect a 3 m length of lay flat tube for rain irrigation 
system (without perforation) to a suitable hydraulic 
pump. Blank the free end of lay flat tube with a suitable 
coupling having arrangement to bleed out entrapped 
air with the help of suitable stop cock or pet cock. Fill 
the lay flat tube for rain irrigation system with water 
and raise the pressure to 50 kPa (0.5 kgf/cm?). Allow 
complete air to escape through stop cock by raising 
the free end of the lay flat tube and again rebuild the 
pressure to 50 kPa. Now kink the lay flat tube through 
180° at approximately 50 cm from the free end by tying 
the lay flat tube back against itself as close to the fitting 
as practicable. Increase the pressure to half the burst 


IS 17728 : 2021 


pressure as specified in column 3 of Table 3 in not less 
than 15 s and not more than 30 s. When maximum 
pressure has been attained, retain it for 30 s, release the 
pressure, and examine it for any sign of leakage and 
damage. There shall be no sign of leakage or rupture 
and no thread in the jacket shall break. 


6.6 Welded Seam Strength before UV Exposure 


When a sample of fabric with seam cut from the 
perforated lay flat tube for use in rain irrigation system 
is tested for welded seam strength as per the method 
specified in IS 1969 (Part 1), welded seam strength 
before UV exposure shall be not less than the 80 percent 
of the original actual fabric strength. 


NOTE — Sample for welded seam strength shall be taken from 
finished perforated lay flat tube and may contain perforations. 


6.7 Welded Seam Strength after UV Exposure 


When a sample of fabric with seam cut from the 
perforated lay flat tube for use in rain irrigation system 
is tested for welded seam strength as per the method 
specified in Annex B and IS 1969 (Part 1), the change 
in welded seam strength after UV exposure shall not be 
more than 15 percent. The time for UV exposure shall 
be 500 h. 

NOTE — Sample for welded seam strength shall be taken from 

finished perforated lay flat tube and may contain perforations. 


6.8 Susceptibility to Environmental Stress Cracking 


The susceptibility to environmental stress cracking 
shall be tested in accordance with the test method 
specified in Annex E and the test results shall comply 
with the requirements of the Annex E. 


6.9 Coefficient of Distribution Uniformity (CDU) 
and Throw as a Function of Inlet Pressure 


6.9.1 Requirement for coefficient of distribution 
uniformity for single line and overlap line distribution 
arrangement shall be as given in Table 4 when tested as 
per method given in Annex F. 


6.9.2 Requirement for uniformity of throw shall be as 
given in Table 5 when tested as per method given in 
Annex F. 


6.10 Temperature Cyclic Test for Change in Hole 
Behaviour 


The perforated lay flat tube for use in rain irrigation 
system shall conform to the following requirements for 
temperature cyclic tests when tested as per the method 
prescribed in Annex G. 


a) Change in hole diameter, | HD, — HD, | < + 0.05 mm 

b) Change in CDU, | CDU, — CDU, | <5 percent 

c) Change in throw distance: 
(| TD, -TD, |x100) 
a 


l < 5 percent 


IS 17728 : 2021 


Table 4 Requirement for Coefficient of Distribution Uniformitv (CDU) 
(Clause 6.9.1) 


SI No. Line Distribution 


Coefficient of Distribution Uniformity (CDU), percent, Min 


System 
1 At Pressure Range (kg/cm?) N 
Minimum working pressure, P . | Nominal working pressure, P şm Maximum working pressure, P ax 
a) 2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Single line 80 85 85 
ii) Overlap line 80 85 85 


Table 5 Requirement for Uniformity of Throw 
( Clause 6.9.2 ) 


SI Nominal Internal Diameter, Throw Distance, m, Min 
No: we At Pressure Range (kg/cm?) 
Minimum working pressure, Nominal working pressure, Maximum working pressure, 
d) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 32 3.7 4.0 4.3 
ii) 40 3:7 4.0 4.2 


6.11 Change in Hole Behaviour at High Pressure 
and High Temperature 


The percent change in hole diameter of the perforated 
lav flat tube for use in rain irrigation svstem after 
exposure at the test conditions specified in Annex 
H shall be less than 5 percent when tested as per the 
method prescribed in Annex H. 


6.12 Uniformitv of Water Flow Rate 


Uniformitv of water flow rate in litres per hour per 
metre at different working pressures for perforated 
lav flat tube for use in rain irrigation svstem shall be 
as given in Table 6 when tested as per the method 
prescribed in Annex J. 


6.13 Colour 


The colour of perforated lav flat tube for use in rain 
irrigation shall be as per agreement between the buver 
and the seller, usuallv white. 


7 FITTINGS 


7.1 The manufacturer shall supply, for each size of 
perforated lay flat tube, fittings suitable in size and 
shape to ensue easy and leak proof connections to 
the rain irrigation system. The fittings shall have 
no manufacturing defects that may impair their 
performance. 


7.2 The jointing, made with or without the use of 
clamping bands shall be of sufficient strength to 


withstand the full range of working pressure. The 
jointing shall also withstand the test pressure of 
2.6 kg/cm? when tested as per the method specified in 
7.2.1 and shall not develop any leakage or sweating 
from the joints/fittings. Test sample shall be 1 m in 
length without perforations and joint or fitting shall be 
kept at the center of sample. 


7.2.1 Connect the test specimen to the hydraulic pressure 
line and completely fill with water by bleeding all air 
from the free end of the lay flat tube through a petcock 
or valve. The hydrostatic pressure shall be applied at 
a uniform rate of increase by means of a hand pump, 
hydraulic pump or accumulator. Raise the pressure 
to 2.6 kg/cm? in not less than 15 s and not more than 
30 s. Maintain the pressure in the lay flat tube for about 
5 min and thoroughly inspect the joint or fitting, while 
at the specified pressure. 
NOTE — Manufacture shall supply suitable tool/template for 
punching hole on lay flat tubes for use in rain irrigation system 
to ensure easy connection with the perforated lay flat tube or 
emitting pipe system. 


7.3 Resistance to Pull Out of Joints Between Fitting 
and Perforated Lay Flat Tube 


7.3.1 This test shall be performed in accordance with 
IS 13479, but the test pull out load shall be 200 N, 
applied for 1 h or alternatively dead weight may be 
used for applying the test pull. 


7.3.2 The fitting shall not pull out from the perforated 
lay flat tube. 


IS 17728 : 2021 


Table 6 Water Flow Rate (1/h/meter) at Different Working Pressures 
( Clause 6.12) 


SI Nominal Internal Diameter, 


Water Flow Rate, 1/h/meter 


No. mm 
At minimum working At nominal working pressure, At maximum working 
pressure, pressure, 
kg/cm? kg/cm? kg/cm? 

(1) (2) G) (4) 6) 

i) 32 To be declared by manufacture To be declared by manufacture To be declared by manufacture 
+ 5 percent + 5 percent + 5 percent 

ii) 40 To be declared by manufacture To be declared by manufacture To be declared by manufacture 
E 5 percent E 5 percent 


4 + 5 percent i 


8 REQUIREMENTS FOR LAY FLAT TUBE 
FOR USE IN MAINS AND SUB MAINS 


High density polyethylene (HDPE) laminated woven 
lay flat tube for use in mains and sub mains of rain 
irrigation system shall conform to requirements 
specified in IS 16627. 


9 PATCHING OF PERFORATED LAY FLAT 
TUBE 


Perforated lay flat tube for use in rain irrigation system 
shall have the provision for patching, if it develops 
puncture or leak, after use. The manufacture shall 
supply detailed instruction for carrying out patching on 
lay flat tube. If required by the buyer, a patching kit 
may also be supplied along with the lay flat tubes. 


10 MARKING 


10.1 Perforated Lay Flat Tube — Each bundle of 
perforated lay flat tube for use in rain irrigation system 
shall be legibly marked with the following information 
at one end either with tag or by printing on it: 


a) Manufacturer's name, initials or trade-mark; 
b) Nominal internal diameter; 
c) Range of working pressure, in kg/em'; 
d) Water flow rate, in 1/h/m; 
d) Length, in m; 
e) Batch No. or Lot No.; and 
f) Any other information as required by the buyer or 
the law in force. 
10.1.1 Fittings 


Fittings shall bear clear and permanent markings, 
including the following particulars: 


a) Manufacturer's name, initials or trade-mark; and 
b) Size. 
10.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The perforated lay flat tube for use in rain irrigation 
system conforming to the requirements of this standard 


may be certified as per the conformity assessment 
schemes under the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and Regulations 
framed thereunder, and the perforated lay flat tube may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


11 PACKING 


The perforated lay flat tube for use in rain Irrigation 
system shall be packed as agreed to between the buyer 
and the seller. 


12 SAMPLING 


12.1 Lot 


All rolls of perforated lay flat tube for use in rain 
irrigation system of same nominal internal diameter 
manufactured under similar conditions and delivered to 
a buyer against one dispatch note shall constitute a lot. 


12.2 Unless otherwise agreed to between the buyer and 
the seller, the number of perforated lay flat tube rolls 
to be selected at random from a lot shall be as given in 
column 3 of Table 7. 

Table 7 Scale of Sampling 


( Clause 12.2 ) 


SINo. No. of Rolls Sample Sub- Permissible 
in Lot Size Sample No. of 
Size Defective Rolls 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) Up to 50 3 2 0 
ii) 51 to 150 5 2 0 
iii) 151 to 300 8 3 1 
iv) 301 to 500 13 5 2 
v) 501 and above 20 5 3 


13 NUMBER OF TEST SPECIMENS AND 
CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 


Number of test specimens and criteria for conformity 
shall be as given in Table 8. 


IS 17728 : 2021 


Table 8 Number of Test Specimens and Criteria for Conformitv 
( Clause 13) 


SI No. Characteristic No. of Rolls Criteria for Conformity 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Internal diameter, overlap, workmanship, According to column 3 of Table 7 The defective rolls shall not exceed the 
length, manufacture and material corresponding number given in column 5 of 
Table 7 
ii) All other requirements According to column 4 of Table 7 All the test specimens shall pass the tests 


IS No. 


105-B02 : 2014 


1964 : 2001 


1969 (Part 1): 
2018 


2530 : 1963 


6192 : 1994 


6359 : 1971 


7016 (Part 8) : 
1975 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Textiles — Tests for colour 
fastness: Part B02 Colour fastness 
to artificial light : Xenon arc fading 
lamp test 


Textiles — Methods for 
determination of mass per unit 
length and mass per unit area of 
fabrics (second revision) 


Textiles — Tensile properties of 
fabrics: Part 1 Determination of 
maximum force and elongation 
at maximum force using the strip 
method (fourth revision) 

Methods of test for polyethylene 
moulding materials and 
polyethylene compounds 


Textiles — Monoaxially oriented 
high density polyethylene tapes — 
Specification (second revision) 


Method for conditioning of textiles 


Methods of test for coated and 
treated fabrics: Part 8 Accelerated 
ageing 


IS No. 


12232 (Part 2) : 
1995 


13162 (Part 3) : 
2021 


13479 : 1992 


14293 : 1995 
14714 : 1999 


16627 : 2017 


IS 17728 : 2021 


Title 


Irrigation equipment — Rotating 
sprinkler: Part 2 Test method 
for uniformity of distribution 
(first revision) 

Geosynthetics — Determination 
of thickness at specified pressures: 
Part 3 Single layers (first revision) 


Assembled joints between fittings 
and polyethylene (PE) pressure 
pipes — Test for resistance to pull 
out 


Geotextiles — Method of test for 
trapezoid tearing strength 


Geotextiles — Determination of 
abrasion resistance 


Agro Textiles — High density 
polyethylene (HDPE) laminated 
woven lay flat tube for use in mains 
and submains of drip irrigation 
system — Specification 


IS 17728 : 2021 


ANNEX B 
[ Table 2, SI No. (iv) and Clause 6.7) 
UV RESISTANCE TEST 


B-1 PRINCIPLE 


Specimens of fabric used for manufacturing lav flat 
tube for use in rain irrigation svstem for the machine 
and cross directions are exposed for 500 h ofultraviolet 
exposure in a Xenon-arc apparatus. The exposure 
consists of 120 min cvcles consisting of 102 min of 
light only, followed by 18 min of water spray and light. 
After the exposure, the specimens are subjected to a 
cut strip tensile test as prescribed in IS 1969 (Part 1). 
The test results are compared to the test results for 
unexposed specimens and the deterioration which has 
taken place due to ultraviolet exposure is assessed. 


B-2 ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS FOR 
CONDITIONING AND TESTING 


Condition the test specimens to moisture equilibrium 
from the dry side in the standard atmosphere of 
65+2 percent relative humidity and 27+2 *C 
temperature (see also IS 6359). When the specimens 
have been left in such an atmosphere so that both the 
faces are exposed to the standard atmosphere as far as 
possible for 24 h, they shall be deemed to have reached 
the state of moisture equilibrium. 


B-3 PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMENS 


B-3.1 Cut 5 test specimens from each of the machines 
and the cross directions from the test pieces. 


B-3.2 Specimens shall not contain dirt, irregular spots, 
creases, holes or other visible faults. 


B-3.3 Any two specimens shall not contain the same 
longitudinal or transversal position. If it is not possible, 
it shall be reported. 


B-4 APPARATUS 


B-4.1 The working details of Xenon-arc apparatus are 
described in IS 105-B02. 


B-4.1.1 The apparatus shall be capable of exposing 
the specimens to cycles of light only, followed by 
water spray and light under controlled atmospheric 
conditions. 


10 


B-4.1.2 The apparatus shall be equipped with an 
inner and outer borosilicate filter glass as described in 
IS 105-B02. 


B-4.2 Tensile strength testing machine as described for 
cut strip test in IS 1969 (Part 1). 


B-5 PROCEDURE 


B-5.1 Operate the Xenon-arc apparatus as directed in 
IS 105-B02 to provide 120 min cycles as follows: 


102 min of light only at 65 + 5 °C black panel 
temperature, and 30 + 5 percent relative humidity, 
followed by 18 min of light and water spray. 


B-5.1.1 Set the minimum level of radiation to 
0.5 W/m?, 1 nm bandpass at 340 nm. 


B-5.2 Randomly expose five specimens for each 
direction for 500 h exposure time. Place 10 specimens 
(5 for each direction) in the apparatus, such that the side 
most likely to be exposed to the effects of ultraviolet 
light shall be exposed in the apparatus. 


B-5.3 At the end of exposure time, remove the test 
specimens for tensile test using cut strip test as given 
in IS 1969 (Part 1). 


B-5.4 Test five unexposed specimens (zero exposure 
time) and five exposed specimens for each direction 
for breaking strength on a constant-rate-of-extension 
(CRE) or a constant rate-of-traverse (CRT) type testing 
machine by cut strip test, as given in IS 1969 (Part 1). 
In case of controversy, the CRE method shall prevail. 
NOTE — A specimen of 50 mm width at a gauge length 


75 + 1 mm shall be used. If tested on a CRT machine, the 
traverse speed shall be 300 + 15 mm/min. 


B-6 CALCULATIONS 


B-6.1 Calculate the average breaking strength, in N, 
for all exposed and unexposed specimens for each 
direction. 


B-6.2 Calculate the percent loss of strength for the 
unexposed specimens for the average results for each 
direction. 


IS 17728 : 2021 


ANNEX C 
| Table 2, SI No. (vii) | 
TEST METHOD FOR INDEX PUNCTURE RESISTANCE 


C-1 SCOPE 


This test method is used to measure the index puncture 
resistance of fabric used for manufacturing lav flat 
tubes for use in rain irrigation svstem. 


C-2 PRINCIPLE 


A test specimen is clamped without tension between 
circular plates of a ring clamp attachment secured in a 
tensile testing machine. A force is exerted against the 
centre of the unsupported portion of the test specimen 
by a solid steel rod attached to the load indicator until 
rupture of the specimen occurs. The maximum force 
recorded is the value of puncture resistance of the 
specimen. 


C-3 APPARATUS 


C-3.1 Tensile/Compression Testing Machine, of the 
constant-rate-of extension (CRE) type. 


C-3.2 Ring Clamp Attachment, consisting of concentric 
plates with an open internal diameter of 45 + 0.025 mm 
capable of clamping the test specimen without slippage. 
A suggested clamping arrangement is shown in Fig. 4. 
The external diameter is suggested to be 100 4 0.025 
mm. The diameter of the six holes used for securing the 
ring clamp assembly is suggested to be 8 mm and equally 
spaced at a radius of 37 mm. The surfaces of these plates 
can consist of grooves with 'o'-rings or coarse sandpaper 
bonded onto opposing surfaces. 


C-3.3 Solid Steel Rod, with a diameter of 8 + 0.01 mm 
having a flat end with a 45° x 0.8 mm chamfered edge 
contacting the test specimen's surface (see Fig. 4 and 
Fig. 5). 


11 


C-4 TEST SPECIMEN 


The test specimens shall be cut from the HDPE woven 
laminated fabric and shall have a minimum diameter of 
100 mm to facilitate clamping. If the 100 mm diameter 
sample is not available, smaller diameter may be taken 
provided sample is properly clamped. 3 test specimens 
shall be tested. 


C-5 CONDITIONING 


Bring the specimens to moisture equilibrium in the 
atmosphere for testing (65 + 5 percent relative humidity 
and 27 + 2 °C temperature). Equilibrium is considered 
to have been reached when the increase in the mass of 
the specimen, in successive weighings made at intervals 
of not less than 2 h, does not exceed 0.1 percent of the 
mass of the specimen. 


C-6 PROCEDURE 


C-6.1 Select the load range of the tensile/compression 
testing machine such that the rupture occurs between 
10 and 90 percent of the full-scale load. 


C-6.2 Centre and secure the specimen between the 
holding plates ensuring that the test specimen extends 
to or beyond the outer edges of the clamping plates. 


C-6.3 Test at a machine speed of 300 + 10 mm/min until 
the puncture rod completely ruptures the test specimen. 
NOTE — The rate of testing specified is not an indication of 


the performance of the specimen for its end use. 


C-7 CALCULATION 


Calculate the average puncture resistance and standard 
deviation for all tests as read directly from the recording 
instrument. 


IS 17728 : 2021 


100mm+0.025mm DIA 45mm+0.025mm DIA 


ALL HOLES Ø 8mm DIA 
EQUALLY SPACED 


AN 


37mm10.025 RAD 


TOP VIEW 
—12mm 
H FACING SURFACES 
i GROOVED WITH 'O' RING 
OR COARSE SANDPAPER 
Test  —— FIXED TO PLATES 
Specimen Y 
| 
4 150mm 


1 


Fic. 4 TEST FIXTURE DETAIL (NOT TO SCALE) 


12 


IS 17728 : 2021 


130mm 


BEVAL 


+1mm 


8mm+0.1mm 


Ø16mm MACHINE FINISH 


0.8X45” CHAMFER 


FIG. 5 TEST PROBE DETAIL (NOT TO SCALE) 


ANNEX D 
| Table 2, SI No. (ix) ] 
METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF COLD-CRACK RESISTANCE TEST 


D-1 PRINCIPLES 


Specimens bowed in the shape of a loop are placed in 
a cooling chamber at —5 °C and subjected to sudden 
folding under the impact of a free-falling mass of 
500 g. The test specimen shall not break or is damaged. 


D-2 APPARATUS 


The following description is an example of a typical 
test apparatus design (see Fig. 6). 


D-2.1 Impact Device, comprising the following 
elements. 


D-2.1.1 Specimen Holder, permitting the fastening of 
one or more specimens on a platen by means of clamps 
(for example, leaf springs) to clench each specimen 


13 


along its entire width (15 mm) and to secure 10 mm of 
each end of the loop (see Fig. 6) so that the length of the 
loop section subjected to folding is 40 mm. 


The platen may be equipped with a mechanism 
(revolving type) that allows each specimen to be placed 
successively in the test position under the guide tube 
which guides the impact mass. 


D-2.1.2 Rigid Anvil, connected to, or part of, the 
specimen holder and on which the specimen is brought 
into the test position. 


D-2.1.3 Impact Mass, 500 g, consisting of metal 
cylinders with a diameter of not less than 18 mm and 
not more than 29 mm, the edge of the lower face being 
slightly rounded. 


IS 17728 : 2021 


Impact mass 


Guide tube N 


— Paper (to verify effective 
folding) 


Clamp 


L— — 


Specimen 


Ki 


Specimen-holder — 
platen 


— 15mmr- 


Anvil 


FIG. 6 TYPICAL IMPACT DEVICE FOR DETERMINATION OF COLD CRACK RESISTANCE TEST 


D-2.1.4 Guide Tube, to guide the impact mass equipped 
at the upper end with a mechanism to release the mass 
(solenoid or mechanical trigger). 


This tube, approximately 250 mm long and with a 
diameter I mm larger than that of the impact mass, shall 
be placed vertically above the specimen test position 
and shall be mounted so that the drop height, that is the 
distance between the base of the impact mass and the 
anvil, is 200 + 2 mm. 


D-2.1.5 Holding Device, to align the platen and the 
guide tube in such a position that the centre of the 
impact mass coincides with the edge of the flattened 
loop (20 mm from the clamp). 


D-2.2 Cooling Chamber, to house the impact device 
allowing the temperature to be lowered in steps of 1 *C, 
and able to maintain a temperature constant to within 
+1 °C 


14 


D-2.3 Thermometer, graduated in 0.5°C, or 
thermocouple, with an accuracy of 0.5 °C, placed in 
the cooling chamber in the proximity of the specimens. 


D-3 SPECIMENS 


D-3.1 Shape and Dimensions 


The specimens shall consist of strips measuring 
60 mm x 15 mm. Their edges shall be free from cuts, 
scratches and other imperfections. 


D-3.2 Number of specimens 


Five specimens shall be taken with their long axis 
(60 mm) parallel to the machine (that is longitudinal) 
direction, and five specimens with their long axis 
parallel to the transverse direction. 


D-4 ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS FOR 
CONDITIONING AND TESTING 


Condition the test specimens to moisture equilibrium 
from the drv side in the standard atmosphere of 
652 percent relative humidity and 2742 °C 
temperature (see also IS 6359). When the specimens 
have been left in such an atmosphere so that both the 
faces are exposed to the standard atmosphere as far as 
possible for 24 h, thev shall be deemed to have reached 
the state of moisture equilibrium. 


D-5 PROCEDURE 


D-5.1 Verifv the alignment of the guide tube with 
respect to the position of the specimen on the platen. 


IS 17728 : 2021 


D-5.2 Place the impact device containing the mounted 
specimens in the cooling chamber. When the impact 
device has reached equilibrium at the test temperature 
of—5 °C (approximately 15 min), position the specimen 
below the guide tube. Release the impact mass, then 
reset it to its initial position. Repeat the operation for 
the other specimens, if any. 


Take the platen out of the cooling chamber, remove the 
specimens and inspect them. 


A specimen is deemed to be damaged or broken, if 
any trace of breaking is visible to the naked eye. This 
trace can be a point or a line, while total rupture may 
occur, with or without splintering. A whitish line at 
the fold may occur with certain types of pigmented or 
un-pigmented material, but this is not considered as a 
failure. 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 6.8 ) 
METHOD OF TEST FOR RESISTANCE TO ENVIRONMENTAL STRESS CRACKING 


E-1 APPARATUS 


A constant temperature bath, maintained at 60 + 3 °C, 
capable of re-establishing that temperature within five 
minutes after insertion of test pieces. 


E-2 REAGENT 


A 10 percent diluted (volume/volume) of surface active 
agent of the nonylphenoxy poly (ethyleneoxy) ethanol 
type, kept in closed container shall be used. Igepal 
CO-630 or Antarox CO-630 or equivalent may be used 
for reference purposes. This information is given for 
the convenience of users of this Indian Standard and 
does not constitute an endorsement by BIS of these 
products. Reagent in the bath shall be replaced every 
week. 


E-3 TEST PIECES 


Five sections of lay flat tube, preferably from different 
bundles, each of length about 20 times the diameter 
shall constitute the test piece. 

NOTE — Shorter lengths may also be used, but less 


conveniently. The test pieces shall not initially contain any 
cracks. 


E-4 PROCEDURE 


E-4.1 Condition the test specimen in an air circulating 
oven at 80 + 1 °C for 1 h and then air cool. Bend each 
test piece sharply at two places, to form two U-bends, 
in two different planes perpendicular to each other 
(see Fig. 7). Each bend is worked to the limit, that is 


until both sides of the fold touch and lie parallel to each 
other, and then the bend is tightly secured to maintain 
that deformation throughout the test (see Fig. 7). 


NOTE — Rings cut of PE pipes of larger diameters can be 
slipped over the bent lay flat tube to help in securing them. 


E-4.2 U bend test pieces shall be immersed in a 
constant temperature bath containing the reagent and 
maintained at 60 + 3 °C. It shall be ensured that no 
additional stress is imposed on the test specimens 
while immersing in the reagent bath. The concentration 
of the surface active agent shall be 10 percent and test 
duration shall be 48 h. 


E-4.3 After the test duration, take the test pieces out 
and release the stress and wipe the bends free of the 
reagent. 


E-4.4 Inspect each bend thoroughly, with the unaided 
eye for any visible cracks (generally originating at the 
two ends of the fold). 


E-5 EXPRESSION OF RESULTS 


Any bend which contains at least one visible crack 
(excluding cracks induced by the object used to secure 
the bend), is classified as failed. The total number of 
bends which fail shall be noted. 


NOTE — Each test piece consists of two bends which shall be 
counted independently. 


E-5.1 The definitions of various terms for assessing the 
failure shall be: 


IS 17728 : 2021 


a) Cracking 
Anv narrow opening or fissure in the surface, that is, 
visible to the naked eve. 

b) Crazing 
Apparent fine cracks at or under the surface of the lav 
flat tube. 


NOTE — The crazed areas are composed of polymeric 
materials of lower density than the surrounding matrix. 


c) Bloom 


A visible exudation or efflorescence on the surface of 
the lay flat tube. 


i 
SPECIMEN BEFORE 
BENDING 


d) Rupture 
A break in the lay flat tube wall with immediate loss of 
test fluid and continued loss of pressure. 


E-6 RETEST 


If one bend failed while nine others did not, the whole 
procedure is repeated with five further test pieces (that 
is ten further bends). 


E-7 REQUIREMENTS 


The lay flat tube is considered to have passed the test 
if none of the first ten bends fails or, not more than two 
bends fail in the total sample of 20 bends. 


STRING RING ETC. 


TRING RING ETC. 


SPECIMEN AFTER BENDING 
(READY FOR TEST) 


FIG. 7 PREPARING THE U BENDS 


16 


IS 17728 : 2021 


ANNEX F 
( Clauses 6.9.1 and 6.9.2 ) 


DETERMINATION OF COEFFICIENT OF DISTRIBUTION 
UNIFORMITY AND THROW DISTANCE 


F-1 SCOPE 


This method is used for testing the uniformity of 
distribution of perforated lay flat tube for use in 
rain irrigation system expressed as a function of the 
coefficient of distribution uniformity (CDU) and throw 
distance [see IS 12232 (Part 2)]. 


F-2 GENERAL TEST CONDITIONS 


F-2.1 Test Area Layout 


The test area where the collectors are positioned shall 
be levelled evenly in a horizontal plane (a maximum 
slope of one percent for the test area is acceptable). 
It shall be free from obstacles that could block the 
free distribution of water. There shall be no trees 
or obstructions in the vicinity, as these could cause 
varying air flow over the test area. The test area may be 
within a sheltered, enclosed structure or out in the open. 


F-2.2 Design of Collectors 


Collectors used for collecting the water discharged shall 
be cylindrical for at least the top third of their height, 
of uniform shape and size and their open edges shall be 
sharp and free from deformities. The collectors shall be 
so constructed that none of the water collected splashes 
out. The height of the collectors shall be at least twice 
the average depth of the water collected during the test 
but not less than 15 cm. The diameter of the collector 
opening shall be half to one times its height but not less 
than 8.5 cm. 


Collectors intended for collecting water for transfer 
to a measuring fixture shall have a sharp-edged round 
opening of at least 8.5 cm diameter. The collectors shall 
be cylindrical or conical (wide base on top), with side 
walls inclined at least 45° from the horizontal. 


Other types of collectors may be used, provided that 
their measuring accuracy is not less than the accuracy 
of the collectors described above. The openings of all 
the collectors shall be in a place parallel to the ground, 
with a tolerance of + 5° and the difference in height 
between any two adjacent collectors shall not exceed 
2 cm. 


F-2.3 Test Conditions 


F-2.3.1 Testing shall be carried out at an ambient 
weather condition. Wind velocitv during the test shall 
be maximum 0.9 m/s. 


F-2.3.2 The flow rate in litres per hour per metre during 
the test at different working pressures shall be as given 
in 6.12. 


17 


F-2.4 Procedure for Coefficient of Distribution 
Uniformitv 


F-2.4.1 Install the perforated lav flat tube for use in rain 
irrigation svstem along with well-equipped pressure 
gauge and controllers onto a flat field under controlled 
test conditions. Take one perforated lav flat tube of 
40 m length for 32 mm size and 45 m length for 40 mm 
size for single line installation svstem. For overlap line 
installation svstem, take two perforated lav flat tube 
and install them parallel to each other at an interval of 
4 m each. Perforated lav flat tube shall be fixed to the 
ground by appropriate means to restrict movement. 


For single line installation system, place the collectors 
at one side of the perforated lay flat tube in such a way 
that collector to tube distance and collector to collector 
distance shall be 1 m. 


For overlap line installation system, place the collectors 
in between the two rows of the perforated lay flat tube in 
such a way that collector to tube distance and collector 
to collector distance shall be 1 m. 


Now turn on the pump and the pressure of the pump 
shall be maintained at nominal working pressure 
declared by manufacture. Run the test for a period of 
30 min. Measure the water collected in the collectors 
and compute the coefficient of distribution uniformity 
(CDU) as per the equation given below: 


Coefficient of distribution uniformity (CDU) = 


100 1-2) l J 


xh, 
where 
ha = arithmetic average of the 
readings; 
h, = individual reading at each 
collector; 
n = number of readings; and 
X(h —h) = sum of the absolute values of 


the individual deviations from 
the average. 


F-2.4.2 Now repeat the procedure as specified in F-2.4.1 
at pump pressure of minimum and maximum working 
pressure declared by manufacture and determine the 
CDU. 


F-2.5 Procedure for Throw Distance 


F-2.5.1 Install the perforated lay flat tube for use in rain 


IS 17728 : 2021 


irrigation svstem along with well-equipped pressure 
gauge and controllers onto a flat field under controlled 
test conditions. Take one perforated lav flat tube of 
40 m length for 32 mm size and 45 m length for 40 mm 
size. Perforated lav flat tube shall be fixed to the ground 
bv appropriate means to restrict movement. 


Now turn on the pump and the pressure of the pump 
shall be maintained at nominal working pressure 
declared bv manufacture. Run the test for a period of 
5 min. 


After 5 min, measure the farthest distance from the 


perforated lav flat tube centreline to the point at 
which the tube deposits water at the minimum rate of 
0.25 mm/h. Throw distance shall be measured at start, 
middle and end of perforated lav flat tube at both the 
sides of tube with an accuracy of 10 mm and average of 
the 6 readings shall be reported. 


F-2.5.2 Now repeat the procedure as specified in F-2.5.1 
at pump pressure of minimum and maximum working 
pressure declared bv manufacture and determine the 
throw distance. 


ANNEX G 
( Clause 6.10 ) 
TEMPERATURE CYCLIC TEST FOR CHANGE IN HOLE BEHAVIOUR 


G-1 PRINCIPLE 


Perforated lay flat tube shall be tested for hole 
expansion/contraction after subjecting it to temperature 
cycles. The CDU (see Annex F), throw distance 
(see Annex F) and hole diameter (see 5.4) is determined 
before and after test and change in hole characteristics 
is determined. 


NOTE — CDU and throw distance shall be determined by 
single line distribution system only. 


G-2 APPARATUS 


G-2.1 Two separate conditioning chambers to maintain 
temperature at minus (—) 5 °C and 70 °C respectively. 


G-2.2 Water pump, suitable to conduct test at range of 
working pressure declared by the manufacture. 


G-3 PROCEDURE 


G-3.1 Take one sample each of 40 m for 32 mm and 
45 m for 40 mm perforated lay flat tube. Determine its 
hole diameter as per the method specified in 5.4 and 
report as HD. 


G-3.2 Initial CDU and throw distance of sample shall 
be determined before the test at maximum working 


18 


pressure declared by the manufacture and report as 
CDU, and TD, respectively. 


G-3.3 The sample shall be first placed in a conditioning 
chamber maintained at a temperature of (70 + 2) °C for 
8 h. After the test duration, samples shall be conditioned 
at a temperature of 27 + 2 °C in air for at least 60 min. 
(Step 1) 


G-3.4 Now transfer the sample conditioned as per 
G-3.3 into the conditioning chamber maintained at a 
temperature of (minus 5 + 2) °C and keep the sample 
at this temperature condition for 4 h. After the test 
duration, samples shall be conditioned at a temperature 
of 27 + 2 °C in air for at least 60 min (Step 2). 


G-3.5 Step | and Step 2 specified in G-3.3 and G-3.4 
shall be considered as one temperature cycle. 


G-3.6 Repeat the temperature cyclic test for a total of 
14 cycles. 


G-3.7 After 14 cycles, final hole diameter of the sample 
shall be determined as per the method specified in 5.4 
and report as HD. Similarly, final CDU and throw 
distance of sample shall be determined at maximum 
working pressure declared bv the manufacture and 
report as CDU, and TD, respectivelv. 


IS 17728 : 2021 


ANNEX H 
(Clause 6.11) 
CHANGE IN HOLE BEHAVIOUR AT HIGH PRESSURE AND HIGH TEMPERATURE 


H-1 PRINCIPLE 


Hot water is circulated through a sample of perforated 
lav flat tube for use in rain irrigation svstem for a 
specified time at maximum working pressure (P  ) and 
the change in hole diameter is measured. 


H-2 SAMPLE 
Take one meter sample of perforated lav flat tube for 
use in rain irrigation svstem. 
NOTE — The length of the sample taken shall be free length 
between the end fittings. 


H-3 APPARATUS 


H-3.1 Hot Water Tank, which can maintain 
temperature up to 80 °C. 


H-3.1.1 The hot water tank shall maintain the constant 
temperature, within + 2 °C of the required temperature 
throughout the duration of the test. 


H-3.2 Pressurizing Equipment, capable of applying 
pressure up to maximum declared working pressure. 
The pressurizing equipment shall maintain the pressure 
constant within + 2.5 percent of the required pressure 
throughout the duration of the test. 


H-3.2.1 The pressurizing equipment shall be capable 
of supplying hot water at the same test temperature, 
maintained inside the tank. 


H-3.3 End Fittings 
H-3.4 Stop Watch/Time Measuring Device 


19 


H-4 PROCEDURE 


H-4.1 Measure the initial hole diameter as per the 
method specified in 5.4 and report it as HD.. 


H-4.2 Fix the end fitting at one end of the sample and 
join the other end to the pressurizing equipment. 


H-4.3 The sample shall be immersed in hot bath and 
temperature in the hot water tank shall be maintained 
at 70 + 2 °C. 


H-4.4 Turn on the pressurizing equipment and set the 
pressure at maximum declared working pressure (P a) 
and start recording the time. 

NOTE — The hot water being circulated through the 


pressurizing equipment through the sample shall also be 
maintained at 70 + 2 °C. 


H-4.5 Pressurizing equipment shall be run for a period 
of 24 h and shall be stopped thereafter. 


H-4.6 After the completion of the test, the sample shall 
be removed from the hot bath and allow it to cool and 
dry for I h. 


H-4.7 Now measure the final hole diameter as per the 
method specified in 5.4 and report it as HD. 


H-4.8 Calculate the percent change in hole diameter 
with the formula given below: 


Percent change in hole diameter = 
(LHD, - HD, |) 
——— |x100 
HD, 


H-4.9 The percent change in hole diameter shall be less 
than 5 percent. 


IS 17728 : 2021 


ANNEX J 
( Clause 6.12 ) 
DETERMINATION OF WATER FLOW RATE 


J-1 PRINCIPLE 


The water is circulated through a sample of perforated 
lay flat tube for use in rain irrigation system for a 
specified time and collected water is measured in litres 
per hour per metre (1/h/m) at range of working pressures 
(P .P andP ) declared by manufacturer. 


min ~ nom max 


J-2 SAMPLE 


Take three samples of one meter each of perforated lay 
flat tube for use in rain irrigation system. 


NOTE — The length of the sample taken shall be free length 
between the end fittings. 


J-3 APPARATUS 


J-3.1 Water Collection Tank, with suitable dimensions 
to accommodate the sample. 


J-3.1.1 Tank shall consist of supports or hangers 
enabling the test specimens to avoid contact with the 
sides or base of the tank. 


J-3.1.2 The tank shall consist of a drain point at the 
bottom, which shall be connected to a pipe in order to 
transfer the water to the measuring device. 


J-3.2 Pressurizing equipment, capable of applying 
pressure for range of working pressures (Piw Prom and 


P ax) The pressurizing equipment shall maintain the 


pressure constant within + 2.5 percent of the required 
pressure throughout the duration of the test. 


J-3.3 End Fittings 
J-3.4 Stop Watch/Time Measuring Device 
J-4 PROCEDURE 


J-4.1 It shall be ensured that the water collecting tank 
shall be empty or completely drained before the start 
of test. 


20 


J-4.2 Fix the end fitting at one end of the test specimen 
and join the other end to the pressurizing equipment. 


J-4.3 Turn on the pressurizing equipment and raise the 
pressure at 0.5 kgf/cm? and allow the air inside the test 
specimen to bleed off. 


J-4.4 Increase the pressure to P and place the 
test specimen upon the support/hanger of the water 
collection tank. Simultaneously, start the time 
measuring device. 


J-4.5 The test specimen shall be placed facing 
downwards in order to avoid any water loss during the 
test, and to ensure that the whole water gets collected 
inside the water collection tank. 


J-4.6 Run the pressurizing equipment for a period of 
5 min and immediately stop the pressurizing equipment 
and remove the sample from the tank. 


J-4.7 Now drain the water collected inside the tank and 
transfer it to a water measuring container through the 
pipe connected to the drain. Report the value of water 
collected in litres to the nearest 10 ml as W. 


J-4.8 The above-mentioned procedure shall be repeated 
with pressures at P and P . 


pS 


J-4.9 The above-mentioned procedure shall be repeated 
with other two samples. The average value of water 
collected in litres for three samples at range of working 
pressures (P i Prom and P a) shall be calculated. 


min 


J-5 CALCULATION 


nom 


J-5.1 The water flow rate shall be calculated by the 
following formula: 


Water Flow Rate (L/h/m) = W x 12 
where, 


W= Value in litres of the water collected in water 
measuring container. 


IS 17728 : 2021 


ANNEX K 
( Foreword ) 


INSTALLATION GUIDELINES, HANDLING AND STORAGE OF HDPE LAMINATED WOVEN LAY 
FLAT TUBE AND ITS FITTINGS FOR USE IN RAIN IRRIGATION SYSTEM 


K-1 RAIN IRRIGATION SYSTEM KIT 


A rain irrigation system kit consists of the following 
components: 


a) Main/Sub main line (see IS 16627); 
b) Perforated lay flat tube; 
c) Connectors to join main line through pump; 


d) Connectors to join sub main line to perforated lay 
flat tube; 


e) Jointers to join two individual perforated lay flat 
tube with each other to extend the line if required; 


f) Endcap with anchor/stopper to close the perforated 
lay flat tube end and prevent from tube twisting 
during operation; and 

g) Puncture kit and cutting template. 

NOTE — For installation of perforated lay flat tube for use in 
rain irrigation system over a large area, it shall be supplied with 


jointers for main/sub main line also as per agreement between 
buyer and the seller. 


K-2 INSTALLATION PROCEDURE 


K-2.1 Firstly, the sub main line shall be laid down near 
the pumping station throughout the field. 


K-2.2 One end of the pipe shall be connected to main 
line or pump orifice with the help of connector. The 
schematic diagram of water pump connection to main 
line is given in Fig. 8. 


K-2.3 Mark the distance in main and submain line from 
the starting point towards end point as suggested by 
manufacturer in the manual. 


K-2.4 Now the end point shall be closed with the pipe 
piece or flush valve if field area is large and water is 
sandy. 


NOTE — Flush valve prevents the rain irrigation system from 
water contaminants. 


K-2.5 The main and sub main line pipe shall be cut with 
the help of cutting template at a spacing as suggested 
by manufacturer in the manual. The schematic diagram 
showing the main pipe connection to sub main line is 
given in Fig. 9. 


K-2.6 Perforated lay flat tube shall be connected 
on male threaded adopter and shall be laid down 


21 


perpendicular to sub main line. Perforated lay flat 
tube shall be locked-in properly in order to avoid any 
leakage. The schematic diagram showing the steps 
involved in sub main line connection to perforated lay 
flat tube connector is given in Fig. 10. 


K-2.7 In case of extension, the jointer (lock ring) shall 
be used to achieve the desired length of the perforated 
lay flat tube. The schematic diagram showing the 
jointing of two perforated lay flat tube is given in 
Fig. 11. 


K-2.8 Now put the anchor end cap at the end of 
perforated lay flat tube. Schematic diagram of 
perforated lay flat tube and its fittings for use in rain 
irrigation system is given in Fig. 12. 


K-2.9 Additionally rain irrigation system may be 
used with venture injector or fertilizer tank to give 
micro-nutrients with this system. 


K-3 PRECAUTIONS TO BE TAKEN 


K-3.1 Main/submain line and perforated lay flat tube 
should be flushed every time before and after use. 


K-3.2 Perforated lay flat tube shall be treated with 
using 10 N HCI at a frequency of 3 months in order to 
clean the residual salt deposited. 


K-3.3 For the installation of the perforated lay flat tube, 
the minimum distance between the two crops should 
be 300 mm. 


K-3.4 Mesh filter of 250 microns shall be used in case 
water is contaminated or when water is being pumped 
out from a pond, lake or river. 


K-3.5 Permissible length of the perforated lay flat tube 
with internal diameter of 40 mm shall be 45 m and 
permissible length of the perforated lay flat tube with 
internal diameter of 32 mm shall be 40 m. 


K-3.6 Water shall be drained completely before 
uninstallation. 


K-3.7 The system shall be dried completely before 
storage. The perforated lay flat tube for use in rain 
irrigation system shall be stored securely to avoid any 
damage from the rodents. 


Flush valve 


Hose collar HDPE Laminated 
fleakproof inlet) Lay Flat Tube 


by” ‘a 


Control Unit 


a 


FIG. 8 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF WATER PUMP CONNECTION TO MAIN LINE 


MAIN LINE 


p T f Bi N 
- dl V kw 
f ; CONTROL VALVE ? | 


— 


ġġ =" YY” PL” 


a 
TT TT 
— in a ir 


FIG. 9 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM SHOWING THE MAIN PIPE CONNECTION TO SUB MAIN LINE 


22 


IS 17728 : 2021 


a ap e Ma ER - 
RUBBER 
ov 


Fic. 10 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM SHOWING THE STEPS INVOLVED IN SUB MAIN LINE CONNECTION TO PERFORATED 
Lay FLAT TUBE CONNECTOR 


PERFORATED LAY FLAT TUBE 


PERFORATED LAY FLAT TUBE 


FIG. İl SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM SHOWING THE JOINTING OF TWO PERFORATED Lay FLAT TUBE 


23 


IS 17728 : 2021 


RAIN IRRIGATION SYSTEM 


FOR 500 SO. METER 


PUMP TO SUB MAIN LINE 
MULTI LAYER SUB MAIN LINES3 — CONNECTOR 
MM 


PERFORATED LAV FLAT TUBE CONNECTOR 


UE 
SÆ 


cap 


- 
Şan 


/ N a 
NA IF IG | 

ig LNF DA DF RA anım , 
= B $ 
ASAS Ray 
5 IF AZ IF VI 
> LE YA RA RE 
5 AZ AZ AZ NÆS 

A NET EN a EN Zam 
' { Ki T 

WATER DISTRIBUTION SPACING $ MTR PERFORATED LAY FLAT TUBE END CAP 


Fic. 12 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF PERFORATED LAY FLAT TUBE AND 
ITS FITTINGS FOR USE IN RAIN IRRIGATION SYSTEM 


24 


IS 17728 : 2021 


ANNEX L 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Technical Textiles for Agro-Tech Sectional Committee, TXD 35 


Organization 


The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research 
Association, Mumbai 


Central Agricultural University, Imphal 


Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, 
Mumbai 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and 
Technology (CIPET), Chennai 

Central Silk Board, Bengaluru 

Chandra Shekhar Azad University of Agriculture and 
Technology, Kanpur 

CTM Technical Textiles Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkata 


FAD 17, BIS, New Delhi 
FICCI, New Delhi 


Garware Technical Fibres Limited, Satara 
Horticulture Training Centre, Pune 
ICAR-Directorate of Rapeseed-Mustard Research, 


Bharatpur 
ICAR-National Institute of Natural Fibre Engineering 


and Technology, Kolkata 
Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 
Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 
Indian Jute Mills Association, Kolkata 
Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 


Lamifab and Paper (P) Ltd, Aurangabad 


Maharashtra State Horticulture and Medicinal Plant 
Board, Pune 


Representative(s) 
Dr U. K. GANGOPADHYAY (Chairman) 


SHRIMATI MAMONI PROBHA BORAH 


Dr N. VIGNESHWARAN 
Dr P. K. MANDHYAN (Alternate) 


DR ABDUL KADER 
SHRI RAJIV KUMAR LILHARE (Alternate) 


DR SUBHASH V. NAIK 
SHRI V. RAMESH (Alternate) 


DR ASHOK KUMAR 
DR JITENDRA VADAV (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIT AGARWAL 
SHRIMATI JYOTI AGARWAL (Alternate) 


DR SWAPAN KUMAR GHOSH 
PROF A. K. SAMANTA (Alternate) 


MEMBER SECRETARY 


SHRI BIRJU N. BHOJANI 
SHRI VIVEK PRABHU (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY RAUT 
Dr Vay RAMAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVINDRA DESHMUKH 
SHRI SAMPAT YADAV (Alternate) 


Dr PANKAJ SHARMA 


Dr SURAJIT SENGUPTA 
SHRI MANIK BHOWMICK (Alternate) 


Dr T. B. S. RAJPUT 
DR NEELAM PATEL (Alternate) 


DR TANWEER ALAM 
SHRI MADHAB CHAKARVARTY (Alternate) 


DR MAHUYA GHOSH 
Suri D. P. Gon (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR KUMAR CHANDRA 
SHRI J. K. BEHARA (Alternate) 


Dr ANUP RAKSHIT 
SHRIMATI RUCHITA GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI KAMLEISH DHOOT 
SHRI KISHORI LAL DHOOT (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
PROJECT MANAGER (PC & FP) (Alternate) 


IS 17728 : 2021 


Organization 
MAHA Seedsmen Association, Jalna 
Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidvapeeth, Rahuri 


National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development, Mumbai 


National Committee on Precision Agriculture and 
Horticulture, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkata 


National Research Centre for Grapes, Pune 


Office of the Jute Commissioner, Kolkata 
Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 
Parry Enterprises India Limited, Bharuch 
Plastindia Foundation, Mumbai 


Precision Farming Development Centre, Solan 


Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 
Rishi Techtex Ltd, Mumbai 
Shri Ambica Polymer Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Shubham Sales, Valsad 
Texel Industries Limited, Kalol 


Textiles Committee, Mumbai 
The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 
The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research 


Association, Mumbai 
V K Packwell Pvt Ltd, Kanpur 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SATYANARAYAN B. RATHI 
SHRI UDDHAV MANIKRAO SHIRSATH (Alternate) 


DR S. D. GORANTIWAR 
DR M. S. MANE (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI VINITA SINGH 
SHRI SANDEEP SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND ZAMBRE 
SHRI K. K. KAUSHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri M. Dutta (Alternate) 


DR D. S. YADAV 


SHRI SOUMYADIPTA DATTA 
SHRI PRABHAS KUMAR Biswas (Alternate) 


SHRI SIVAKUMAR S. 
SHRI N. K. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI NOBLE DEIVANAYAGAM 
SHRI NIKHIL JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI SURENDER CHOUDHARY 
Dr E. SUNDARESAN (Alternate) 


Dr R. S. SPEHIA 


Dr SuNIL MAHAJAN 
SHRI KESHAV PAREEK (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA MEHTA 
SHRI MAVJI SAVANI (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI JYOTIKA NAGRI 
SHRI PARTH NAGRI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY LOHIVA 


SHRI SHAILESH R. MEHTA 
SHRI NARESH R. MEHTA (Alternate) 


SHRI R. CHANDRAN 
SHRI P. N. S. SIVAKUMAR (Alternate) 


DR PRASANTA KUMAR PANDA 
SHRI G. R. MAHAJAN (Alternate) 


DR MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 


SHRI VIKESH KUMAR GUPTA 
Dr Vijav KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI ABHISHEK KUMAR (Young Professional) 


SHRI A. K. BERA, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TEXTILES) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio)) 


Member Secretary 


SHRI J. K. GUPTA 
SCIENTIST ‘E’ (TEXTILES), BIS 


26 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutorv institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 35 (17570). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern o : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published bv BIS, New Delhi 


