IS 4839 ( Part 2 ) Z 1992

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

ws 2 WZK -iI @!

(

$W

pfmT )

Indian Standard

MAINTENANCEOFCANALS-CODB OFPRACTICE
PART 2 ( LINED CANALS

Second Revision )

UDC

626'14 [ 626'823'9 ] : 006'76

Q BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG Price Group 2

February 1992

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Irrigation

Canals and Canal Linings Sectional Committee,

RVD 13

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Irrigation Canals and Canal Linings Sectional Committee, had been approved by the River valley Division Council. This standard gives necessary guidance regarding the maictenance of a lined canal for the assistance of engineers in field. However, as it does not cover all types of contingencies, the engineer-in-charge~would have to use his discretion in many cases. This standard was first published in 1971 and subsequently revised in 1979. This second revision has been taken up in the light of the experience gained during the last few years in the use of this standard. The salient features of this revision are given below: a) A paragraph under Inspection of the canal. b) i;t$le of lining has been added to know the hydraulic discharge efficiency has been

measure to be taken to bring the canal to carry its authorised paragraph is added under maintenance of lining.

c) An additional

Part I of this standard covers maintenance and repair of unlined canals. The recommendations for repair of canal structures, drains, outlets, jungle clearance, plantation and regulation of canals are covered in Part III of this standard. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular the final value, observed or calculated, expressing off in accordar,ce with IS 2 : 1960. The number velue shculd be th.e s-an e as thet of the specified requirement of this standard is complied with, the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded of significant places retained in the rounded off value in this standard.

IS 4839 ( Part 2 ) f 1992

Indian Standard
MAINTENANCE OF CANALS OF PRACTICE
PART 2 LINED CANALS

CODE

( Second Revision )
1 SCOPE This standard ( Part 2 > covers the maintenance and repair of lined canals. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed below are necessary adjuncts to this standard:
IS No. Title

judicious operation of gates of cross regulators silt ejectors/desilting basins, wherever provided. These gates should be lowered for pending on the upstream side only under the following conditions: a) To limit the rate of drawdown in the lined canal to a maximum of 0'5 metre per day either during fluctuations of z:&;;rge or when the canal is being b) To enable channels taking off upstream of the regulator to be fed properly or to divert flow through escapes. At all other times, the canal should be run with gates-full open. 3.1.2 Special design features like under-drainage arrangements, humps or regulators in canal bed, silt ejectors, surface drainage; etc should continue to function efficiently so that the safety of the lining is not endangered. 3.2 Canal Closure Suitable rules should be framed and observed for each canal system to ensure that the closure does not create a rate of drawdown which is more than what is provided for in the design. 3.3 Inspections
of Lining

3873 : 1992

Code of practice for laying concrete in-situ cement lining of canals ( first
revision )

for Code of 4839 practice ~Of canals: ( Part 1 ) : 1992 maintenance Part 1 Unlined canals ( second revision ) 3 CANAL LINING 3.1 General A lined canal should be maintained so that it continues to function efficiently and serves the purpose for which it has been constructed, throughout its effective span of life. In addition to maintaining its imperviousness, the lining should be maintained so that it also continues to have the same discharge capacity for which it has been designed and which it had when it started operating soon after the construction The reduction in discharge may was over. .generally be due to accumulation of silt; cracking of lining; failure of the drainage; growth of weeds, algae and moss; seepage and evaporation etc. -3.1.1 Normally no silt deposition should be permitted to take place in a lined canal. Sometimes the canal may have to be run at less than the designed full supply discharge on account of fluctuating water demands, over the base Also even periods of the crops to be irrigated. for a single crop discharge requirements vary from month to month. Such low discharge conditions include deposition of silt over the canal bed owing to low velocities of flow. Consequently, the discharge carrying capacity of the lined canal is adversely affected. Silt deposition in lined canals can be minimised by

Whenever canal is closed for periodical inspection and repairs, the lining, its auxiliaries and special design features should be carefully inspected. The following points should be noted while carrying out the inspection: a) Whether any cav:ties or pockets have been formed behind the lining. NOTE - At places where considered necessary
these may be checked by sounding the lining tiles inspection of wet patches on outside slopes on regular basis should be done.

b) Development of any cracks or displacement or damage to lining; c) Whether the filler material in the joints of the lining is sound, intact and leak-proof and any weed growth in the joints has t iken place; d) Whether pressure release arrangements and humps or regulators ( if any ) function effectively; 1

IS 4839 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 provided in the crest of falls are choked; f) Silt deposits and weed growth; aod $9Bench marks iBoundary pillars, full supply water levels/gauge at suitable intervals be pointed/fixed to know about the hydraulic efficiency of the canal. 3.4 Maintenance of Lining There can be distress to the lining ranging from small settlement cracks to excessive heaving displacement and sinking of the lining in the following situations: a) Cuts in soft fine nrained soils, specially when the lining was laid directly on thk soil without any special preparation of the subgrade; b) High water table situated considerably above the canal bed, specially in fine grained soils, where weep holes or other simple drainage devices are not very effective; specially if cl Freshly laid embankments, composed of clayey soils; d) High continuous spoil banks, left too near the canal excavation without sufficiently wide berms and adequate arrangements for draining the rain water away from the canal and similar situations permitting surface drainage to enter behind the lining; and

e) Whether pipes and openings

on the lining may be sealed by dumping powdered clay upstream of the cracks. 3.4.3 The damaged or displaced portions of the joint filler should be carefully removed. The joint should be cleaned of dirt, weeds, etc, before filling in fresh filler material. 3.4.4 The chocked pressure release pipes should be cleaned by intermittent application of air and water~or by rodding. Defective flap valves or other parts should be rep~aired or replaced. The humps or regulators should be well maintained and repaired, if necessary. 3.4.5 All drainage and pressure release pipes and openings should be cleaned of any dirt, debris, etc, and water accumulating upstream of the fall, if any, should be drained off. 3.4.6 Tn pervious linings, such as boulder lining, any portion in which excessive settlement has taken place, should be repaired by dismantling making up the sub-grade and relaying the liuing. 3.4.7 The lining should be protected from ingress of rain water behind the lining. The free edge of the lining should be well tucked into the canal bank. Turfing of the slope above the lining level would greatly help in preventing scours and gully formation. Suitable measure be taken to bring the canal to carry its authorised discharge when it is noticed that the discharging capacity is reduced. It should be done by maintaining the lined surface of the canal to its original shape and slopes. 3.4.8 Dischage table be prepared once a year near the flumes or free falls or at other conspicuous points where such hydraulic structures are not available. 3.5 Reaches with High Subsoil Water Level The subsoil water level should be observed in such reaches carefully and regularly during and after the rainv seasoo besides routine observations from time to time. In case of rise, the adequacy of the pressure release system or other remedial measures like humps, regulators, etc, provided for the safety of the lining, should be reviewed and further measures adopted, if necessary. 3-6 Seepage Through Embankments Seepage through embankments, if any, should be observed at reasonable intervals, of time. Where necessary, particularly in high embankment reaches, observations of seepage flow should be made and any abnormal increase in the seepage rate and soil particles should be viewed with caution, its possible causes investigated and remedial measures taken. 2

e) Cavities

behind lining caused due to sucking out action on subgrade material by oscillating waves or fluctuating supplies of' water of the canal through cracks, open joints and holes in lining. Such action as may be necessary to avoid recurrence of any failure in the lining should be taken by investigating the causes of the failure and remedying them. The defects or damaged parts of the lming, joint filler, etc, should be immediately attended to and repaired so as to ensure a sound, stable and watertight lining.

3.4.1 Any activities or pockets detected behind the lining should be carefully packed with sand or other suitable material. Care should be taken to ensure that the lining does not get damaged or displaced during the operation. 3.4.2 Damaged or displaced portions of lining should be removed and replaced by fresh lining of quality comparable to the original lining. The sub-grade should be throughly compacted and prepared in accordance with IS 3873 : 1992 before laying the fresh lining. The cracks (-other than hair cracks ) should be filled with bituman or other suitable filler so as to ensure water-tightness of the lining. A more effective sealing of cracks may be obtained by cutting a V-groove along the face of the cracks before filling with staling compound. Minor cracks

IS 4839 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 3.7 Silt Clearance If an~ si1t depositiorr is detecteck dming 4 CANAL BANKS, ROADS AND RAMPS AND SOURCES OF EARTH FOR REPAIR

inspection, steps should be taken to investigate causes thereof and too take remedial measures for the same. Only in exceptional circumstances it may be necessary to excavate the silt and remove it. If any silting tendency is noticed in the form of reduction of discharge carrying capacity, cross-sections of the lined canal should be taken at frequent intervals to determine the extent of silting and to see if the silt deposited during monscons can be flushed out duling nonmonsoon period when the water is silt free. Where silt clearance is unavoidable, it should be done carefully by manual labour to prevent damage to lining.

of canal banks, roads and ramps and sources of earth for repair, ref erance may be made to IS 4839 (Part 1) : 1992. Th e canal banks should also be inspected for the seepage conditions at the outer slope and for some distance beyond the toe, especially in high fill reaches. 5 PERFORMANCE
5.1 An accurate OF CANAL

4.1 For the maintenance

3.8 Weed Removal Aquatic ~weedgrowth, if observed below the supply level should be removed. Land weed ~&rowing over the free board should also be controlled.

and systematic record of the performance of a canal should be maintained by periodic observations of Manning's roughness coefficient evaporation and seepage losses, life and behavior of the lining adopted, surge wave heights, and performance of any special design features like pressure release system, provision of humps or regulators, etc.

6 MISCELLANEoUS 6.1 Brushwood that collects at bridges, siphons and falls should be removed. When trees fall into canal they shall be removed at once.

Standard Mark

Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. The use of the Standard
Standards Act, I986 and the Rules

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, I986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. RVD 13 ( 9 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected publications may does not preclude such as symbols to the Director ( be reproduced in the free use, in and sizes, type or Publication ), BIS.

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephones 331 01 31 331 13 75

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW Delhi-l 10002 Eastern : l/l4 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C.I.T. Campus,

37 86 62 53 38 43 412916 6 32 92 95

160036

IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. Mar~ol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, FARI DABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAGATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed

at Swatantra

Bharat

Press,

Delhi.

India

