IS12746 (Part l/Set 1) : 1999 IEC 670-1-l ( 1988 )
( Reaffirmed 2006 )

vl?rhm

Indian Standard TELECONTROL EQUIPMENT
Section 1 General

AND SYSTEMS

PART 1 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Principles

ICS 33.200

(B BIS 1999

BUREAU

OF
NEW

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

MANAK BHAVAN,

January 1999

Price

Group 10

Power Systems Control and Associated Communications Sectional Committee, LTD 25

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with IEC 870-l -1 ( 1988 ) `Telecontrol equipment and systems - Part 1 : General considerationsSection 1 General principles' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) was adpoted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Power Systems Control and Associated Communications Sectional Committee (LTD 25) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. The text of the IEC standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. CROSSREFERENCES In this Indian Standard, the following International places the following : international Standard Standards are referred to. Read in their respective Standard' appear referring to, this standard, they should be

Corresponding Indian Standard

Degree of Equivalence

IEC 50 (371) : 1984 International Electrotechnical Vocabulary (IEV) - Chapter 371 : Telecontrol IEC 870-l -2 : 1989 Telecontrol equipment and systems - Part 1 : General considerations-Section 2 Guide for specifications IEC 870-l -3 : 1990 Telecontrol equipment and systems - Part 1 : General considerations -Section 3 Glossary IEC 870-2-l : 1987 Telecontrol equipment and systems - Part 2 : Operating conditions -Section 1 Environmental conditions and power supplies IEC 870-3 : 1989 Telgcontrol equipment and systems - Part 3 : Interfaces (Electrical characteristics) - Specifications IEC 870-4 : 1990 Telecontrol equipment and systems - Part 4 : Performance requirements IEC 870-5 : 1993 Telecontrol equipment and systems - Part 5 : Transmission protocols

IS 1885 (Part 50) : 1985 Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part 50 Telecontrol ( first revision ) IS 12746 (Part l/Set 2) : 1993 Telecontrol equipment and systems : Part I General considerations, Section 2 Guide for specifications IS 12746 (Part l/Set 3) : 1993Telecontrol equipment and systems : Part 1 General consideration, Section 3 Glossary IS 12746 (Part 2) : 1989 Telecontrol equipment and systems : Part 2 Environmental conditions and power supplies

Technically Equivalent Identical

do

Technically Equivalent

IS 12746 (Part 3) : 1995 Telecontrol equip ment and systems : Part 3 Interfaces (Electriil-characteristics) - Specifications IS 12746 (Part 4) : 1993 Telecontrol equipment and systems : Part 4 Performance requirements IS 12746 (Part 5) : 1992 Telecontrol equipment and systems : Part 5 Transmission protocols

Identical

Only the English language text in the International Standard has been retained while adopting It in thls Indian Standard.

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set 1) : 1999 IEC 870-l-l ( 1988 )

Indian Standard

TELECONTROL

EQUIPMENT AND SYSTEMS

PART 1 GENERAL CONSiDERATlONS Section 1 General Principle6

INTRODUCTION Telecontrol systems serve for monitoring and control of processes which are geographically widespread. They include ail equipment and functions for acquisition, processing, transmission and display of the necessary process information. The performance of a telecontrol system is determined basically by:

1)

the data integrity destination, and the speed with which

of

information

transfer,

from

a

source

to

its

2)

information

is transferred

to its destination.

The data integrity is defined as the unchangeability of an information content from a source to its destination, while the speed of information transfer is measured by the overall transfer time.

The high responsibility which is associated with the transmission of information such as commands and the occurrence of adverse environmental conditions necessitate standards for data acquisition and of data transmission which fulfil stringent requirements of data integrity and transmission efficiency.

. produced

should be noted that although this series of standards has been specifically for telecontrol systems used in electrical power systems, they may also be applied to other fields of application, e.g. gas and water supply and distribution, etc.

It

The aim of these standards is to provide adequate information correct planning and reliable operation of telecontrol systems. standards are divided into different parts, listed in Clause 2 of report.

for The this

This part of this series of telecontrol standards is intended to give the user a general survey of the systems and their elements, thus presenting the necessary basic information for a thorough understanding of the following parts of these standards.

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set IEC 870-l -1 ( 1988 ) 1. Scope

1)

:1999

of standards applies to telecontrol equipment and systems This series with coded bit serial data transmission for monitoring and control of geographically widespread processes.

2.

Object This series of standards describes configurations and functions of telecontrol systems and of related elements. It defines the functional requirements, logical characteristics and interface conditions of the basic elements and the rules those elements shall follow in co-existing with other elements. These standards such elements nor do not define the internal physical construction or material the layout, characteristics used. of

following ripple

subjects

are

outside

the

scope

of these

standards:

control

systems; channels of transmission and local bus (highway) communication between process input/output elements;

properties systems for

teleprotection may sometimes

and locally automated be implemented within

functions a telecontrol

even though system.

they

These divided bearing

standards are subdivided into several parts, which are subinto several sections and issued as separate publications the following titles and scopes: Part 1: General constitutes this considerations, report) Section One -

IEC Publication 870- 1- 1: General principles (which

This report basic functions

the structural explains of telecontrol systems.

elements,

configurations

and

It gives structures

an overview and possible

of functional elements which contribute to choice of telecontrol systems configurations.

basic

It deals with functions which are typical for any monitored and controlled but emphasizes the specific characterize geographically widespread processes, such influence of telecommunication links with restricted often low signal-to-noise ratio.

process to be problems which as the dominant bandwidth and

this However, detailed standards below.

report and

shall only serve as an recommendations laid down

introduction
in Parts 2-5

to

the

quoted

2

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set IEC 670-l -1 ( 1966 ) /EC Publication 870-l Guide for specifications -2: Part (under 1: General considerations, consideration) guidelines for and equipment Section

1 ) : 1999

Two

-

This Section Two of Part 1 will describe defining specifications of telecontrol systems accommodate individual application demands.

planning and in order to

/EC Publication Glossary (under

870-l-3: Part consideration)

1: General

considerations,

Section

Three

-

This Section Three of Part 1 will present the specific terms of telecontrol techniques as defined in the International Electrotechnical Vocabulary [IEV] [ IEC Publication 50 (371)] as well as other terms which are necessary for the understanding of this series of standards.

IEC Publication Environmental This

870-2-l: conditions

Part 2: and power

Operating supplies

conditions,

Section

One

-

Section One of Part 2 defines the environmental conditions to which the telecontrol equipment SUPPlY designed in order to fulfil its specifications. It establishes different conditions and also defines test procedures.

and power should be classes for

IEC Publication with electromagnetic influences. /EC Publication

870-2-2 will constitute Section Two and it will deal compatibility as well as corrosive and erosive

870-3:

Part

3:

Interfaces

(in

preparation)

This part will define the interface conditions that have to be met order to correlate the different pieces of equipment needed to form telecontrol system and to allow the user to manage such a system.

in a

IEC Publication paration)

870-Y:

Part

4:

Performance

requirements

(in

pre-

This part will deal with those characteristics that have to be met by to accomplish the functions for telecontrol equipment and systems secure and precise manner, which they are intended in a continuous, and in addition to be flexible enough to accommodate future demands.

IEC

Publication

870-5:

Part

5:

Transmission

protocols

(in

preparation)

This part will describe the functional characteristics of data transmission that shall be met in order to implement a telecontrol Data integrity requirements for system by means of links or networks. distinct data formats and transmission information transmission, methods, which fulfil these requirements, will be defined.

3

IS 12746 (Part l/See 1) : 1999 IEC 879-l-l ( 1988 )

This

part

will include

several above

sections. will be completed by additional parts and

The standards listed sections as appropriate.

3.

General

aspects

related

to telecontrol

systems

The fundamental aspects relating to the operation of geographically widespread processes including the generation and optimum transportation and distribution of a product are very similar for the different kinds of products (e.g. gas, water, oil or electricity). Telecontrol systems employed in the operation of electric power systems have been developed to a very advanced state and often serve as examples for applications in other areas. For this reason, the general aspects relating to the operation of any geographically widespread process are explained in the following sub-clauses by reference where appropriate to the operation of an electric power system.

3.1

The

role

of telecontrol

qystems

in power

systems

operation

which includes its reliability, The quality of the power supply, depends to a large extent on the existence of a coordinated telecontrol system which assures all the necessary supervisory and control functions. The structure of such a telecontrol system is dictated by the power system's architecture and by the strategy of operation adopted It is in essence a distributed process control system by the user(s). conforming to the hierarchical structure of the geographically widespread power transportation and distribution networks. A typical case of a telecontrol system is depicted in Figure 1, page 25.

point of view, A system can, from the operational power network or be split up into different levels of even into partially or fully independent subsystems.

service a whole responsibility or

The local controj systems of power stations are usually independent of the power network telecontrol system but certain monitored information is fed from the power stations control systems into the power network telecontrol system. Conversely, certain control information, such as set points for power generation, are transmitted into power stations (e.g. in the case of automatic load/frequency control).

Telecontrol system configurations range from a few point-to-point monitoring and control functions up to multilevel systems covering vast technology on all levels of the geographic areas. The use of computer system allows telecontrol systems and architectures to use distributed intelligence with possibilities of preprocessing information to avoid Redundancy is provided for vital functions in superfluous data flow. order to fulfil specified availability and reliability requirements.

IS 12746 (Part l/Set IEC 670-1-l ( 1966 )

1 ) : 1999

Extended processing functions, such as load/frequency control, state estimation and short-term predictive energy security analysis, may be carried out either by a separate real-time management, computer system or by the telecontrol system itself, according to the choice of the systems architecture. It has also to be noted that equipment and subsystems are manufactured by different suppiiers and/or stem from different Their integration into telecontrol systems rations of technology. creates interface problems which are sometimes difficult to solve. often genethus

3.2

The

role

of the

data

transmission

system to be taken into account is the specification of in the

One of the important factors which has the planning stage of a telecontrol system data transmission system,

Private or public communication cables, microwave channels and power line carrier (PLC) are most widely used. Since telecontrol systems have to operate in real-time mode, limitations imposed by the telecommunication channels may heavily impair the overall system efficiency. The implication is restricted bandwidth and hence restricted bit rates to be transmitted under noisy environmental conditions, which cause distortion of transmitted signal elements. Conversely specifications of the overall channels have to be chosen to allow optimization of the overall system performance. The data transmission system has to be considered in this sense as an integrated part of the telecontrol system.

In addition, all transmission equipment located in the vicinity voltage equipment such as circuit breakers and isolators, is intermittent high noise levels of the burst type and transient This is especially true for PLC channels.

of high prone to voltages.

The performance requirements and boundary telecontrol applications, such as teletripping generation/load rejection schemes, protection, taneous response in real-time mode is critical, direct logical connections between data sources This means that the application of store and packet switching are explicitly prohibited in such

conditions for some in transmission line etc., where instandictate the permanent and their destinations. forward techniques or systems.

There are however telecontrol functions with less demanding performance requirements which may adopt the general techniques and applicastandards which have been developed for office automation tions. Data exchanges among central stations for regions, districts or even nations may fall into that category.

5

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set 1 ) : 1999 IEC 670-l -1 ( 1966 ) 3.3 Requirements which determine the design of a telecontrol system

For 3.3.1

detailed

information, characteristics

see

IEC

Publication

870-4.

Functional

The system shall be designed so that the operators will obtain on actual operational status from strategic the correct information points of the power network and shall be able to respond quickly and accurately . 3.3.2 Environmental conditions

The installed equipment has to operate correctly under specified operational environmental conditions. Detailed specifications and a classification of environmental conditions are given in IEC Publication 870-2-l. 3.3.3 Reliability, availability and security

(RAS)

RAS specifications depend on the particular application, and have to be met by the system and all its functional elements. These include uninterrupted power supplies which generally are not considered as Electromagnetic compatibility being part of the telecontrol system itself. has to receive close attention for all electronic equipment involved in telecontrol systems.

Systems should be laid out to operate in nent failures should be indicated immediately.

a fail

safe

mode

and

compo-

3.3.

4

Maintainability, serviceability upwards compatibility

and

expandability,

Means for quick fault indication and location are required together with self-diagnosis of the equipment. Both hardware and software should ensure maintainability and expandability, to cope with successive alteration and expansion of the process. Design improvement and changes of technology and of the methods of operation should also be taken into account. The organization of the software should be such as to permit operational control staff to carry out changes quickly and easily to cater for alterations in the power supply network.

3.4

Main

differences

between

telecontrol

systems

and

local

control

systems

The control

characteristics systems are:

which

differentiate

telecontrol

systems

from

local

The use of telecommunication links under restriction of bandwidth and under noisy environmental conditions, requires optimum tradeoffs between transmission speed and reliable information transfer in order to cope with the amount of data to be transmitted and the overall transfer time needed.

6

IS 12746 (Part l/Set IEC 870-l-l ( 1988 )

1)

: 1999

Long distance data transmission links or networks, sometimes composed of different transmission media, create problems with occasional high noise levels. The chosen data transmission protocol has to consider these circumstances. High data integrity rates have to be guaranteed at arbitrary high noise levels, whilst taking account of the fact that information transfer rates decrease gradually with increasing noise.

Numerous geographically tions) have to be controlled

widespread plants (and by the same centre.

telecontrol

sta-

4.

Structures

and

configurations structure and their

of telecontrol

systems

A system's basic elements that system. A system stations and 4.1 Interrelation and telecon

is understood interactions,

as the hierarchic order of the which constitute and characterize

configuration is a their interconnections.

specified

arrangement

of

telecontrol

of process network architectures trol s ys tern configurations

In the planning stage, the system configuration has to be defined and tailored according to the user specifications. The configuration of the process, e-g. of a power grid, with the number of voltage levels involved, the number and geographical locations of power stations, control centres, substations and outstations, determines first of all the layout of the data transmission system which has to interconnect these points.

This utility,

strategy may differ from country being state or privately owned.

to

country

and

from

utility

to

Emphasis may be given to monitoring functions, leaving control functions partly or entirely to the local operators in substations but providing means for later upgrading of the system. Full operational facilities for remote monitoring and telecontrol functions may be right from the beginning. Even in relatively simple implemented the monitoring and control functions may be quite complex systems, in order to satisfy the many operational requirements for each hierarchical level of a power network. They may also be influenced by security requirements, statutory regulations and economic considerations. The trend to more power grid tie lines, either at company levels or at national levels, calls for high grade application control functions and hence highly sophisticated telecontrol system structures.

7

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set 1 ) : 1999 IEC 870-l-l ( 1988 ) For the therefore responsibility parency . 4.2 Basic sake often of reliability and security, telecontrol systems are subdivided into a number of different levels of while still maintaining an overall operational trans-

functional

modules

of a point-to-point

telecontrol

system

A simple but typical point-to-point structure, defined in IEC Publication 870-3 is represented This serves to describe and explain briefly modules of equipment or subsystems, namely:

with interfaces to be in Figure 2, page 26. the basic functional

process input/output; information processing data transmission; information processing operator input/output.

in the in the

controlled controlling

station; station;

Table I, page 23, represents modules and possible types of ment. It should be noted that cation functions in the controlled station may be performed either in in separate equipment (i.e. computer) which then has to be a data bus.

typical interrelations of these functional related telecontrol modules and equipprocessing of local and special applistation as well as in the controlling in the telecontrol equipment itself or additional processors or in a process linked to the telecontrol equipment by

4.3

Functional Telecontrol in Table I I,

software

modules can be divided into the categories shown

system software page ,24.

the basic and In typical systems, New development standard modules. project specific software. 4.4 Configuration of telecontrol systems

application work is

software consist normally restricted

of to

Data transmission network configurations can be broken down into the basic functional elements listed below, which constitute the basis of Details concerning data transall composite network configurations. mission and traffic methods are dealt with in Clause 6. However, some specific remarks concerning data transmission have to be formulated at The telecontrol equipment in the control centre usually this stage. communicates with more than one outstation and -uses more than one link terminal (see Figure 2: DCE, modems, page 26) for this purpose. The number of link terminals used influences the organization of the data transfer. l

The various types of data are now illustrated, using the

transfer following

suitable symbols:

for

telecontrol

purposes

8

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set 1) : 1999 IEC 870-l-l ( 1988 )

Dl

Main

control

centre

Control terminals

centre

with

one

or

more

link

The small circles inserted number of link terminals per

into the symbols control centre.

for

stations

symbolize

the

n
0
4.4.1 Pointto-point configuration

Outstation, terminal unit

controlled (RTU)

station,

remote

Information exchange

collecting, points

concentrating

and

Data

transmission

line

4.4.2

Multiple

point-

a
to-point

This configuration stations and is the

connects simplest

two telecontrol type possible

configuration

The control centre is connected to the outstations by one link terminal per outall outstations are At any time, station. allowed to transmit data to the control may transmit which return in centre, outstations more to one or messages simultaneously.

9

IS 12746( Part l/Secl) IEC 670-1-l (1966)

:1999

4.4.3

Multipoint-star

configuration

The control centre is connected to more than one outstation by one common link terminal. At any time, only one outstation is allowed to transmit data to the control centre. The central telecontrol equipment may transmit data either to one or more selected outstations or global messages to all outstations simultaneously.

4.4.4

Multipoint-partyline

configuration

The control centre is connected to more than one outstation by a common path. The restrictions imposed on the exchange between centra! and outstations is the same as in the multipoint-star configuration (Sub-clause 4.4.3).

4.4.5

Multipoint-ring

configuration

[partyline-ring)

The communication path between all stations forms a ring. This is a preferred method to improve the availability of the communication path. If the path is interrupted in some full communication is location, maintained, since every station can be reached from two sides of the ring.

10

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set IEC 870-l-l ( 1988 ) 4.4.6 Composite (hybrid) configuration

1)

: 1999

Configurations of the types indicated in Sub-clauses 4.4.1 to can be combined in a great variety of composite configurations. most important variety is the meshed network configuration in communication between any pair of stations is required.

4.4.5 The which

Information inserted, Multirouting reliability and

collection,

concentration

and

exchange

points

may

be

as shown availability

in Sub-clauses 4.4.5 of data transmission.

and

4.4.6

increases

the

5. 5.1

Functions Layered

of telecontrol structure

systems functions

of telecontrol

The functions of data systems may be subdivided into seven layers as specified in the OSI (Open System Interconnection) reference model defined by ISO, This subdivision into modular layers is a useful theoretical. model for defining standards. Each layer is essentially independent of the layers below and above it. It trea,ts the layer below as a "service" above as a "master" with which function and the layer it exchanges data and to which it reports errors. It communicates, in general, layer on the other side of the transwith its corresponding mission line.

The independence of the layers gives is possible to alter one layer without some layers may be omitted. Telecontrol system functions are divided

a modularity to the in altering others,

system. It particular

into

the

following

layers:

11

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set IEC 670-l -1 ( 1988 ) Application

1)

: 1999

functions

Cover the special needs of the process to wnich a telecontrol thus dealing with the types of information system is applied, emanating from the process or from the operator. This information is transferred to the telecontrol system by signals and is handled within this system in the form of data.

Operational Conversion equipment. Data

processing of

functions into

including signals

presentation and data in

functions the operational

information

transport,

network,

link

and

physical

transmission

functions

functions associated and operational processing Application functions are described in general in Sub-clauses 5.2 to 5.4 below. network and link functions (such as Standards for data transport, data format structures) are described in general in Clause 6 below and will be dealt with in detail in IEC Publication 870-5.

5.2

Application Application

functions functions are divided into the following two categories:

Basic functions; Extended processing 5.2.1 Basic These process functions

function 75.

deal with all types and the operator.

of

indiv

idual

information

from

and

to

the

The information content functions remains unaltered system (i.e. the data integrity

resulting from basic of data while being processed by the is maintained).

application telecontrol

The

main

subgroups

are: acquisition from the process)

Monitoring .

(information

Teleindication discrete state

information

(single,

double

or multipoint).

.

Telemetering continuous Telecounting integrated

variable

quantities.

.

variables

or

incremental

information.

12

IS 12746 ( Part l/See IEC 670-l-l ( 1966 )

1)

: 1999

Command and control
.

(acting

on the process)

Telecommand, teleswitching single or double commands,

pulse type

or maintained

commands.

l

Teleregulation and teleadjusting continuous and discontinuous variable
processing functions

quantities.

5.2.2

Extended

They are derived from and/or output side of the processing functions.

a set of basic functions acting on the input process and operator by means of operational

Extended processing functions may alternatively be performed CPU of the telecontrol system or by separate computer systems.

by the

Typical examples priority) :

are

(in

order

of

decreasing

overall

transfer

time

limit indication; automatic interpretation of alarms; display of faulty states; display of summated measured values; real time state estimation; fault location routines (process and telecontrol real time event logging for post mortem analysis;

system);

load/frequency control and economic energy management; security monitoring and analysis; display of integrated metered values; short-term energy management; contingency evaluation; automatic load shedding and restoration; hydro-thermal optimization and unit commitment. 5.3
Operational processing functions

Operational processing functions ensure correct data, acquisition and Typical operational processing provide appropriate data presentation. functions are:

matching of input/output signals which cross interfaces to the process; suppression of contact bounces; detection of faulty state information; limit checks; plausibility checks; increment pulse validation; calculation of engineering values of measurands; summation and other arithmetic operations,

to man and

13

IS 12746( Partl/Secl) `IEC 870-l-l (1988)

:1999

Modern technology allows the economic implementation of additional operational processing functions within stations where information is acquired and within information concentrators. This procedure is called preprocessing. Preprocessed information may also be further processed by the CPU of the controlling station (or a separate computer system).

Preprocessing may also reduce the amount of data to and may prevent, particularly in emergency situations, loading of transmission links, the CPU and the man-machine

be transmitted possible overinterface.

5.4

Presentation

of the

process

information

to the

operator

The man-machine interface is defined as the shared boundary between the terminal of a data processing system and the operator. The type and form of information to be interchanged between man and machine and the hardware and software to accomplish this have to be specified accordingly. The basic requirement for optimum man-machine communication is therefore to provide operators maintenance personnel with and adequate and reliable information on the actual status of the power grid and the telecontrol system itself and to make use of central facilities to allow possible intervention in the process.

The types are typically

of information mentioned displayed by the following

in Sub-clauses hardware:

5.2.1

and

5.2.2

Mimic diagram Represents the topology and indicates the status of the power grid. Active and/or passive elements such as multi-aspect indidiscrepancy switches, push buttons may indication lamps, caters, be used to display the status and to initiate commands.

Operator's console Usually consists of a combination of and keyboards, which display units detailed information and control facilities.

displays, provide

especially the operator

visual with

indicating instruments (analogue and/or digital) For measured and composite values (e.g. sums or processed values). Visual display units (VLW] Usually serve for alphanumeric display of alarms, other information and for graphic display of status, etc. Recording equipment For alphanumeric and graphic recording printers, hardcopying devices and plotters.

of

analogue

values

measurands and process network

such

as

teletype,

line

14

IS 12746 (Part l/Set IEC 670-l-l ( 1966 ) Acoustic signalization

1 ) : 1999

For attracting

the operator's

attention

to dangerous

situations.

Maintenance

equlpmen

t

For monitoring

and maintenance

of the telecontrol

system

itself.

6.

Transmission
The role

of telecontrol
transmission

data
standards

6.1

of data

Data transmission standards have been issued by international bodies such as CCITT and ISO. Existing standards are characterized by the fact that they cover commercial type data transmission, i.e. data transfer between scientific or commercial computer systems and remote terminals, Transmission paths may be circuits rented from the public covering distances from a few kilometres up to telephone authority, several hundred kilometres. Data handling of this type is, typically optimized for office automation tasks. Message frames and protocols are mostly adequate for the degree of time requirements and data integrity required by those services.

On-line, real-time telecontrol data transmission on the other hand, which is characterized by the fact that telecontrol systems cause require standards which fulfil stringent material or energy to move, data integrity requirements.

The typical

requirements

of telecontrol

data transmission

are:

very very short _ _

high high

availability; data integrity; time which allows real-time response to events;

transfer

high

information

transfer

efficiency; electromagnetic inter-

proper ference

of high operation in the presence and differences in earth potential.

The major obstacle in fulfilling these requirements is the fact that the two requirements, "high data integrity" and "low transmission are two conflicting properties in transmission paths with delay", restricted bandwidths and under inimical environmental conditions.

Consequently it is necessary to standardize with fair compromises on these two properties.

transmission

methods

15

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set 1) : 1999 IEC 870-l -1 ( 1968 ) and overhead Utility owned transmission media, such as underground cables, PLC and microwave links are very often put into operation in order to achieve high availability of the communication links.

6.2

Data

transport,

network,

link

and

physical

transmission

functions

Data transport functions cover all functions reliable information management of efficient and stations.

involved transfer

in the between

Requests for the transmission of messages with various priorities, lengths, dialogue types and destinations are accepted from the "appliAppropriate transmission procedures are cation" layer in each station. delegated to the lower protocol layers which report on the successful performance or on observed errors to the higher layers. Automatic recovery procedures are initiated upon dynamic errors, while error reports to the higher layers are generated upon the detection of persistent errors.

Typical functions operation with the mission" are: Priority transfers.

which lower

are managed in the protocol layers "link"

higher layers and "physical

in cotrans-

organization

for

spontaneous

and

cyclic

information

Performance of maintenance and test routines upon request activating or deactivating links, stations or system parts).

(e.g.

Error

recovery

strategies. error-detecting codes. acknowledgement

Generating

and monitoring

Generating and monitoring frame synchronization, of message frames and detecting frame size errors.

Serializing Monitoring Converting
6.3 6.3.1 Characteristics Telecontrol

and deserializing signal signal quality. levels

of message frames.

and data formats.
data transmission

of telecontrol message structure

The general structure of a telecontrol message is shown in Figure 3, page 27 (for details, see IEC Publication 870-5). Standard frame formats provide information field lengths which may vary only by multiples of octets.

16

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set IEC 670-1-l ( 1988 ) 6.3.2 Transmission initiation modes of telecontrol devices

1)

: 1999

Three basic data transmission Event

transmission : transmission

initiation

modes

are

used

for

telecontrol

initiated

(spontaneous

transmission]

Data transmission is initiated by events in stations where they such as changes of breaker positions, changes of measured occur, values, etc. This method best meets real-time requirements. The proper operation of event initiated transmission is ascertained by transmission of periodic test information ("watchdog" function).

Transmission

on demand the the or master case polling station to of several mode.

In this case the outstation is requested by transmit the actual information status. In outstations this mode is also called interrogative

Cyclic

transmission

This mode is frequently used for transmission of measured values and binary information from outstation to the control station. Sets of measured values and/or binary status information are transmitted in a time division scheme. It has to be noted that cyclic transmission causes a time delay in updating which increases with the amount of information to be scanned in one cycle. A data path is needed in the direction of information flow only.

Event initiated transmission and transmission on demand, where data call for transmission with very high data is transmitted only once, For the cyclic updating mode, where occasional wrong integrity. information is corrected during the following cycle, a lower data would be sufficient (for details, see IEC Publiintegrity class cation 870-5).

6.3.3

Combinations

of transmission

initiation

modes

and

dialog

procedures

initiation modes of transmission and types of Link configurations, traffic are principally independent of each other and a multitude of theoretically be possible. combinations would therefore Practical solutions, are limited by a series of restrictions imposed however, mostly by considerations of a partly technical and a partly economical nature. Combinations of transmission initiation modes are:

17

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set IEC 670-l-l ( 1968 )

1)

: 1999

Event initiation ation from one values and/or scanned during

and transmission on demand, polled status informor more outstations, or a set of specific measured single-point or double-point status information is a requested time period, etc.

Event initiated and cyclic transmission. Cyclic transmission interrupted, thus enabling event transmission which has priority. Periodically initiated test data transmission may used as "watchdog" function.

can be higher also be

Combination of following priority 1) 2) 3)

the three allocation:

transmission

initiation

modes

with

the

event initiated transmission; transmission on demand; cyclic transmission. configurations the following points have to be

With regard to network taken into consideration :

Multiple point-to-point configurations can be broken up into the equivalent number of point-to-point link elements, all having independent link terminals on both ends. All three initiation modes of transmission and combinations thereof can be applied to each link individually. The data flow from n outstations will be limited by the throughput of the system's central processors and not by the capacity of the individual link terminals.

Restrictions mission, are

in data flow, especially for due to the imposed transmission

links with priorities.

cyclic

trans-

All the l/n

multipoint configurations, possible data transmission per outstation.

such rate

as star from n

and party outstations

line, restrict to less than

Further restrictions are due to the choice of combinations of the three transmission initiation modes and the imposed transmission It has to be noted that the information handling strategies priorities. of multipoint configurations are equal to those of bit-serial data bus Bus systems may operate in different initiation modes and systems. therefore need sophisticated data transmission handling capabilities.

Event initiated transmission may in the case of emergency cause an increasing amount of information to be transmitted time (of the order of magnitude of 1 or 2 s duration) at outstations. Multiple point-to-point configurations are more coping with an emergency than multipoint configurations.

suddenly in a short one or all flexible in

18

IS 12746( Partl/Sec IEC 870-1-l (1988)

1) :1999

6.4

Types

of traffic

in transmission

channels communication sequence in of the types

The particular procedures for conveying data over the and the chronological link, together with the direction which communication links may be needed, are functions of traffic carried by the link. 6.4.1 Simplex traffic be used in telemonitoring the cyclic systems

Simplex (one way) traffic may in point-to-point and multipoint using the channel selecting mode. 6.4.2 Halfduplex traffic

updating mode or in systems

Halfduplex traffic is characterized by a transmission link common to thus precluding simultaneous transmission in both both directions, Compared to simplex transmission, it offers enhanced directions . protection of event information against loss by defining appropriate dialogue procedures. 6.4.3 Duplex traffic outpath both

Independent transmission channels exist for the incoming and going directions, thus representing a four-wire transmission simultaneous data transmission in having the possibility of directions. 6.5 Telecommunication s ys terns

Properties of telecommunication systems are mentioned in this context only in so far as they serve as a subsystem to a telecontrol system for data transmission.

Transmission of telecontrol data is performed in most countries over fully or partly utility owned information transmission systems. Rented channels from telephone companies are also in use.

The use:

channels

usually

comprise

the

following

facilities

for

internal

telephone with private automatic teleprinter, facsimile; telecontrol data transmission; teleprotection; closed circuit video. Selections of which others) adopted. 6.5.1 Transmission The following

branch

exchange

(PABX)

;

existing transmission fulfil the requirements

standards (CCITT, of telecontrol

EIA systems

and are

media transmission media are currently in use:

19

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set 1) : 1999 IEC 870-l -1 ( 1988 ) radio (VHF, UHF); point-to-point microwave; power line carrier (PLC); communication cable embedded in earth suspended communication cable underground communication cable wire I multiwire cables, coax cables, optical fibres.

The transmission facilities form a more or less complete telecommuData transmission rates of telecontrol systems are nication network. usually in the range of 50 bits/s to 2 400 bits/s, infrequently as high as 4 800 bits/s and 9 600 bits/s. Signalling speeds in excess of 9 600 bits/s generally require special broadband channels which can be provided using conventional telecommunication transmission techniques over various telecommunication media.

6.5.2

Transmission

methods

Telecontrol systems rely exclusively on bit-serial binary data formats. The physical representation of the information units (bits) on the transmission path depends on the transmission medium used, on bandwidth limitations, and other environmental conditions.

The

most

common

transmission

methods

are:

Pulse code modulation (PCM) in which binary information is reprein the sented by two distinct signal levels of fixed duration, case of cablebound transmission over short distances (baseband or by two distinct frequencies of distinct duration transmission), for longer distances or other transmission media. In the case of low transmission rates (up to 1 200 bits/s) ordinary "frequency channels are used which convert the two distinct signal shift" levels into two distinct frequencies. For higher transmission speeds various multilevel modulation techniques are applied which require in addition to the binary data flow, "signal-elementand deliver, information and other data control information. timing"

Digital pulse duration modulation (DPDM) in which binary information is represented by signal pulses of two distinct durations. The number of pulses and pulse intervals represent a given number of bits. Frequency shift channels and modem techniques can be implemented with DPDM and PCM.

6.6

Protection With following

of messages

against

noise

on the

transmission

channel the

regard to telecontrol data transmission characteristics of specific channel types

and its integrity are of interest:

available

bandwidth

per

channel;

20

1s 12746 ( Part
EC

l/Set

1)

: ~QQQ

670-1-l (1966)

planned signal/noise ratio figures which environmental conditions and extremely during intervals of burst type noise; attenuation (weather, transmission (db/km) and icing, etc, ) ; time delay its variations due

prevail during low signal/noise

normal ratios

to

external

influences

(ms/lOO

km). transmission media

These characteristics are very different for the cited above and interrelated for specific channel type.

produced by operation of circuit breakers and Burst type noise, is practically absent on microwave channels, although isolators, variations in attenuation due to atmospheric scattering may have to be compensated by diversity operation. PLC on the other hand is characterized by poor signal/noise ratios during the short periods of burst type noise but attenuation a'llowing increased per kilometre is low, thus repeater spacing.

6.6.1

Protection

of information

against

falsification of telecontrol Examples systems of typical to reduce measures

Measures can be applied in all layers the possibility of information falsification. are: Improving the signal-to-noise screening of coaxial cables, frequencies. Active carrier transmitter power, etc. By weighted supervision of residual obtained.

ratio. Passive proper choice of methods include

methods include carrier and subincrease of the

superposition of redundant coding and signal quality (pulse amplitude, signal distortion), maximum reduction in transmission links can be (undetected) errors

After error detection, be suppressed.

the

output

of the

falsified

information

has

to

Using plausibility checks, ation transmission procedures command transmission). 6.6.2 Protection against loss

state estimators and extended inform(such as "check before operate" for

of information the informpath. This

Spontaneous telecontrol systems may lose information if ation is discarded after error detection on the transmission can be avoided by different methods such as:

Decision

feed

back for example transmission positive if the acknowledgement positive acknow-

Various methods are in use, and automatic repetition of ledgement does not arrive.

21

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set JEC 670-l-l ( 1966 )

1 ) : 1999

Information

feed back

This method combines error detection with protection against loss of information by performing an identity check between the information sent out and retransmitted to the initiating station.

Provision

of sequential

numbers

for subsequent

message frames.

22

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set IEC 670-1-l ( 1966 )

1 ) : 1999

TABLE

I

and

typical

Interrelation of basic functional modules systems functions with typical hardware within a telecontrol system
Typical (application and telecontrol) systems functions To ensure information transfer Type

modules

Basic functional modules Process inputlou(put

or related modules of equipment

Process

equipment

- To convert actual physical states of the process into coded data [monitoring direction) - Act on the process [command direction)

- From sensors In the process to CPU, e.g. to add up and to code metering pulses - From CPU via transducers and actuators to the process

- Sensors In the process - Input channels receiving (analogue or digital) data from the process - Transducers, actuators In the process, operating valves, circuit-breakers, goverhors 1 -

Specific telecon trol in formation processing in the controlled station - To process data according predefined rules to

To process information,

incoming e.g.

and outgoing

Telecon trol equipment Central processor ICPU) Associated front-end processors Hard wired logic Main memory devices Internal bus subsystems Input/output channels to process equipment

- To detect events by comparison of former and new status information - To reduce data if needed - To react on comparison of set point and measurands by sending an actuator command

Data transmission

To ensure reliable transmission of oil importon t process information ignal (and/or) format conversion -E rror detection, e.g. by codes and signal quality monitoring - Data path performance monitoring

Ooto circuit-terminating

equipment

- To transmit serial data between wldespread stations of a telecontrol system

- Standardized CCITT modems - Special modems, e.g. incorporating channel switching and processlng In case of sophisticated communications networks

Specific telecon trol in formation processing in the controlling station - To process data according to predefined rules

To process information,

incoming e.g.

and outgoing

Telecantrol -

equipment

- To prepare clear, comprehensive information for display - To derive automatic commands from information coming from different stations of the tclccontrol system

Central processor (CPU) Associated front-end processors Hard-wired logic (very rarely) Main memory devices (Core, IC) Auxiliary mass storage (disk, tape) - Internal bus subsystem - Input/output channels I Operotor's lo equipment

Operator's

input/output

To convert dato into information comprehensible by personnel and convert humon actions into data - Indication alarm and record functions on/off status - Digital and analog metering - Control and command functions - Supervisory alarm functions - Fault diagnosis

- Information display and recording - To provide means for interacting with the process by operators - To provide means for online testing and fault dlagnosls of the Mecontrol system Itself

-

Mimic dlagram Visual display (VDU) Signallinq lamps Recorders, line printers, data logqers Analog and digital lndlcating instruments Process operator consoles, keyboards Discrepancy (control) switches Light pen, trace ball or joystick for VDU

Note.-

The mark indicates that basic funct tanal modules.

the reldted

hardware

equipment

need not necessarily

coincide

fully

with the

23

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set IEC 870-l -1 ( 1988 )

1 ) : 1999

TABLE Typical

II of telecontrol systems

functional

software

modules

TELECONTROL

SYSTEMS

SOFTWARE

BASIC

SOFTWARE

STANDARD APPLICATION SOFTWARE system independent

PROJECT SPECIFIC SOFTWARE project dependent

DATA

BASE

appkatlon

independent

system

dependent

- Operstlng

system

- Telecommunication and Interprocessor communication - Man-machine dialogue

- Hardware

drivers

- Particular functions of of a system (e.g. arithmetic procedures far analogue values)

- System

control

tables

- Tables for object descrlptlons (software modules - Object status tables (process state)

- Time and mathematical basic functions - Programs for maintenance and tests

- Data input/output programs - Data processing and control programs - Data logging, display and long time storage programs - Data base management

- Data bese maintenance software

24

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set IEC 870-l-l ( 1968 )

1)

: 1999

DCC

-k
l_E!J
cc
Main (or national) control centre

cl
DCC

District

control

centre

cl
RCC

Regional or area control centre

cl
PS

Power

station

-_-.
Fig. 1.

Alternative (a power station may be controlled either to a regional control centre or to a district control centre)

n

Outstation, controlled station or remote terminal unit (RTU)

- `Typical hierarchical structure for power transportation and

of a telecontrol system distribution network.

25

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set IEC 870-l-l ( 1988 )

1 ) : 1999

CONTROLLING STATION

CONTROLLED STATION . )

t
OPERATOR'S EGUIPMENT TELECONTROL EQUIPMENT DTE DCE DCE TELECONTROL EQUIPMENT DTE

I Alarms

t

PROCESS EQUIPMENT

status Posltlons
Meter Information input equipment fsensorst

j

pq u u
Operator's console

IEzrn 1

c

c

Processorhl~ for operational 4 processing functions

DCE Ifvlodemt

I

Processorfs) for operational processing functions

i
F -. Special processorlsl Transmissron line (channel) -* Data circuit

7

l

-

l-iSwitch commands

I

lnformatron output equrpment hsctuators~

I comm Special processor(s)

~Telecontrol equipment / to DCE interface

Telecontrol system in restricted sense * Telecontrol equrpment to operator's equrpment interface

------A Telecontrol equrpment to process equrpment rnterface

Telecontrol system rn wide sense . Man-machine Interface VW: DCE: DTE: . Vrsual display unrt Data circurt-termmating equrpment Data termrnal equipment Optional Interface between telecontrol processor(s) and specral processorIs) .

Fig.

2.

-

Typical (shown

structure of a telecontrol system by a point-to-point configuration).

26

IS 12746 ( Part l/Set IEC 870-l-l ( 1988 )

1)

: 1999

FRAME DELlMlTER

ORGANIZATION

IDENTIFICATION

STATUSCONTROL i

II

CHECK

Start delimiters

Type of message Serial number

Address type:

User

data

Protection against error

Specification of dialogue elements, e.g. interrogation, answer, etc.

- source - destination

Check

bits

-----------t ______________ ____________________-------

Information
Block

field length

______________: ______________________________:

Frame

~~~-~~;-~~~-~~~-~~~---~-------~-~~>

Fig.

3.-

General

structure

of a telecontrol

message

27

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau oflndian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. LTD 25 ( 965 1. Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue
Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur
Telephones

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 33 75

110002

Telegrams:

Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

I 323 76 17 323 3841

Eastern Northern Southern Western

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

I

337 3378499,3378561 86 26, 337 86 62 I 60 38 20 43 25

: C. I. T Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113
: Manakalaya, EY MIDC, Marol. MUMBAI 400093 Andheri (East)

235 02 16, 235 04 42 235 IS 19,235 23 15 832Y2YS.8327858 83278')1,8327892

Branches

BHUBANESHWAR. BHOPAL : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. COIMBATORE. FARlDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHA I-I. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

