Indian Standard

IS : 5991 -19irsc ( Reaffirmed 2006 )

l

GUIDE FOR PREPARATION OF DRAWINGS OF SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES
( Second Reprint MAY 1990)

,-

t;
I. /, -.

,

UDC

621'7 : 744 : 621'382

0 Copyright 1969 BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAPAR MARG

Gr 6

August 1969

Indian Standard
GLJIDE
DRAWINGS

FOR PREPARATIO-N OF SEMICONDUCTOR
Devices Sectional Committee,

OF DEVJ&
ETDC 40

Semiconductor

Chailmar
DR B. H. WADIA MCI&T5 Da K. S. BALAIN Semiconductors

Representing Limited, Poona

Central Electronics Engineering ( CSIR ) , Pilani

Rescareh

I&tuta

Da B. R. MARATKE ( Allcrnate ) Directorate General of Inspection ( Mim if Ds R. R. DUTTA GUPTA Defence ) I SHRI R. C. PANDEY ( dlternafe ) National Test House, Calcutta SERI B. P. G=oa~ The Radio, Electronics & Television Manufmw' SHE1 A. K. GOPALAKRIEHNAN Association ( RETMA 1. Bombav Directorate of Tkhnical Dkvelopmeht & Production wo CDR J. S. LAMBA ( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ) SH~I E. G. NAC+A~AJAN ( Alternate) Continental Device India Ltd, Faridabad SXEI S. S. MADAN , SHRIA. A. PATANXAR ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs ( &part_ SHBI G. B. MEEXAMBI ment of Communications 1. New Delhi Directorate General of Dgfence Research and SHBI B. S. MURTHY Development ( Ministry of Defence j Sx~r K. C. CHHABRA ( Alternate j Electronic Corporation of India Ltd ( Department of SHRI P. S. RAJU Atomic Energy ) , Hyderabad National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DR RAM PAREHAD SERI s. P. SURI ( Ahmate) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI K. R. SA+OOR Directorate General of Defence Research and Develop SHBI C. G. SUBRAMANYAN ment ( Ministry -of Defence ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-qficio Memh ) SHRI Y. S. VENRATESWARAN, Director ( Elec tech ) Secrsta~ SHRI N. SBINIVASAN Deputy Director ( Elec tech ) , IS1

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARC;

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

1s : 5dol- 1969

Panel

for Mechanical

Standardization ETDC 40 : Pl

of Semiconductor

Devices, Clmvenn
*DR B. H. WADlA Members Ds R. R. DWTA GUPTA

Representing

Semiconductors Directorate

Limited, Poona Inspection ( Mmtstry
of

&RI R. C. PANDEY ( Alternate) Continental Device India Ltd, Faridabad Electronic Corporation of India Lid ( Department of SHRI P. S. RAJU Atomic Energy ), Hyderabad RI-Semikron Private Limited, Bombay SHBI I.`M. RAO Sam S. S. MADAN S-1 K. R..
SAVOOR

Defence )

General of

Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore

*Dr B. H. Wadia was Convener for the meeting

at which this standard

was mom-

men&l

for finalization. 2

Indian Standard
GYIDE ;OiiiPREPARATION

DRAWINGS

OF SEMI-CONDUCTOR
0. FOREWORD

OF DEVICES

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards I&tution on 1 February 1969, after the draft finalized by the !kmiconductor Devices Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Counci! 0.2 This standard deals with the guiding principles for the preparation of drawings for semiconductor devices, such as device outlines, base oudiues, and case outlines. It confines itself only to the mechanical outlines amI does not concern with the various internal connections and details of the devices which may go into these outlines. 0.3 This standard is based largely on IEC Pub 191-l ` Mechanical standardization of semiconductor devices: Part I Preparation of drawings of semiconductor devices ' issued by International ElectmtechuicaI Commission. _

0.4 This standard is one2fzzserjsf devices. _ --..

Indian Standards on semicouduct9t~

u)

J 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular'requirement

value, observed or calculated, standard is complied with, the I&l expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retajned in the rounded off IS:2-1960*. value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

gf thii

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down guiding principles for the preparatron of out line drawings of semiconductor devices, such as device outlines, case outlines and base outlines. ~_ ___ __ ...-*Rulesfor
rounding off numerkd V&ES (4).

3

ss:!io91-1969
2. TERMINOLOGY
2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions to those specified in IS : 1885 ( Part VII )-1965* shall apply. 2.1 Device OutIine sional characteristics complete device. in addition

Drawing -A drawing which includes all dimenrequired for the mechanical interchangeability of the and the locating tab, if used in

It includes the case or body, all terminals present.

2.2 Terminal --That part of the semiconductor device primarily making an electrical, mechanical or thermal connection.

Examples of terminals are flexible leads, rigid leads, pins, studs, etc. 2.3 Case Outline Drawing-A drawing which includes all dimensional characteristics required for the mechanical interchangeability of the case or body. It does not include the dimensions of the terminals or the locating tab, if present, but their positions are shown by dotted lines. 2.4 Base Olltlineaau\ringA drawing which includes all dimensional characteristics of base required for the mechanical interchangeability of ,. the terminals and mechanical index. Examples of these characteristics are lead length, lead diameters with controlled zones, lead spacing, pitch circle diameter of the leads, thickness, width and length of a tab, etc. The diameter OF major axis of the case outline should not be given on ._^ * the base drawing.
-NOTE - Many wmiconductor device+have identical cases, but differ in the number Ir is also poriblc to have the same type of base associated or the length of ter&Cnals. with casea which are not identical. Consequently, there are advantages in having : (a) d&xGonal characteristics of the xze outline and bases which can bc associated with this case outline, only the dimensional characteristics of the base and case outlines which can bc associated with this base. i a Cgle drawing including only the separate drawings for the various or (b) a single drawing including separate drawings for the various

2.5 Mechanical Index - A locating feature, or that portion of the device specifically designed to provide orientation. Examples
*Electrotechnical

of a mechanical
vocabulary:

index are key, keyway, locating tab, etc.
devices.

Part VII Semiconductor

IS:!mM-1968 2.6 ~ima~ Index- Any single terminal ( or omission of ) `readily .dii tinguishable by the eye from others, or any distinctive boss, stippled pattern or colour mark adjacent to a terminal
2.7 Datum Line -A line defined by .a mechanical or a visual index and nsed as a reference for locating and numbering terminals. 2.9 Seating Plane or Seating Base -A reference plane from which, in general, outline and base dimensions are given. 2.9 Seated Height or Mounted Height -The distance from the seatlug plane to the top of any exposed tip or rigid terminal -present, otherwlto the top of the, outline. Flexible terminals should not be included as part of the seated height, but the mounted height should include a-minimum allowance necessary for an axially mounted flexible lead to be -bent at right angles. 2.10 Controlled Cylindrical Zone - A zone which defines a portion of the body of minimum length over which the diameter is controlled to closer tolerances than is allowed over the full length of the body. 3. GENERAL object of these drawings is to indicate the space which should be allowed for devices in an equipment to&&her with other dimensional characteristics required to ensure' mechanical interchangeability. It should be understood that complete interchangeability involves other considerations, such as the electrical and thermal characteristics of the semiconductor devices concerned. NOTE-Additional
arc given in Appendix details on the standardization A. p>ilFsophy adopted for this standard

3.1 The primary

3.2 The form of standardization represented by this standard is properly termed ` unification ' and consists. of combining the dimensions of a number of manufacturers ' devices in a single drawing in such a way that the devices obtained are mechanically interchangeable.

' 3.3 If a manufacturer

describes a device as conforming to a standard outline, the dimensions shown on the relevant data sheet shall comply with, or fall within the tolerances of the standard drawing. The equipment designer, when using the standard drawings, is strongly .advised to use the tolerances shown in this standard if he wishes to take advantage of the availability of supplies from more than one manufacturer.

3.4 The dimensions on the standard drawing are such, however, that the tolerances shown are considered acceptable for the purposes of mechaua interchangeability in an equipment, or for adaptation to other accessories when incorporated in an equipment and for good engineering practice.

I!S:!Nel-1969 %5 oh is also assumed that in the drawings for high power devices used .in larger equipment where packing density requirements may not be as stringent as those for low power devices in smaller equipment, the space required for the case of the device n+d -not be defined as closely as the space for the cases of the smaller transistors and diodes. This does not seriously affect the interchangeability Value of the information for high power devices. 4. GENERAL 4.1 Drawing RULES Layout FOR ALL DRAWINGS

Cl.1 A drawing should show all dimensions required to ensure mechanical interchangeability. 4.13 The drawing using third-angle projection, should include:

a) a suitable side-view; II) suitable end-views, where appropriate;and c) such additional views and details as are requhed to show' any special corifigurationor features. 4.1.3 The following information shobld also be provided: a) The projection method where there is more than one view, indicated as in Fig. 1.

FIG. 1

INDICATION OF THIRD ANGLE PROJECTION

b)

Desibation codes of ISI, IEC and other interested countries.

Cl.4 When a drawing is.re-issuedbecause of modifications, the changes made should be indicated by arrows in the margin. 4.15 While drawings need not to be drawn to scale, they should be roughly in proportion and, where necessary for clarity, Cnlarged detail drawing(s) should be used. 4.2 IMmensions , ` 4.2.1 Dimensions of outline drawings quoted shall apply to the finished product. They should, therefore, not quote manufacturing tolerances, but give customers acceptance limits. 6 and T:lerances :h

JS : 5991.1969
4.2.2 The following types ofdimension appropriate: a)
Toleranced dimen.rions -

may be used on the drawings as

A toleranced dimension can be expressed:

1) preferably by-both minimum and maximum limits; or 2) by a nominal value and maximum and-minimum limits. Such a nominal value need not necessarily be the ~average of two limits. b)
Untoleranced dimensions

1) Untheranced only.
2)

limiting dimensions -minimum

only or maximum

Untoleranced nominal dimensions -These
ii)

dimensions may be used:

if either for general information as an actual nominal figure; or to specify true geometrical position (by means of linear or angular dimensions ). Such dimensions shall be indicated by an asterisk ( * ) after the numerical value; the asterisk in this sense meaning ` true geometrical position `.

4.2.3 Single minimum, single maximum or single nominal (where not given for.general information ) dimensions should be stated in decimals to such a number of places as is considered adequate to express the degree of accuracy appropriate for that dimension; for example, if measurement to the nearest 0.001 mm is considered appropriate, the dimension should be &pressed to the third decimal place (for example, 0.500 mm), but if the measurement to the nearest 0.01 mm is sufficient, the dimension should be expressed to the second decimal place (for example, 0.50 mm) and so on. 4.2.4 Limiting values or nominal value and limits of a toleranced dimension should be stated with the same number of decimal places (for example, 0*016 mm Min .- 0.017 mm Nom - O*O19 mm Max).
4.2.5 Numerical dimensions should not be shown directlyon the f&e(s). They should be shown in tabular form under the figure(s) and correspond

to the reference letter symbols on the

fipt~(s).

and lower case letters for base outlirle dimensions.

4.2.5.1 The letter symbols on the figure(s).should be upright. TJpper case letters should be used for device outline and case outline dimensions

4.2.5.2 If confusion should arise, upper case letters should preferably be used throughout. 4.2.6 In the case of a diameter, the symbol ' 4 ' should appear after the reference letter concerned on the figure(s). 4.2.6.1
round ), the ` + '

In cases where the cross-section is uncontrolled (not necessarily symbol should not be used. 7

Js�5091-1969 4.2.7 The dimensions and limits which should normally be given and their corresponding reference letter symbols are contained in Appendix B. Some examples of drawings prepared in accordance with these rules are given in Appendix C. 4.2.7.1 Where a particular reference letter should be used for more than one di?ension on the same drawing, use should be made of a~sufix to identify the dimensions. 4.2.7.2 Appendix B may not be expected to include all dimensions likely to be necessary for mechanical standardization, more particularly in the future. A distinction has been made between primary and secondary reference letter symbols, primary reference letter symbols being those which are used Frequently, and secondary reference letter symbols being those which are used less frequently and which can, if necessary, be associated with dimensions other than those given in the table. 4.2.8 Where it is self-evident that several angles are equal, it is not necessary to ;how more than one angle m the figure(s). 42.9 Notes will be numbered and placed under the table of dimensions which till1 have a `notes' .column on the right-hand side. The note refereqce will be placed opposite the dimension to which the note refers to in the &ble, or when this dimension does not appear in the table, in the The numerical sequence of the notes should follow the f$We(s) alphabetical sequence of the dimensional reference letters to which the
notes refer. Notes referring to the figure(s) to dimensions given in the table. 5. IDENTIFICATION ihould follow notes referring

i .

'

OF TERMINATIONS

5.1 General - Principally terminations can be identified by a number of methods, namely: a) Numbering of terminals, b) Colour coding, c) Coding by means of symbols, and d) Physical shapes. 5.2 Ntlmbering 5.3 Colour 5.4 Coding 5.4.1
1965*] 5.62
Fo7

by Terminals

-

sek7.2.

Coding by Means
Diodes-The

Under consideration. of Symbols
diode symbol Under [see 3.7 of IS : 2032 (Part VIII )-

may be used.

For Other Devices -

consideration.

*Graphical symbols used

in electrotcchnology: Part VIII Semiconductor devlca.
8

IS : 5001-1969 5.5 Physical be preferable identification
Shapes -Where the devices are very small in size, it may to use physical shape of the devices or leads themselves for of termination. RULES FOR DEVICE

6. ADDITIONAL DRAWINGS

AND

CASE

OUTLINE

6.1 Device Outline Drawing-The include all dimensional characteristics accordance yith general rules.

device required

outline drawings should for interchangeability in

6.2 Case Outline Drawing-The case outline drawings should include all dimensional characteristics required for interchangeability in accordance with general rules, omitting the terminal dimensioning which will be given on the associated base drawings. /` 6.2.1 On the case outline by dotted lines. drawings, the terminals should be shown only will permit, so that the

6.3 Where the requirements for mechanical interchangeability the minimum and maximum dimensions should be chosen creation of unnecessary drawings of variants is avoided. 7. ADDITIONAL 7.1 General Rules RULES FOR BASE OUTLINE

DRAWINGS

7.1.1 The base outline drawings should include the dimensional characteristics required for interchangeability of the base and in certain instances for compatibility between the base and a socket. 7.1.2 7.1.3 bases: a) The terminals The following should be numbered system in accordance with 7.2, on the

should be used to locate the terminals

The true geometrical position of the terminals (or of the holes in gauges) is defined by angular spacing on a pitch circle (polar coordinates) or by rectangular co-ordinates in relation to certain fixed references. Such dimensions are not toleranced. The positional tolerance is indicated by stating that the crosssection of each terminal at its point of origin or at a specified distance from the seating plane lies in a circle ( of stated diameter ) centred at the true geometrical point defining the terminal axis.

b)

IS:!iool-196!, 7.1.4 The fi)llowing s'vstem (see Fig. 2) should be used either in part to indicate the dimensions of the terminals.
SEATING PCAVE

in tota

or

Y

b, 0 applies

over

the length

I,, I, I, I,, and I, or where appropriate over I--I,.

b, @ akplies over the length b, @ apblies over the length
Frc.

2

INDICA.IXON OF DIMENSIONS OF TERMINALS .

7.2 Numbering of Terminals - \Yhcre possible. device terminals should be idcnrified hy numbers according to the system outlined in 7.2.1 to 7.2.5. In all instances terminals are considered as being viewed from their frc>r ends. 7.2.1 .S;in,=lc-I:`n&d D evices with Terminals in a Linear Array

7.2.1.1 S~rnm~~~rical linear array-The terminal nearest to the rcfcrenre mark \ltould hr tltnnbered as No. 1. the other terminals should be numbered progressively from terminal No. 1. 7.2.1.2 .~lsymme~ricalLi,lear array -The terminals progressively from the end having the most number 7.2.2 Sin,o1e-Bdd Devices with Terminals should be nur:~bcxt-l of terminals.

in a Circular Array

7.2.2.1 The terminal, the centre of which is past the datum line, should be numbered as No. 1, the other terminals should be numbered progressivcly.and in a clockwise sequence from No. 1. " 7.2.2.2 Where a terminal should be known as the centre is situated in the centre of the base, this terminal and shall not be given a number. 10

IS : 5001- 1969 7.2.2.3 Where omission of one terminal in an otherwise equally spaced array identifies the datum line, the position of the omitted terminal should not be numbered; but, in a fixed modular circular array, any location of omitted terminal which does not define a datum line should be numbered. 7.2.3 Double-Ended Devices-Terminals on both numbered without duplication of numbers. 7.2.4 end views should be

( Under

Devices with Tertninals consideration ).

Dis$osed in a Square or Rectangular

Pcr@ery -

7.2.5 Other Devices -For devices having terminals, mounting studs, holes, in more than one plane, the following rules should apply and the numbering should start at the end: a) b) c) d) Opposite Opposite to the end containing identified a threaded stud or hole; of terminals; dot or other flange, insert, applied etc. to the end with the smallest number

Opposite to the end visual identification; Opposite

by a hand,

to the end with the larger ferrule,

7.3 Meihods for Locating the Datum Line When more than belo!\, in order of preference. possible for a given device, the method appearing be used. When none of the following methods is suited to the device should be used. The datum line can be located line through as:

These methods are listed one of these methods is earliest in the list should possible, the method best

the radial

the centre of the mechanical

orvisual

index;

the radial line midway between the two terminals which obviously comprise a ,gap in an otherwise equally spaced circular .terminal array;

4
d;

the radial terminal: the radial 2)

line 180' from the locating line 180" from the mid-point spaced spaced

radius

of the most

isolated

of, in order of preference: and

1) the two most widely the two most closely

terminals; terminals;

e)

the radial line through the centre of the index terminals. In order of preference, the index terminal is defined as that having: 1) the-smallest the case, 2) cross-sectiqnal area at the point of emergence when one terminal is noticeably from longer

the greatest axial length, than the others, and

11

1s:5001-1969
3) the smallest axial length, shorter than others. FOR CODING system should be used to identify the device covered by the drawings contained in this letter ` OD ' followed by a serial number. letter ` OB' followed by a serial number. when one terminal is noticeably

8. RULES

8.1 The following coding base and case outlines standard: a) b) c) Device Outlines-Code Base Outlines-Code Case Outlines-Code

letter ` OC ' followed by a serial number.

8.2 Where type variants are shown as types A, B, C, etc, these should be distinguished by adding the appropriate letter ( A, B, C, etc.) to the coding system. Examples: OD-5,OD-7A, OB-2B, OC-3.

APPENDIX ( Clause 3.1 )
STANDARDIZATION

A

PHILOSOPHY

A-l. A-l.1

GENERAL

If an equipment designer allows for the dimensions and tolerances indicated by the drawing, he will be able to take advantage of the availWhere an equipment ability of supplies from more than one source. designer is unable to do this, for instance because of stringent space considerations, it follows that he may be limiting his possible suppliers. A-1.2 When a device is likely to be used in an equipment where there are stringent packing density requirements (generally the case for low-power devices) the space required for the body of such a device is closely defined. For a high-pqwer device (where generally the heat sink to which it' is attached is larger than the device )_ packing density is not the chief factor Parts used for fixing the when considering mechanical standardization. devices, such as bases, studs, etc, are closely defined. 12

IS : 5001-

1969

A-1.3 In this standard it has, therefore, been attempted to standardize those dimensions considered to be important for mechanical interchangeability in all its aspects and to dimension them closely, leaving the device manufacturer as much freedom as possible for other dimension& and base outline drawings have been shown separately bases may be associated with the same case outline or different case outlines may be associated with the same base outline. , In case of device outlines, the drawing contains all the dimensional information and there are no separate base drawings. A-I.4 Case outline

'

because diRerent

A-l.5 Some outline drawings show a control1.e.d cylindrical -zone. This zone defines a portion of the body of a minimum length over \zhich the diameter is controlled to closer tolerances than is allowed over the full length of the body. This zone defines a mechanical contact surface, on all devices embraced by the particular outline drawing, which may be used for mechanical mounting and for heat sink design on case rated devices. A-2. TYPE VARIANTS These cover devices which have A-2.1 Some drawings show type variants. basically the same shape and size, but differ in one or more respects which may affect interchangeability in certain applications, such as difference in Examples are the body diameter of double-ended devices, one dimension. These variants are shown as Type A, lengths of terminals and stud lengths. Type B, etc. A-3. SPACE CYLINDER CONCEPT

A-3.1 Most of drawings considered, give an outline of space cylinder except where dimensions are required to be more closely defined. For low-power devices, the space cylinder accommodates the body. For high-power devices, because of the different interchangeability requirements, the space cylinder has been extended to include parts other than the body. This is known as the space cylinder concept and it has been tkmught desirable to include in this appendix full details of the considerations applying this concept to high-power devices. A-3.2 High-power The Bases For stud-ended devices, the stud should be closely of diameter, pitch and length. For flat base devices, indicated. The Body the dimensions for fixing defined in terms Devices

A-3.2.1 a) b)

should be precisely

A-3.2.2 a)

The diameter of the space cylinder depends on the construction, for example, for stud-ended types it would be the `across flats' dimension 13

IS : 5001- 1969
ofthe hexagon. The length ofthe space cylinder dependson the ty$ of terginationprovided, and examples are considered in A-3.2.3. b) Dimensions for both the across-flats and across-corners dimensions of the hexagon are to he given; the across-flats dimension is useful in choosing a suitable spanner for mounting, and the across-corners dimension is necessary for interchangeability when. the device is screwed intodhe heat sink. c) The heighrof the hexagon flange is not so important in the space cylinder concept and in general only a minimum will he given for this dimension, which permits the hexagonal prism to extend the full height of the body of the device. There is no need to specify the minimum height of the flats at the corners of the hexagon when the manufacturer states the limits~of torque which may be applied. is considered devices. for

A-3.2.3 Terminations-The extent of the space cylinder rigid lug devices, flexible terminal devices and post-ended

4

Rigid lu,q devices- Since most devices -of this type are stud-ended, the final orientation of the lugi,s) is not determined and the space cylinder includes the lugi,s). No part of the lug(s) may be outside this space cylinder. Figure 3 illustrates this presentation. Flexible terminal derices -- The user of a high-power device requires to know: flexible terminal

b)

1)

The distance from the seating plane to the hole in the termination (when the flexible terminal is very flexible and can easilv be bent, only a minimum dimension of this distance is suffi&ent to ensure iwrchangeability; if it is not, the difference between the maximum and the minimum should be compatible M.ith good engineering practice \. The seated height of the device when the terminal is bent at right angles. (The user can then calculate how far the terminal at the end of the flexible terminal will extend laterally from the axis of the device. )

2)

Dc,vic es of this type use a space cylinder of diameter equal to the acr(xss flats dimension of the hexagon (or as appropriate for flat base devic-es) and of length equal to a dimension which includes an allowance for the axially mounted terminal to be bent at right angles. Figure 4 illustrates this presentation.

C) Post-ended devices - It

will be apparent from consideration of A-3.2.1. and A-3.2.2 that the space cylinder will' be of length equal to the mounted height and of diameter appropriate to the design, for example, ` across-flats ' for stud-ended rectifiers. 14

*

15:5001-1969 4

m = Minimum M 5 Maximum Jv =*Nominai -NOTE 1 -This de& with the exception of the hexagon and stud lies within the cylinder of~diameter D, and length 3. NOTE 2 - Diameter D, shall not be greater than the actual across flats dimension of :he hexagon. NOTE 3 - Contour and orientation of terminal lugs are undefined. NOTE 4 - The large terminal lug is No. 1, the small terminal lug is No. 2. NOTIC 5 - Diameter M refers to zone NrN,. The maximum value should not exceed the outside diameter of the thread. NOTF: 6 - Metric thread reference. NOT& 7 - Minimum flat.
FIG.

3

EXAMPLE

OF RIGID LUG DEVICE

I

+JlMlINote31

--+j

I------

O,lm,M+-----l

m = Minimum J4 = Maximum N == Nominal NOTE 1 -The device with the exception of the hexagon stud and flexible leads lies within the cylinder of diameter D, and length J. N~TC 2 - Diameter D, shall not be greater than the actual across flats dimension of the hexagon, NATE 3 -. Dimension J includes an allowance for the flexible leads to be bent at r,ight angles. NOTE 4 - Contour and orientation of terminal lugs are undefined. NOTE 5 -The large terminal lug is No. 1. the small terminal lug is No. 2. The maximum value s&s&r! not MCCA NOTE 6 - Diameter M reft'rs to zone N,. the outside diameter of the thread. NOTE 7 - Metric thread reference. NOTE 8 - Minimum flat. FIG.

4

EXAMPI.E

OF FLEXIBLE

TERMINAL

~)EVICE

xsr5001-1969

APPENDIX B ( Clauses 4.2.7 and 4.2.7.2 )
REFERENCE B-l. Where appropriate to the dimensions listed in the following reference letter symbols:
REFERENCE LETTER SYMBOI,

LETTER

SYMBOLS

particular drawing being prepared, the table should be given with the associated
TYPE OF LIMITS NOTES

DESCRIPTION OF THE DIMENSION

A a 8, b

Length from top of case Pitch circle nals

seating diameter

plane

to

-----AMin

Nom* -

Max Max

P P

of termi-

Min

Diameter of a terminal, or of the larger terminal, if the crosssection is circular If the cross-section is not circular, width or major axis of the cross-section of a terminal

1, 2, 3, p

&,

bl

Other diameter of terminal shown in Fig. 2 Other diameter of terminal shown in Fig. 2 Other diameter of terminal shown in Fig. 2

as as as

Min -

-

Max Max Max
.WlX

P P P 1,2,3,4;S

Be, bn B:,,h C,C

Diameter of smaller terminal, if the cross-section is circular If the cross-section is not circular, thickness or minor axis of the cross-section of a terminal Diameter Smallest Other
-

Min

-

D L),
DP, etc
NOTE

or major axis of case diameter of case of case

Mill

-

Max Max Max

13

Min Min

-

13

Da,

diameters

l,P

P = Primary r-eferencc letter symbol S = Secondary reference letter symbol > Ibe 42.9.

*True geometrical position.
16

REFERENCE LETTER SYtiBhL

DESCRIPTIONOF THE

DIMENSION

TYPE OF Lrhfrrs

NOTES

d E E e

Distance from an axial reference line to a terminal centre Minor axis of case Or Across-flats hexagon dimension ~of a

---

Nom*

-

S 1,s 1AS S

Min Min -

Nom
Nom*

Max Max
-

Distance between two terminal centres (distance between the centres of the nearest terminals when there are more than two terminals ) Or Clearance nals between two termi-

e
cr, ca,etc

Min
-

Nom*-

-

S S

Other distance terminal between centrrs Or Clearance between terminals

er, c2,etc

F

Thickness <IT length of llange zone of the case including any fillet if present Overall length excluding nals and slugs termi-

Min Min

-

Max

S 2,s

G G1 H

Min
-

-

Max Max Max Max Max Max

1,s S S S P S S

Overall length excluding terminals but including slugs Overall nals Height length including termi-

Min Min
-

of a mechanical

index

;
j K

Seated height or mounted height Width or diameter nical index of a me&a-

Min
-

Length of top zone of the case

NoTI3- P = Primary reference 1ette.rsymbol S = Secondary refkrence letter symbol > sec 4'2'g' *True geometrical position. 17

%FERENCE LETTER
SYMBOL

D~~SCRIIJTI~N

0F

THE

DIMENSION

TYPE OF
LIMITS

NOTES

----h-----l
T,ength of a mechanical Length of a terminal +erminal terminal. terminal as as as index Min Min Min Min Min Min -1fax Max Max Max Max 12cfax
S 2,5,6 53 p

Other length of sho'wn in Fig. 2 Other length of shown in Fig. 2 Other length -of the shown in Fig. 2

5,P 2,5,P 1,P P 13

Diameter or width of a terminal stud or slug Overall length of a stud threaded entirely or partially or not at all NI, nl 0 Distance to end of full thread ( unthreaded portion ) ofa stud Distance between seated plane and centre of hole in the lug of a terminal Length case Diameter Other of controlled zone of the hole

Min Min

-

Max Max

1,P 2,s

P P

Min

-

-

S s S

of a mounting

Jfin

-

Max

Q 4 R,r
R 1,
s r4

dimensions of

Djstance betkveen the centres two mounting holes Curve radii ends

Ah
Min

-

Max Max Max Max

S 1,2,P P 1,s

Curve radii of the base seat

of the

Min

Distance from a reference line to the centre line of a terminal

h'OTE -

P = Primary reference letter symbol see 4.2.9. S 5= Secondary reference letter symboi > * 18

IS : 507U - 1969
KEQERRNCE

DESCRIPTION OF THE
DIMENSION

TYPE OF LIMITS

NOTES

kl-l'ER SYMBOL S

Distance from the reference-line through the centres of two terminals to the centre of the mounting hole which is the farthest from this reference line Diameter of the hole ( or smallest dimension of a non-circular hole ) in a terminal lug or slug Depth of a tapped hole Diameter of the threaded portion of a stud with full thread form, or diameter of a tapped hole
>

-

Nom*

-

S

T,t

Min

-

Max

2,P

P,u
M',W

Min

-

Max

S 7,P

Thread reference

x-x

Y-Y X-Y -Cz

Section reference, continuous Section reference, nuous Other dimensions Small angle Larger angles not conti-

-

Nom Nom

-

P P S P P

NOTE

1 -

Minimum dimension may be omitted where appropriate. dimension may be omitted where appropriate.

NATE 2 -Maximum

Noes 3 -To distinguish in the same drawing between major and minor axes of crosssection ofdifferent terminals having different dimensions, the signs (`) prime (") second, etc, may be used with reference letters b, b and C,c. Nox~ 4 - Reference leker symbols C,, c,; Cs, cs; Cs, cs may also be used in the same manner as reference letter symbols B or b. NOTE 5 - Measured from the seating plane. NATE 6 -For terminals of different overall lengths, the letter symbols Lr, lr, ,& la, L= le. Lw, Iw, etc, may be used. Metric thread reference ( the-pitch is assumed to be coarse unless otherwise soTE7stated ) ( see IS: 1330-1958t and IS: 1362- 19623 ). NOTE 8 P = Primary reference letter symbol S = Secondary reference letter symbol > see 4*2'g'

*True geometrical position. enera plane for metric screw threads with IS0 profile ( diameter -range @25 to 300mm). *Dimensions for screw threads for general purpoqes ( diameter range 1.6 to 39 rmn ) ( rvvised ).

19

IS:5&M- 1969

APPENDIX C ( Clause 4.2.7 )
EXAMPLES OF DRAWINGS OF SEMICONDJJCTOR DEVICES

L

-n

IS : 5601- 1969

,' 3

-\

2

e d

e1

\! @

.'

21

15:5001.1969
`-I-

IS : 5001- 1969

23

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters; Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( Common to all offices) Telephones Regional Offices: 331 01 31 Central : `Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, I 331 1375 NEW ~DELHI-110002 36 24 99 *Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUlTA 700054 21843 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, I 31641 CHANDIGARH 169036 Southern twestern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 `ii ;;;;

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East), BOMBAY 400093 Branch Offices: `Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AH MEDABAD 380001 SPeenya Industrial Area, Ist Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 Plot No, 82183, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 53/5, Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, ~5th Byelane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), HYDERABAD 500001 RI4 Yudhister 117/418 Marg, C Scheme, Nagar, JAIPUR 302005

I 41 2916 6 329295

26348 t 26349 38 49 55 [ 38 49 56 66716 5 36 27 3 31 77 23 1083 63471 [ 6 98 32 21 68 76 [ 21 82 92 62305 621 04 1 621 17 251 71

B Sarvodaya

KANPUR 208005

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 T.C. No. 14/l 421, University P.O., Palayam TRIVAND~RUM 695035 inspection Ofice (With Sale Point) : Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji PUNE 411005

Nagar,

~524 35
27 68 00 89 65 28 22 36 71

*Sales Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, Calcutta 700072 tSales Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, Bombay 400007 `&ales Ofice in Bangalore is at Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square Bangalore 560002

Printed at Slmco Prlntinp Press. Oelhl, India

AMENDMENT NO. 1
TO

SE~TE~~RER 1972

'

IS : 5001-1969 (ZX.B@WFORPREPARATION OF DRAWINGS OF SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES Alierations
7 ( Dstigmtioon) -Substitute' IS : 5001 ( Part I )-1969 ' for ` IS : 5OOl1969 ' wherever it appears in the standard. ( First mm page, pages 1 and 3, Title j the existing title:, ' Substitute the following for

Indian Standard
OF DRAWINGS OF AND INTEGRATED
DEVICES'

GUIDE FOR PREPARATION SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES CIRCUITS
PART I (ETJx4@)

SEMICONDUCTOR

Printed at Stmco Printing Press, Delhi, India

