(Reaffirmed 2001)

IS : 3479 - 1966

Indian

Standard

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STEEL DROP, UPSET AND PRESS FORGINGS
Steel Forgings
Chaimm SEBI T. R. GUPTA Munbers Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam SHRX K. K. B~ERJEIC SEBI R. V. RAMACEAXDBAN ( Altmralc ) Bajaj Auto Ltd, Bombay SERI B. B. BANQIA Central Boilers Board (Ministry of Industry & SEBI S. R. BEATTA SUPPlY 1 Hindustan Stee 1Ltd, Ranchi DB G. P. CHATR~BJEE SH~I V. K. RAJAQOPALAN ( Alfcrnafc ) Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd. JamshedSHBI C. R. DAS Sssr Y. P. BEASIN ( Al-e) SHE1 A. K. Dnrr DB P. DAYAL Heavy Engineering

Sectional

Committee,

SMDC 21
Ltd, Ranchi

Refiescnting Corporation

pur
Guest, Keen, Wil!iams Ltd, Calcutta Directorate General of Technical Develonmeti ( Ministry of Industry C Supply )
1

SHRI B. P. SINHA ( Alternate) SHBI S. K. GBOSH The Indian Standard Wagon Co Ltd, Burnpur S~sr M. bl. GUPTA Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI A. K. JBE ( Alfernafe ) SH~I H. A. JAIBMOHAXU Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd, Bombay S~sr S. KANJI LAL Bum & Co Ltd, Howtab SBBI K. GHATAK (Al&mats ) SHEI A. KBOSLA Shardlow ( India ) Ltd. Madras SHBI T. V. N. KIDAO Ashok Leyland Ltd, Madras SHBI A. PADMANABHILN( Alfernafe ) DB RAJENDBA KUXAB National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), Jamshedpur SHBI D. R. MALIK Directorate General of Ordnance Factories ( Ministry of Defence ) SHEI D. SEX ( Alfernalc ) DB K. B. MEEITA Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd (Foundry Forge Plant ), Ranchi DB S. S. KEANNA ( Alfmafc ) SHBX R. M. MISHBA Textile Machinery Corporation Ltd, Belgharia ( West Bengal) DE G. MWHBRJEE Alloy Steel Project, Durgapur SEXI N. R. ROY (ALfemale) ( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN STANDARDS MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR
NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAFt MARC

ls:3479-1966
( Chtinuedfrom jage 1 ) RCpIwnhilg Indian Machine Tool Manufacturers' of Suppks ( Ministry Aasociatio~, & Disposals of Industry & Members SABI K. P. K. NAIB SERI E. K. N. NAXBIAB SHRI B. M. PAX ( Altemalc ) PEODIJCTION ENQWEEB CHITTARINJAN i_.OCOMOTIVSWOBKS.
CEI~ABANJAN

Dirc%%Y General &~;p~y;tion wing) Ministry of Railways

SHBI H. S. V. R~LNGA SETTY
SIEBI s. K. SOOD SHBI B. S. KBISRNAYACHAB, Director ( Strut & Met )

Indian, Institute Dutur & Co Sudsons ( Private Director General,

of Metals, Calcurta, Ltd. Calcutta ) Ltd, Calcutta IS1 ( &o&k Men&r)

and

M..N.

SERI H. P. G~osm Deputy Director ( Met ), IS1

2

Is:3479-1966

Indian

Standard

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STEEL DROP, UPSET AND PRESS FORGINGS
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard
was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 24 March 1966, after the draft finalized by the Steel Forgings Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 Forgings are used in the production of various components to impart the desired grain structure and also to impart fibre strength in the most suitable direction to withstand service stresses. With the growing demand for forgings in the country, a standard covering the general requirements Requirements other than those given in this standard may will be useful. be specified for special components and such requirements shall be laid down in the respective standards. 0.3 This standard contains clauses and 14.1.1 which permit the purchaser suit his requirements. 4.6, 7.1, 8.1, 10.1,13.1, 14.1 to use his option for selection to I requirement of this calculated, expressin accordance with in the rounded off in this standard.

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular standard is complied with, the final value, observed or ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off The number 01 significant places retained IS : 2-1960*. value should be the same as that of the specified value

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard
parts manufactured
2. SUPPLY OF covers the general by the technique MATERIAL relating to the supply ofmaterial shall be. as laid requirements for steel components of drop, upset or press forgings. or

2.1 General requirements down in IS : 1387-1959t.

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( r&d).

tG:neral rcquirem:ntr for the supply of metals and metal products. 3

IS : 3479 - 1966 3. TERMINOLOGY 3.1 For the purpose of this standard, definitions of forging terms as given in IS : 1956-1962* shall be applicable. . 4. MANUFACTURE 4.1 Steels for forgings shall conform to IS : 1570-1961-f. 4.2 Forgings may be manufactured from dressed billets and in such cases the supplier shall ensure that the condition in which the forgings are suppliect is satisfactory. 4.3 Amount of hot working and finishing temperature shall be such as to ensure complete soundness and adequate uniformity of structure and The forgings shall not be overheated. mechaqical properties. 4.4 Fqings shall be finished to shape and size by hot-working, and shall, where @a&cable, be so worked as to cause metal flow in the direction most favourable for resisting the service stresses where these are known. When specified in the order, the supplier shall submit, for the approval of the purchaser, a sketch showing the shape of the rough forging before machining and the supplier may also be required to show, by sectioning and etching a representative forging that soundness and a satisfactory grain flow have been obtained. 4.5 With certain steels, special piecautions after hot-working are necessary and in such cases the supplier shall ensure that the condition in which the steel is supplied is\satisfactory. 4.6 Descaling of forgings by any approved method shall be subject agreement between the supplier and the purchaser. 5. WORKMANSHIP 5.1 Forgings shall be free from any harmful surface defects. 6. HEAT TREATMENT to

6.1 Forgings may be supplied in the as forged, normalized, annealed or hardened and tempered conditions as agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser. The heat treatment shall be suitably conducted to impart the required physical properties. If a forging is subsequently heated for any purpose, it shall be reheat-treated.
*Glossary tSchedula of

terms relating to iron and steel. 4

for wrought steels for general engineering purposes.

IS : 3479 - 1966 7. TOLERANCES 7.1 Forgings shall normally be manufactured in accordance with the In special cases, tolerances shall be tolerances specified in IS : 3%9*. agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser. 8. SELECTION OF TEST SAMPLES FOR PHYSICAL TESTS

8.1 For forgings with ruling sections equivalent to a diameter greater than 28 mm, integral test samples may be provided subject to mutual agreement In that case a prolongation shall between the supplier and the purchaser. be made on an agreed portion of forgings. Unless agreed otherwise, the prolongation .shall have a ruling section approximately equal to that of the forging and it shall be heat-treated similarly and simultaneously with the forging it represents. 8.2 Where integral test samples are not required and for small forgings with rding section equivalent to a diameter of 28 mm or less, separate test samples shall be provided from the,bars or billets from' which forgings are made. They shall be forged to the ruling section of the forgings and shall be heat-treated similarly and simultaneously with the forgings they represent. 8.3 The number standard. of tests shall be as specified in the respective material

8.4 Unless specified otherwise, the axis of the test samples shall be located at any point midway between the centre and the surface of solid forgings and at any point midway between the inner and outer surface of the wall of hollow forgings and shall be parallel to the axis of the forgings in the direction in which the metal is most drawn out. 9. PHYSICAL TESTS

9.1 Tensile Test - Tensile test shall be carried out in accordance with 1s : 1608-1960t. The test piece shall be machined lengthwise from each test sample. The tensile properties shall conform to the requirements specified in IS : 1570-1961$. Bend test shall be carried. out in accordance with degree of bend and the diameter of the former through which the test piece is to be bent shall be as laid down in the respective material standard.
1s : 1599-19605. The
*Tolerances for steel drop, upset and press forgings and forged bars ( under prepwatia tMethod for tensile testing of steel products other than sheet, strip, wire and tube. SSchedules for wrought stec!s for genaal engineering purposes. fjBend test for steel products other than sheet, strip, wire and tube.

9.2 Bend

Test -

).

5

IS : 3479 - 1966 9.3 Impact Test - In case of special forgings and wherever it is stated either in the contract or in the drawing, izod impact test shall be carried out on each test sample. Impact test shall be carried out on test piece machiiled lengthwise from each sample in accordance with IS : 1598-1960*. 9.4 Hardness Test -Hardness test, where required, shall be carried either in accordance with IS : 1500-1959T or IS : 1501-1959$. 10. DECARBURIZATION 10.1 Decarburization shall be kept to minimum. The limit of decarburization shall be subject to mutual agreement between the supplier and the purchaser. 11. Ol'TIqNAL TESTS out

11.1 Subject to mutual agreement between the supplier and the purchaser, tests other than those specified in 9 shall be carried out. 12. RETEST 12.1 Should any of the original test pieces fail to pass physical tests specified in respective material standards, two further samples shall be selected for retest for each of the test sample that fails. One of the test samples shall be taken from the forgin g from which original test sample was taken unless that forging has been withdrawn by the manufacturer. 12.2 The mechanical properties obtained from the test pieces prepared from the two further test samples shall comply with the speci6c requirements. Should either of the test pieces fail to meet the specific requirem:nts, the material represented shall be liable to rejection except that the supplier may reheat-treat the forging or forging s represented and re-submit it for testing. No forging shall be reheat-treated m3re than twice. 13. SURFACE CONDITION

13.1 The forgings may be supplied in any one of the following surface conditions, subject to mutual agreement between the manufacturer and the purchaser: a) As forged, b) Machined, c) Treated.
*hod

and

impact test for steel. tMethod for Brine11hardnesstest for steel. *Method for Vickas hardnesstest for steel. 6

IS : 3479 - 1966 14. MAREING AND PACKINd

14.1 Uoless agreed otherwise between the manufacturer and the purchaser, each forging shall be clearly marked with the following information.
a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, b) Steel designation, and c) Identification mark by which it can be traced to the cast of steel from which the forging was made. 14.1.1 The material may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark.

NOTE- The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of tbe
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, and tbe Rules and Regulations made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with tbc requirements of that standard., under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control during produchon. `Ibis system, which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by tbc producer, has tbc further safeguard that tbe products as actually marketed are continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to tbc standard. Details of conditions, under which a liccnce for the use of tbc IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to ' manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from tbc Indian Standards Institution.

14.2 Packing and despatch of forgings shall be subject to agreement between the manufhcturer and the purchaser.

