RAT ATT IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Brak NAU ates cant À Uva SEUTA 
suat — oft arar 


art 6 Stax Arator 


Use of Structural Steel in 
Overhead Transmission 
Line Towers — Code of Practice 


Part 6 Tower Erection 


ICS 91.080.10 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM SA 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SEGUE TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


zf MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2022 Price Group 8 


Structural Engineering and Structural Sections Sectional Committee, CED 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 6) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Structural Engineering and Structural Sections Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


Transmission towers are tall structures, usually steel lattice towers, used to support overhead power lines. 
Transmission line towers are key infrastructural components. The standards under IS 802 series have been 
prepared with a view to establishing uniform practices for design, fabrication, inspection, testing and erection of 
overhead transmission line towers. 


This standard (Part 6) aims to provide general guidelines for erection of transmission line towers. The other parts 
in this series are: 


Part 1 Material, loads and design strengths, permissible stresses 
Sec | Material and loads 
Sec 2 Design strength 
Part 2 Fabrication, galvanizing, inspection and packing 
Part 3 Testing 
Part 4 Requirements for latticed switchyard structures (under preparation) 
Part 5 Requirements for tall river crossing towers (under preparation) 
While preparing this standard, practices prevailing in the country in this field have been kept in view. Assistance 
has also been derived from the following publication: 
IEEE Std 951-1966 IEEE Guide to the Assembly and Erection of Metal Transmission Structures 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall he rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


USE OF STRUCTURAL STEEL IN OVERHEAD 
TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


PART 6 TOWER ERECTION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 6) covers the guidelines relating 
to the erection of self-supporting lattice towers for 
overhead transmission lines. 


1.1.1 Provisions regarding loads, permissible stresses 
and design considerations have been covered in IS 802 
(Part 1/Sec 1) and IS 802 (Part 1/Sec 2). Provisions 
regarding fabrication, galvanizing, inspection and 
packing have been covered in IS 802 (Part 2). Provisions 
regarding prototype testing have been covered in 
IS 802 (Part 3). 


1.2 This standard does not cover erection aspects of 
guyed towers and tubular/pole structure towers. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards given in Annex A contain 
provisions, which through reference in this text, 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time 
of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
edition of the standard. 


3 ERECTION OF TRANSMISSION LINE 
TOWERS 


3.1 General Considerations 


Assembly and erection of towers is one of the major 
activities of transmission line construction. Various 
factors which can influence the selection of construction 
methods and equipment for tower erection are given 
below which should be considered judiciously during 
pre-construction planning and execution stage: 

a) Line route and right of way (ROW) conditions; 

b) Environmental constraints and public concerns; 

c) Accessibility of sites; 

d) Configuration, sizes, sectional details and weight 

of structures; 
e) Material delivery, location of yards; 


f) Constructor’s experience, capabilities, available 
equipment and tool and plants (T and P), etc; and 


g) Prevailing practices. 


It is desirable that detailed work procedures, checklists 
and guidelines including field quality and safety 
plans are prepared and all legal and environmental 
requirements of national, state or local regulations shall 
be followed. 


Proper packing, transportation, delivery and receipt 
of required tower materials as well as their handling 
and storage play an important role in facilitating tower 
erection work less in a smooth, complete and safe 
manner. 


3.2 Packing and Transportation 


All the material shall be packed and transported as 
prescribed in IS 802 (Part 2). 


3.3 Material Delivery, Receipt, Handling and 
Storage 


3.3.1 Receipt and Inspection of Materials 


The supply requirements of towers at various locations 
should be well co-ordinated based on the construction 
schedules and progress of work. For smooth erection 
of towers, location-wise schedule of erection of towers 
shall we planned and recorded in advance supply of 
tower parts should be ensured as per the construction 
schedules and progress of work. 


The constructor should maintain a current inventory, by 
location, of all materials for the project. The constructor 
should have a material coordinator assigned to receive, 
store, and disburse all materials. An itemized tabulation 
showing the quantity and description of the items being 
dispatched and received should be maintained. 


All materials delivered to the project should be promptly 
unloaded preferably using crane to avoid or minimize 
demurrage charges. All safety precautions shall be 
taken to ensure the safety of personnel and avoid 
potential damage to the materials. It is recommended 
that the constructor’s material coordinator and owner’s 
representative should reconcile and inspect all the 
materials received against the dispatch documents, 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


indicating all missing, extra, or damaged items. 
The discrepancies and damage, if any, should be 
recorded and communicated to the supplier for timely 
replenishment to minimize possible delay in erection 
of towers. 


The use of bar coding helps expedite receipt and 
disbursement of materials and helps in keeping an 
accurate inventory. Bar-coding techniques may be used 
for the receipt and inventory of materials subject to 
mutual agreement between the supplier and the owner. 


3.3.2 Handling and Storage of Materials 


Site stores/material yards should be set up at suitable 
places close to the line route as per the requirement 
for storage of material inventory and facilitating easy 
and timely movement of tower materials to the specific 
locations. Construction stores should be developed 
and maintained by the construction agency along the 
route of the transmission line for storing the required 
transmission line construction materials. 


Salient recommended measures and guidelines in 
respect of handling and storage of tower materials are 
given below: 


a) During unloading, handling, and storage of 
structural members, care should be exercised so 
as not to damage the surface coating or deform the 
members. Bare wire rope or steel chains should not 
be used for handling without adequate protection 
of the surface coating. Structural members should 
not be dumped, dragged, rolled, dropped, nor used 
as loading or unloading skids or for blocking. 


b 


wm 


The parts of each tower should be kept separate so 
that they can be delivered from the stores direct to 
the tower site. The tower sets should be placed in 
a suitable position in the store where they can be 
picked up easily as a complete unit. 


c 


— 


All bolts, washers, nuts and small parts should be 
in bags and labelled with the number of the tower 
they are intended for. 


d 


Lez 


The structural steel of different classification, 
sizes and lengths shall be stored separately. These 
shall be stored above ground level at least 150 mm 
on platforms, skids or any other suitable supports 
to avoid any distortion of sections. 


€ 


wn 


In order to prevent white-rust formation, sufficient 
care should be exercised while storing, handling 
and transporting galvanized products. The 
structural steel/tower parts shall be stored in an 
adequately ventilated area. These shall be stored 
with spacers in between them and kept at an 
inclination to facilitate easy drainage of any water 
collected on the structural steel tower parts. 


f) Heavy members should not be stacked on top 
of lighter members. Members with dissimilar 
finishes should not be stored over one another to 
minimize discolouration of the lower members. 


g) The tower accessories, such as anti-climbing 
devices, bird guards, number plate, danger plate, 
phase identification plates, earthing materials, etc, 
should be stored in closed premises to prevent 
damage and pilferage. 


3.4 Pre-erection Checks 


Salient pre-erection checks and precautions shall be as 
prescribed in 3.4.1 to 3.4.6. 


3.4.1 Foundation Checks 


Tower erection work should normally be taken up only 
after foundation concreting is cured for 14 days. If 
admixtures are used for quick setting of concreting, the 
time gap between foundation construction and tower 
erection can be reduced as per mutually agreed field 
quality plan between constructing agency and owner. 


The stubs shall be set such that the distance between 
the stubs (back to back/diagonals), their level, 
alignment and slope is in accordance with the approved 
drawings. Foundation pits are properly backfilled 
and site is levelled. The dimensions shall be checked 
and verified to be within + 5 mm tolerance limits for 
centre-to-centre of pedestal. The tolerance in back to 
back/diagonal distance between centre of pedestal 
shall not be more than + 50 mm. The difference in 
level of top of pedestal shall not be more than + 10 
mm. This is required to permit smooth assembling of 
superstructures without undue strain or distortion in any 
part of the structure. In case of any deviations beyond 
permissible limits, the foundation shall be rectified or 
re-cast by the constructing agency as mutually agreed 
by the constructor and the owner. 


Revetment/benching wherever required should be 
completed so that there is no danger to foundation 
during and after tower erection. 


3.4.2 Tower Materials 


It shall be ensured that approved structural drawings 
and bill of materials with latest revision are available at 
site to facilitate tower erection. All tower members shall 
be available at site as per approved bill of materials 
and shall be serially placed panel-wise on ground in 
order of erection requirements. All required sizes of 
bolts/nuts, spring/packing washers in required quantity 
shall be available at site. Minor defects in hot dip 
galvanized members, shall be repaired by applying 
zinc-rich paint in affected portion. 


3.4.3 Tools and Plants (T and P) 


a) Allthe Tand P required for safe and efficient tower 
erection shall be available at site. Detailed listing 
of T and P being deployed by the constructor 
and used by different erection gangs shall be 
maintained at site. 


b 


= 


Tools and plants shall be tested as per applicable 
standards and safety norms. Relevant test 


certificates should be available at respective 
sites. All lifting tools and tackles shall be 
marked with unique identification number, their 
capacity/strength and shall match with test 
certificates. 


c 


— 


Derricks/gin pole and other load tools that is wire 
rope, polypropylene rope, d-shackles, pulleys, etc 
shall be inspected for their fitness before putting 
them in use. Only tested tools with valid test 
certificates should be used. Testing of all the tools 
and tackles as well as ropes should be carried out 
to check safe working capacity. 


d) Home-made tools shall not be allowed for use at 
site. 


e) The size of wire ropes and polypropylene ropes 
to be used, shall be in accordance with the 
requirement of lifting load or anchoring tension. 


3.4.4 Personal Protective Equipment 


a) All necessary personal protective equipment 
(PPE) like hand gloves, safety belts (full body 
harness), safety helmet, safety shoes, etc as per 
relevant Indian Standards shall be used and their 
fitness shall be ensured. 


b 


wm 


All the persons working on tower shall wear safety 
helmet, gloves, safety harnesses, fall arrester, 
high visible vest and safety shoes as per the job 
requirements. Similarly, all the persons working 
on ground shall wear safety helmet, high visible 
vest and safety shoes. Detailed list of safety 
equipment and PPE being used by the constructor 
gangs shall be maintained at site. 


c 


— 


Condition of safety equipment shall be visually 
checked before every use. These shall be tested as 
per the applicable Indian standards; safety norms 
and necessary test certificate shall be available. 
Also, periodic check shall be carried out to ensure 
their requisite fitness. 


3.4.5 Manpower 


Manpower engaged for the purpose of tower erection 
should be skilled, experienced and competent enough 
to ensure safe, smooth and efficient tower erection 
activity. Required number of skilled manpower is to 
be deployed to ensure smooth and efficient erection of 
towers. Unskilled workers or labourers or medically 
unfit/unwell workers should never be allowed to climb 
the towers during erection process. 


A list of manpower under each gang deployed at various 
tower locations shall be maintained by constructing 
agency covering name, age, qualification, skill, work 
allocation, etc and other details of persons as per 
statutory provisions under relevant Laws. Cranes and 
winches used for tower erection should be operated by 
appropriately trained and experienced persons only. 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


3.4.6 Miscellaneous 


If there is any LV/MV power line in the vicinity of 
the tower being erected and likely to cause electrical 
accident, shutdown of the power line should be 
obtained from the authorized personnel of the utility 
responsible for power distribution in the region. If 
there is any crude oil or gas pipeline is in near the 
vicinity of the tower being erected, necessary safety 
requirement/permission shall be obtained in writing 
from the concerned agency. 


The area shall be barricaded by high visible safety tape 
and warning signs shall be put in order to inform the 
public about the work activity. 


In order to minimize ROW constraints and objections/ 
interference by farmers/field owners, it is desirable that 
crop/tree compensation for crop/tree at foundation site 
is paid to the owners before taking up tower erection 
works. 


3.5 Checks During Tower Erection 


3.5.1 Safety Precautions 


a) The erection crew member should be apprised 
of safety requirements by gang leader or safety 
steward to workmen before starting the work to 
explain the methodology of the work and safety 
precautions/practice. 


b) The erection crew leader should have locational 


and contact details of nearest hospital(s)/doctor(s). 


wm 


First aid box should be available at erection site 
and should be put at place which is accessible for 
everyone. Immediate medical care/first aid should 
be provided to workmen met with an accident. All 
the crew members shall be trained for carrying out 
emergency activity. 


c 


wm 


d) First-aid kit with all the recommended contents as 
per the Building and Other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of 


Service) Act, 1996 shall be available at each site. 


Portable stretchers should preferably be 
maintained at all sites for immediate shifting of 
injured person(s) to nearby hospital after rendering 
first-aid. 


f) One vehicle should be available in the vicinity for 
providing immediate medical help to the injured. 


wm 


e 


wm 


g) Tower erection activity shall be carried out under 
the close supervision of experienced supervisor. 


h) Power winch machine should be anchored and 
earthed properly and operated by trained persons 
only. 

j) Required capacity/strength of derrick/gin pole 
should be ensured and they should be guyed at 
minimum 3 points. 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


k) During lifting of tower members/assembled 
tower parts, proper lifting arrangement and tie 
ropes should be ensured. 


m 


wm 


While lifting tower materials, workmen should 
not be allowed to stand underneath the suspended 
load. 


n) Workmen working on tower shall use full body 
harness having double lanyard. Supervisor 
should ensure that workmen always keep one 
lanyard tied with the structure during working 
or movement on tower, or during climbing or 
coming down. 


wm 


It should be ensured that workers are climbing 
up and down on tower through mobile grab 
fall arrester. Fall arrestor may be used in leg(s) 
provided with step bolts. 


p 


q) Proper tool bags should be used for handling of 
tools and nut bolts during movement of fitters. 


r) Safe working procedures written in Hindi/local 
languages should be available with supervisor/ 
team leader of contractor. 


s) Working area of the site shall be clean and free 
from undulations, water table, mud, ice, garbage, 
etc. 


t) During tower erection activity, communication 
should be through red/green flag signal and 
walkie-talkie. Use of mobile phone can be 
allowed by observing safety norms. 


u) It is preferable that tower erection activity 
is performed during the day time and under 
normal weather conditions. Work during extreme 
conditions should be avoided unless special 
precautions have been taken to ensure hospitable 
and safe working. Tower erection should not 
be carried out during heavy wind and rainy 
conditions. 


v 


— 


Guying and earthing of tower should be done 
as per the requirement. Crowbars used for 
terminating stay ropes should be fixed on 
firm ground to withstand requisite anchoring 
force. 


3.5.2 Checking Erection Process and Completeness 


The approved structural drawings and bill of materials 
should be available at site and referred during the 
erection process. It should be verified that the tower 
is erected as per the approved drawings and all tower 
members, plates, cleats, bolts and nuts, washers, etc. 
are provided. 


Erection of the first tower of every type ina transmission 
line should be supervised closely by representatives of 
constructor agency and owner in order to ensure safe, 
correct and efficient erection works and to take timely 
remedial measures, if any required. 


3.6 Tower Erection Practices 
3.6.1 General 


3.6.1.1 Towers should be erected as per proven industry 
practice following prudent methodology and procedures. 
In case any new technique is proposed by the constructing 
agency, the same shall be subject to review and approval 
by client/owner’s site in-charge. 


3.6.1.2 Power winches shall be used for lifting of 
tower members/tower parts during erection and use 
of tractors/other vehicles should be avoided. Cranes, if 
any used, should be of appropriate size and capacity. 
Use of helicopter for faster erection of transmission 
line, particularly in difficult and inaccessible 
terrain, may be undertaken subject to the required 
clearance from the Director General of Civil Aviation 
(DGCA)/other competent authorities. 


3.6.1.3 In case of gin pole, all guys should be of 
minimum 16 mm diameter steel wire rope and connected 
with adequate anchors provided in the ground level. 
Tripod/chain hoist of adequate capacity should be used 
to facilitate tightening and loosening of guy rope during 
operation. 


3.6.1.4 The inclination angle of the gin pole should not be 
more than 20° from vertical. 


3.6.1.5 Derricks should be provided with three guy ropes. 
Guys provided during erection should be anchored to 
a strong anchorage point. No trees should be used as 
anchorage point. 


3.6.1.6 One anchorage point shall be used to support one 
guy wire/rope only. 


3.6.1.7 Guying angle should preferably be less than 
45° from ground and distance of guy point should be 
maintained within safe limit. 


3.6.1.8 Softener (gunny bags, etc) should be used while 
tying ropes/slings with the tower members to avoid 
damage to galvanized surface of the member. 


3.6.2 Inspection and Sorting Out 


All the members should be sorted out properly at the 
erection site to check that all items are available and 
should be placed in a manner such that they are easily 
located during erection. 


The members should be examined for defects in 
protective surface finish, if any. Minor defects in hot dip 
galvanized members should be repaired by applying two 
coats of zinc-rich paint having at least 90 percent zinc 
content conforming to approved quality. The paint shall 
be applied after cleaning the surface and ensuring that the 
surface is dry before the application of the paint. Tower 
members bent in transit should not be used. 


3.6.3 Assembly 


Irrespective of the method followed for the erection of 
towers, the points mentioned below should be observed: 


a) Straining of the members should not be permitted 


b 


c 


d 


e 


8 


= 


wa 


wa 


wn 


a 


for bringing them into position. It may, however, 
be necessary to match hole positions at joints 
and to facilitate this, tommy bars not more than 
450 mm long may be used. It should be ensured 
that the bolt is inserted easily after matching the 
holes. 


Before starting erection of an upper section, the 
lower section should be completely braced and 
all bolts fitted and tightened in accordance with 
approved drawings. 


All plan diagonals relevant to a section of tower 
should be placed in position before assembly of 
upper section is taken up. 


All bolts should have their nuts facing outside 
of the tower for horizontal or nearly horizontal 
bolt connections and downwards for vertical bolt 
connections. 


The cross-arms may be assembled on the ground 
and for the vertical configuration of the phases the 
top cross-arm should be lifted first, followed by 
the other cross-arms. For single circuit horizontal 
configuration, two cross-arms shall be at the same 
level. The tips should be fully tightened before 
lifting them into position. Such bolts which are 
not accessible for tightening by ordinary tommy 
spanners, may be tightened with the help of box or 
ratchet ring spanners. 


All the blank holes, if any left, after complete 
erection of tower, are to be filled up by bolts and 
nuts of correct size. 


Necessary safety precautions should be taken 
during tower erection and fitness of T and Ps used 
for tower erection, namely gin pole, derricks, 
winches, pulleys, ropes, shackles, etc should be 
checked on a regular basis. 


3.7 Methods of Tower Erection 


Following four main methods are used for erection of 
steel transmission towers: 


a) Built-up method or piecemeal method, 
b) Section method, 
c) Ground assembly method, and 


d) Crane/helicopter method. 
3.7.1 Built-up Method 


This method is commonly used for the erection of 
transmission line towers. The broad procedure and 
salient activities involved in this method of erection are 
given below: 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


a) The erection progresses from the bottom to 


b 


c 


d 


e 


8 


h 


) 


wm 


— 


wa 


) 


wm 


upwards. The main corner leg members are to be 
prepared by fitting all cleats/plates for joints and 
bracings and step bolts. 


The four main corner leg members of the first 
section of the tower are first erected and kept in 
position by fixing temporary rope guys. More than 
one leg section of each corner leg may be bolted 
together at the ground and erected in case they are 
short in length and light in weight. Total length 
of all legs connected together shall not be more 
than 10 m for angle sections up to 130 mm flange 
width and not more than 15 m, for sections above 
130 mm and up to 200 mm flange width, and not 
more than 25 m for built-up sections. 


The cross bracings of the first section, which may 
be assembled on the ground, are raised one by one 
as a unit and bolted to the already erected corner 
leg angles. The first section of the tower thus built 
and horizontal struts (belt members), if any, are 
bolted in position and tightened. 


For smaller base towers/vertical configuration 
towers, one derrick/gin pole can be used. For wide 
based towers (400 kV and above voltage level) 
and if one assembled section/panel of the tower 
is to be erected, then two derricks/gin poles are 
placed, one each on the top of diagonally opposite 
comer legs. The gin poles are guyed using ropes 
and temporary ground anchors. 


For assembling the second section of the tower, 
the derrick is placed on the top of one comer leg 
with at least one-third overlapping. First, the leg 
members of the second section are hoisted and 
assembled. The temporary rope guys are shifted 
to the legs of the second section when they are 
being raised for erection. The legs of the second 
section/story are kept in position by fixing the 
temporary rope guys. The bracings of the second 
section are then hoisted and assembled. 


The derrick is then shifted to the corner leg 
member on the top of the second section to raise 
the parts of third section of the tower in position 
for assembly and the temporary rope guys for 
the leg members are thus moved up as the tower 
is built-up. This process is continued till the 
complete tower is erected. 


The indicative stages in this method of erection 
are shown in Fig. | and Fig. 2. 


Cross-arms are generally assembled on the 
ground and raised suitably up with rope and 
pulley arrangement and fixed to the main body 
of the tower. Indicative sketch of cross-arm 
erection is shown in Fig. 3. For the heavy and long 
cross-arms, piece-meal erection is needed. 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


j) For heavier towers, a small boom can be rigged on 
one of the tower legs for hoisting purposes. The 
members/sections can be hoisted by pulling with a 
power winch machines operated from the ground. 


k 


wa 


Suitable guying arrangements are to be done at 
waist level/bottom cross-arm level as well as in 
the girder level/top cross-arm level depending on 
type and configuration of towers and it should 
normally be installed at more than 45° from the 
vertical. The dead men for guying arrangements 
are to be properly made. Guying should be done 
using steel wire or polypropylene rope of required 
strength. Nominal tension is to be given in guying 
wire/rope for holding the tower in position. 


3.7.2 Section Method 


In this method, major sections of the tower are 
assembled on the ground and the same are erected 
as units. Either a mobile crane or a gin pole is used. 
The gin pole to be used is held in place by means of 
guys attached to the side of the tower to be erected 
(see Fig. 4, Fig. 5 and Fig. 6). 


ERECTED 
BRACINGS 


GUY ROPE FOR 
MAIN LEG 


FIRST STOREY 


The two opposite sides of the sections of the tower 
are assembled on the ground. Each assembled side is 
then lifted clear of the ground with the gin pole and 
is lowered into position on bolts to stubs or anchor 
bolts. One side is held in place with props or rope guys 
while the other side is being erected. The two opposite 
sides are then laced together with cross-members and 
bracings/diagonals and the assembled section is lined 
up and made square to the line. 


After completing the first section, the gin pole is set in 
the first section. The gin pole is made to rest in centre 
of the tower in first section using four steel wire ropes. 
The gin pole is then properly guyed into position. 


The first face of the second section is raised in centre 
of the tower in first section using four steel wire ropes. 
After completing first face, opposite face of the second 
section is raised and then the bracings of other two 
sides are fitted and bolted up. 


The last lift raises the top of the towers. After the tower 
top is placed and all side bracings have been bolted up, 
all the guys are removed except the one which is to be 
used to lower the gin pole. 


PULLEY 


BRACINGS TO 
BE ERECTED 


GUY ROPE FOR 
MAIN LEG 


MAIN LEG OF 
FIRST STOREY 


PULLEY 


PULL 


Fic. 1 LIFTING OF TOWER Parts USING DERRICK 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


PULLEY 


MAIN LEG OF ip 
SECOND STOREY O 


DERRICK / GIN POLE 


GUY ROPES FOR 
DERRICK / GIN POLE 


GUY ROPE FOR LEG 
UNDER ERECTION 


ALREADY ERECTED 
FIRST STOREY 


lo 


FIG. 2 ERECTION OF TOWER USING BUILT-UP METHOD (SECOND STOREY UPWARDS) 


3 
5 
a 


| <V4] 
es Sİ 


\ 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


— 


FIG. 4 ERECTION OF TOWER USING Two DERRICKS 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


Fic. 5 BASKET GIN POLE BEING USED TO RAISE A TOWER SECTION 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


Fic. 6 LIFTING OF GIN POLE 


Sometimes, one whole face of the tower is assembled 
on the ground, hoisted and supported in position. The 
opposite face is similarly assembled and hoisted and 
then the bracing angles connecting these two faces are 
fitted. 


The cross-arms are assembled and erected in similar 
manner as in case of built-up method. Dimensions of 
bottom segment of tower are verified to match with 
as-built distance between centre-to-centre distance 
between pedestal before fabrication/ assembly of 
bottom segment of the tower. 


3.7.3 Ground Assembly Method 


This method consists of assembling the tower on the 
ground and erecting it as a complete unit. This method 
is not useful when the towers are large and heavy 
and the foundations are located in arable land where 
assembling and erecting complete towers would cause 
damage to large areas or in hilly terrain where the 
assembly of complete tower on sloping ground may not 
be possible and it may be difficult to get the crane into 


position to raise the complete tower. This method is not 
generally adopted because of non-availability of good 
approach roads to tower location. 


For this method of erection, a level piece of ground 
close to the footing is chosen for the tower assembly. 
On sloping ground, however, elaborate packing of the 
low side is essential before assembly commences. 


The complete tower is assembled in a horizontal 
position on even ground. The tower is assembled along 
the direction of the line to allow the cross arms to be 
fitted. 


After the assembly is complete, the tower is picked up 
from the ground with the help of a crane and carried 
to its location and set on its foundation (see Fig. 7). 
Dimensions of bottom segment of tower are verified to 
match with as-built distance between centre-to-centre 
distance between pedestal before fabrication/assembly 
of bottom segment of tower. The crane can also be 
deployed to lift and erect tower section by section 
(see Fig. 8) 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


FIG. 7 LIFTING OF HORIZONTALLY ASSEMBLED TOWER USING CRANE 


12 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


“öze 


ea, f=), e 


if 


AS 


FIG. 8 ERECTION OF TOWER SUB ASSEMBLY USING CRANE 


13 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


3.7.4 Crane/Helicopter Method 


In the helicopter method, the transmission line tower 
is erected in sections. For example bottom section is 
first lifted, placed and bolted on to the stubs and then 
upper section is lifted and bolted to the first section 
and the process is repeated till the complete tower is 
erected. Sometimes, a complete assembled tower is 
raised with the help of a helicopter. Helicopters are also 
used for lifting of completely assembled towers with 


L 
À 


À 


> 


guys from the marshalling yards, where these towers 
are fabricated and then transported one by one to line 
location. The helicopter hovers over the line location 
while the tower is securely guyed. The ground crew 
members connect and tighten the tower, and as soon as 
the tie lines are bolted tight, the helicopter disengages 
and returns to the marshaling yards for another tower. 
This method is adopted particularly when the approach 
is extremely difficult (see Fig. 9). 


FIG. 9 TYPICAL HELICOPTER ATTACHMENT SCHEME FOR TOWER ERECTION 


14 


The availability of helicopters with larger load 
capacities, innovations in helicopter construction 
and maintenance techniques, and the increasing need 
to construct and maintain transmission lines with 
the least possible environmental impact have led to 
occasional use of helicopters for both line construction 
and maintenance. However, this method should be 
adopted with all due care and after obtaining necessary 
permissions from concerned authorities. 


3.8 Tightening, Punching and Tack Welding 


3.8.1 Tightening of Bolts/Nuts 


All the members should be fitted with requisite quantity 
of nuts and bolts, plate, cleats, packing plates, spring 
washers as per the approved drawings and bill of 
materials. All nuts should be tightened properly by 
applying recommended torque using correct size of 
spanners/torque wrench. 


Before tightening, it is ensured that filler washers and 
plates are placed in relevant gaps between members, 
bolts of proper size and length are inserted, and one 
spring washer has been inserted under each nut. In case 
of step bolts, spring washer shall be placed under the 
outer nut. 


The tightening should be done progressively from the 
top to downwards. It shall be ensured that all bolts at 
every level are tightened simultaneously. It is suggested 
to deploy four persons simultaneously for tightening 
activity, each covering one leg and the face to his left. 


It should be ensured that the threaded portion of each 
bolt protrudes not less than 3 mm and not more than 8 
mm when fully tightened. 


3.8.2 Punching and Tack Welding 


If during the tightening process, a nut is found to be 
slipping over the bolt threads, the bolt together with the 
nut should be replaced. To avoid the loosening of the 
nuts due to wind induced vibrations on the tower parts, 
the threads of nuts and bolts in the interface should be 
damaged by a sharp punch at 3 places radially at 120° 
on the circumference 


To avoid the theft of tower members, the threads of all 
the bolts projected outside the nuts should be welded at 
two diametrically opposite places; the circular length of 
each welding point should be at least 10 mm. The welding 
should be provided from ground level up to waist level 
for single circuit towers and up to bottom cross-arm 
level for double circuit towers and for single circuit 
vertical configuration towers subject to maximum 30 
m height from ground level. After welding, the surface 
of welding should be cleaned, dried and made free of 
oil, grease and corrosion promoting products. On this 
surface at least two coats of zinc-rich paint should be 
applied by means of a brush according to the paint 
manufacturer’s recommendations. Zinc-rich paint, 


15 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


pre-mixed type paint, based on organic/inorganic 
binders specially formulated for steel surfaces may be 
used for the purpose. The dried film of zinc-rich paint 
should contain a minimum of 90 percent zinc dust by 
mass. 


3.9 Verticality 


Tower shall be checked for verticality both in 
longitudinal and transverse direction using a theodolite 
or total station placed away from the tower but in the 
longitudinal and transverse centre lines of the tower. 
Tower shall not be out of vertical by more than 1 in 360. 


The finally erected tower should be vertical and aligned 
as per requirement. No straining is permitted to bring it 
in alignment. 


3.10 Earthing 


Each tower shall be earthed as per the provisions of 
IS 5613 series of standards by using pipe type or 
counter-poise type earthing equipment, depending 
upon the type of soil in which the tower is founded and 
resistivity of the soil. The constructing agency shall 
measure the tower footing resistance by appropriate 
equipment and ensure that it is not more than 10 ohms. 
The tower footing resistance shall be measured during 
dry season and preferably immediately after the tower 
erection. The resistance shall be measured before 
connecting the earthing device to the tower leg. If the 
resistance is found to be more than 10 ohms, additional 
earthing equipment shall be connected to bring the 
value below 10 ohms. 


3.11 Replacement 


If any replacements are to be effected after stringing 
and tensioning or during maintenance, leg members 
and main bracings should not be taken out without 
reducing the tension on the tower with proper guying 
or releasing the conductor or de- stringing. If the 
replacement of cross-arms becomes necessary, after 
stringing the conductor should be suitably tied to the 
tower at tension points or transferred to suitable roller 
pullies at suspension points. 


3.12 Erection/Fitting of Tower Accessories 


After the tower is completely erected, the tower 
accessories like anti-climbing devices, bird guards, 
number plate, danger plate, phase identification plate, 
etc should be fixed on the tower body as indicated in 
the structural drawing. 


3.13 Trueness of Erected Tower Members 


After erection all members should be straight. Bowing 
of the members is not advisable. Due to slope of the 
tower, main bracings and secondary members may bent 
due to self-weight. Bending of such members by more 
than 5 mm per meter length shall not be allowed, and 
such members shall be rectified suitably. 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


IS No. 


802 


(Part 1/Sec 1): 
2015 


(Part 1/Sec 2) : 
2016 


(Part 2) : 1978 


(Part 3) : 1978 
5613 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Code of practice for use of structural 
steel in overhead transmission line 
towers 


Materials, loads and design 
strengths, Section 1 materials and 
loads (fourth revision) 


Materials, loads and design 
strengths, Section 2 design 
strengths (fourth revision) 


Part 2 Fabrication, galvanizing, 
inspection and packing 

Part 3 Testing 

Code of practice for design, 


installation and maintenance of 
overhead power lines 


16 


IS No. 


(Part 1/Sec 1): 


1985 


(Part 1/Sec 2) : 


1985 


(Part 2/Sec 1): 


1985 


(Part 2/Sec 2) : 


1985 


(Part 3/Sec 1): 


1989 


(Part 3/Sec 2) : 


1989 


Title 


Part 1 Lines up to and including 
11 kv, Section 1 Design 
(first revision) 

Part 1 Lines up to and including 
11 kv, Section 2 Installation and 
maintenance 


Part 2 Lines above 11 kV and up 
to and including 220 kV, Section 1 
Design (first revision) 

Part 2 Lines above 11 kV and up 
to and including 220 kV, Section 2 
Installation and maintenance 

Part 3 400 kV lines, Section 1 
Design 


Part 3 400 kV lines, Section 2 
Installation and maintenance 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Structural Engineering and Structural Sections Sectional Committee, CED 07 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (Block 2, Flat 2A Rani 
Meyyammai Tower, MRC Nagar,RA 
Puram,Chennai 600028) 


Ashwathnarayana and Eswara, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Engineering Science and 
Technology, Shibpur 


Bhilai Institute of Technology, Durg 


C.R. Narayana Rao, Architects and Engineers, 
Chennai 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
Construma Consultancy Private Limited, Mumbai 


Consulting Engineering Services (India) Private 
Limited, New Delhi 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

GAIL India Limited, New Delhi 

Gammon Engineers and Contractors Private Limited, 


Mumbai 
Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited, 


Kolkata 
Geodesic Techniques Private Limited, Bengaluru 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Noida 


Indian Road Congress, New Delhi 


Institute for Steel Development and Growth, Kolkata 


Representative(s) 


Dr V. KALYANARAMAN (Chairman) 


SHRI H. E. SRIPRAKASH SHASTRY 


Dr SAIBAL KUMAR GHOSH 
DR SUBRATA CHACKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Dr MOHAN KUMAR GUPTA 


Dr C. N. SRINIVASAN 

SHRI C. R. ARVIND (Alternate) 
SHRI A. K. JAIN 

DIRECTOR (TRANSMISSION) (Alternate) 
Suri D. K. GARG 

Suri N. K. BANSAL (Alternate) 
DIRECTOR-GATES (NW & S) 

DIRECTOR-GATES DESIGN (N & W) (Alternate) 
Dr HARSHAVARDHAN SUBBARAO 
SHRI S. GHOSH 

DR B. C. Roy (Alternate) 
Dr G. S. PALANI 

DR Nara PRASADA Rao (Alternate) 
SHRI A. SINHA 

SHRI VIRENDER GOEL (Alternate) 
SHRI SHASHI RANJAN 

SHRI S. AsHISH VAIDYA (Alternate) 
SHRI RAKESH KUMAR MEHTA 

SHRI ABHILASH KUMAR SUDHA (Alternate) 
SHRI SOMNATH BANERJEE 

SHRI PRANIT Biswas (Alternate) 
SHRI SRINIDHI ANANTHARAMAN 

SHRIMATI JYOTI C. UBHAYAKAR (Alternate) 
Dr Dipti RANJAN SAHOO 

Dr ALOK MADAN (Alternate) 
Dr S. ARUL JAYACHANDRAN 

DR RUPEN GOSWAMI (Alternate) 
SHRI T. BANDYOPADHYAY 

SHRI P. V. RAJARAM (Alternate) 
SECRETARY GENERAL 

DIRECTOR (Alternate) 


SHRI ARJIT GUHA 
SHRI LAKHAMANA Rao PYDI (Alternate) 


17 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


Organization 
Jindal Steel and Power Limited, Gurugram 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 
M. N. Dastur and Company Private Limited, Kolkata 
MECON Limited, Ranchi 
Powergrid Corporation of India Limited, New Delhi 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of Ministry of Defence 
(Army), New Delhi 


NTPC Limited, Noida 

Research Designs and Standards Organization, 
Lucknow 

RITES Limited, Gurugram 

Steel Authority of India Limited, Ranchi 

Steel Re-Rolling Mills Association of India, Kolkata 

STUP Consultants Private Limited, Kolkata 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 
Visakhapatnam Steel Project, Visakhapatnam 


In Personal Capacity (4/197 Vishwamitry Township, 
Opp Gujarat Tractors, Vadodara 390011) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ASHWANI KUMAR 
SHRI SANJAY NANDANWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH BABU REDDY 


SHRI SHUVENDU CHATTOPADHYAY 
SHRI GARGI ADITYA Basu (Alternate I) 
SHRI MOHUA CHATTERJEE (Alternate II) 


SHRI B. K. PANDEY 
SHRI J. K. SARKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHISHEK 
SHRI SUMANA MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


BRIG GIRISH JOSHI 
Lr CoL GAURAV KAUSHIK (Alternate) 


SHRI HIMANSHU KUNDU 
SHRI CHANDER SHEKHAR (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (B & S)/SB-II 
DIRECTOR (B & S)/SB-I (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL KHANNA 
SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ANURAG UPADHYAY 
Suri C. M. CHUGH (Alternate) 


SHRI B. M. BERIWALA 
SHRI RAJESH VIJAYAVERGIA (Alternate) 


SHRI A. GHOSHAL 
DR N. BANDOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


Ms SUROVI GANGULY 
SHRI SHRIPRASAD T. (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI ADINARAYANA MURTHY 
SHRI T. S. AJIT KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. M. TAKALKAR 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio )] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ABHISHKEK PAL 
SCIENTIST C (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


18 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


Use of Steel in Overhead line Towers and Switchyard Structures and Masts for Telecommunication and Flood 
Lighting Subcommittee, CED 7 : 1 


Organization 


In personal capacity (4/197 Vishwamitry Township, 
Opp Gujarat Tractors, Vadodara 390011) 


Bhakara Beas Management Board, Chandigarh 
Birla Vishvakarma Mahavidyala, Vallabh Vidyanagar 
Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 


Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Electronics Corporation of India Limited, Hyderabad 
GTL Limited, Navi Mumbai 

Gujarat Electricity Board, Vadodara 

Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Kalpataru Power Transmission Limited, Gandhinagar 
KEC International Limited, Mumbai 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 


Ministry of Communications, Deptt of 
Telecommunications, New Delhi 


Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 
NHPC Limited, Faridabad 


National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 


Nippon Koei Company Limited, New Delhi 


Power Grid Corporation of India Limited, Gurugram 
Projects and Development India Limited, Noida 


Ramboll India Private Limited, Hyderabad 


Research Designs and Standards Organization, 
Lucknow 


Skipper India Private Limited, Pune 


Telecom Factory, Jabalpur 


Representative(s) 
SHRI S. M. TAKALKAR (Convener) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
PROF A. N. DESAI 


DIRECTOR (TRANSMISSION) 
SHRI SIDHARTH Mitra (Alternate) 


SHRI M. SELVARAJ 
SHRI VIJAYA Kumar K. (Alternate) 


DR NAPA PRASADA RAO 
SHRI R. P. ROKADE (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRI GIRISH GARG 

SHRI SUBHASH CHANDRA 
DR D.C. Rar 


DR S. ARUL JAYACHANDRAN 
DR RUPEN GOSWAMI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI NITIN PATEL 
SHRI MILIND NENE (Alternate) 


SHRI E. V. RAO 
SHRI RAHUL KAIRAM (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH BABU REDDY 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR 


SHRI P. N. KAPOOR 


SHRI KAMAL KAPOOR 
SHRI R. P. LAL (Alternate) 


SHRI S. GHOSH 
SHRI G. Biswas (Alternate) 


SHRI M. L. SACHDEVA 


SHRI ABHISHEK 
SHRI SUMANA MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI B. K. JAISWAL 
SHRI A. K. PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI D. SANKARA GANESH 


Jomnt DIRECTOR (B & S)-SB II 
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR (B & S)-T I (Alternate) 


SHRI DAYANAND K. 


SHRI K. C. BHATTACHARYA 
SHRI Roop NARAIN (Alternate) 


19 


IS 802 (Part 6) : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 


Transmission Corporation of Andhra Pradesh Limited, CHIEF ENGINEER (TRANSMISSION) 
Hyderabad SUPTDG ENGINEER (TRANSMISSION) (Alternate) 


Triveni Structurals Limited, Allahabad SHRI K. K. SAXENA 
SHRI VIBHAV KUMAR (Alternate) 


20 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 07 (15603). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern (o : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western E Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAL 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


