**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 12240-2 (1988) : Methods of test for polyvinyl chloride 
boots, Part 2: Determination of durometer hardness Shore A 
[CHD 19: Footwear] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 685-315*41 [678-743'22] : 620-178"152"22 



IS: 12240 (Part 2)^1988 



( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 
METHODS OF TEST FOR POLYVINYL CHLORIDE BOOTS 

PART 2 DETERMINATION OF DUROMETER HARDNESS, SHORE A 



o 

o 
a 
o 



1 . Scope — This standard ( Part 2 ) prescribes the test procedure for determination of the durometer 
hardness, Shore A of the components for polyvinyl chloride boots. 

2. Apparatus 

2.1 The durometer, Type A consists of the following components: 

a) Presser foot, with a hole between 2*5 and 3'5 mm in diameter, centred at least 6 mm from 
any edge of the foot. 

b) Indenter, formed from a hardened steel rod between 1 "1 and 1'40 mm in diameter to the 
shape and dimensions shown in Fig. 1 for Type A durometers. 



PRESSER 
FOOT 



^^ 



o. 
£ 

<0 



£ 
o 
O 





-35 + - 0.25 



A = <fi 3 ± 5 mm 
B = ^ 1-25 + 0*15 mm 
C = ^2-50 ± 0'04 mm 
D = ^0*79 ± 003 mm 

FIG. 1 INDENTER FOR TYPE A DUROMETER 



c) Indicating device, for reading the extent of protrusion of the point of the indenter beyond 
the face of the presser foot; this may be read directly in terms of units ranging from zero, 
for full protrusion of 2'50 ± 0'04 mm to 100, for nil protrusion obtained by placing the 
pressure foot and indenter in firm contact with a flat piece of glass. 

d) Calibrated spring for applying force to the indenter in accordance with the following 
equation: 

Force in gram = 56 + 7'66 H A 

where Ha is hardness reading on Type A durometer. 

3. Test Piece 

3.1 For the determination of hardness by Type A Shore durometer, the test piece should be at feast 
5 mm thick and of convenient area. A test piece may be composed of thinner layers to obtain the 
necessary thickness, but determinations made on such test pieces may not agreee with those made 
on one-piece test pieces because the surfaces between plies may not be in complete contact with 



Adopted 1 January 1988 



(§) May, 1988, BIS 



Gr2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
(VIANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 12240 (Part 2) -1988 

each other. The dimensions of the test piece should be sufficient to permit measurements at least 
12 mm away from any edge, unless it is known that identical results are obtained when measure- 
ments are made at a lesser distance from an edge. The surface of the test piece should be flat over 
an area sufficient to permit the presser foot to be in contact with the test piece over an area having 
a radius of at least 6 mm from the indenter point. Satisfactory hardness determinations cannot be 
made on rounded, uneven or rough surfaces. 

4. Conditioning of Test Piece 

4.1 Test should be made at 27 ± 2°C and relative humidity of 65±5 percent [ see IS : 196-1966 
'Atmospheric conditions for testing (revised)' ]. 

The durometer and test pieces should be conditioned at the temperature of test for at least 
sixteen hours before testing. 

Note — When a durometer is moved from a location below room temperature to a location with a higher temperature, 
it should be placed in a suitable desiccator or airtight container immediately upon removal and allowed to remain there 
until the temperature of the durometer is above the dew point of the air in the new environment. 

5. Procedure 

5.1 Calibration— The spring of the durometer is calibrated by supporting the durometer in a vertical 
position and resting the point of the indenter on a small spacer at the centre of one pan of a balance 
as shown in Fig. 2, in order to prevent interference between the presser foot and the pan (see Note 
below). The spacer has a small cylindrical stem approximately 2'5 mm in height and 1 '25 mm in 
diameter, and is slightly cupped on top to accommodate the indenter point. The mass of the spacer 
is balanced by a weight on the opposite pan of the balance. Weights are added to the opposite pan 
to balance the force on the indenter at various scale readings. The measured force should be equal 
to the force calculated by equation given in 2.1 (d) within ±8g. 

Note — Instruments specifically designed for calibration of durometers may be used. Balance or instruments used 
for calibration should be capable of measuring or applying a force on the point of the indenter within 0'4 gf for Type A 

durometer. 




FIG. 2 APPARATUS FOR CALIBRATION OF DUROMETER SPRING 



5.2 Place the test piece on a hard horizontal, plane surface. Hold the durometer in a vertical 
position with the point of the indenter at least 12 mm from any edge of the test piece. Apply the 
presser foot to the test piece as rapidly as possible, without shock, keeping the foot parallel to the 
surface of the test piece. Apply just sufficient pressure to obtain firm contact between presser foot 
and test piece ( see Note below). Read the scale after 15 ±1 seconds. If an instantaneous 
reading is specified, read the scale within one second after the presser foot is in firm contact with 
the test piece. 

Note — Better reproducibility may be obtained by using either a durometer stand or a weight centred on the axis of 
the indenter, or both, to apply the presser foot to the test piece. Recommended mass is 1 kg for the Type A durometer. 

5.3 Make three measurements of hardness at different positions on the test piece at least 6 mm 
apart and determine the mean value, 

6, Report 

6.1 The report shall state the following; 

a) Hardness of the material, and 

b) The individual test results. 



IS: 12240 (Part 2). 1988 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

The prescribed method measures the penetration of a specified indenter forced into the material 
under specified conditions. The indentation hardness is inversely related to the penetration and is 
dependent on the modulus of elasticity and the viscoelastic properties of the material. The shape 
of the indenter and the force applied to it, influence the results obtained so that there may be no 
simple relationship between the results obtained with one type of durometer and those obtained with 
either another type of durometer or another instrument for measuring hardness. 

IS ; 12240-1988 Methods of test for polyvinyl chloride boots has been published in various 
parts as follows: 

Parti Measurement of thickness; 

Part 2 Determination of durometer hardness, Shore A; 

Part 3 Determination of relative density; 

Part 4 Determination of volatility; 

Part 5 Determination of lead content; 

Part 6 Determination of tensile strength and elongation at break; 

Part 7 Flexing test resistance to cut growth for soling material; and 

Part 8 Resistance to flexing for polyvinyl chloride upper material. 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Preaa, Dolhf, India 



